@@@@@


doc= 38030


Stutchbury, Samuel (1798-1859), naturalist and geologist, was born in London on 15 January 1798, the third child and second son of Joseph Sidney Stutchbury (1769-1810), gauging instrument maker, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Smith (1776-1820x29). Although he had little formal education, in 1820 Stutchbury became assistant to William Clift, conservator of the Hunterian Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons. That same year, he married, on 2 August, Hannah Louise Barnard; a daughter, Louise, was born in 1822. 
In 1825 Stutchbury became zoologist to the Pacific Pearl Fishery Company's expedition to the Tuamotu archipelago. His journal contains pertinent observations on the natural history and social conditions of the places visited and accounts of diving and pearling, and he made extensive collections of shells and native artefacts. Between 1827 and 1830 he was a dealer in natural-history specimens, associated with his brother, Henry Rome Stutchbury (1796-1853). In 1831 Stutchbury became curator at the Bristol Institution, where he published significant papers on conchology and palaeontology and made the museum one of the best in Europe. He also carried out geological surveys of the mines of the duchy of Cornwall and others, and was involved in the early work of the first director of the Geological Survey of Great Britain, Henry De la Beche. 
In 1850 Stutchbury resigned from his curatorship to become mineral surveyor of New South Wales, provoking the hostility of Revd William Clarke (1798-1878), who had also applied for the position and who believed Stutchbury to be a mere museum curator, unqualified for field work. Following his appointment, Stutchbury spent five years mapping 80,000 square kilometres of eastern Australia (including part of what is now Queensland), virtually unaided. In the frenzy of gold-rush fever his work received little acknowledgement by officials at the time. He returned to Bristol in ill health in 1855, and undertook consulting work until his death, at 3 Park Street, Bristol, on 12 February 1859. He was buried on 17 February at Arnos Vale cemetery in Bristol. 
Stutchbury had excellent powers of observation and a good critical sense, both of which made him a fine scientist, and his work has stood the test of time. He was not an aggressive person or of high social status, and he had little ambition for public notice, so he tended to be overshadowed by contemporaries such as Richard Owen (1804-1892), Charles Darwin (1809-1882), for whom he provided barnacles, and Charles Lyell (1797-1875), who used his information on the Pacific islands and coral reefs. 
Stutchbury became an associate of the Linnean Society in 1821, a fellow of the Geological Society of London in 1841, and he was an honorary member of a number of European scientific bodies. Somewhat portly and with an open countenance, his friendly co-operation and his knowledge were greatly appreciated by a wide range of scientists, who honoured him in the scientific names of a number of fossil and recent organisms. 


@@@@@


doc= 38031


Sugden, Samuel (1892-1950), chemist, was born on 21 February 1892 at 2 Arthington View, Hunslet, Leeds, the eldest son of Samuel Sugden, a master draper of Leeds who was connected with wool-trade journals, and his wife, Eliza Jane Broadbent. He was educated at Batley grammar school from where he went to the Royal College of Science in London in 1912. In 1914 he graduated with first-class honours as an associate. 
Because of the outbreak of war Sugden abandoned plans to do research and took an industrial job, but in September 1915 he joined the Royal Army Medical Corps as a private soldier and served with the British expeditionary force. In June 1916 he was released to join the research department at the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich, working under Robert Robertson. He prospered there, but in April 1919 resigned to become a lecturer at Birkbeck College, London. 
In 1924 Sugden published work on the 'parachor', a function of surface tension which could give information about the structure of molecules. This attracted much attention and thereafter his advancement was rapid: in 1928 he was appointed reader and in 1932 professor of physical chemistry at Birkbeck. He was elected FRS in 1934 and in 1937 he was appointed professor of chemistry at University College, London. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War, Sugden immediately joined the Ministry of Supply and went to the chemical defence experimental station in Porton, near Salisbury. He became impatient with the pace of work there, and felt that gas warfare was unlikely to be used, and so he obtained a post as a superintendent of explosives research at the armament research department in 1942. But here, too, there were soon difficulties and in 1943 he resigned to become scientific adviser to the United States 8th army air force in Great Britain. Later that year he suffered a breakdown of health following a severe attack of influenza. In September 1944 he was able to return to his academic duties, but soon after the war ended he was stricken by chronic illness and did relatively little research thereafter. 
Though Sugden did very useful work on molecular structure by other means, his main contributions came through his parachor. This proved to be an additive function of atomic constants with structural constants in addition. Unfortunately these constants could not be determined theoretically but only empirically, and eventually this proved to be an unsound basis. Nevertheless, because it came when the instrumental techniques of structural determination were in a rudimentary state or were non-existent, Sugden's work was very stimulating and may have helped encourage the search for better methods. He published his major book, 'The Parachor and Valency', in 1930. 
In 1926 Sugden married Eleanor, daughter of Thomas Dunlop of Glasgow. They had no children. Sugden died on 20 October 1950 at the Epsom and Ewell Cottage Hospital near his home in West Hill Avenue, Epsom, Surrey; his wife survived him. 
L. E. Sutton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38032


Sulivan, Laurence (c.1713-1786), director of the East India Company and politician, is thought to have been the illegitimate son of Philip O'Sullivan ('bap'. 1682, died 1737) of co. Cork, Ireland. Nothing is known of his life until he went to India. By 1739 he is recorded as a private merchant in the East India Company's settlement of Bombay. He was appointed to the company's service in 1741. For the next twelve years he held various administrative posts in Bombay and became a member of the council for the settlement in 1752. Having accumulated a comfortable fortune, he returned to Britain in 1753 with his wife, Elizabeth Owen (died 1782). Elizabeth is likely to have been the daughter of Edward Owen of the company's service; the couple had married in 1739, and had at least one surviving child, their son Stephen. 
Although Sulivan bought an estate at Ponsbourne in Hertfordshire, he spent most of his time in London, living for many years in a house in Queen Square. In 1755 he was elected to the court of directors of the East India Company. From then until his death some thirty years later, except for an interval of six years between 1772 and 1778, Sulivan was more or less continuously a director. He had three spells as chairman and three as deputy chairman. At such times his domination of the company was virtually complete. He was accused of being 'dictator' over it (Bowen, 99). Even when he was not formally responsible for them, the company's affairs were the main interest of his life. His concern for the company led him to seek seats in parliament, first at Taunton (1762-8) and then at Ashburton (1768-74). 
At any time in the eighteenth century management of the East India Company's complex concerns was a formidable task, but the years from the 1750s to the 1780s were a period of tumultuous upheavals. In addition to managing its trade, its directors had to sustain wars in Asia, to try to devise means of governing newly conquered Indian provinces, and to cope with the demands of the national government and of parliament for an ever greater measure of control over the company. The difficulties which the directors faced were greatly exacerbated by constantly recurring struggles for power within the company itself. To gain and maintain his hold over the company Sulivan had to become a formidable politician, and he inevitably made many enemies. These tended to portray him as being concerned with little more than his own power. There can, however, be no doubt that he was devoted to what he considered to be the company's interests and to finding appropriate solutions to the unprecedented problems facing it. 
Sulivan later wrote that his power over the company had been 'absolute' from 1757 to 1763 (letter to his son, 27 Feb 1778, Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. hist. c 472, fol. 4). During that period he had co-operated closely with the government in the war against the French and in the subsequent peace. In 1763, however, his authority over the company was challenged by Robert, Baron Clive, the conqueror of Bengal. Their antagonism, which had much more to do with a clash of temperaments than with deep issues of principle, convulsed the company and drew national political factions into supporting one side or the other. In 1764 Sulivan was worsted. He staged a counter-attack, which brought him back into power in 1769, but at the price of a financial disaster from which he never recovered; money was borrowed to buy shares with which to create votes for the election of directors at a time when the value of the company's stock collapsed. In the early 1770s he promoted the career of Warren Hastings as a reforming governor of Bengal, but he was unable to prevent a major loss of the company's autonomy when the government took powers over it in the 'Regulating Act' of 1773. The government of Lord North, which he had opposed in 1773, encouraged Sulivan to take on the management of the company yet again in 1780. He was engaged in a new round of organizing the company's war effort and parrying political threats to it virtually until the time of his death. By then his beloved company had survived and had even acquired an imperial role, which Sulivan had never envisaged. The price of survival had, however, involved a cession of power to the government, which he deplored. 
In 1778 in a letter to his son Sulivan described himself as having once been 'wild, dissipated and favorite with both sexes'. After his marriage he had reformed, filling the day with unremitting attention to business and spending 'almost every evening of my life with my family'. In twenty-five years he had not been 'ten times in a tavern, eight times in a coffee house'. The happiness he believed that he enjoyed he attributed to 'method, regularity and constantly measuring our whole time in habitual but commendable pursuits' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. hist. c.269). He died, probably in London, on 21 February 1786, and was buried at St George the Martyr, Queen Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 38033


Sumner, (George) Heywood Maunoir (1853-1940), artist and archaeologist, was born on 14 October 1853 in Old Alresford, Hampshire, the youngest of three children and only son of the Revd George Henry Sumner (1826-1909), rector of Alresford and later bishop of Guildford, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Sumner (1828-1921), the founder of the Mothers' Union and daughter of Thomas Heywood, a Liverpool banker and antiquary. His other grandfather was Charles Richard Sumner, bishop of Winchester. Sumner was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he read classics and then changed to modern history, being awarded second-class honours in 1874. Two years later he entered Lincoln's Inn and was called to the bar in 1879, but he never practised. 
During this time Sumner shared lodgings with W. A. S. Benson, a metalwork designer and friend of William Morris. Sumner was thus introduced to the arts and crafts movement, and became a keen adherent for the next twenty years. In 1883 he married Agnes, daughter of William Benson, barrister, and sister of W. A. S. Benson, the actor-manager Sir Frank Benson, and the politician Godfrey Benson, first Baron Charnwood. They had three sons and two daughters. The middle son was Benedict Humphrey Sumner, warden of All Souls College, Oxford. Sumner began his artistic career as an etcher and published two books of etchings -- 'The Itchen Valley' (1881) and 'The Avon from Naseby to Tewkesbury' (1882). In 1883 a new edition of 'The New Forest' by J. R. Wise was published containing twelve additional etchings by Sumner. These etchings were produced with a detailed traditional technique, but during the next twenty years his style altered radically to one that verged on art nouveau. He illustrated editions of 'Sintram and his Companions' (1883) and 'Undine' (1888), both written by F. H. K. De La Motte Fouque. 
Sumner worked in a wide range of other media which included textiles, wallpapers, tapestries, tesserae, painted gesso, and stained glass. Sumner became the leading English exponent of the technique of sgraffito, a method of decorating walls by incising designs on coloured plaster; he decorated eleven churches and several private houses in this way. The first of these was his parents' house at 1 The Close, Winchester, in 1885; he also designed and executed wall paintings at St Paul's Church, Winchester (1903-4), later whitened over in 1962. His other churches included St Mary's, Llanfair Cilgedin, Monmouthshire (1888); St Agatha's, Landport, Portsmouth, Hampshire (1895); and All Saints, Ennismore Gardens in London (1897-1903) which also contains examples of Sumner's stained glass. 
Sumner was associated with the Century Guild from 1884. From 1885 to 1888 and in 1894 he was a committee member of the Art-Workers' Guild. With Walter Crane and W. A. S. Benson he organized the first arts and crafts exhibition in Crane Street in 1888. 
At the turn of the century Sumner and his family moved out of London, and finally settled in 1904 at Cuckoo Hill near Fordingbridge in the New Forest. The house, the garden, and all the furnishings and fittings were designed by Sumner. His move to the New Forest and the forest itself were vividly described in his 'The Book of Gorley' (1910). Probably disillusioned with the arts and crafts movement, Sumner turned to archaeology and during the next thirty years worked on sites in the area. His best-known excavations were those which he described in 'Excavations in New Forest Roman Pottery Sites' (1927). 
Sumner was a tall, strikingly handsome man with dark hair and a beard which turned white in old age. He died at Cuckoo Hill on 21 December 1940, one year after his wife. They are buried together in the churchyard at Ibsley, Hampshire. 
Jane Barbour', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38034


Sumner, Mary Elizabeth (1828-1921), founder of the Mothers' Union, the daughter of Thomas Heywood (1797-1866), antiquary, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Barton (died 1870), was born on 31 December 1828 at the Barton family home at Swinton near Manchester. In 1832 Thomas Heywood retired from the family bank to live as a country gentleman, purchasing the estate of Hope End, Colwall, Herefordshire, from the father of Elizabeth Barrett Browning, the poet. Mary and her elder brother and sister were taught literature, mathematics, and music by their parents, and were taken abroad to learn languages. Mary showed exceptional talent in music: her father bought her an organ and engaged an Italian singing teacher in Rome, who suggested that she pursue an operatic career. However, during this visit she met her future husband, George Henry Sumner (1826-1909), son of Charles Richard Sumner, the bishop of Winchester, and soon himself to be ordained; the couple were married in Colwall church on 26 July 1848. 
George and Mary Sumner lived first at Crawley, near Winchester, moving to Farnham Castle after the death of George's mother. Here, at the bishop's palace, two daughters were born. Soon afterwards George was appointed to the living of Old Alresford, where they remained for thirty-four years. In 1853 a son was born who would make his mark as the artist (George) Heywood Maunoir Sumner (1853-1940). Mary Sumner worked in the parish and played the organ. The family were joined in their substantial rectory by Mary's widowed mother, whose influence partly inspired the meetings for women which Mary began to hold in 1876. At first her visitors were women of her own class; then, boldly crossing the social boundaries, she invited the 'cottage mothers', whose long working hours in the fields provoked her concern. At the first meeting all were addressed by the rector, and in this informal way the Mothers' Union was anticipated (meetings were also held for husbands on Sunday evenings). 
With her children married, Mary Sumner at just past fifty was ready for a new challenge. Then her husband became archdeacon, entailing a move to Winchester Cathedral Close; further preferment came with his appointment as suffragan bishop of Guildford, but they still resided at 1 The Close. Relieved of parochial duties, Mary Sumner concentrated on her ideas for a network of mothers' groups which would help women deepen their spiritual lives through 'Bible' reading, prayer, and fellowship. The groups would benefit both church and society, strengthening family life through material influence for good and providing a meeting-ground for women of different social classes. 
Knowing of her aspirations, the bishop of Newcastle asked her to speak at a church congress at Portsmouth in 1885: this proved to be the foundation of the Mothers' Union proper. It was established initially in Winchester diocese, with Mary Sumner herself as an active chairperson; this position she held until the age of eighty, always chairing the monthly diocesan Mothers' Union meetings until 1910, and frequently addressing large meetings throughout the country thereafter. Many other branches were soon launched, often by competent clergy wives, and they drew their members from a wide social spectrum. Meetings were interdenominational, concentrating on devotional and practical topics. Mary Sumner became a well-known figure as the Mothers' Union spread to other dioceses and to the colonies. In her pamphlets, and in a journal which she co-edited with Charlotte Yonge, she dwelt on the subjects of 'Bible' reading and prayer, although showing a considerable breadth of knowledge and an awareness of family problems. 
The Edwardian period saw the heyday of Mary Sumner and her new movement: it was heavily patronized by royalty and titled ladies, who saw it as a bastion of respectability in an age of growing emancipation. For their diamond wedding in 1908 the Sumners were given a large triptych screen, painted and illuminated by women and signed by Queen Alexandra and other royal and aristocratic supporters (this now hangs in Mary Sumner House, the world-wide headquarters of the Mothers' Union). 
After her husband's death in 1909 Mary Sumner continued to speak, write, and work for the movement, living at 1 The Close but often travelling alone to London by train. She frequently visited and entertained her numerous grandchildren. From her bedroom window she could see her husband's grave, where she finally joined him after her death at home on 9 August 1921. Her funeral service was attended by 4000 people, including representatives from Mothers' Union branches all over the country. It is true that she herself experienced few deprivations in her life, but sour comments about her affluence cannot conceal her vision, her understanding, and her dedicated commitment to her faith. 


@@@@@


doc= 38035


Sutton, Daniel (1735-1819), smallpox inoculator, was born on 4 May 1735 in Kenton, Suffolk, the second of eight sons (there were also three daughters) of Robert Sutton (bap. 1708, d. 1788), surgeon, apothecary, and inoculator, and his wife, Sarah Barker of Debenham. He trained under and worked for his father until about 1760. He then became an assistant to an Essex doctor, and returned to his father late in 1762 or early in 1763. Disagreeing with him over the patients' preparatory period before inoculation, which he proposed to reduce from a month to eight or ten days, and recommending an open-air regime instead of confinement indoors following inoculation, Sutton left to set up his own practice at Ingatestone, Essex, in October 1763. 
In his first year of independent practice Sutton earned 2000 guineas. He inoculated 923 people in the first twenty weeks of 1765 and by late September had three inoculation houses at Ingatestone for different classes of patients paying 6, 4, or 3 guineas. By the end of the year two inoculation houses had been opened in London and in conjunction with his father and brothers Sutton had begun setting up partnerships throughout the country with 'Eminent physicians and surgeons daily applying... to be appointed partners for particular counties, or for foreign parts'. The income of the practice in 1765 was $6300. 
In May 1766 in Maldon, Essex, Sutton performed his first mass or general inoculation. In one day 487 inhabitants were inoculated, thereby curtailing an epidemic. About the same time he purchased Maisonette, a country house and grounds in Ingatestone. A few weeks later he appeared at Chelmsford summer assizes, charged with causing an epidemic then raging in the town. Since all the doctors in Chelmsford practised inoculation it was impossible to prove him responsible and Sutton declared the prosecution to have been founded on the envy and malice of his enemies in the medical profession. In July and August further successful general inoculations took place in Maidstone, Kent, and Ewell, Surrey. In 1766 Sutton personally inoculated 7816 people. The total number inoculated by him, his assistants, and partners in the three years 1764-6 amounted to almost 20,000 without, it was claimed, a single death directly attributable to the treatment. 
Events continued to move rapidly. By 1767 Sutton's method was becoming known on the European mainland, where it was recommended by Sir John Pringle. In August 1767 Sutton was granted a coat of arms with the motto 'Safely, quickly and pleasantly'. He also married Rachel, widow of William Westley of Shepton Mallet, Somerset, and daughter of Simon and Frances Warlock of Antigua and Westminster. They were to have one son, Daniel, born in 1768, and a daughter, Frances. The inoculating business had now reached its zenith with forty-seven 'authorized' partnerships (including Sutton, his father, and six brothers) in England, Ireland, Wales, the Netherlands, France, Jamaica, and Virginia in 1768. 
By about 1769 Sutton began to be superseded as first-choice inoculator of the wealthy by Thomas Dimsdale. Having successfully demonstrated the safety of his method of treatment so that it was being adopted by inoculators throughout the country, Sutton had already unwittingly performed his greatest service in the fight against smallpox. At the time of his father's death in April 1788 he and his brothers were still 'very eminent in the practice', and in 1796 he published 'The Inoculator', in which he explained his method and displayed his contempt for the medical establishment. In his final years he witnessed the introduction of vaccination, in 1798, and the rejection of inoculation by the majority of doctors. He died in semi-obscurity at his London residence in Hart Street, Bloomsbury Square, in February 1819. 
J. R. Smith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38036


Sutton, Martin Hope (1815-1901), seed merchant, was born on 14 March 1815 at Reading, the second of three sons (there were also three daughters, as well as a further son and daughter who died young) of John Sutton (bap. 1777, d. 1863), corn factor, and his wife, Sarah Norris (died 1834). The name Hope was added because his father, in severe financial straits after the collapse of a Reading bank, welcomed the child's arrival as a hopeful sign for the future. 
Although his elder brother was allowed to study medicine, after a brief education at Huntley's School and Greathead's School, Sutton at the age of twelve was obliged to join his father's business. As John Sutton's poor health was exacerbated by a drink problem -- which Martin's devoted efforts later cured -- Martin had great responsibility at an early age. He realized that far better returns could be achieved from seeds than from dealing in corn, but his father refused to let him study botany or to deal in seeds during working hours, and he pursued these activities in his spare time. He nevertheless built up a network of seed growers from among local market-gardeners, and the corn side of the business was phased out after Martin Sutton was made partner in 1836, aged twenty-one. In 1840 turnover came to $1800 and profits to nearly $580. 
Until then Sutton had sold mainly agricultural seeds, but he steadily enlarged his range to include flower seeds for the suburban and country gardens that were by then becoming popular. He also advertised vegetables and ornamental plants, at first in handbills, from 1832, and later in catalogues. The introduction of the penny post in 1840 allowed him to create a mail-order system: each year he sent out thousands of these catalogues, which contained order forms, and he executed the resulting orders by return of post. By then he had embarked on a typically persistent and laborious campaign to bring about the improvement of seed quality throughout the country, but not until 1869 was the 'Seeds Adulteration Act' passed into law. 
In his younger days Sutton was sociable and quite a dandy. Then he became converted to more sober ways by Charlotte Trendell (1818-1846), daughter of a Reading watchmaker, whom he married in 1844. A son and a daughter died soon after birth; Charlotte herself died of consumption in 1846, aged twenty-eight. Sutton was helped over his grief by months of exertion in fulfilling large government orders for Ireland after the outbreak of the great famine there, and by experiments to develop disease-resistant strains of potato. In 1848 he married Sophia Woodhead (died 1894), daughter of William Warwick of nearby Whitley. They had five sons and four daughters. 
During the 1850s annual sales rose from under $5000 to $35,000, and Sutton was asked to supply seeds to the royal gardens at Windsor, to give advice on crops in the home farm there, and to help with the laying out of the gardens at Osborne House, Queen Victoria's residence in the Isle of Wight. Thereafter he received a present from her each Christmas; he was also offered a knighthood, which he declined. His 'Royal Seed Establishment' received royal warrants from both the queen and from the prince of Wales (later Edward VII). In 1856 Sutton issued the first 'Amateur's Guide in Horticulture', in five parts, the last of which provided a 'calendar of operations' which enthusiasts could follow through the seasons. He wrote an article on laying down land for permanent pasture in the Royal Agricultural Society's journal for 1861. 
Together with his younger brother Alfred, Sutton oversaw the steady growth of the firm, which in 1870 had sales of $75,000 and which he boasted was the largest retail seed firm in Britain. A few years later he raised this claim to the most considerable business of its kind in the world, by turnover and by the number of customers. In 1871 his eldest son, Martin John Sutton, became a partner, and two other sons later joined the partnership of Sutton & Sons. As the father aged he fought a succession of running battles with his sons -- never face-to-face but by the exchange of notes and memoranda -- over issues such as the need to keep costs down and for them to pay ever more detailed attention to all aspects of the business. They in turn looked for some enjoyment out of their growing affluence, and fruitlessly campaigned for him to stand down; not until 1888 did he and Alfred retire, and Martin John Sutton become the senior partner. Turnover was then nearly $170,000 and profit $33,000. An equally sore point was the extent of Martin Sutton's charitable donations, which he increased from 5 per cent of his personal income in the mid-1840s to 20 per cent from the late 1860s onwards. 
Sutton consistently refused to serve either as an MP or as a town councillor; instead he actively supported such religious bodies as the British and Foreign Bible Society, the Church Missionary Society, and the YMCA. As a young man he had been a Sunday school teacher and had thought of becoming a missionary; and he and Alfred subsidized the foundation of certain local schools. On the evangelical wing of the Church of England, he regularly met delegations and individuals of the same persuasion, and he freely handed out tracts that reflected his views. 
A grandson by marriage characterized Sutton in his riper years as 'a direct-looking old gentleman with rather wide-set eyes, a bold and broad-based nose and patriarchal beard', easily mistaken for a nonconformist divine or even a street-corner evangelist (Bashford, 180). While entertaining dignitaries in his home, he was accompanied by a footman who placed over his shoulders different thicknesses of cloak according to the temperature. Sutton died at his home, Cintra Lodge, Whitley, Reading, on 4 October 1901. The distance he had travelled socially since his early corn-chandling days may be seen from the eloquent words uttered by a clergyman son at his funeral: 'And he died mourned by the whole town and his eighteen indoor and outdoor servants' (ibid., 200). He was buried at Reading cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 38037


Sutton, Sir Robert (1671/2-1746), diplomatist and politician, was the elder son of Robert Sutton of Averham, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Katherine, the daughter of the Revd William Sherborne of Pembridge, Herefordshire. He went to Trinity College, Oxford, in 1688 and the Middle Temple in 1691, the year in which he inherited property upon his father's death. Far from wealthy, he took deacon's orders and became chaplain to his cousin Robert Sutton, second Baron Lexington, the new ambassador to Vienna in 1694. 
Sutton abandoned the church on being appointed secretary to the embassy at Vienna in 1697. As secretary and later resident he was responsible for English representation at Vienna in 1697-1700, although William III placed more reliance on his Dutch counterpart. Thanks to Lexington's influence, Sutton was appointed ambassador at Constantinople in December 1700. Having been knighted in 1701, he reached Constantinople in early 1702 and remained there until 1717. Sutton served with distinction: his assessment of Turkish policy was usually correct, and he knew Italian and Latin, the crucial languages in Constantinople. 
In 1717 Sutton was appointed, with Abraham Stanyan, joint mediator at the Austro-Turkish peace congress at Passarowitz, a task he discharged ably the following year and for which he was well rewarded. His last diplomatic posting was as ambassador and plenipotentiary in Paris. He was appointed in April 1720, but had to be threatened with dismissal by James Craggs, the secretary of state, before he would go. He was in Paris from June 1720 until November 1721, but the ministry had little confidence in him and appointed first John, second Baron Carteret (later Earl Granville), as ambassador-extraordinary in January 1721, a post he did not take up, and second Sir Luke Schaub as ambassador the following month. Schaub had already served in Paris, and he acted jointly with Sutton from March 1721 until the latter's departure. 
Aside from the fact that he was considered a very good ombre player, opinions of Sutton varied considerably. Described to the French government in April 1720 as very gallant, and able in both diplomacy and the sciences, he was nevertheless criticized by one of George I's diplomats, St Saphorin, for being too inclined to sharp practice. 
Sutton had become wealthy as a result of his diplomatic career, and he was one of the successful whig candidates in the very expensive Nottinghamshire election in April 1722, after which he was sworn of the privy council. He acquired estates in Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire, worth nearly $5000 a year, and houses in Grosvenor Square, London, and at Broughton, Lincolnshire. In 1724 he married Judith, the daughter of Benjamin Tichborne and the widow of Charles Spencer, third earl of Sunderland. Two sons survived infancy. Sutton was appointed KCB in 1725 and moved the address in 1726, the same year he became sub-governor of the Royal African Company. 
In 1725 Sutton became a member of the committee of management of the Charitable Corporation. Active in increasing the authorized capital of this corporation, he made money by insider dealing in its shares and was involved in the scandal following disclosures of extensive frauds in 1732, in which he himself lost severely. He was expelled from the Commons as a result of giving false statements, but was returned unopposed in 1734 for Great Grimsby, a venal borough that had elected other disreputable financiers and in which Sutton owned considerable property. He remained MP until 1741, and did not stand again. He played no further part in politics or business, having ceased his connection with the African Company in 1732, and died on 13 August 1746. 
Jeremy Black', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38038


Sutton, Thomas (fl. 1274-1300), Dominican friar and theologian, was ordained deacon on 20 September 1274 at Blyth in the York diocese. He may have been a fellow of Merton College, Oxford, 'c'.1270, and was certainly a member of the Dominican convent in Oxford, perhaps by 'c'.1282. He had a long career in the university, graduating bachelor and then, 'c'.1284, doctor of theology as well as master 'c'.1290. He was licensed to hear confessions in the Lincoln diocese on 11 October 1300, and it is likely that he is the Thomas Sutton who preached in Oxford on 23 November 1292, and on 1 March and 24 May 1293. He was perhaps still living in 1315, but the date of his death and the place of his burial are not known. 
Sutton was one of the foremost early exponents and defenders at the University of Oxford of the teaching of Thomas Aquinas, the Dominican philosopher and theologian. Aquinas had incorporated into his philosophy many Aristotelian features, such as the notion that human knowledge starts from sense perception rather than with a divine illumination of the human mind in which 'seminal reasons' are implanted. Also controversial at Oxford at this time was the question whether man, being both body and soul, has both a corporeal and a spiritual form: Aquinas taught that in every corporeal being there is one substantial form. In 1277 Robert Kilwardby (died 1279), the archbishop of Canterbury, himself a Dominican friar and former master at Oxford University, condemned a range of Aristotelian theses as well as Aquinas's novel doctrine of the unicity of forms. This condemnation was renewed in 1284 by Archbishop John Pecham (died 1292), a Franciscan friar and former master at Oxford who also excommunicated an English Dominican master, Richard Knapwell, in 1286. At this time and in this climate Thomas Sutton emerged as a keen student and follower of Thomas Aquinas and as a notable thinker among the group of English Dominican Thomists who flourished in the last quarter of the thirteenth century. The group included Robert Winchelsey (died 1313), Simon of Faversham, and Robert Orford. Thomas Sutton also participated in the quarrels between the Friars Preacher and the Friars Minor over the issue of poverty. 
Sutton's writings are difficult to identify and to date, and some have in the past been confused with writings of Thomas Aquinas. He apparently wrote a continuation of the unfinished commentary of Aquinas on Aristotle's 'Perihermeneias', as well as a continuation of Aquinas's commentary on Aristotle's 'De generatione et corruptione'. Another confusion is possibly with a Thomas the Englishman, whose 'Liber propugnatorius' ('c'.1311) contains an attack upon Duns Scotus (died 1308), the Franciscan master, who taught at Oxford during the 1290s. Thomas Sutton wrote 'De esse et essentia' (in support of Aquinas, and against Henri de Gand) and probably also 'Quaestiones super sententias'. He wrote 'Quodlibeta' (between 1291 and 1301), and treatises opposing the doctrine of the plurality of forms. 
David Luscombe', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38039


Swan, John (bap. 1605, d. 1671), Church of England clergyman and encyclopaedist, was baptized at Ickleton, Cambridgeshire, on 26 September 1605, the eldest son of John Swan (died 1639), vicar of nearby Sawston from 1600 to 1639, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Thomas Adams of Wisbech. In 1622 Swan followed his father to Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1626 and proceeding MA in 1629; he later described himself as BD. He was ordained deacon and priest at Peterborough in December 1629, and occurs as minister (probably curate) in Duxford St Peter, Cambridgeshire, in 1630. On 21 June 1634 at Sawston he married Frances Rudland (died 1667). 
In 1635 Swan published the first edition of his encyclopaedia, 'Speculum mundi'. In dedicating it to the duke of Lennox, a contemporary at Trinity who shared the same tutor, he numbered himself among men 'of retired lives, and small-grown fortunes'. The work was loosely based on Guillaume de Saluste du Bartas, 'Premiere semaine, ou, Creation du monde' (1578), and subsequent editions, usually translated in English as 'Divine Weeks'. He organized his material around the six days of creation, concentrating on cosmology, meteorology, mineralogy, zoology, and botany. Although essentially traditionalist, the work shows a critical spirit and a lively interest in recent discoveries and debates. On cosmology he generally followed Tycho Brahe, whose scheme he reproduced in diagrammatic form. 
By the later 1630s Swan revealed himself as a pugnacious Laudian. It is not clear whether 'A sermon pointing out the chiefe causes, and cure, of such unruly stirres, as are not seldom found in the church of God' (1639), preached at Sawston at the archdeacon's visitation on 19 September 1638, was delivered by Swan or by his father. However, the John Swan who wrote the violently anti-puritan 'Profanomastix' (1639), which has stylistic similarities, was explicitly identified as the curate of Duxford St Peter. His 'Redde debitum, or, A Discourse in Defence of the Three Chiefe Fatherhoods' (1640), written 'in confutation of all disobedient and factious kinde of people, who are enemies to both church and state', is in the same vein. 
Yet Swan was not sequestered. In 1646 the county committee installed him briefly as interim following the ejection of the vicar of Duxford St Peter, George Chamberlaine. In 1647 Swan signed the Sawston registers for the first time as minister, and from the same year he was also rector of nearby Whittlesford, although both were poor livings, valued at $20 and $23 p.a. respectively in 1650. Either he had modified his views or he had influential patrons; he certainly counted the militant parliamentarian astrologer, John Booker, among his friends. Swan himself was keenly interested in astrology, both natural and judicial, and vigorously defended it in 'Signa coeli: the Signs of Heaven' (1652), a sermon preached the day before the notorious 'Black Monday', the solar eclipse of 29 March 1652. The following year he published a chronology of the ancient world, 'Calumnus mensurans: the Measuring Reed, or, The Standard of Time', dedicating it to councillor of state Bulstrode Whitelocke. He compiled a series of almanacs published annually in Cambridge from 1657, and may have been responsible too for other titles, such as those ostensibly by 'Swallow' and 'Dove'. 
It is not entirely clear how Swan was affected by the Restoration. He did not sign the Whittlesford registers between 1659 and 1662, nor the Sawston registers between 1662 and 1664. Thereafter, however, his title seems to have been secure. Following the death of Frances Swan in 1667 he married Ellen or Helen Rudland (presumably from the same family) at Pampisford, Cambridgeshire, in September 1669. She was still alive when Swan made his will in 1670, as were three of his children. Swan died in 1671 and was buried at Sawston on 17 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 38040


Swanwick, Helena Maria Lucy (1864-1939), suffragist, was born in Munich, Bavaria, in 1864, the only daughter of Oswald Adalbert Sickert (1828-1885), a commercial artist of Danish origin (who became a German by virtue of the Prussian invasion of Schleswig-Holstein), and his wife, Eleanor Louisa Moravia Henry (1830-1922), the illegitimate daughter of a professional dancer and a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. She had three brothers, of whom the eldest was Walter Sickert, the artist. In 1868 the Sickerts moved to England and settled first in Bedford, and then in Notting Hill, London, where they were part of an artistic and literary circle that included the families of William Morris and Edward Burne-Jones, and later Oscar Wilde. 
Helena was educated at a French boarding-school in Neuville, and then at Notting Hill high school. In 1882 she went to Girton College, Cambridge, where she studied with Henry Sidgwick, Alfred Marshall, and Neville Keynes. She gained second-class honours in the moral sciences tripos (1885). In 1885 she was appointed lecturer in psychology at Westfield College, London. In 1888 she married Frederick Tertius Swanwick (1851-1931), a Cambridge wrangler and lecturer in mathematics at Owens College, Manchester (later to become Manchester University). He was the son of Thomas Swanwick, a Manchester merchant from a Unitarian family. There were no children of the marriage. Helena Swanwick became a close friend of C. P. Scott and his wife, Rachel, and over the next eighteen years wrote and reviewed regularly for the 'Manchester Guardian' on domestic and feminist subjects and gardening. Her first book, 'The Small Town Garden', was published in 1907. 
Swanwick also did voluntary work in a girls' club, which brought her into contact with the local women's trade union council, the Women's Co-operative Guild, and ultimately the Labour Party. Through them she met Emmeline Pankhurst and her daughters, and became involved in the women's suffrage movement. However, she found the physical force tactics employed by the Pankhursts unacceptable, and in 1905 joined the North of England Suffrage Society, which was affiliated to Millicent Fawcett's National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. In 1908 she addressed 150 mass meetings in all parts of Britain, and in 1909-14 was editor of the suffragist newspaper, the 'Common Cause'. 
In 1914 Swanwick resigned from the paper because of differences with her colleagues over the issue of war, and became a member of the executive committee of the Union of Democratic Control, founded by E. D. Morel to campaign against secret diplomacy. From 1915 to 1922 she was chairman of the Women's International League for Peace, which aimed to harness feminism to the peace movement; and throughout the First World War she campaigned for a negotiated peace and the establishment of an international peace-keeping organization. She was highly critical, however, of the terms under which the League of Nations was set up in 1919, partly because the league was permitted the use of force and economic sanctions, and partly because it was committed to supporting the Versailles settlement, which she regarded from the start as an unjust and unstable peace. In 1920-21 she campaigned against the activities of the Black and Tans in Ireland, and in 1923-4 she campaigned against the French invasion of the Ruhr (the latter she saw as legitimizing renascent German nationalism). 
Swanwick published a history of the Union of Democratic Control, 'Builders of Peace' (1924), and from 1925 to 1928 was editor of the organization's journal, 'Foreign Affairs', which she aimed to make a more popular and widely read journal. Through its columns she continually attacked the 'war guilt' clause of the Versailles treaty, denounced the 'tragic-comedy' of the Locarno treaty, and argued that the new phenomenon of aerial bombardment had made any form of war an intolerable option, however just its cause. In 1924 and again in 1928-31 she was a member of the British empire delegation to the League of Nations assembly. In 1929 she visited Bavaria for the first time since her childhood: a visit that reinforced her sense of cultural sympathy with Germany, and of the injustice to the German people meted out by Versailles. 
In 1930 Helena Swanwick was appointed CH for her services to 'peace and the enfranchisement of women'. Throughout the 1930s, however, she was an increasingly isolated figure. Her husband died in 1931; and she found herself increasingly estranged both from moderate members of the peace movement (who disliked her attacks on the League of Nations), and from its more extremist members (who disliked her refusal to countenance violent revolution). Her own stance in this period was one not of pure pacifism, but of non-interventionism and isolationism -- a position that she defended on largely pragmatic grounds. She outlined her ideas and the rationale behind them in a very attractively written autobiography, 'I have been Young' (1935). But her differences with other peace campaigners were reinforced by the rise of Nazism, and by her publication of 'Collective Insecurity' (1937) and 'The Roots of Peace' (1938). These books defended Adolf Hitler's foreign policies as no different from those of other imperialists, past and present, and claimed that nothing could be done about his uncivilized domestic policies (any more than the equally objectionable policies of Soviet Russia). Instead she argued for the development of a federal Europe, with communal control of all vital strategic areas, and for the cultivation of an 'international mind' among European citizens. In the context of the late 1930s such proposals confirmed her separation from all sections of British politics. She committed suicide on 16 November 1939 at her home, Satis, Boulters Lane, Maidenhead, Berkshire, after the outbreak of the Second World War. 
Jose Harris', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38041


Swinderby, William (fl. 1382-1392), heretic, was a disciple of John Wyclif during the 1380s and 1390s. His origins, date of birth, and education are unknown. He is first recorded in Leicester in 1382, but was apparently not a native of the town; he was called a priest, but doubts about his ordination were later expressed. Late in his recorded career he described himself as 'only simply lettered' (Capes, 262), but his extensive citation of biblical, patristic, and canonistic authorities, in both Latin and English, suggests that he must have been familiar with academic sources. 
Before his association with William Smith and other Lollards of Leicester, Swinderby had been a preacher and for a time a hermit, with varied reception, but some support, from the Augustinian canons at Leicester Abbey. He then began preaching Wycliffite views to enthusiastic congregations in and near the town. After an attempt to silence him failed, John Buckingham, bishop of Lincoln, in May 1382 ordered the investigation of sixteen articles brought by three friars; in July Swinderby abjured six heresies and five errors. Punishment was allegedly mitigated by the intercession of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and of his son. Swinderby was freed, but prohibited from further preaching without licence; he returned to Leicester briefly but soon left for Coventry. Little is known of his activities there, but he seems to have resumed the preaching of similar views, and to have been forced to leave the town. 
Swinderby's next certain appearance was in the diocese of Hereford, where Bishop John Trefnant in 1390 obtained a transcript of the condemnation of 1382; evidently Swinderby's preaching was notorious along the Welsh border. In June 1391 Swinderby appeared before Trefnant, and produced a justification of his position on the articles in the Buckingham condemnation and other charges; because of a safe conduct he was allowed to depart unharmed. In the following months he was summoned to appear before Trefnant; this he repeatedly failed to do, although he sent a further document. In October Swinderby appeared and submitted another defence of a longer set of opinions; on these he was adjudged heretical, but he managed to escape from custody. He appealed in writing from Trefnant's condemnation to the king and parliament, but this went unheard, and by early March 1392 he was being sought in Wales. No more is known of his history. 
The charges against Swinderby reveal him to have taught characteristic Wycliffite doctrines concerning the eucharist, absolution, tithes, preaching, and ecclesiastical temporalities; he seems to have gone further than some Wycliffites in urging the spiritual incompetence of clerics in mortal sin. It would seem that, despite the obscurity of much of his career, Swinderby was a considerable influence in the early spread of Lollardy. 
Anne Hudson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38042


Swindin, Norman (1880-1976), chemical engineer, was born at Silkstone Common, Silkstone, Yorkshire, on 16 December 1880, the eldest of three sons and a daughter of William Swindin, stationmaster at Silkstone, and his wife, Martha Normansell. The family moved in 1884 to Macclesfield, where Swindin attended St Paul's School, winning a scholarship to Macclesfield grammar school. His father died in 1892 and Swindin, aged fourteen, started work as a weigh-bridge clerk to help support his family. In 1895 they moved to his mother's home town of Barnsley, and Swindin found employment as a clerk at Rylands bottling plant. His interest in improving the operating systems in the plant brought home to him his lack of mathematical and scientific knowledge and he began to study at evening classes, a habit which continued throughout his working life. 
In 1901 Swindin joined Davis Brothers, a firm of consulting chemical engineers in Manchester, as a draughtsman. He was given a good training and much responsibility, and as George Davis was the owner of the 'Chemical Trade Journal', Swindin found himself writing for this and for technical books published by the firm. He revelled in Manchester's cultural life, joined various social and radical groups, and exchanged his earlier orthodox belief for a respectful atheism. On 14 May 1910 he married Norah Beatrice Bayfield, the daughter of a shipper's clerk, and they set up house at Stockport. It was to be a long and happy, though childless, marriage. 
George Davis's death in 1907 caused Swindin to seek work elsewhere. His next three years were spent at the Lennox foundry in south London where he designed chemical vessels to be cast in a non-corroding alloy invented by Lennox. Swindin did not enjoy his time there but learned much that was of use in later years. There was a brief episode with the Safety Celluloid Company, the first manufacturers of cellophane, before Swindin joined Edgar Ashcroft, a more generous inventor who gave him free rein. Around 1918 a change of management drove him out and he joined the staff of Beckton gasworks, spending two years there before moving to work for Frank Elmore designing apparatus for the extraction of zinc and lead from sulphide ores. 
Swindin confessed in his autobiography that his whole career had consisted of interludes until he joined Elmore (Swindin, 122), but during his time at Elmore's Harlesden workshops he developed two techniques of fundamental importance for handling and processing corrosive chemicals, which also reduced the cost of plant construction. The first was the Swindin burner for submerged combustion, in which the flame was immersed within the liquor to be heated; the second was a method of bonding vulcanized rubber to mild steel so that corrosive liquors could safely be circulated through steel pipes, pumps, and holding tanks. 
Elmore's lead-extraction process ended in failure and his company was taken over. Swindin decided that the time had come for him to set up his own consultancy; having recruited his brother Thomas, and a few friends from previous projects, he set up a laboratory at Wealdstone, trading under the name Nordac. The business flourished and Swindin was able to devote more time to professional activities. He was a member of the Institute of Mechanical Engineers and a founder member of the Institution of Chemical Engineers, in which he was too much of a maverick to reach high office, though he received its Osborne Reynolds medal. He took a keen interest in professional training for young engineers and developed a close association with Loughborough University, which awarded him an honorary degree in 1972. In 1946 and again in 1950 he and his wife crossed the Atlantic to visit chemical engineering plants in the USA and Canada, and in 1948 he was invited to lecture in Paris. 
Reading was always Swindin's passion and his means of self-improvement. He retained a strong belief in social justice, without desiring to take part in politics. He was no stranger to the problems of management and administration, yet these had no appeal for him, and although a successful businessman, he never considered himself a capitalist. Swindin retired at the age of eighty, and moved to Bognor Regis, where he died at his home, 7 Parkway, on 25 August 1976. 


@@@@@


doc= 38043


Swire, John Kidston (1893-1983), businessman, was born on 19 February 1893 in Kensingston Court, London, the elder son and second of four children of John Swire of Hillingdon House, Harlow, Essex, and his wife, Emily Kidston; he was the grandson of John Samuel Swire (1825-1898), who moved the emphasis of the family's trading business from Liverpool to the Far East in the mid-1800s. Of Scottish descent, Jock Swire was educated at Eton College (1906-10) and University College, Oxford (1910-13), where he obtained a third class in jurisprudence. 
Swire joined the family business, John Swire & Sons, in 1913, arriving in Hong Kong just before the First World War broke out. Having been commissioned in the Oxford University officer training corps cavalry in 1912 and transferred to the Essex yeomanry in 1913, he served in the war with his regiment in France, rising to the rank of major. He was twice wounded and twice recommended for decorations; he remained partially deaf for the rest of his life. In 1920 Swire became the London-based director in charge of the company's overseas staff, and thereafter in a series of long, energetic, and often dangerous tours -- the civil war in China was at its height -- he regularly explored every nook and cranny of the company's Far Eastern empire. One of the suggestions, revolutionary at the time, which Swire put to his board in London, was that female clerks should work on an equal footing with men, and for the same pay; another was that Swire recruits earmarked for Eastern posts should be university graduates, and should also learn Chinese. His was also an important voice, together with that of his uncle G. Warren Swire (1883-1949), in arguing that Chinese nationalism had to be accommodated by British firms, and that companies like Swires had, in effect, to 'Sinify' themselves, if they were to survive. On 18 July 1923 Swire married Juliet Richenda (1901-1981), daughter of Theodore Barclay, a Hertford stockbroker; they had two daughters and two sons. 
In the Second World War, when German bombing destroyed the Swire head office in the City, Swire moved his entire staff to his mother's house in Harlow. He was high sheriff of Essex, 1941-2. As chairman of the port employers in London (1941-5), Swire was involved in organizing the loading of the myriad vessels needed to carry troops and stores for the invasion of Europe. Fortunately he had become friendly in the 1930s with Ernest Bevin, then a dock-union leader. Once, after a long negotiation, Swire invited Bevin for a drink and a sandwich at the City of London Club, where the chairman reprimanded him for having brought a working man into the club. Swire was delighted when Bevin subsequently became wartime minister of labour. 
In 1946 Swire became chairman of the group, and he directed its operations until 1966. He succeeded his uncle, G. W. Swire, with whom he had seriously disagreed over the firm's direction. His finest hours came after VJ-day. His contribution, as chairman of John Swire & Sons, to the rebuilding of Hong Kong was inestimable. The colony had been devastated during the Japanese occupation. Swires' Taikoo dockyard was in ruins, Swires' ships sunk or dispersed. Hong Kong's great harbour, full of sunken vessels, was stagnant; the docks were at a standstill; so was public transport. Thanks to Swire's optimism, foresight, and dogged determination, the firm's operations were restored. The joint efforts of Swires, Jardine Matheson, and the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank (which provided unstinting financial support) enabled Hong Kong to rise from its rubble, and provided the foundations on which Chinese and foreign enterprise made it one of the commercial successes of the Eastern world. Swire was chairman of the China Association from 1951 to 1955. 
Swire's other triumph was his creation of a worldwide airline. Before 1939 John Swire & Sons had tinkered with the idea: its large interests on passenger shipping made this a logical step forward. By 1947 it was obvious to John Swire that long-distance travel in the East, as elsewhere, would be by passenger aircraft. Despite the misgivings of his more conservative directors, he induced his company to acquire a small Hong Kong-based airline, Cathay Pacific Airways, recently founded by two wartime fliers. Though somewhat ramshackle, the airline had proved successful. Swire intended to develop a top-class regional airline serving cities in the East and Australia. With the jet age, however, Cathay was obliged to expand. Before he died in 1983, Swire, then honorary president of the company, had the exhilarating experience of watching one of his Cathay Pacific aircraft landing at Gatwick airport, the first of innumerable scheduled passenger flights from and to Hong Kong by the airline he had built up as an international enterprise. 
Swire was very tall and good-looking, had a zest for life, and was a good horseman. He was warm, gregarious, crotchety, and humorous. His wife predeceased him in 1981; and he died on 22 February 1983 at his home, Hubbards Hall, Churchgate Street, Old Harlow, Essex. He was buried at St Mary's, Harlow, on 28 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 38044


Sykes, William Robert (1840-1917), railway signalling engineer, was born on 15 June 1840 at 11 Grosvenor Street, Westminster, London, the eldest in the family of two sons and one daughter of George Sykes, builder, and his wife, Mary Burden. His father died when he was thirteen. He was educated at the Blue Coat School, Westminster. In 1854 he began training in the workshops of the Electric Telegraph Company and four years later transferred to their central London headquarters. In 1860 he left this company and joined Charles Shepherd of Leadenhall Street, maker of chronometers and horological instruments and inventor of the electrical clocks used by the Royal Observatory. 
In 1863 Sykes joined the London, Chatham, and Dover Railway, taking charge of maintenance of their telegraph instruments, clocks, and watches under the chief engineer for telegraphs and electric lighting. Within two years he had designed and installed electrical repeater devices, indicating to signalmen the position of semaphore signal arms which were outside their range of vision; an automatic device recording on tape the bell-code communications between signal boxes; and the first track circuiting in which the presence of a train on a section of track was indicated electrically in the signal cabin. In 1872 he introduced at Victoria on the Metropolitan District Railway an automatic train-protection system whereby a red lens positioned in front of a white signal light was raised above it on actuation from an electrical contact only when the track section ahead was clear. This system was also used later by the Metropolitain in Paris. 
In 1875 Sykes achieved one of the greatest advances in safety in railway operation with his 'lock and block' system. In this the mechanical signals were interlocked with electrical block instruments in the signal cabins, by which a train was authorized to enter the succeeding section only when this was not occupied by another train. Thus the signalman was prevented from inadvertently releasing signals for a second train to enter the section before the first was clear. This system overcame the risks of human error which had been the cause of serious accidents. The Board of Trade repeatedly advocated the use of 'lock and block' in its accident reports. Sykes's system, which was also used for interlocking railway swing bridges across rivers, was applied widely in Britain and in the USA, Russia, and Japan. A later development was the combination of track circuiting, in which an electrical circuit is completed, detecting the presence of wheels of a train passing over a section of track, with 'lock and block' so that the electric-block instruments were controlled by the trains themselves and thus safety was doubly assured. 
Electrically actuated signals worked by small switches and interlocked with the points they controlled were first introduced by Sykes at Penge in 1875 and were the forerunner of large electro-mechanical signalling systems in which electrically actuated signals controlled by small slides were introduced, with lever-controlled points actuated by rodding. Sykes was also responsible for many other signalling and safety devices, including depression or fouling bars interlocked with signals, thus providing valuable protection against these inadvertently being set to allow the passage of a train if other trains were obstructing its path. 
In 1899 the London, Chatham, and Dover and the South Eastern railways were brought under the operational control of a joint managing committee and Sykes was appointed consulting electrical engineer to the new organization, in which capacity he continued until his death, having served the same railway for fifty-four years. He also founded the W. R. Sykes Interlocking Signal Company, which was continued by his sons and eventually absorbed by Westinghouse Brake and Signal Company. Sykes obtained awards for his signalling and railway safety inventions at many international exhibitions, notably at Paris in 1881; Crystal Palace in 1882, 1892, and 1893; Antwerp in 1894; and Brussels in 1897. 
On 14 July 1861 Sykes married Eliza Church, from co. Cork, daughter of Robert Church, lithographic printer. They had two daughters and four sons, one of whom (also an inventor) died relatively young, and three of whom became engineers. Sykes died on 2 October 1917 at his home, Roselands, Joy Lane, in Whitstable, Kent, and was buried at St Luke's cemetery, Magpie Lane, Bromley, Kent. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38045


Symons, Alphonse James Albert (1900-1941), book collector and writer, was born on 16 August 1900 in Battersea, London, the eldest in the family of four sons and one daughter of Maurice (or Morris) Albert Symons (died 1929), auctioneer, a Jewish immigrant from eastern Europe, and his wife, Minnie Louise, 'nee' Bull. Julian Gustave Symons was his youngest brother. He was educated at Wix's Lane School, Battersea, and left at the age of fourteen to take up an apprenticeship to a firm of fur dealers for three years. Although declared unfit for military service, he joined the Artists' Rifles Officers' Training Corps and began an active social career. On 1 August 1924 he married Victoria Emily (Gladys) Weeks ('b'. 1897/8), the daughter of Arthur Weeks, a builder and decorator. The marriage ended in divorce in 1936; there were no children. 
In 1922, supported initially by William Foyle, Symons had started the First Edition Club, a centre for bibliographical information and a dining club in Bloomsbury. Symons organized the selection of 'fifty books of the year' from 1926 on and, despite the end of his First Edition Club in 1931, became an important influence in the bibliographical world through the foundation, in 1930, of the 'Book-Collector's Quarterly'. Symons specialized in the authors of the 1890s but, although he worked from 1925 to 1930 on compiling 'A select bibliography and history of the books of the nineties, with notes on their authors', his only separate bibliographical publication in this field was a check-list of W. B. Yeats (1924). His 'Anthology of Nineties Verse' (1928) was followed by a biography of Emin Pasha in the same year, and then by a life of the explorer Sir Henry Morton Stanley (1933). In 1934 came Symons's best-known work, 'The Quest for Corvo', a brilliantly evocative account of how he established the facts surrounding the life and literary career of Baron Corvo (Frederick Rolfe), the eccentric homosexual writer. The book took the form of a detective fiction, in which the author's pursuit of the baron is intertwined with his account of the baron's own life. It was an immediate success, not only for its sexual interest and its association with the notorious Maundy Gregory, but also because it was seen as 'an experiment in biography' (Symons, 'Life', 132), revealing as much of the biographer and of his interest in his subject as it did of the subject himself. Writing did not come easily to Symons: 'the act of composition has always been accompanied by more pain than pleasure' (Symons and Holland, 200), and was often neglected in favour of social engagements. 
Symons lived a financially precarious life to the full and, in his own phrase, 'no one so poor has lived so well' (Symons, 'Life', 268). He favoured suits of unusual colour and cloth with double-breasted waistcoats, and 'extravagant shirts and ties and pointed, hand-made shoes' (ibid., 60-61). He taught himself calligraphy by copying out passages from the 'Dictionary of National Biography' in a minute Gothic script. In 1931 he was associated with Andre L. Simon in the foundation of the Saintsbury Club and, in October 1933, with that of the Wine and Food Society, the aim of which was 'to raise standards of cooking throughout the country' and to provide 'practical demonstrations of the arts of the table' (ibid., 142). His many-sided aesthetic interests led him to surround himself with first editions, Bristol glass, mother-of-pearl knick-knacks, and, above all, his notable collection of musical boxes (later given to the Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford). In reaction to his family, and possibly to their Jewish background, he sought an escape into social life and literary interests, his sensitivity to his first name leading him later to change it to Alroy, the name of a character in a novel by Benjamin Disraeli. His friends commonly called him AJ. He was possessed of an aggressive resolve for social success, coupled with an interest in (but not a taste for) the psychologically abnormal. An epitaph referred to 'kindness and culture, lovely things and mirth'. Symons died of cardiac failure in the Essex County Hospital, Colchester, on 25 August 1941. 


@@@@@


doc= 38046


Szabo, Violette Reine Elizabeth (1921-1945), special operations officer, was born in Paris on 26 June 1921, the second child and only daughter in the family of five children of Charles George Bushell, a regular soldier, and his wife, Reine Blanche Leroy, a dressmaker from Pont-Remy, Somme, France. He held various jobs in France and England before settling in 1932 in Brixton as a secondhand motor car dealer. From her mother's family Violette picked up fluent French, spoken with an English accent. She left the London county council school in Stockwell Road, Brixton, at fourteen to work as a shop assistant. She was under 5 feet 5 inches tall, but strikingly good-looking, with dark hair and eyes and vivacious manners. 
Violette married in Aldershot, on 21 August 1940, Etienne Michel Rene Szabo, a thirty-year-old Frenchman of Hungarian descent from Marseilles, who had fought in Norway with the French Foreign Legion and elected to join General de Gaulle's nascent Free French forces. He was soon posted to north Africa, and never met their only child, Tania, a daughter born on 8 June 1941. He died on 27 October 1942 from wounds received the previous day in battle. 
To avenge him, his widow joined the independent French section of the Special Operations Executive (SOE) in October 1943. During the usual paramilitary, parachute, and security training it emerged that Szabo was an admirable shot. She parachuted twice into occupied France, each time as courier to Philippe Liewer, an experienced agent. Her first mission began on 5-6 April 1944. They found that the Gestapo had broken up Liewer's former group of saboteur friends between Rouen and Le Havre; they returned to England by light aircraft on 30 April. Between her first and second missions she was commissioned an ensign in the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry. 
Szabo and Liewer returned to France on 7-8 June 1944 to set up a new group of resisters between Limoges and Perigueux. On 10 June she and two companions, in a motor car, encountered a German road block at Salon-la-Tour, some 30 miles south-east of Limoges. Both sides opened fire. According to her George Cross citation Szabo, armed only with a sten sub-machine gun, covered her companions' retreat through standing corn for twenty minutes until she had no more ammunition and was taken prisoner. (Another version of her capture has suggested that she tripped, fell, and was captured unarmed.) Brutal interrogations got nothing out of her but contempt. 
On 8 August, handcuffed to a neighbour on a train bound for Germany, Szabo crawled round offering water to her fellow prisoners while the train was under attack by the Royal Air Force. She was put in Ravensbruck concentration camp, whence she went with two SOE colleagues, Lilian Rolfe and Denise Bloch, on a working party at Torgau. For some infraction they were then sent to a punishment camp some 60 miles eastward, at Klein Konigsberg. Even her tremendously high spirits were lowered by its regime. Her companions returned from it hardly able to stand; she was not much sturdier. About 27 January 1945, shortly after their return to Ravensbruck, all three were shot dead. Szabo was awarded a French Croix de Guerre in 1944, and a posthumous George Cross. This was presented to the four-year-old Tania in 1946. 
Violette Szabo's wartime exploits were immortalized in 1958 in a film, 'Carve her Name with Pride' (from the book of that name by R. J. Minney). The role of Violette was taken by Virginia McKenna. A commemorative blue plaque was placed on her home at 18 Burnley Road, Stockwell, London, and early in 2000 a museum about her was opened at Cartref, her uncle's home in Wormelow, near Hereford. 
M. R. D. Foot', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38047


Talbot, George (1816-1886), papal official, was born at Evercreech, near Wells, the third son in the family of five sons and four daughters of James Talbot, a lawyer and third Baron Talbot of Malahide ('c'.1768-1850), and his wife, Anne Sarah (died 1857), daughter of Samuel Rodbard of Evercreech in Somerset. After education at St Mary's Hall, Oxford (where he graduated BA in 1839 and MA in 1841), Talbot followed the familiar path of aristocratic younger sons to ordination in the Church of England, and in 1840 was appointed to a family living at Evercreech. He was received into the Roman Catholic church by Nicholas Wiseman in 1843 at St Mary's College, Oscott. He trained for the Catholic priesthood at Oscott alongside Edmund Stonor and Edward Howard. Both men were lifelong friends of his and also had influential careers in Rome. In June 1846 Talbot was ordained priest by Wiseman at Oscott. He applied to join the English Oratorian Congregation, newly formed by John Henry Newman, but was turned down in March 1847. Until 1849 he worked as a pastoral priest at the St George's Cathedral in Southwark, which he was reluctant to leave. However, through Wiseman's influence, he was appointed a canon of St Peter's, Rome, and a chamberlain to Pope Pius IX. 
As a recent convert with only brief pastoral experience, Talbot's knowledge of the English Catholic scene was limited. Today he is best remembered for his view that the laity should be restricted to hunting, shooting, and entertaining (Purcell, 2.318). However, he gained the confidence and friendship of Pope Pius IX and exercised considerable influence for the next twenty years. Despite the fact that the rector of the English College in Rome acted as agent for the English bishops, Talbot became a self-appointed and unofficial agent, working assiduously for Wiseman and Henry Edward Manning, and strongly supporting their ultramontane line. 
Many other English bishops resented Talbot, and his frank letters to his close confidant Manning caused the latter to describe him in later years as 'the most imprudent man who ever lived'. Manning's biographer, Edmund Sheridan Purcell, certainly made very free with Talbot's letters to Manning from Rome, thus providing Lytton Strachey with dubious ammunition for his hostile portrait of Manning in 'Eminent Victorians' (1918). Talbot was implacably opposed to Newman, describing him as 'the most dangerous man in England'. In the jurisdictional dispute between Wiseman and his coadjutor George Errington, Talbot sided against Errington and did all he could to bring about the coadjutor's eventual resignation. 
Talbot's presence and his influence in Rome undermined that of successive rectors of the English College. He exercised increasing influence over the college, and in 1860 was appointed delegate protector. In 1852 he was mainly responsible for establishing within the walls of the English College the Collegio Pio, reorganized in 1898 and now known as the Beda College, for the training of convert and older clergy. In 1866 he launched an ambitious plan to rebuild the college chapel and began fund-raising with a donation of $100 from the pope himself. By 1867 his influence was such that he was able to force the resignation of the rector in office and persuade the pope to accept his nominee. 
However, Talbot's days close to the papal throne were by then limited. Worry over the funding of the rebuilding of the chapel, possibly combined with his capacity for intrigue, spilled over into a genuine mental instability, and in 1869 he was removed from Rome to an asylum for the insane in Bon Secours convent at Passy, a suburb of Paris. For many years the pope kept Talbot's apartments in the Vatican ready in case he should return. He died at Passy on 16 October 1886, and was buried quietly in the cemetery of Pere Lachaise. 


@@@@@


doc= 38048


Talbot, John, sixteenth earl of Shrewsbury and sixteenth earl of Waterford (1791-1852), Roman Catholic layman and patron of the Gothic revival, was born at Grafton Manor, Bromsgrove, on 18 March 1791, the eldest surviving child of John Joseph Talbot (1765-1815), who was the brother of Charles, the fifteenth earl of Shrewsbury, and his wife, Catherine (1768-1791), daughter of Thomas Clifton of Lytham, Lancashire. His mother died two months after his birth and on his father's remarriage he was entrusted to the care of his great-aunt, the dowager countess of Shrewsbury, at Lacock Abbey, Wiltshire. Born in the same year as the 'Catholic Relief Act' was passed, Talbot was one of the first sons of the Catholic nobility to benefit from a Catholic education in Britain, being sent first to the Benedictines at Vernon Hall, Lancashire (the forerunner of Ampleforth College), then in 1802 to Stonyhurst, and finally in 1806 to St Edmund's College, near Ware. In 1812 he made a Mediterranean tour, accompanied by the Revd John Chetwode Eustace, and in Spain witnessed some of the action of the Peninsular War. In 1814 he married Maria Theresa (1794-1856), eldest daughter of William Talbot of Castle Talbot, co. Wexford; they had a son who died in infancy and two daughters. 
In June 1827 Talbot succeeded to the earldom and estates of his uncle Charles. The Talbots were one of the oldest Catholic families in Britain, who had managed to retain most of their estates. They were the most important landowners in the midlands. The principal family seat at Heythrop, Oxfordshire, was burnt down in 1831, and the new earl took up residence at Alton Abbey, Staffordshire, a Gothic mansion erected by his predecessor. Reluctant to pursue the political career that was open to him following the 'Catholic Emancipation Act' of 1829, he set about the realization at Alton of a Gothic dream, made possible by the artistic genius of A. W. Pugin, who had converted to Catholicism shortly after meeting him. Between 1839 and 1851 Pugin completed the mansion, now renamed Alton Towers, and built Alton Castle with its neo-medieval church, school, almshouse, and hospital, thereby embodying the spiritual ideals that Talbot shared with his close friend and collaborator Ambrose Phillipps De Lisle. 
Shrewsbury sponsored the building of many of the churches designed by Pugin, notably that of St Giles's, Cheadle, Staffordshire, and provided financial support for De Lisle's schemes for the reconversion of England. However, he took a far more realistic approach to the revival, and did not share De Lisle's conviction that the Oxford Movement would lead to the reunion of the Church of England with the Roman Catholic church. Although regarded by the leaders of the Catholic revival as their patron, 'the Good Earl John' (as he was known by them) retained something of the old Catholic suspicion of 'enthusiasm'. When the English Catholic hierarchy was restored in 1850, Shrewsbury defended the restoration in public and denounced the Catholic peers who distanced themselves from it; but he nevertheless felt that the triumphalism of Cardinal Nicholas Wiseman was imprudent and ill-advised. Politically he was a whig who nevertheless supported the union, and was distressed to find himself at odds with some of his fellow Catholics over Ireland. He deplored the support given to Daniel O'Connell by the Catholic periodical 'The Tablet'. 
By 1850 the earl was spending most of his time in Italy, closing Alton Towers for most of the year in order to save money for his schemes. In all, he is estimated to have spent some $500,000 on churches and charities. He died at Naples on 9 November 1852. His remains were taken to Alton, where his funeral on 14 December was the occasion for a solemn ritual worthy of its setting, and was attended by virtually all the leading Catholic churchmen and laity. Pugin died two months before his patron, in September 1852. Both Shrewsbury's daughters married Roman noblemen. The younger, Gwendalyn, Princess Borghese, died in 1840 at the age of twenty-two while ministering to the victims of an epidemic at Rome. The elder, Mary, born in 1815, married Prince Doria Pamphilij. Shrewsbury's will was the subject of a prolonged legal dispute between the family and the executors, Charles Scott Murray and Ambrose Phillipps De Lisle. He was succeeded by his cousin Bertram Arthur Talbot (1832-1856). On the death of the latter at the age of twenty-four the title passed out of Catholic hands and devolved upon Henry John Chetwynd, third Earl Talbot of Hensol. 


@@@@@


doc= 38049


Tate, Maurice William (1895-1956), cricketer, was born at 28 Warleigh Road, Preston, Brighton, on 30 May 1895. He was the eldest in the family of three sons and seven daughters of Frederick William Tate (1867-1943), professional cricketer, and his wife, Gertrude Beach. One of his younger brothers, Cecil Frederick Tate, played a few first-class games for Derbyshire and Warwickshire between 1928 and 1933. Maurice Tate was educated at Belvedere School, Haywards Heath, but was not good enough to play for the school eleven, and aspired rather to become a farmer. However, encouraged by his father, he had a trial for Sussex County Cricket Club when he was fifteen and made his debut when he was seventeen. Fond legend has it that his father, following his own somewhat traumatic part in the 1902 test against Australia at Old Trafford when his dropped catch contributed substantially to defeat in a close-run contest, consoled himself with the anticipation that his son, then but a seven-year-old, would compensate in effective kind. He lived to enjoy that pleasure. 
Tate played for Sussex from 1912 to 1937, with an interruption of four seasons during the First World War when he served in France as a signaller in the Royal Artillery. During his Sussex career, embracing 525 matches, he took 2211 wickets for the county at an average cost of 17.41 runs. No mean bat, he also scored just over 17,000 runs for Sussex, and he did the double of 100 wickets and 1000 runs seven times for Sussex alone. Counting all first-class cricket he completed the much-cherished double in eight domestic seasons and once overseas. Three times he took 200 wickets and scored over 1000 runs in a season, while his best bowling performance was nine for 71 for Sussex v. Middlesex at Lord's in 1926. In all first-class cricket he had 2784 victims, at an average of 18.16, and he took 100 wickets in each of fourteen seasons. With his hard-hitting and combative style he scored 21,717 runs (average 25) in all first-class cricket, his highest score being 203 -- one of his twenty-three centuries -- for Sussex against Northamptonshire at Hove in 1921. Earlier in that year, on 20 January 1921, he had married Kathleen Miriam, the 21-year-old daughter of Alfred Charles Freeman, artist, with whom he had twin daughters and two sons. 
Although Tate made his considerable name as a bowler, it is proper to acknowledge that, as one of only nine cricketers to have accomplished the substantial feat of scoring 20,000 runs and taking 2000 wickets, he should be recognized as one of cricket's leading all-rounders. It was as a bowler that he was first chosen to play for England; he made his debut in 1924 and thereafter won thirty-nine caps, including appearances in twenty consecutive test matches against Australia, and nineteen against South Africa, India, and the West Indies. He took 155 wickets, at an average of 26.16, for England, quite a haul for the period, his best series being during the MCC tour of Australia in 1924-5, when he took thirty-eight wickets, a record for England versus Australia until broken by J. C. Laker in 1956, just after Tate's death. He is still regarded as second only to the great S. F. Barnes as the scourge of Australian batsmen on their own soil. 
Under the influence of the Sussex and England captain A. E. R. Gilligan, who converted him from the slower mode he had inherited from his father, Tate developed into a fast medium bowler from 1922. He was able to control deceptive swerve and telling accuracy over exacting periods. His briskness of pace off the pitch became legendary and he is said to have been the first bowler deliberately to have deployed the ball's seam in his technique. He is generally regarded as one of the best two or three fast medium bowlers in cricket's annals, with only notables such as Sir Alec Bedser or George Lohmann, both of Surrey, thought of as worthy of comparison. As C. B. Fry, cited in Tate's 'Wisden' obituary, said, Maurice Tate 'could make the ball rear off the pitch like a snake striking' (Green, 877). 
'Chubby' Tate was the most whole-hearted and cheerful of competitors. He was a large, strong man of genuinely and pleasantly rustic character. He constantly bore a huge grin and this, together with his massively booted feet, made him the darling of the sports cartoonists of his day, notably Tom Webster of the 'Daily Mail'. That greater press coverage, coupled with the social efforts of colleagues such as Herbert Sutcliffe and Walter Hammond, marked the transition in the status of professional cricketers from the old-style 'feudal' position to something more akin to a well-respected technician. Maurice Tate was the first 'pro' to captain Sussex; he was made an honorary life member of the county club, where memorial gates commemorate him, and he was one of twenty-six former professionals made MCC life members in 1949. He published his memoirs in 1934, and in the early 1930s sponsored commercial products including Hovis bread and Shredded Wheat breakfast cereal. 
Tate's decline was abrupt -- he was no longer a lethal bowler -- and his first-class career ended in 1937, when he was 'paid off' by the county in circumstances that left him aggrieved. He played professional league cricket for Walsall for a spell, and undertook occasional journalism. During service in the Second World War he was commissioned as a billeting officer, a further sign of the cricket professional making good. In 1950 he was appointed cricket coach at Tonbridge School. The amiable host of several Sussex hostelries, Tate died suddenly from a blood clot at the Greyhound Hotel, Wadhurst, Sussex, where he was landlord, on 18 May 1956. He was buried in Wadhurst churchyard, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 38050


Tauber, Richard (1891-1948), singer, was born on 16 May 1891 in Linz, Austria. He was illegitimate and was baptized Richard Denemy after his mother's maiden name. His father, (Anton) Richard Tauber, was an actor, and his mother, Elisabeth Denemy (later Seiffert), played musical comedy roles. He studied at the conservatory in Frankfurt (1909-11) and with Carl Beines in Freiburg, and made a youthful debut in 1913 as Tamino in 'The Magic Flute' at the Neues Stadt-Theater in Chemnitz, of which his father was director, with instant success. He was soon engaged on a five-year contract with the Dresden Opera, where he sang all the leading lyrical tenor parts. In 1915 he made his first appearance at the German Opera House, Berlin. From 1922 his career centred on Vienna, where he sang the classical repertory at the Staatsoper and operetta at the Theater an der Wien. 
During the Mozart festivals in both Munich and Salzburg, Tauber became enormously popular as Tamino, Belmonte, and Don Ottavio. The famous Swedish Don Giovanni, John Forsell, declared that the young Tauber was the greatest Ottavio he had ever heard, and he was noted for the intense conviction with which he declaimed to his Donna Anna (in the German text then still generally in use, even at festivals) the solemn oath, 'Ich schwore'. Among his non-Mozartian roles those of Max in Weber's 'Der Freischutz' and of Hans in the German version of Smetana's 'The Bartered Bride' were especially successful. 
Tauber's name and achievements became better known to the general public, however, in the sphere of lighter music: in operetta rather than in opera, and above all in the stage works of Franz Lehar, in which he charmed thousands by his sympathetic tenor quality and by the grace and variety of his vocal inflections. The song 'You are my heart's delight' from Leher's operetta 'The Land of Smiles' (1929) was one of his most famous, and it was in this work that he first came to England in 1931. He also showed marked ability as a conductor with the London Philharmonic Orchestra and as a composer. His operetta 'The Singing Dream' (1934) was a great success in Vienna, and his other works included the operetta 'Old Chelsea' (1943) and an orchestral piece, 'Sunshine Suite'. Except for a film version of Leoncavallo's 'Pagliacci', his film career was mainly an extension of his operetta activities. 
It would not be quite true to claim that Tauber's wide experience of light music, and the strain of singing long parts, with numerous encores, throughout the week left no mark on either his style or his vocal chords, but he can be justly likened to two other similarly popular tenors, John McCormack and Tito Schipa, in his ability to return successfully to serious music until the end of his career. In 1938 and 1939 he appeared under Sir Thomas Beecham at Covent Garden in his three greatest Mozartian roles and in a German-language 'Bartered Bride', and after the war he insisted on taking part, with his old colleagues, the visiting Vienna State Opera, as Don Ottavio in a 'Don Giovanni' at Covent Garden -- his final stage appearance in September 1947. 
In appearance Tauber was not handsome, but genial. His first marriage, in 1927, to the operetta singer Carlotta Vanconti, was unsuccessful and led to protracted divorce proceedings, which were not finalized until 1936; in that year he married his second wife, the English stage and film actress, Diana Napier, and settled in England. He was naturalized British in 1940. After his death Diana Napier wrote (or collaborated in) three volumes of biography or memoirs. There were no children of either marriage. Tauber died from lung cancer on 8 January 1948 at the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, London. 
Desmond Shawe-Taylor', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38051


Mill, Harriet (1807-1858), advocate of sexual equality, was born on 10 October 1807 at 18 Beckford Row, Walworth, in south London, daughter of Harriet ('nee' Hurst) and Thomas Hardy (died 1849), surgeon and 'man-midwife' of Walworth. Harriet Hurst's family lived in Walworth; they were of cavalier stock and very proud of their lineage. Thomas Hardy's family were of the gentry, with lands in Yorkshire, which Thomas was to inherit in 1836. At the time of his daughter's birth Thomas had been for five years a member of the Royal College of Surgeons and was practising in Walworth. Harriet was the middle child, with five brothers and a younger sister; only with her youngest brother, Arthur, did Harriet remain on good terms. She appears to have been educated at home; at least no outside schooling is known. On 14 March 1826, at the age of eighteen, she married John Taylor (1796-1849) of Islington, eleven years her senior and a partner in a family firm of wholesale druggists in the City of London; they had three children: Herbert ('b'. 1827), Algernon ('b'. 1830), and Helen Taylor (1831-1907). The Taylors' first home was at 4 Christopher Street, Finsbury, close to the family firm and the Unitarian chapel at South Place, which they attended. At the end of 1832 they moved to 17 Kent Terrace, Regent's Park. 
Although there is a tradition that Harriet Hardy married John Taylor solely to escape from a home dominated by an irascible father, the few extant letters from the first years of their marriage show great affection between Harriet and John Taylor, and affection would appear to have remained the hallmark of all the years of what was to become an unconventional domestic life. They remained on friendly terms, celebrating together family events and writing frequently, especially when she was travelling. 
In the early years of their marriage Harriet and John Taylor had, through their Unitarian connections, become the centre of a small circle of radicals; in this group Harriet Taylor was an outspoken and passionate advocate of completely equal rights for women and men. One of their circle was William Johnson Fox, minister at South Place Chapel and editor of the advanced and feminist 'Monthly Repository', and it was he, probably near the end of 1830, who was asked to bring John Stuart Mill (1806-1873) to one of the frequent dinners at the hospitable and congenial Taylor home. Fox's daughter gave in her memoirs a description of Harriet Taylor as she remembered her in these years: 'Mrs. Taylor at this date, when she was, perhaps about five and twenty years of age, was possessed of a beauty and grace quite unique of their kind. Tall and slight, with a slightly drooping figure, the movements of undulating grace. A small head, a swan-like throat, and a complexion like a pearl. Large eyes, not soft or sleepy, but with a look of quiet command in them. A low sweet voice with very distinct utterance emphasized the effect of her engrossing personality. Her children idolized her. (Hayek, 25)' And not only her children; John Stuart Mill too idolized her. The attraction between Harriet Taylor and John Stuart Mill was immediate, intellectually fired by their shared views about social, educational, and political reform, especially the removal of the legal disabilities imposed on women. It was for them both an intimate and lasting friendship at first sight. 
In 1833 Harriet Taylor and Mill travelled to Paris together; after some weeks she decided a complete break with her husband would bring 'insupportable unhappiness' (Mill to W. J. Fox, 5 or 6 Nov 1833; 'Collected Works', 12.188). Some time in the late 1830s John Taylor agreed to her having her own establishment, and she moved with her daughter, first (probably for only a short time) to Keston Heath, Bromley, Kent, and in the late 1830s to Walton-on-Thames, 17 miles south-west of London in Surrey. (Algernon seems to have lived with them at least part of the time in his earlier years; Herbert lived with his father.) John Taylor stayed in Kent Terrace; John Stuart Mill remained at home in Kensington with his parents and siblings. Trying to avoid the gossip this 'demenage a trois' excited, and suffering from ill health, Harriet Taylor lived away from society, seeing only a few close friends including, of course, John Stuart Mill frequently, and her husband occasionally. As her lungs became worse, she made a number of tours in Europe seeking a warmer, drier climate, accompanied by her daughter and sometimes by Mill; she also spent part of several winters in the south of England. 
In May of 1849, when John Taylor told her he was dying of cancer, Harriet Taylor returned to Kent Terrace to nurse him until his death two months later. After a suitable interval she married John Stuart Mill on 21 April 1851. They lived in Blackheath Park, south-east of London; Helen also lived there, continuing to take care of her mother and the household. In October 1858, after Mill's retirement from the East India Company on its being taken over by the crown, the Mills travelled to the south of France for her health. But to no avail: Harriet Mill died of a haemorrhage of the lungs on 3 November 1858 at the Hotel de l'Europe, Avignon. Mill wrote: 'while she lived, she never sought to be known beyond her small circle of intimates' (Mill to A. Ruge, 2 March 1859; 'Collected Works', 15.598). 
It is not easy to estimate the importance and influence of a reclusive woman who wrote little; if there had been no John Stuart Mill, Harriet Mill would not be remembered. But there was, and her influence on and through Mill was great, changing his reasoned conviction that 'complete equality in all legal, political, social and domestic relations... ought to exist between men and women' into a crusade for the improvement of mankind. He had held these advanced views before he met her, but it was she who showed him the practical consequences of the lack of equality, 'the mode in which the consequences of the inferior position of women intertwine themselves with all the evils of the existing society and with the difficulties of human improvement' ('Collected Works', 1.252). This aspect of her influence is not unexpected, for her early essay on marriage, written probably for Mill in 1834 and not for publication, shows a young woman more strongly influenced by the Romantic movement than by any formal education, but acutely aware of the everyday effects on women and on men, especially in the married state, of women's social inequality. There can be little reason to doubt that it was she who convinced Mill that the complete equality of the sexes before the law -- the argument later developed in 'The Subjection of Women' -- was the next immediate and essential rung on the ladder to the hoped-for heaven that was their shared vision. 
The little that Harriet is known to have published does not refute Mill's estimate of her influence on him, although it makes credence in her genius difficult. She wrote eleven pieces for the 'Monthly Repository' (one in 1831 and ten in 1832): critical notices, poems and mood pieces, reviews and historical essays, all short. Her most substantial essay, 'The Enfranchisement of Women', was published under John Stuart Mill's name in the 'Westminster Review' (55, 1851, 298-311); in it she claimed for women 'their admission, in law and in fact, to equality in all rights, political, civil, and social, with the male citizens of the community'. She argued that without equality between the sexes, society would remain tyrannical and corrupt; this argument was to be developed in the Mills' joint productions. 
Harriet published nothing else on her own, but she unquestionably wrote or dictated part of the letters they wrote together to the newspapers (mostly to the 'Morning Chronicle') in 1846 and the early 1850s in response to reported cases of domestic brutality. There is evidence from these letters and also from drafts surviving in their papers that at this time they were attempting to work out together the practical consequences of sexual inequality, which Harriet Mill had touched on in 'The Enfranchisement'. In the letters they emphasized the importance of domestic practices in corrupting or improving society. They had come to believe that the prevalence and acceptance of domestic brutality, especially among the English working classes, and its lenient treatment in the courts helped explain empirically why some hopes held nearly twenty years earlier by the band of visionaries writing for the 'Monthly Repository' had not materialized. Women's legal inequality resulted in injustice and tyranny in the home, reflected not only in the relations between husbands and wives but also in the treatment and upbringing of children. These brutal qualities, imbibed from birth, permeated social attitudes at all levels and in all areas. They were convinced that the slavery in family life was the root cause for the failure of reforms to effect fundamental improvements in society and that thus it had a profound, historically crucial, effect on society. 
Harriet Mill's share in and influence on John Stuart Mill's major works cannot be documented precisely with chapter and verse. She read and commented on the draft of his 'Principles of Political Economy' (1848): Mill's dedication of the book to her -- a dedication John Taylor would not allow to be printed ('Collected Works', 3.1026, n. 2) -- and his attribution to her prompting of the chapter 'On the probable futurity of the working classes' bear ample testimony to her part in this work. And one can attribute to her at least the heightening of his awareness that 'From an imperfection in our language... there is often almost a necessity for using the masculine 'pronoun' where both sexes are equally concerned, but seldom the masculine 'substantive'. The effect upon the mind of this phraseology is bad; it encourages the habit of 'passing by' one-half of the race as not concerned in its highest interests. ('The Examiner', 1 June 1834)' Although Mill continued in his own work to sanction the practice, a silent but significant change occurred at the time of his marriage. In the revision for the third edition of his 'Logic' (1851) and of his 'Principles of Political Economy' (1852) he systematically altered, in gender-neutral contexts, 'men' to 'people' or 'mankind' (to him evidently a neutral term), and 'a man' and 'he' to 'a person'. He also added an explicit footnote in that edition of the 'Logic' referring 'to the almost universal habit, of thinking and speaking of one-half the human species as the whole' ('Collected Works', 8.837 n). 
As their health, particularly Harriet's, became of increasing concern, they planned together the future publications on which John Stuart Mill should work, one of them being 'On Liberty' (1859). On it Harriet's influence is usually acknowledged -- certainly it contains ideas she expressed in her earliest unpublished writings; but of the works which Mill wrote after his wife's death 'The Subjection of Women' (1869) shows most undeniably her influence. The argument of the book is simple and straightforward, and is clearly a fulfilment of the idea, which Mill attributes to her early influence on him and which they had been developing together in the 1850s, 'That the principle which regulates the existing social relations between the two sexes -- the legal subordination of one sex to the other -- is wrong in itself, and now one of the chief hindrances to human improvement; and that it ought to be replaced by a principle of perfect equality, admitting no power or privilege on the one side, nor disability on the other. ('Collected Works', 21.259)' There are strong echoes of Harriet Mill's phrasing in her early unfinished pieces on marriage in 'The Enfranchisement', and in the newspaper letters they wrote together; the themes of male tyranny, domestic slavery, the husband's ownership of his wife and family, and domestic brutality set the tone of 'The Subjection of Women': '[H]owever brutal a tyrant she may unfortunately be chained to -- though she may know that he hates her, though it may be his daily pleasure to torture her, and though she may feel it impossible not to loathe him -- he can claim from her and enforce the lowest degradation of a human being, that of being made the instrument of an animal function contrary to her inclinations. ('Collected Works', 21.285)' Harriet Mill's posthumous influence can also be seen in the activities of John Stuart Mill and her daughter Helen Taylor in furthering the suffrage cause. John Stuart Mill's amendment to the second 'Reform Bill' on 27 May 1867, to replace the word 'man' with 'person', bears a singular resemblance to his earlier amendments to his own editions, and the arguments are many of them similar to those in Harriet Mill's article (but it must be said these arguments were the common coin of many suffragists by the 1860s). John Stuart Mill was honorary president of the first London suffrage society, and both he and Helen Taylor worked hard behind the scenes and spoke at public meetings for the society. The bond that joined John Stuart Mill and his stepdaughter and motivated them was their common devotion to Harriet Mill. John Stuart Mill bought a house overlooking her grave in Avignon, where they lived for six months of each year. There and in London John Stuart Mill and Helen Taylor laboured to advance the ideas they had shared with 'her'. Mill and Taylor stood together at the graveside when the huge slab of finest Carrara marble was lowered onto the top of Harriet Mill's grave. There Mill had writ in stone: 'To the beloved memory of Harriet Mill, the dearly beloved and deeply regretted wife of John Stuart Mill. Her great and loving heart, her noble soul, her clear, powerful and original comprehensive intellect made her the guide and support, the instructor in wisdom and the example of goodness, as she was the sole earthly delight, of those who had the happiness to belong to her. As earnest for the public good as she was generous and devoted to all who surrounded her, her influence has been felt in many of the greatest improvements of the age and will be in those still to come. Were there but a few hearts and intellects like hers this earth would already become the hoped-for heaven. She died, to the irreparable loss of those who survive her, at Avignon, Nov. 3 1858.' 



@@@@@


doc= 38052


Taylor, (James) Hudson (1832-1905), missionary, was born in Barnsley, Yorkshire, on 21 May 1832, the eldest of the five children (two sons and three daughters, one son and one daughter dying in childhood) of James Taylor, chemist and Wesleyan local preacher, and his wife Amelia, daughter of the Revd Benjamin Brook Hudson, Wesleyan minister. Taylor was educated at home and at a private day school, and as apprentice to his father. At fifteen he worked in a bank to learn accountancy, until his eyesight gave trouble. In June 1849, aged seventeen, he underwent an evangelical conversion and determined to bring the Christian gospel to the Chinese, although inland China was closed to foreigners. He began medical training, first in the slums of Hull, and then at the London Hospital, but sailed unqualified as first agent of the new Chinese Evangelization Society. He landed in Shanghai on 1 March 1854. 
In 1855, to the disgust of established missionaries, Taylor adopted Chinese dress and a pigtail. Inland travel and preaching became easier at once, though he had hair-raising adventures and was not naturally brave. Meanwhile his society's inefficiency left him destitute. He severed connections. Following the example of the preacher and philanthropist George Muller and applying his own highly original survival training in Hull, he lived by the principles of faith and prayer on which he later built his mission: never appealing for funds except to God, and administering all gifts with scrupulous stewardship. In 1858, at Ningbo, he married Maria Jane (died 1870), orphaned daughter of the Revd Samuel Dyer, missionary in Singapore. They had five sons and three daughters. Ill health drove Taylor back to England in 1860 and in 1862 he qualified MRCS and in midwifery. 
The treaty of Nanjing had opened the interior of China, but no existing mission had accepted the challenge. Taylor therefore published a pamphlet, 'China: its Spiritual Need and Claims', and founded the undenominational China Inland Mission in 1865, praying for twenty-four 'willing, skilful labourers', two symbolically for each province. In 1866 the Taylors took their children and most of their twenty-four workers to Shanghai. The China Inland Mission's early years inland were hazardous, with riots, some internal dissension, and opposition from established missionaries, who especially objected to the use of Chinese dress. Despite sickness and discouragement Taylor persevered and every province was penetrated. Maria Hudson died in childbirth at Zhenjiang in July 1870. On 14 November 1871, in London, Taylor married her best friend and fellow missionary, Jane Elizabeth 
(Jennie; 1842/3-1904)
, daughter of Joseph William F. Faulding, fret-cutter and piano-frame maker of St Pancras. They had one son and one daughter. 
At home, Taylor's writings and dramatic appeals stirred the churches: among volunteers who responded was the celebrated C. T. Studd in 1885. Taylor promoted all missions, and believed that the surest way to help the East was to deepen spirituality in the West. The mission now grew rapidly until by 1895 Taylor was directing nearly half the protestant force in China. He was ahead of his time in identification with the people, working towards indigenous leadership. He also took a strong part in famine relief and the campaign to abolish the British opium trade to China. In the Boxer uprising (1899-1901) a total of seventy-nine China Inland Mission missionaries and children were killed. Taylor refused compensation, to the amazement of the mandarins, who issued proclamations applauding the spirit of the Christians. He retired as general director of the mission in 1902. 
Taylor, who had a strong sense of humour, was small, sandy-haired, musical, and affectionate. His example and strategies, his integrity, saintliness, courage, and originality had a lasting influence on Christian missions worldwide. The fast-growing, and later wholly indigenous, protestant church in China owed more to him than to any other foreigner. He died on 3 June 1905 at Changsha, Hunan, China. 
John Pollock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38053


Taylor, William Ernest (1856-1927), Swahili scholar and missionary, was born on 25 January 1856 at 26 The Cross, St Nicholas, Worcester, the eldest child in the family of at least four sons and two daughters of Samuel Taylor (1822-1884), perfumer, and his wife, Harriette Fussell (1827-1907). From King's School, Worcester, he won a scholarship in 1873 to Hertford College, Oxford, and obtained a third class in classical honour moderations in 1876. He studied at the medical school of Edinburgh University in 1879. 
In July 1880 Taylor was made deacon by the bishop of Mauritius for the bishop of London, and in the same month he sailed for east Africa, to the Nyanza mission, under the auspices of the Church Missionary Society (CMS). The greater part of this first tour was spent in or near Mombasa, when the Swahili-speaking people still formed the overwhelming majority of the island's population. Taylor quickly began to acquire that complete command of the Swahili language and that intimacy with its literature on which his fame would rest. He was fortunate in having as his teachers two of Mombasa's foremost scholars, Mu'allim Sikujua bin Abdallah al-Batawi and Bwana Hemedi bin Muhammad al-Mambasi. 
Taylor returned to east Africa for a second tour at the end of 1884, and was ordained priest by Bishop James Hannington in Frere Town, Mombasa, on 31 May 1885. In 1891 came the publication of 'African Aphorisms, or, Saws from Swahili-Land', an annotated collection of some 600 proverbs: the work (reissued in 1924) provided an outlet for his immense erudition, and became recognized as a classic in the domain of Swahili studies. In the same year the British Museum acquired its first Swahili manuscript (BL, MS Or. 4534), the vendor being Taylor. 
On 21 April 1892 Taylor married Catherine Tesseyman (1864-1959); they had five sons and a daughter. Following his marriage he left England on his third and final east African tour. In 1895 he became examining chaplain to the bishop of eastern equatorial Africa, Alfred Tucker. In 1896 the CMS requested Taylor to continue his translation work in Swahili in Cairo, not Mombasa. After a brief visit to Omdurman in 1900, he returned to England. In 1903 he was a CMS missionary in Khartoum and acting chaplain to the forces, but on medical grounds he was compelled to retire to England later that year. Taylor then held a succession of clerical appointments, the last of which was the benefice of Halton Holgate, Lincolnshire, in 1921. 

'Zaburi za Davidi' (1904), the 'Psalms' of David, is probably Taylor's finest 'Bible' translation -- it may reasonably be compared with the Coverdale psalter. In 1910 Taylor's fellow missionary Alice Burt published her 'Swahili Grammar and Vocabulary'; the standard of Swahili adopted was that set by Taylor. At the end of the twentieth century, this work remained the unrivalled grammatical introduction to the Swahili of Mombasa. In 1915 Taylor published the Mombasa version of a much-loved poem 'al-Inkishafi'; the poetic rendering that accompanied the recension was the first printed English translation of a major Swahili poem. 
Taylor was the first to realize that, on linguistic grounds, Swahililand should be studied as three regions; he was the first to study in depth the phenomenon of aspiration in Swahili; he was the first and (with the exception of H. E. Lambert) the only European to compose and publish Swahili poetry; and he was the only European to have caused a new genre to be introduced to Swahili poetry, 'mahadhi ya Tela' ('Taylor's tune'). With his teachers he salvaged from oblivion many of the Swahili poets, notably the Mombasa poet Bwana Muyaka. Only two other Englishmen approached Taylor's achievement -- H. E. Lambert (1893-1967) and J. W. T. Allen (1904-1979): all three were amateurs. 
Taylor was a non-smoker and a teetotaller. The evidence suggests that he did not relate well to other people -- the literati of Swahili Mombasa being the exception. Taylor died of a heart attack at Manvers Hall, Bath, on 2 October 1927, and was buried five days later at Lyncombe, Widcombe, and St James's cemetery, Bath. He bequeathed his linguistic books and papers to the British Museum, but the bequest was turned down. Much of his invaluable collection went to the library of the School of Oriental and African Studies in London, and other items were acquired by the University of Hamburg. 


@@@@@


doc= 38054


Teerlinc, Levina (d. 1576), painter, was one of the daughters of Simon Bening, or Benninck (1483?-1561), the finest Bruges illuminator of the sixteenth century. She was presumably trained in her father's workshop, and came to England, into royal service, about 1545. She was by then married to George Teerlinc, who became a gentleman pensioner, while she was granted in November 1546 an annuity of $40 p.a., which continued until her death. The Teerlincs lived in more than one London parish, and Levina, for a painter, enjoyed an unusual degree of social status. In the new year's gift list of 1563 she is described as 'gentlewoman' and by her son, in 1595, as 'sworne as one of the privye chamber to the Quenes Majestie' (Strong, 'Renaissance Miniature', 54). 
In that role Teerlinc annually presented a miniature. In 1553 she gave Mary I 'a smale picture of the Trynite' (Strong, 'Renaissance Miniature', 55), and nine more miniatures are recorded in the surviving new year's gift lists between 1559 and 1576. These were either portraits of the young queen or of her in a group with, for example, her knights of the Garter or on progress. As early as 1551 Teerlinc was sent to the Princess Elizabeth 'to drawe owt her picture' (ibid.). No signed or documented work by her is known and what can be assembled as an 'oeuvre' emerges from the few surviving miniatures between 1545 and 1575. The most important of these is that depicting the royal maundy (priv. coll.) and an early portrait of Elizabeth I (Royal Collection). Others can be more speculatively added to that nucleus, both miniatures and illuminations, but there can be no certainty that they are by her. 
Based on this possible 'oeuvre', Levina Teerlinc's style is that of the illuminators in the Ghent-Bruges tradition, although the portrait miniatures attributed to her show the influence of Lucas Hornebolt, her predecessor, and -- in terms of composition -- Hans Eworth. Their most characteristic feature is a head attached to a too small, spindly body. Their technique is awkward, thin, and often cursory, which is perhaps surprising in light of the regard in which she was held, as suggested by her very high salary. Resident in Stepney, she died on 23 June 1576. 
Roy Strong', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38055


Teulon, Samuel Sanders (1812-1873), architect, was born on 2 March 1812 at Hillside, Crooms Hill, Greenwich, the eldest of the four sons of Samuel Teulon ('b'. 1785), cabinet-maker (later a surveyor) of Greenwich, and his wife, Louisa Sanders from Rotherhithe. His father's family was of Huguenot origin and he retained an allegiance to this French connection. In 1835 Teulon married Harriet Bayne (died 1866), with whom he had six sons (two died in infancy and the eldest became principal of Chichester Theological College) and four daughters. 
Teulon attended the Royal Academy Schools and was then articled to the architects George Legg and George Porter, before starting his own practice in London in 1838. He spent much of 1841-2 travelling and sketching on the continent with, among others, Ewan Christian and Horace Jones, both later architects of distinction. 
Teulon developed a vigorous and idiosyncratic Gothic style: indeed he has come to be regarded as the chief among the rogue architects of the mid-Victorian Gothic revival (cf. H. R. Goodhart Rendel, 'Journal of the Royal Institute of British Architects', 56, 1949, 251). He obtained few commissions for public buildings because, after his early success, he declined to enter the competitions, but he acquired connections with the landed and wealthy, including the royal family, and as a result designed several spectacular country houses. Clients valued his highly individual command of the Gothic language and came to respect him as a reliable man of business. Among the most notable of his houses were: Shadwell, Norfolk (1856-60), for Lady Buxton; Tortworth Court, Gloucestershire (1849-53), built for the second earl of Ducie; Bestwood Park, Nottinghamshire (1862-4), for the tenth duke of St Albans; and Elvetham Hall, Hampshire (1859-62), for Lord Calthorpe. All these are in the most energetic high Victorian style, with a rich multiplicity of towers and gables, and a studiously observed asymmetry. His many churches are equally eclectic, with frequent use of the patterned brickwork and polychromy more often associated with William Butterfield. The most striking surviving examples are: at Burringham, Lincolnshire (1856-7); his vigorous recasting of St Mary's, Ealing (1863-74); Huntley, Gloucestershire (1861-3), with clear echoes of Burges at Cardiff Castle; Hunstanworth, co. Durham (1862-3); Leckhampsted, Berkshire (1859-60); St Mark's, Silvertown, in London's docklands (1862); St Thomas's, Wells (1856-7); as well as Woodchester, Gloucestershire (1862-3), and his two essays in neo-Romanesque at Hawkley, Hampshire (1865), and Oare, Wiltshire (1857-8). His masterpiece was St Stephen's, Rosslyn Hill, Hampstead (1869-75), finished after Teulon's death by Ewan Christian. Teulon's most prominently sited non-ecclesiastical work is the Buxton memorial fountain (1861-6) in Victoria Tower Gardens, Westminster, a richly decorated structure with Gothic arches and a much repaired spire of iron and enamel. 
Teulon died on 2 May 1873 in his house, Tensleys, The Green, Hampstead, and was buried under a simple tomb in Highgate cemetery. He left a substantial estate of nearly $30,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 38056


Thom, Alexander (1894-1985), aerodynamicist and archaeologist, was born on 26 March 1894 in Carradale Mains, Argyll, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Archibald Thom, farmer, and his wife, Lily Stevenson Strang of Glasgow. The family moved in 1901 to Dunlop, Ayrshire, where Thom went to school, afterwards attending Kilmarnock Academy, from about 1907. He studied civil engineering at the Royal Technical College in Glasgow and at the University of Glasgow (BSc 1915), where he won the George Harvey prize and also studied archaeology. In 1917 he married Jeanie Boyd (died 1975), daughter of Allan Kirkwood, farmer. They had two sons and a daughter. The younger son, Alan, an aerodynamicist, was killed in a flying accident in 1945; the other, Archibald S. Thom, followed his father as a lecturer in engineering at Glasgow University. 
After working as a structural engineering designer Thom was a draughtsman with aircraft firms before becoming a lecturer at the University of Glasgow in civil engineering and aeronautics (1922-39). He built the first wind tunnel in Scotland and obtained his PhD in 1926 and DSc in 1929 from Glasgow University, both for theoretical and experimental studies of flow around cylinders in various configurations. 
Thom worked throughout the Second World War at the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough, where he commissioned and ran the high-speed tunnel for testing early Spitfires. In 1945 Thom was elected professor of engineering science at Oxford and a fellow of Brasenose College. He took over a small department and greatly expanded it, his research centring on a method of calculation of flow problems. Initially he used a small mechanical calculator to solve each problem, a laborious process later rapidly accomplished by computer. He was an active member of the Aeronautical Research Committee for many years. 
In parallel with his academic work Thom spent every summer accurately surveying megalithic sites on the west coast of Scotland, an activity which combined happily with his skill as a yachtsman. On his retirement in 1961 he returned to his home at Dunlop and devoted himself to analysis and further surveys of megalithic circles and aligned stones, from the Orkneys to as far south as the well-known Carnac site in Brittany, with over 2000 stones. The results of these labours over a period of fifty years were many papers and five influential books, the last two of which were completed by his son. These, particularly 'Megalithic Sites in Britain' (1967), drew attention to the probable astronomical significance of the megalithic remains. By statistical analysis of his surveys he deduced that their builders had employed a common unit of measurement, the megalithic yard of 0.83m, not in simple circles but in circular arcs centred on right-angled triangles. Some sites he considered to be astronomical calendars, others lunar observatories, showing the scientific abilities of prehistoric man. 
Thom's ideas remain contentious, and although he presented his theories fully supported by data and lucidly explained, their comprehension requires a knowledge of mathematics, statistics, surveying, astronomy, and archaeology -- not a common combination. However, he is regarded as the founder of the subject of 'archaeoastronomy'. Thom's work was recognized by honorary degrees from the universities of Glasgow (LLD, 1960) and Strathclyde (DSc, 1976). He was a member of the British Astronomical Association, and a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society, the Society of Antiquaries of London, and the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. Above all, Sandy Thom was esteemed by his colleagues; he was truly egregious, a kind man and a good skipper, whether of a yacht's crew, a survey party, or a department. Thom died in Belford Hospital, Fort William, on 7 November 1985. 
S. S. Wilson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38057


York, Thomas of (b. c.1220, d. before 1269), Franciscan friar and theologian, of unknown parentage, had entered the Franciscan order in England by 1245, when Adam Marsh (died 1259), a leading English Franciscan, requested the loan of a philosophy text in York's keeping. York was probably then resident at the London convent and studying arts, but must have been sent to Oxford before 1249. While studying theology at Oxford he joined for a time the household of Robert Grosseteste, bishop of Lincoln (died 1253), probably through the good offices of Adam Marsh, who described York as 'active, discreet, full of goodwill and devoted to the cure of souls' (Brewer, 1.115). He was appointed lector at the Oxford Franciscan convent, but in 1253 a dispute arose at his presentation to incept as a doctor of theology, the opponents of the friars challenging his eligibility, as he had not been a master of arts. Through the firm and persuasive advocacy of Marsh he was eventually permitted to incept, but the case provoked the university to decree that in future no scholar who had not ruled in arts could proceed to a degree in theology: a statute that would engender recurrent disputes between the friars and the university. York's confrere Roger Bacon (died 1294) was probably referring to him when he wrote scornfully of a colleague who had presumed to teach philosophy without having read it; his critics ignored his fruitful study of arts, evident in his 'Sapientiale', at the London Franciscan convent. About 1256-7 he was lector at the Cambridge convent. Bonaventure's reference in 1269 to his defence of the friars implies that York was dead by then. 
York's defence of the mendicant friars' claims, 'Manus quae contra omnipotentem', was written 'c'.1253-6; and his sermon, 'Christ's passion' (Cambridge, Trinity College, MS B.15.38), is probably contemporaneous with it. His major and unpublished work, the 'Sapientiale' (Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, MS Conv. sopp. A.6.437), is a digest of the principal theological issues under debate in Oxford in the early 1250s, and was probably compiled from his university lectures and disputations. He proposed independent solutions to the current problems of generation and becoming, individuation, universals, the nature of the soul, and immaterial intelligences, which were influenced but not dominated by Grosseteste's ideas. In general he attempted a series of solutions to specific questions without displaying an overall metaphysical coherence, and the work's chief contribution was to bring into consideration the ideas of recently translated Arab and Jewish philosophers, especially Averroes and Moses Maimonides. It was soon overtaken by the profounder and better known works of Bonaventure, Albert the Great (Albertus Magnus), and Aquinas. 
Jeremy Catto', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38058


Thomas, Hugh Owen (1834-1891), orthopaedic surgeon, was born on 23 August 1834 in Bodedern, Anglesey, the eldest child in the family of five sons and two daughters of Evan Thomas (1804-1884), a bone-setter, of Liverpool, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Owen. His father was seventh in a line of bone-setters descended from a farming family in Anglesey, but by the middle of the nineteenth century medical opinion was becoming increasingly hostile to these unqualified practitioners, and Evan Thomas sent all of his five sons to study medicine at Edinburgh University. Hugh Thomas lived with his grandparents in Rhoscolyn, Anglesey, until he was thirteen, attending the local school, and then went to Dr Poggi's school in New Brighton, Cheshire. In 1851 he began four years' apprenticeship with his uncle, Dr Owen Roberts, of St Asaph, doctor at the Liverpool workhouse infirmary, who prepared him for Edinburgh University, where he studied medicine from 1854 until 1857. He then spent time at University College, London, becoming MRCS in 1857. He spent a short time in Paris, studying French surgical methods, and then returned to Liverpool and joined his father's practice in 1858. 
After a year Thomas set up his own practice at 24 Hardy Street, in the heart of the Liverpool docklands. In 1864 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Jones, an architect and builder, of Rhyl, Wales. They had no children, and in 1873 they invited Elizabeth's nephew, Robert Jones, to live with them so that he could study at the Liverpool school of medicine. In 1866 Thomas moved to 11 Nelson Street, Liverpool, where he remained until his death; he later turned 24 Hardy Street into a private nursing home. Although he became critical of the methods of the old bone-setters, and especially of their views on diseases of the joints, he had learned from watching his father's manipulative practices; and in his workshop he followed their practice of making their own splints, constantly experimenting with new designs. He offered to supply his splints to the French army during the Franco-Prussian War in 1870, but this was rejected. His patients were mainly Merseyside dockers and shipyard workers, and seamen injured at sea, and he had to deal with many severe accident cases. His free Sunday clinics at 11 Nelson Street from 1870 onwards became famous, and patients arrived in handcarts, wheelbarrows, and donkey carts. He went on his daily rounds in a scarlet phaeton designed by himself, pulled by two black horses, with his wife beside him. 
Because Thomas held neither hospital nor university appointments, his work was slow to gain recognition, but in 1875 he published 'Diseases of the Hip, Knee, and Ankle Joints, with their Deformities', which reached a third edition in 1878. He was elected a member of the Liverpool Medical Institution in 1876, and his splints were praised at the International Medical Congress in 1881. He lectured to the Harveian Society of London in 1887. He published a series of eight 'Contributions to Surgery and Medicine' (1883-90), many of which were polemical, and he made enemies among English surgeons whom he attacked in print, including Sir Frederick Treves. However, he had a wide following in the United States, and several American orthopaedic surgeons visited him, one of whom, John Ridlon, a founder of the American Orthopaedic Association, who first visited him in 1887, became his leading American supporter. In 1890 he received the honorary degree of MD from the University of St Louis. 
Thomas was very small, with a brusque, hectoring manner, and his only relaxation was playing his flute, which he had modified in his workshop. He was an agnostic, and a friend of Charles Bradlaugh. Thomas died of pneumonia on 6 January 1891 at his residence at 11 Nelson Street, Liverpool, and was survived by his wife; thousands of Liverpool poor followed the hearse and crowded the church at his funeral. 
After his death Thomas's work was largely forgotten, until the First World War, when Robert Jones became director of orthopaedic surgery for the British army. Thanks to his efforts the Army Medical Service introduced the Thomas splint for compound fractures of the lower limbs, and it was in general use from the end of 1915 for the transport of stretcher cases from the front to casualty stations, and in base hospitals, greatly reducing the mortality rate. Thomas made an important contribution to the treatment of fractures. He strongly opposed surgical intervention, especially amputation, and believed in the principle of enforced rest and immobilization of the fractured limb. He felt that the less the surgeon interfered with nature the better. 


@@@@@


doc= 38059


Thompson, Flora Jane (1876-1947), author, was born in Juniper Hill, a hamlet in north-east Oxfordshire, on 5 December 1876, the eldest survivor of the ten children of Albert Timms (1854-1918), a stonemason, and his wife, Emma, 'nee' Dibber or Dipper (1853-1933), a nursemaid. Her favourite brother, Edwin, died in the battle of the Somme in 1916. After elementary education at the village school in Cottisford she became, at the age of fourteen, an unofficial Post Office counter clerk in the Oxfordshire village of Fringford. In 1898 she went to work at the post office in Grayshott, Hampshire, where she served some of the literary figures who lived in the area, including George Bernard Shaw, Arthur Conan Doyle, Grant Allen, and Richard Le Gallienne. Overawed by the talents of her literary customers, she almost gave up her own attempts at writing at that time. 
On 7 January 1903 Flora Timms married John William Thompson (1874-1948), a Post Office clerk and telegraphist from the Isle of Wight. They moved to Bournemouth, where two of their three children were born. In 1911 Flora Thompson won a magazine essay competition and went on to write short stories and newspaper articles. The family moved to Liphook, in Hampshire, in 1916, and from there Flora contributed two long series of articles for the 'Catholic Fireside' magazine; these were nature articles and literary essays written in alternate fortnights. She was a dedicated, self-taught naturalist; her nature articles subsequently appeared in Margaret Lane's 'A Country Calendar' (1979) and in Julian Shuckburgh's 'The Peverel Papers' (1986). The literary articles were the result of her private study of literature; she made extensive use of the recently established free library system to supplement her elementary school education. Her first published book was a volume of poems, 'Bog Myrtle and Peat' (1921). From 1925 until the outbreak of the Second World War, she ran a postal writers' circle called the Peverel Society. 
In 1938 Flora Thompson sent a collection of essays on her country childhood to Oxford University Press. They were first published as 'Lark Rise' (1939), 'Over to Candleford' (1941), and 'Candleford Green' (1943), and subsequently as a trilogy under the title 'Lark Rise to Candleford' (1945). The books are the lightly disguised story of Flora Thompson's youth, evoking the life of a hamlet, a village, and a country town in the England of the 1880s. Some historians have cast doubt on their validity as primary sources for the social history of the period, but they have been widely used for that purpose. Few works better or more elegantly capture the decay of Victorian agrarian England. Two musical plays based on the books, 'Lark Rise' and 'Candleford', by Keith Dewhurst, were performed at the National Theatre, London, in 1978 and 1979. 'Heatherley', the story of Flora Thompson's time in the post office at Grayshott, was not published in her lifetime; it is included in Lane's 'A Country Calendar'. Her last book, 'Still Glides the Stream', was published posthumously in 1948. 
Flora Thompson's younger son was lost at sea in the Second World War, when the merchant navy ship on which he was serving was torpedoed in mid-Atlantic. She never recovered from his loss, and died on 21 May 1947 at her home, Lauriston, New Road, Brixham, Devon. She was buried in Longcross cemetery, Dartmouth. Her husband survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 38060


Thomson, David (1912-1970), historian, was born in Edinburgh on 13 January 1912, the only son and elder child of Robert Thomson, printer, and his wife, Isabella Barr. Educated at Sir George Monoux Grammar School, Walthamstow, and Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, he remained in the college for the rest of his life. He was research fellow (1938-45), teaching fellow (1945-57), and master (1957-70). 
Having obtained first-class honours with distinction in both parts of the historical tripos in 1933 and 1934, Thomson did research under Sir Ernest Barker on attitudes to political parties in eighteenth-century Britain, winning the Gladstone memorial prize in 1937 and receiving his PhD in 1938. By then he was already working on recent French history; he had begun his lifelong association with the Workers' Educational Association as lecturer and committee man; and he could write in 1942 (in a letter to Kingsley Martin, Thomson papers), that he had 'several years of free-lance journalism' behind him. During the Second World War he was much in demand from the BBC and the Ministry of Information for lectures and pamphlets, some of them explicitly countering Nazi propaganda. He became involved in organizations such as the London Institute of World Affairs which were promoting serious debate about the war, the future peace, and reconstruction. As an expert on France he had some awkward dealings with the Free French in London. From this time date his small book 'The Democratic Ideal in France and England' (1944) and 'Patterns of Peacemaking' (1945), written with E. Meyer and Asa Briggs. 
After the war Thomson became a much appreciated lecturer in Cambridge (university lecturer, 1948-68; reader in modern French history, 1968-70). It was no doubt mainly because the focus of his interests had shifted that he did not pursue earlier plans to publish his important PhD thesis. But he was conscious that its subject matter and argument were deeply suspect to the school of eighteenth-century historians who followed Sir Lewis Namier and were believed to exercise a virtual veto on academic publication in their period. The broader standpoint of his own teaching and lecturing on modern British history had a significant impact on his pupils and was conveyed to a wider audience in his two volumes in the 'Pelican History of England', 'England in the Nineteenth Century' (1950) and 'England in the Twentieth Century' (1965). But his most notable influence as a teacher in Cambridge was exercised through his lectures on French history and especially those on theories of the modern state, in which he not only gave an account of the work of major thinkers but also brought out the interaction between ideology and political developments in nineteenth- and twentieth-century history. 
Thomson's writing on France was crowned by his seminal 'Democracy in France' (1946), which emphasized the underlying continuity and stability of the Third Republic despite its frequent changes of ministry. He was fascinated by the character and political career of de Gaulle, about whom he wrote in many newspaper articles and (with Laval) in 'Two Frenchmen' (1951); and in the early sixties the Foreign Office commissioned from him a report on Gaullism. Of his other writings his substantial 'Europe since Napoleon' (1957) has held its place for half a century as one of the best general surveys of its field. He also wrote a 'World History from 1914 to 1968' (1969; 1st edn to 1950, 1964) and edited the controversial volume 12 of the 'New Cambridge Modern History'. He held that the study of history is 'the best liberal education a student can have in the modern world' and defended the writing of contemporary history against those who maintained that the historian could form worthwhile judgements only about distant periods. He believed that dons should seek to enlighten the public and the government, and that governments should draw on the knowledge and wisdom of dons. In his last book, 'The Aims of History' (1969), he described himself when he wrote of the historical 'general practitioner' who is 'a craftsman of synthesis rather than of analysis, a weaver of other men's threads (and some of his own) into patterns which they had not foreseen or even expected'. 
Thomson was active in Cambridge University affairs: member of the council of the senate from 1950 to 1958, chairman of the faculty board of history from 1958 to 1960, from 1962 to his death chairman of the governors of the Institute of Education; and then the first chairman of the colleges' committee set up after the report in 1962 on the relationship between the colleges and the university, chaired by Lord Bridges. Meanwhile, he was one of the first history dons to become a regular visitor to the United States: he was visiting professor of public law and government at Columbia University, New York, in 1950 and 1953. In his Hoernle memorial lecture at the University of the Witwatersrand in 1958, 'The government of divided communities', he tackled a dangerously topical issue. He continued to write for the national press, especially 'The Times', to which he contributed some anonymous leaders, many signed articles on France, and numerous letters. 
Deeply attached to his college, Thomson was a dedicated and much loved teacher and (from 1946 to 1953) a benevolent and conscientious senior tutor. He worked to maintain academic standards and took pride in the fact that Sidney Sussex admitted relatively more students from grammar schools than most colleges did at that period: among those for whose admission his intervention was directly responsible was Royston Lambert. As master his contribution was distinctive. Neither of his two predecessors had been productive scholars or in the public eye, and the lodge had seen little hospitality. It now became a family place where he and his wife, Margaret Gordon, daughter of James Dallas, schoolmaster, whom he had married in 1943, lived with their two schoolboy sons, entertaining with great warmth and without the least sign of pomposity. He brimmed over with amusing anecdotes and his large frame frequently shook with laughter. In his day the lodge was visited by such notables as Adlai Stevenson, Pierre Mendes-France, and Hubert Humphrey; research seminars took place in it; and yet the master was always accessible to undergraduates and old members of the college, particularly his ex-pupils. During his mastership the number of fellows almost doubled and the first post-war block of undergraduate accommodation was built. 
Thomson's historical breadth and the range of his other activities were made possible only by exceptional energy and application, a calm and cheerful temperament, and extraordinary powers of concentration. Visitors noticed that, after a chat in which he had seemed to have all the time in the world, he would be back at his typewriter before they were out of earshot. 
Amid all his other activities Thomson was first and foremost a don and an educationist. He was a strong believer in the species of grammar school which he himself had attended. He thoroughly enjoyed his duties as chairman of the governors of the Perse School, which included planning its move from central Cambridge. He was in many ways an innovator, helping to pioneer educational films and the BBC's schools history programmes and joining in an unsuccessful campaign in Cambridge to establish a centre of advanced study. But he was suspicious of the proposals for large-scale university expansion made in the report of the committee on higher education (1961-4) chaired by Lord Robbins. By the end of the sixties he was seen by radicals as a reactionary, and undergraduate militancy was making residence in the middle of a college less agreeable -- a particularly unkind reward to this most approachable of dons. 
In 1968 Thomson was found to have lung cancer, from which he died, in Cambridge, on 24 February 1970. He was cremated at Cambridge crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 38061


Thomson, Maurice (1604-1676), merchant, was born in Watton, Hertfordshire, the eldest son and third child in the minor gentry family of five sons and four daughters of Robert Thompson of Cheshunt and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Halfehead. One of his brothers was George Thomson, parliamentarian. He arrived in Virginia at the age of twelve or thirteen, perhaps as one learning seamanship. He quickly established himself near the settlement of William Tucker, who had married his sister Mary and brought over three of their younger brothers. Thomson was married twice, first to Ellen Owen on 12 August 1628, and second to Dorothy Vaux. Their children were John Thompson (later first Baron Haversham), Maurice, who died in infancy, and four daughters, Mary, Katherine, Martha, and Elizabeth. Thomson and his partners (probably his three brothers) enjoyed a short-lived monopoly to market the entire tobacco crop, supplied provisions amid protests by the planters about engrossing (1632-3), participated in a huge land grant (1636), and came to dominate the tobacco trade, Thomson paying the largest duties on imports into England in 1642. 
With other partners Thomson developed wider markets. He brought slaves to their 1000 acre plantation on St Kitts (1626), entered the North American-Canadian fur and provisioning trades (1631), re-exported tobacco to Europe with an agent in Amsterdam (1638-9), and interloped against the Levant and Guinea companies. Other triangular trade centred on the East Indies, where he had been associated with the interloping of Sir William Courteen against the East India Company from the late 1630s. Leading dissident merchants, he was elected a director of the company in 1647, gaining a majority for a 'free well-regulated trade' and an expansive policy including colonization, voyages to the Far East, incorporation of the west African trade, and compensation from the Dutch for the interlopers (1649-50). The council of state ordered a settlement, but Thomson's group won only a partial victory. The East India Company was re-capitalized and he was elected governor, but the joint-stock system was retained (1657). 
Thomson had been prominent in trade, colonization, and legalized piracy in the Caribbean, and in enterprises such as Providence Island, favoured by Robert Rich, second earl of Warwick, John Pym, and opposition leaders (1639-42). He presented to the king in York a huge petition from Londoners for a parliament, and signed Pym's petition against Spain (1640) and another critical of the Lords after the Irish rising (1641). He was much involved in Irish land investment and naval actions and led a mission to the Netherlands for relief of Irish protestants (1643). He was an early recruit to the Honourable Artillery Company (1628), to the London militia committee (1642), and to his local Tower Hamlets militia (1647-60). Among the three richest men in Billingsgate ward in 1640, he was a commissioner for contributions in London, Middlesex, and Westminster (1642), and for customs (1643-7), a plum of parliamentary finance. 
A stream of offices followed, showing both Thomson's high standing with the parliamentary leadership and his commercial prominence: he joined in the pacification of Kent; recovered mutinous ships in the Netherlands; and held appointments to trade committees, the high court of justice, and the excise (1645-54). Thomson and other merchants were consulted by the government when some of the colonies sought independent policies. Trade with them was forbidden, and Thomson himself sailed with the fleet in an expedition which forced the colonies to submit (1650-55). He was a major war contractor whose interests extended to nascent industrial enterprises, such as the growing sugar capitalism of the West Indies, the mines, works, and specialist timbers of the East, and saltpetre imports and gunpowder production at home. He influenced the first 'Navigation Act' (1650), when foreign ships were banned from the colonies, but in the second act (1651) the trade was opened. The new merchants lacked the political power to prevail. When Thomson and other radicals signed a petition against the dismissal of the Rump (1653), Oliver Cromwell dismissed them from their offices and contracts. But Thomson was soon back in favour again, receiving instructions on the management of the impending war with Spain in the Caribbean from the protector, who told him to liaise with the fleet commanders (1654), and joining an enlarged trade committee (1655). 
Thomson's religious outlook was consistently that of an Independent puritan: he was a petitioner in St Dunstan-in-the-East for a radical lecturer (1642), a regularly elected vestryman and parish leader, a trier (1645-8), and a Middlesex commissioner judging scandalous ministers (1654). He was left undisturbed at the Restoration, though he lost his place as a Trinity brother. An informer's report (1666) accusing him of treason with the Dutch and always opposing 'kingly government' was ignored. He even sailed with the fleet to Barbados (1667). Almost to the last he kept his director's seat in the East India Company, attending over half the courts in a year (1672-3). 
Thomson died in 1676 and was buried at Haversham church. In his will he left $1 each to '100 poor silenced ministers', and properties in England, Ireland, Virginia, and throughout the Caribbean. 
Valerie Pearl', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38062


Thornton, Abraham (c.1793-1860), bricklayer and accused murderer, was the son of a builder of Castle Bromwich. He was accused of rape and murder after attending a dance where he became intimate with a gardener's daughter named Mary Ashford. They left the dance together and her body was found the next morning in a deep pool of water near a local footpath. Thornton was tried at the Warwick assizes on 8 August 1817. Since the marks on Mary's body were not necessarily inconsistent with Thornton's claim that she had consented to sexual intercourse, and since the times on the morning in question when Thornton was seen walking home to Bromwich suggested he could not have been with her when she met her death, the jury found him not guilty. 
The case aroused much interest and reminded people of the similar murder of a local woman a year earlier. Many were convinced of Thornton's guilt and he was assailed in local and London newspapers. A group collecting around the Birmingham solicitor William Bedford invoked the old legal process of 'appeal of murder', by which a person acquitted of murder could be tried again for the same offence. This process was generally regarded as obsolete, though there had been several instances in the eighteenth century. More controversy arose when Thornton came before the court of the king's bench in November 1817 and demanded ordeal by battle, which was open to the subject of an appeal of murder but had not been claimed since Charles I's reign. After several hearings between November 1817 and April 1818 the court decided that the appellee did have this right. The appeal of murder was dropped. Appeals of murder were abolished in 1819 partly because of this case. 
Thornton was corpulent, about 5 feet 7 inches tall, of 'forbidding' and 'very lusty' appearance, with powerful limbs, a short, thick neck, and a swollen, shining face. He had a local reputation as a sportsman and a strong man, and also as a womanizer. In all his court appearances he was noted for his calmness and composure. Opinion remained hostile towards Thornton; he had to be protected from the London crowds during the hearings there, and back in Bromwich he was hated. Unable to live a normal life, he emigrated to the USA in September 1818. He prospered, married, and died in Baltimore in 1860. 
Michael J. Turner', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38063


Thornton, Alice (1626-1707), autobiographer, was born on 13 February 1626 in Kirklington, North Riding of Yorkshire, and baptized there the following day. She was the fifth child and youngest daughter in the family of four sons and three daughters of Christopher Wandesford (1592-1640) of Kirklington, lord deputy of Ireland, and his wife, Alice (1592-1659), daughter of Sir Hewett Osborne of Kiveton, Yorkshire. Christopher Wandesford, second Viscount Castlecomer (d. 1719) ['see under 'Wandesford, Christopher (1592-1640)] was her brother. Her father was the kinsman, friend, and protege of Thomas Wentworth (later first earl of Strafford), and she spent her childhood as the pampered daughter of a prospering family: 'I enjoyed great easiness and comfort during my honoured father's life, having the fortunate opportunity... of the best education that kingdom could afford.' She was educated with Wentworth's daughters in the traditional female pursuits of French, music, dancing, embroidery, and 'other suitable housewifery', besides receiving 'pious, holy and religious instructions' from her parents ('Autobiography', 8). 
The death of Christopher Wandesford in December 1640 was 'the beginning of troubles in our family' ('Autobiography', 26), followed as it was by the public catastrophes of the Irish rising of 1641 and the English civil war. The family escaped to Chester and then settled, much impoverished, on their mother's jointure estates in Yorkshire. On 15 December 1651 Alice married William Thornton ('b'. 1624), of East Newton, Yorkshire, son and heir of the late Robert, whose parliamentarian connections were seen as useful to her royalist family. William's health was poor, while his improvidence and family quarrels weakened their estate, but on Alice's own account the marriage was an affectionate one and she mourned him sincerely on his early death in 1668. Between 1652 and 1667 Alice gave birth to nine children, five daughters and four sons, only three of whom survived to adulthood. Little is known of Alice's long widowhood: she lived in retirement in East Newton, noted for her charitable and religious activities, and supervised the education and marriages of her children. Her son Robert (1662-1692), an Anglican clergyman, predeceased her. 
Alice Thornton's life made little public impact but her 800-odd pages of autobiographical writings, preserved by the Comber family and published, in part, in the nineteenth century, provide a fascinating account of her personality, and more generally, of the family life of a gentlewoman in later seventeenth-century England. It was perhaps the poignant contrast between her privileged youth and the straitened circumstances of her later life that stimulated Alice to write 'my own book of my life, the collections of God's dealings and mercies to me and all mine till my widowed condition' ('Autobiography', 259). More immediately the autobiography, several times reworked, was circulated among friends and relatives to vindicate her conduct in a series of family quarrels with her husband's kin, her own niece, and especially with her younger brother Christopher, the eventual heir to the Wandesford estates. 
Within a providential framework, Alice Thornton's writings reveal staunch royalist views and a distinctly Anglican Restoration piety expressed through the set forms of the 'Book of Common Prayer' and the regular orderly celebration of the sacraments. They commemorate her father and mother, 'such a holy and sanctified a couple' ('Autobiography', 102); and describe, in great detail, her relationships with her siblings, her husband, and her children. They are an invaluable source for women's health problems in this period, especially the 'dangerous perils' of childbirth (ibid., 145), and movingly discuss the traumas of the early deaths of children, which she met with resigned submission to the will of God. 
Above all, Alice Thornton's autobiography suggests the tensions between her strong-minded, independent personality and the allotted role of a seventeenth-century woman. While overtly and inevitably she accepts women's subordinate position, there are strong undercurrents of resentment at the restrictions of marriage and at her lost prosperity. She was reluctant, given her 'more than competent fortune', to give up 'that happy and free condition' of a single life and suffered a collapse on her wedding day ('Autobiography', 75). When her younger brother tried to challenge her inheritance from her mother: 'I told him that though he was now the heir, as being son, yet I was two years the elder by my birth, and though he had got the birthright, yet I ought to have a share of her blessing. (ibid., 120)' A sense of her own importance, which survived despite the sadnesses of her adult life and prompted her to tell her own story at such length, is summed up in her quotation of a relative's comment on her autobiography, 'it was not writ as if a weak woman might have done it, but might have become a divine' (ibid., 260). 
Alice Thornton died in 1707 in East Newton and was buried on 1 February in the parish church at Stonegrave. Her will indicates a modest estate, although the bulk of her household goods had been settled earlier on her daughters Alice ('b'. 1654), the widow of Dr Thomas Comber, dean of Durham, and Katherine ('b'. 1656), wife of Robert Danby of Northallerton, gentleman. 


@@@@@


doc= 38064


Thornton, Henry (bap. 1750, d. 1818), theatre manager, was born in Clare, Suffolk, the fifth son of Daniel Ford and his wife, Elizabeth, and baptized there on 6 March 1750. He attended Clare School and later claimed to have resided as a law student at the Inner Temple. However, no formal enrolment was made. At the age of twenty-three, having changed his surname to Thornton, he was leading a band of itinerant players in the west country. John Bernard was among them, and described their life in 'Retrospections of the Stage' (1830). About 1780 Thornton married Elizabeth Pritchard, the daughter of a provincial theatre manager. They had at least two sons, who died young, and three daughters. After conducting other strolling groups, in the early 1780s Thornton became prompter, a job akin to stage manager, at the Portsmouth theatre. 
By 1785 Thornton was the established manager of the theatre at Newbury. Shortly afterwards he added Henley and Andover to his circuit, and in 1788 at Reading he set up his first purpose-built theatre. Early in his career he appears to have had a clear idea of the disposition of his circuit. He leased or bought a number of buildings along the London to Bath road in towns used as overnight rests by the coaching companies. A similar pattern of theatres was acquired along the Chichester road and the Portsmouth road, with the circuit terminating on the Isle of Wight at East Cowes and Ryde. 
In 1791 the Windsor theatre, then no more than a shed in a muddy field at the lower end of Peascod Street, was bought from the writer, bookseller, and actor Francis Waldron. Thornton rebuilt it at the foot of the castle ramparts. With its sumptuous furnishings, the playhouse proved to be popular with George III and his family, and a description of their visits is given by Charles Knight in 'A Volume of Varieties' (1844). 
Throughout his management Thornton attracted eminent performers to his theatres. Various members of the Kemble family played in them. Comedians such as John Quick and Richard Suett, both favourites of George III, made regular forays. Dorothy Jordan appeared throughout his management, starring in the first season of the Reading theatre and making her last appearance for Thornton at Ryde in 1813. The circuit was one of the first to stage hippodramas in the provinces, and employed Andrew Ducrow and his horsemen for this purpose. 
Thornton was a man with flair but with no eye for detail. Highly forgetful, he is said to have put on all six shirts his wife packed for his tour and removed each as it became too dirty to wear. He had little patience with learning lines, a habit which spread to members of his company. Nevertheless, when staging epics such as Sheridan's 'Pizarro' he did so with tremendous verve. With such presentations he was helped by one of his sons-in-law, William Hatton, whose own interest lay in the spectacular. Another son-in-law, Edward Barnett, after Thornton's retirement in 1817, took up the reins of management, and cared for the theatres at Newbury, Chelmsford, Guildford, Oxford, and Reading. The last of these Barnett relinquished in 1853 at the age of eighty-three. Thornton died in High Street, Chelmsford, Essex, on 21 April 1818 and was buried on 26 April in the churchyard of St Mary's (later the cathedral). His wife had predeceased him on 11 March 1816. 


@@@@@


doc= 38065


Thornton, Richard (1776-1865), merchant, underwriter, and financier, was born on 20 September 1776 in Burton in Lonsdale, Yorkshire, the third son in the family of four sons and five daughters of Robert Thornton, an impecunious yeoman farmer, and his wife, Ellen. He entered Christ's Hospital school, London, in 1785, leaving in 1791 to become an apprentice to his uncle, Richard Thornton, a hop merchant in Southwark. By 1798 he had moved into the business of insurance as a member of Lloyd's. He also established himself in the Russian trade, which during the French wars offered exceptional opportunities for profit. 
The government's need for naval stores, above all hemp, during the Napoleonic blockade, tempted Thornton into daring ventures through the Baltic in his own armed ships, especially in 1810, when this illicit trade was described as the most lucrative in the world. Two years later, apprised by his elder brother and partner, Laurence, of the defeat of Napoleon at Moscow before this was publicly known, he secured large contracts for the forward delivery of Russian imports from the Baltic at their peak wartime prices. He was said to have made over $100,000 from this masterly stroke. Not surprisingly, he earned the lasting sobriquet, 'the Duke of Danzig' (Hoskins, 575). In 1815 the Thornton brothers moved their base from Southwark to the City side of the river, and carried on their business from Old Swan Wharf, near London Bridge, for the next fifty years. 
The return of peace saw a redirection of Thornton's interests towards the recently opened markets in the East Indies. In partnership with the West family, Thornton exploited the rich pickings of the Dutch East Indies. Thornton, West & Co. were one of the leading British merchant houses in the eastern seas. The firm was based in Rotterdam, though it was reorganized in London in 1837. The East Indies remained a primary destination for Thornton's British-registered ships -- for example, in 1857 six ships traded between London, Java, and Singapore. His fleet also carried French troops to the Crimea. 
Thornton became a leading financier of struggling constitutional regimes in Iberia. In 1834, for example, he headed a subscription for the Spanish politician and financier Mendizabal. But these foreign debts were only intermittently repaid and, as a result, in the 1830s and 1840s Thornton headed the committee of Spanish bondholders urging British governments to intervene on their behalf. Thornton was also an important lender to the British government, and at one point reputedly the largest holder of consols. 
By the 1840s Thornton was in the forefront of the City of London, not only as merchant and financier but as shipowner and leading marine insurance broker. He now receded from the City, rarely appearing at the exchanges, even the Baltic, the scene of his most memorable deals in Russian tallow. He left a reputation for cockney oratory, for daring gambling of all types, but also for geniality and charitableness. He built and endowed almshouses in Barnet for the Leathersellers' Company when he was its master in 1836-7. In his will he left sizeable sums for schools he had built in his home parishes, as well as for Christ's Hospital, of which he had been a donation governor in 1833. In all, his public bequests amounted to the order of $100,000, an impressive sum, yet only a small proportion of his total wealth, the probate value of which -- nearly$2,800,000 -- represented the largest fortune left in Britain before 1870. 
Thornton was a strong, if irregular, family man. The bulk of his fortune was left to Thomas Thornton and Richard Thornton West, his nephews and partners. He never married, but he lived with his housekeeper Lee, and his four illegitimate children were major beneficiaries: his son Richard Napoleon Lee inheriting $400,000, and his three daughters sufficient to maintain them in gentility. Thornton died at his suburban mansion, Cannon Hill, in Merton, Surrey, on 20 June 1865, and was buried in Norwood cemetery. 
A. C. Howe', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38066


Thoroughgood, Sir John (bap. 1594?, d. 1675), government official, was the second son in the family of seven sons and a daughter of William Thorowgood (died 1625) of Grimston, Norfolk, and Anne, his first wife, the daughter of Henry Edwards of Norwich, gentleman. He was probably the son of that name whom they baptized on 4 May 1594. His father, who belonged to an armigerous family in Felsted, Essex, had served as commissary to Edmund Scambler, bishop of Norwich, and continued his career as ecclesiastical administrator until his death. It seems reasonable to suppose that John was born and spent his early years in Grimston, Norfolk, where his family was recorded as having an estate in 1664, but there is no record of his educational background. 
By 1633 Thoroughgood was already moving in court circles. He went to Scotland as a gentleman pensioner to King Charles I in that year and was knighted by the king. In the civil war he sided with parliament, though the strength of his commitment is unclear. By now resident in fashionable Kensington, he was appointed to the Middlesex militia committee in 1644 and to both the Middlesex and the Norfolk militia committees in 1648. He was an assessment commissioner for Westminster and Middlesex in 1649, and in the 1650s he held a number of minor central and local offices and was a commissioner of oyer and terminer. 
Thoroughgood's most important position was as one of the trustees for the maintenance of ministers, appointed in 1649 to supplement the work of the parliamentary plundered ministers' committee by augmenting the stipends of clergy and teachers out of funds at their disposal. He was active, usually as senior trustee, until 1660. Nevertheless no measures were taken against him at the Restoration, suggesting perhaps that he had not been a republican by choice and may have worked towards the return of Charles II. He was even appointed honorary gentleman of the privy chamber to Charles II. His moralizing work, 'The King of Terrors Silenced, by Meditations and Examples of Holy Living and Holy Dying' (1664), reveals an orthodox Calvinism, but neither this nor his will gives any hint of Puritan enthusiasm, despite their author's central role in the administration of the interregnum church. 
Thoroughgood married Frances, daughter of Thomas Meautys (1590-1649) of West Ham, Essex, clerk to the privy council and MP. She died childless when still a minor in 1651 and he never remarried. He died at some point between 12 November 1675, when he signed his will, and 5 December 1675 when the will was proved; he asked to be buried next to his wife in the church of High Ongar, Essex. With no direct heirs he made elaborate provisions in his will to prevent legal disputes between his nephews; the bulk of his estate, including a manor in Bagthorp, Essex, which he was in the process of buying at the time of writing his will, was left to Robert Thoroughgood, the son of his brother Robert. 
Rosemary O'Day', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38067


Throckmorton, Sir George (c.1489-1552), member of parliament, was the eldest son of Sir Robert Throgmorton or Throckmorton (c.1451-1518), a landowner of Coughton, Warwickshire, and his wife, Katherine, daughter of William Marrow or Marrowe of London. He had at least two other brothers, one of whom was Michael Throckmorton, agent for Cardinal Reginald Pole, and at least one sister, Ursula. He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 1 May 1505, and by 1512 had married Katherine, daughter of Nicholas Vaux, first Baron Vaux of Harrowden, a soldier, councillor, and courtier, whose family connection to the Parrs was of subsequent advantage to his children. In 1518 Throckmorton's father, one of Henry VII's courtiers, died on his way to the Holy Land, and George succeeded to a considerable estate, which he further enlarged during his lifetime. 
Throckmorton first attracted attention at court in the 1520s when he was in conflict with Cardinal Thomas Wolsey over land. The cardinal, engaged at the time in a campaign against enclosures, in July 1524 ordered Throckmorton to be bound in $100 to appear before the council to be fined, probably for ignoring Wolsey's policy. Nothing further ensued, however, and the next year the two men traded lands, perhaps to facilitate Wolsey's plans for dissolving several small monasteries. An apparent connection developed which allowed Throckmorton to ask Wolsey for favours and for the cardinal to use Throckmorton to resolve local disputes on behalf of the crown. Although he was active in the local government of Warwickshire, Worcestershire, and, more briefly, Buckinghamshire, Throckmorton's chief claim to fame is as an active member of the conservative political faction in the 1530s. Sitting in the Reformation Parliament as knight of the shire for Warwickshire, Throckmorton, a staunch Catholic, constantly fought against Henry VIII's divorce from Katherine of Aragon, the royal supremacy, and all efforts to reform the church. During the critical year, 1532, Throckmorton visited and plotted with men from all the conservative constituencies. After one speech in the House of Commons, he was summoned before the king himself. There he warned Henry that his conscience would be greatly troubled if he married Anne Boleyn, 'for that it is thought that ye have meddled with both the mother and the sister'. Taken aback, Henry replied weakly that he had not had carnal relations with Anne's mother, and Thomas Cromwell, who was present, firmly interposed that the King had not had relations with the sister either. 
Committed to the papal supremacy and dedicated to fighting against legislation directed against clerical liberties, Throckmorton enmeshed himself in factional politics. He met several other conservative country gentlemen in the Queen's Head tavern in Fleet Street to discuss parliamentary affairs. Cromwell regarded them with some anxiety, and in 1533 he made Throckmorton promise that he would 'stay at home and meddle little with politics' (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 453). 
Late in 1536, however, Throckmorton was arrested for showing an unwise interest in the grievances of the northern rebels. He was questioned about his earlier activities, and told his interrogators that he had been encouraged in his attack on royal policies by several leading members of the conservative faction. William Peto from the house of Franciscan Observants in Greenwich encouraged Throckmorton to oppose the 'Act for the Submission of the Clergy', and he had several meetings with John Fisher, bishop of Rochester, who gave him a pamphlet on papal primacy and recommended him to Nicholas Wilson, formerly the king's confessor but lately a bulwark of Katherine of Aragon's cause. Finally, Throckmorton travelled to Syon and absorbed the counsel of Richard Reynolds, who insisted that he continue to speak in parliament against reform legislation even if it did no good. Throckmorton also claimed that Sir Thomas More had once sent for him and promised that if he continued 'in the same way' and was not afraid, he would 'deserve great reward from God'. Soon released, Throckmorton was in trouble again in 1537 because his younger brother, Michael, who had been sent to spy on Cardinal Pole, instead became his loyal servant. Sir George was taken into custody and held for several weeks. He confessed that he had been blinded by the 'sayings and counsels of men who had led him astray', and begged for forgiveness. By the end of the year his release was assured. 
The fall of Thomas Cromwell in 1540 improved Throckmorton's position, though there is no evidence that he played a significant role in these events. The change in the religious climate did prove beneficial to Throckmorton and his conservative associates. He apparently returned his full attention to acquiring additional lands and consolidating his holdings, and in 1542 he married for a second time. He was able to see his family of eight sons and eleven daughters well established. His sons shared their father's resolute frame of mind, but not necessarily his commitment to conservative doctrine. Some, including the eldest, Robert ('c'.1513-1581), were famous for recusancy, while others, like Clement ('c'.1515-1573), his third son, were convinced puritans. His fourth son, Sir Nicholas Throckmorton (1515/16-1571), a diplomat and MP, was indicted and acquitted of treason in 1554. George ('fl'. 1523-1573) was a courtier; Kenelm ('c'.1514-1583x7) an MP; John ('c'.1524-1580), Throckmorton's seventh son, was an administrator; and his eighth son, Anthony (died 1587), who married a wealthy widow of Chastleton, Gloucestershire, is sometimes confused with the MP and mercer (died 1592/3) of the same name. Clement's son was Job Throckmorton (1545-1601), a politician and religious pamphleteer. Throckmorton and his father were enthusiastic builders, who erected an impressive stone gatehouse at Coughton, with polygonal turrets, large windows, and a battlemented skyline. However, Sir George's plan of making the remainder of the timber-framed house 'suitable' to the gatehouse was not fulfilled. He died on 6 August 1552 and was buried in the impressive marble tomb he had had erected for himself in the church at Coughton. 


@@@@@


doc= 38068


Tilden, Sir William Augustus (1842-1926), chemist, was born on 15 August 1842 at 163 Arlington Street, Regent's Park, London, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Augustus Tilden, a clerk of the Bank of England, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Henry Balls of Cambridge. He was educated at schools in Kidderminster, Bedford, and East Dereham. When Tilden was fifteen, he was apprenticed for five years to Alfred Allchin, a London pharmacist, and attended lectures at the Royal College of Chemistry and the Pharmaceutical Society. Between 1863 and 1872 he worked as a demonstrator at the Pharmaceutical Society under Professor John Attfield; he also obtained a BSc in chemistry (1868) and a DSc (1871) from the University of London. Tilden became senior science master at Clifton College, Bristol, in 1872 and was elected to the chair of chemistry at the newly founded Mason College in Birmingham (later the University of Birmingham) eight years later. In 1894 he replaced T. E. Thorpe as professor of chemistry at the Royal College of Science, which became part of the Imperial College of Science and Technology in 1907, two years before Tilden retired in 1909. 
In 1875 Tilden found that nitrosyl chloride could be used to characterize terpenes, compounds which are found in turpentine and other essential oils. Thereafter, the terpenes and related compounds were Tilden's major interest. One important consequence of this research was his discovery in 1884 that isoprene (the building block of natural rubber) could be prepared by passing turpentine oil vapour through a red-hot iron tube. Much later, in 1892, a sealed bottle of this isoprene was found to contain yellowish lumps which appeared to be similar to natural rubber. Tilden even vulcanized this forerunner of synthetic rubber with sulphur, but did not pursue this line of research in the absence of any pressing need for rubber. In his later years Tilden also studied the specific heat of metals over a wide range of temperatures, and the history of chemistry. He published seven textbooks, the most enduring being his 'Introduction to the Study of Chemical Philosophy' (1876), and four historical works, including a biography of the chemist Sir William Ramsay (1918). 
Tilden was president of the Institute of Chemistry (1891-4) and of the Chemical Society (1903-5). He was elected FRS in 1880, and was awarded the Davy medal in 1908. Honorary degrees were bestowed by the universities of Dublin and Birmingham, and the Victoria University of Manchester, and Tilden was knighted in 1909. In 1869 he married Charlotte Pither (died 1905), daughter of Robert Bush of St Helier, Jersey. They had one son, Philip Armstrong Tilden, architect and garden designer. In 1907 he married Julia Mary, daughter of C. W. Ramie of St Helier, who survived him. Tilden died at his home, The Oaks, 57 Murray Road, Northwood, Middlesex, on 11 December 1926. 
Peter J. T. Morris', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38069


Tiltman, John Hessell (1894-1982), cryptanalyst, was born at 70 Torrington Square, Bloomsbury, London, on 25 May 1894, the youngest in the family of one daughter and two sons of Alfred Hessell Tiltman, architect, and his wife, Sarah Ann Jane Kerr. Tiltman was educated at Charterhouse School, where at the age of thirteen he was offered a place at Oxford University which the family was unable to take up. On leaving school, between 1912 and 1914 he taught at three schools, the last of them Northcliffe House School, Bognor. At the outbreak of the First World War he enlisted and was commissioned in the King's Own Scottish Borderers, and from 1915 to 1917 he served in France, where he won the MC and was severely wounded on the Somme. 
In August 1920, almost by chance, Tiltman was attached for a year to the small peacetime signal intelligence organization in London; he was then posted to Simla in India, where for eight years he performed cipher-breaking duties with remarkable success. On 7 April 1926 he married Tempe Monica ('b'. 1898), daughter of Major-General Oliver Robinson of the Army Medical Service. They had one daughter. Having become a War Office civilian in 1925, he was recalled to the colours as a lieutenant-colonel in September 1939 to command no. iv intelligence school. Before that he had helped to earmark dons and outstanding undergraduates for signal intelligence work in the event of war. Many wartime recruits came under his influence through the Bedford training courses, which he organized and supervised. During the 1930s he led the team which successfully decrypted all Comintern radio traffic with England. The texts of this traffic, released in 1997 to the Public Record Office, revealed the dependence of the Communist Party of Great Britain on secret Soviet monetary support; the names and activities of British individuals engaged in this clandestine liaison; and similar dealings between the USSR and the communist parties of several other countries. By 1939 Tiltman was head of the military section at the Government Code and Cypher School. During the course of the war he was promoted colonel and brigadier, and was made chief cryptographer at the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park. 
The unrivalled versatility of 'the Brig' was shown by the contributions he made to the solution of a number of machine ciphers during the Second World War. For example, he broke the German railway enigma in February 1941, which revealed in detail German preparations to attack Greece and the USSR. His work was crucial to the initial break into the German enciphered teleprinter systems used for the highest level of German services communications. As a solver of non-machine systems he was pre-eminent, through intuition, experience, and dogged persistence producing answers to problems of the most difficult and complex kind and constantly improving the speed and elegance of the methods used. When faced with a new target country he was able quickly to learn enough of the language to enable him to work on its ciphers. For example, in addition to his varied work on German ciphers during the Second World War, he learned sufficient Japanese to enable him to be the key figure in the decipherment of the main Japanese naval code known as JN-25 soon after its introduction in 1939 and of the Japanese military attache code in the summer of 1942. His work on the JN-25 was of value to the Americans after collaboration with them in cryptanalysis began in February 1941. He continued as a civilian in GCHQ after the war and retired at assistant secretary level in 1954. 
Tiltman was every inch a soldier but of unassuming modesty. He believed that the success of his work depended upon personal anonymity and public nondisclosure. From his work against Soviet agent and Comintern systems before the war he knew how governmental revelations could nullify success. His wide-ranging contribution to allied security during the Second World War was recognized by the USA with the award of the US Legion of merit in 1946. He was appointed OBE (1930), CBE (1944), and CMG (1954). Tiltman moved to Washington, DC, after his retirement, and was employed as a consultant by the national security agency, where, in 1980, the director, Admiral Bobbie Inman, and deputy director, Ann Caracristi, presented him with a scroll to celebrate 60 years 'of distinguished cryptologic service'. He died on 10 August 1982 in Hawaii. 


@@@@@


doc= 38070


Tosti, Sir (Francesco) Paolo (1846-1916), songwriter and singing teacher, was born on 9 April 1846 in Ortona sul Mare, Abruzzi, Italy. In 1858 he went to Naples, where he entered the Conservatorio di San Pietro a Majella. There he studied the violin under Pinto. His teachers of composition were Saverio Mercadante, the director of the Collegio di San Sebastiano, the leading conservatory in Naples, and a prolific composer of operas, and Carlo Conti, professor of counterpoint and composition at San Pietro a Majella until 1858, and later director, regarded by Rossini as the most remarkable Italian contrapuntal composer of the time. His success as a pupil led Mercadante to appoint Tosti 'maestrino' (pupil teacher) at a salary of 60 lire a month. His health broke down under the strain of overwork, however, and he returned to Ortona in 1869 to convalesce. During the seven months he spent there he wrote two songs, 'Non m'ama piu' and 'Lamento d'amore', which he had difficulty in publishing at the time, but which later became popular. 
In 1870 Tosti went to Rome, where the pianist Giovanni Sgambati, a pupil of Liszt and a leading figure in the musical life of Rome, recognized his talent and encouraged him. A crucial event in launching his career was a concert at the Sala Dante in Rome, at which Tosti sang a ballad composed specially for the concert by Sgambati, 'Eravi un vecchio', as well as some of his own songs. In the audience was Princess Margherita of Savoy (later queen of Italy), who appointed him as her singing teacher and later keeper of the musical archives of the Italian court. His reputation as a songwriter meanwhile grew rapidly. 
In 1875 Tosti made his first visit to London, and after this returned every year to the city, where he became very popular in fashionable circles. In 1880 he decided to settle in London permanently, and that same year Queen Victoria appointed him teacher of singing to the royal family. He gave lessons to the princess of Wales, and sang duets with the queen. In 1894 he became teacher of singing at the Royal Academy of Music; many of his pupils there became famous singers. 
Tosti's popularity as a songwriter rested mainly on his English ballads, much used in drawing-rooms. The most famous, 'Goodbye', with lyrics by George Whyte-Melville, is a prime example of the genre: '
What are we waiting for? Oh, my heart! 

Kiss me straight on the brows! And part! 

Again! Again! my heart! my heart! 

What are we waiting for, you and I? 

A pleading look -- a stifled cry. 

Goodbye, for ever! Goodbye, for ever! 

Goodbye, Goodbye, Goodbye. 

' Other popular English ballads included 'Parted', with words by F. E. Weatherly, the librettist for many of Tosti's songs, 'Mother', 'Forever', 'Beauty's Eyes', 'At Vespers', 'My Dreams', and 'That Day'. He also continued to write Italian songs, including fifteen duets, 'Canti populari abruzzesi'. His later songs, 'Mattinata' and 'Serenata', were particularly successful. Of his French songs, 'Ninon', 'Chanson de l'adieu', and 'Pour un baiser' were all great favourites in England. 
Tosti was appointed KCVO in 1908. Homesick for Italy, he returned there in 1913, and he died in Rome on 2 December 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 38071


Townesend, William (bap. 1676, d. 1739), master mason, was baptized on 17 December 1676 at St Giles's Church, Oxford, the second child and eldest of the three sons of John Townesend (1648-1728), a mason of Oxford, and his wife, Elizabeth Morrell or Morall. His brothers, John (1678-1742) and George (1681-1719), were also masons -- the former practised in London and the latter in the Bristol area -- but William, the most successful member of the family, remained in Oxford and became the leading master mason in the town during a particularly active phase in its architectural history. Alongside its other main protagonists, the amateur architects Dr Henry Aldrich of Christ Church and Dr George Clarke of All Souls, and the professional Nicholas Hawksmoor, he was a prominent figure in this development; and the statement of the antiquary Thomas Hearne in 1720, that he 'hath a hand in all the Buildings of Oxford, and gets a vast deal of Money that way' (quoted in Colvin, 'Biographical Dictionary of British Architects', 3rd edn, 1995, p. 985), was no exaggeration. His first major undertakings were the erection of Peckwater quadrangle at Christ Church (1706-14) to the design of Aldrich and the fellows' building and cloister at Corpus Christi College (1706-12); and from then on until his death, occasionally working in partnership with another Oxford mason, Bartholomew Peisley (died 1727), he was involved in virtually every significant building project in the university. He also worked elsewhere in the neighbourhood, notably at Radley Hall, Berkshire (1721-5), and as a contractor at Blenheim Palace (1720-39), while other aspects of his business were quarry-working and the production of funerary monuments. 
In the building accounts of Queen's College, Oxford, Townesend is referred to as 'architecto', whereas his father, who had worked there previously, was described as 'lapicidae', a distinction which reflects the fact that, like others of his kind, he was certainly able to design as well as to build; but the extent to which he did so unaided is not entirely clear, many of the projects in Oxford at this time evidently being the work of more than one mind. In two cases where he executed designs by Hawksmoor, the Clarendon Building (1712-15) and the north quadrangle of All Souls (1716-35), he had submitted alternative proposals himself; and at Christ Church Library (1717-38) he acted as Clarke's architectural amanuensis, drawing out his designs as well as executing them. More complicated was the situation at Queen's, where designs for the front quad were prepared by Hawksmoor, but the scheme executed by Townesend (1710-21) appears to have been almost entirely the joint work of himself and Clarke; while for the new building at Magdalen, the original design by Edward Holdsworth was revised by Townesend in 1731 under Clarke's direction. 
In these circumstances Townesend's own architectural identity is not very clearly defined. His predominant mode, in the Clarendon Building and All Souls designs and at Queen's, as well as in other works, such as the Christ Church buttery (1722) and his Durham quadrangle range at Trinity College (1728), was a simplified version of the baroque of Hawksmoor and Sir John Vanbrugh; but the fellows' building at Corpus Christi College, of which he may have been the designer as well as the builder, was close to the proto-Palladian manner of the Peckwater quadrangle, while his Radcliffe quadrangle at University College (1717-19) -- again devised under Clarke's direction -- and his Robinson Buildings at Oriel College (1719-20) were faithful copies of the traditional Jacobean style of the adjoining fabric, the former including a skilfully executed Gothic vault. 
Townesend and his wife, Mary, had two children who survived their father: a son, John, who carried on the business, and a daughter. William Townesend died in September 1739 and was buried at St Giles's Church on 22 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 38072


Townsend, Charles Harrison (1851-1928), architect, was born on 13 May 1851 in Birkenhead, Cheshire, the son of Jackson Townsend, solicitor, and his wife, Pauline, the daughter of Felix Yaniewicz, a well-known Polish violinist; he had five brothers and one sister. After attending Birkenhead School, he was articled to the architect Walter Scott of Liverpool from 1867 to 1872. From 1873 to 1875 he was a draughtsman in the office of Charles Barry, and in 1875 he joined Edward Robert Robson's office at the recently formed London school board. In the same year he made the first of many visits to Europe, to which he returned throughout his life, especially to northern Italy, where he developed a lifelong interest in architectural mosaics. 
In 1877 Townsend started practice on his own in London, and between 1884 and 1886 was in partnership with Thomas Lewis Banks. When the partnership was dissolved he moved his office to 29 Great George Street, Westminster, where it remained for the rest of his life. In 1888 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects. He also designed furniture and wallpaper and was elected, also in 1888, to the Art-Workers' Guild, of which he was to be an enthusiastic and devoted member, and which provided his main circle of friends; he was elected master of the guild for the year 1903. 
Until 1892 Townsend's practice was made up of minor domestic and ecclesiastical work, but in that year he won the competition for the design of the Bishopsgate Institute, the first of the three outstanding public buildings that were to make his reputation. In 1897 he was commissioned to design the Whitechapel Art Gallery and the Horniman Museum in Lewisham, south London, both of which were completed in 1901. These were exceptionally original buildings, and belonged to no recognizable architectural tradition. Writing in 1900, the German architect and critic Hermann Muthesius identified as one of the most significant developments in European architecture the tendency of certain British architects towards what he described as a 'modern' style, which referred to no tradition, and created a new architectural language of space and mass. Foremost among the representatives of this new school he placed Townsend, whom, next to Charles Voysey, he regarded as one of 'the prophets of the new style' (H. Muthesius, 'Die englische Baukunst der Gegenwart', 1, 1900, 30). 
Although the unquestionable and striking originality, particularly of the last two buildings, made this a valid assessment in 1900, Townsend never again produced anything of equal quality. After 1901 his practice was limited to relatively uninteresting private houses in southern England. Why he did not sustain the promise of the works of the 1890s is not clear, though it is certainly connected with the change to a much more conservative and less experimental architectural climate in Britain in the 1900s, when there was a revival of baroque and French Renaissance architecture; it may also be to do with Townsend's own equivocal and confused attitude towards the value of architectural traditions. 
In 1915 Townsend was appointed assistant director of the London county council's civic survey, a scheme to employ architects deprived of work by the war in the collection of social and physical data on the structure of the city. In 1917 he was employed as a Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve lieutenant in Avonmouth on the dazzle-painting of ships. In 1918 he virtually ceased to practise, and in the early 1920s moved to live with his sister in Northwood, Middlesex, where he died, at his house, 30 Murray Road, on 26 December 1928. He never married and had no children. He is said to have been convivial, widely knowledgeable, with a fertile imagination and a whimsical sense of humour. His most regular companions were artists, several of whom, such as Walter Crane, Sir George Frampton, and Robert Anning Bell, collaborated with him on his buildings. 
Adrian Forty', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38073


Tozer, Henry Fanshawe (1829-1916), geographer and classical scholar, was born in Plymouth on 18 May 1829, the only son (there was also a daughter) of Captain Aaron Tozer RN and his wife, Mary Hutton of Lincoln. He entered Winchester College in 1842, and University College, Oxford, in 1847, and won a scholarship to Exeter College, Oxford, in 1848; he obtained a second class in 'literae humaniores' in 1850. He was elected a fellow of Exeter in 1850, and was ordained deacon in 1852 and priest in 1853. He was classical tutor at Exeter College and remained a fellow (from 1893 honorary fellow) until his death, except for the period from 1868, when he vacated his fellowship on his marriage, until 1882, when the passing of the statutes of the second university commissioners enabled him to be readmitted as fellow. Tozer married Augusta Henrietta, daughter of Hans David Christopher Satow, a Swedish merchant who settled in London in 1825, and his wife, Margaret Mason, an Englishwoman. 
A versatile and hardy traveller, Tozer made his first journey to Italy and Sicily, the prelude to an extended and detailed tour of Greece as far as Thessaly. Thereafter he made regular journeys in Greece and Turkey, some of which formed the subject of two of his major travel books, 'Researches in the Highlands of Turkey' (2 vols., 1869) and 'Turkish Armenia and Eastern Asia Minor' (1881). The first of these described two arduous journeys from Constantinople to Salonika (taking in Mount Athos, which he climbed) across the Scardus and Bertiscus ranges, then further north into Montenegro and across the Mirdita country of central Albania; the second described a journey from Samsun across the Anatolian plateau, through Cappadocia, past Lake Van to Erzurum, and so back to Trebizond, the last stretch roughly along the route taken by Xenophon and the Ten Thousand. On these travels Tozer was usually accompanied by T. M. Crowder, bursar of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, whose sixteen volumes of closely written journals, recording these and many other travels, are preserved in the college library. 
Tozer travelled after the pioneer journeys of W. M. Leake in Greece and Macedonia and of W. J. Hamilton in Asia Minor had opened up these countries to archaeologists, and his main interest was not in the discovery of archaeological material but in physical and human geography. He was thus a true follower of Strabo, the author to the dissemination of whose work he contributed most. He was a keen observer of the landscape (including the flora -- he was a skilled botanist) and of the people who lived in it and the regimes under which they lived. In Greece especially he absorbed much local folklore, and all his life he continued to write articles on modern Greek legends and folk-songs and allied topics. He was also deeply interested in Byzantine history and literature, and one of his lasting achievements was to re-edit George Finlay's seven-volume 'History of Greece' (1877). This was a task of considerable complexity and Tozer's edition became the standard one. The geographers were, however, never far from his thoughts, and in 1893 he produced his admirable 'Selections from Strabo' (which remained the most sympathetic introduction to Strabo); this was followed in 1897 by 'A History of Ancient Geography' -- one of the best, if not the best, handbook on both ancient geography and geographical writers, in Greek and Latin, to the end of the western empire. This is in a way a companion volume, in its emphasis on the geographers, to his much earlier book, 'Lectures on the Geography of Greece' (1873), based on lectures given in Oxford in 1872. His later travels in the Aegean formed the subject of his delightful 'Islands of the Aegean' (1890). In addition to this intensive work on his special subjects, and the work, such as the study of modern Greek, that arose naturally out of his other activities, Tozer had an abiding love for Dante, and published both an elegant three-volume commentary on the 'Divina commedia' (1901) and a prose translation of the poem (1904). 
Tozer's writings are invariably simple in style and straightforward in substance, but he had a direct appreciation of landscape, which carries its own charm, and, like his friend Edward Lear, a sharp eye for human foibles and vanities as revealed by the activities of local officials in the Turkish provinces. His main contribution to the understanding of ancient geography lay in his personal knowledge of the topography over a wide area, combined with a natural appreciation of the writings of the geographers themselves, especially Strabo. His eminence in his field was signalled by his inclusion in the original list of fellows of the British Academy in 1903; but in the Oxford of the second half of the nineteenth century, parochial, preoccupied with spiritual and philosophical problems, the Oxford of Jowett, Pater, and Pattison, his interests and experiences must have set him apart. He died childless on 2 June 1916 at his home, 18 Norham Gardens, Oxford. One of his executors was his wife's brother, Sir Ernest Mason Satow. 
Tozer is chiefly remembered as a pioneer of the establishment of geography in British universities, which lagged far behind their continental counterparts in this respect. His particular research and lectures proved, like contemporary work in biblical geography, to be something of an academic cul-de-sac. They were regarded as peripheral to classical studies, and geography ultimately drew more on the natural sciences and contemporary exploration which dominated German advances in the subject. None the less, Tozer's work has been consulted by those (admittedly few) geographers interested in the field (see (Coones, 1986)), and his 'Ancient Geography' was reprinted as late as 1974. It is his staunch belief in the need for history to have a firm base in geography and in the inherent value of geography that remain of most interest. He strongly advocated 'the intelligent study of historical geography' (his dedication to A. P. Stanley in the 'Geography of Greece'), and in the 1880s wrote to John Scott Keltie to say 'it would be a good thing to have a professor or reader in geography [at Oxford] as a definite recognition of the subject and as providing the university with a man who should represent the branch of knowledge', though he recognized that 'the studies of undergraduates are almost entirely regulated by the examination' so that without syllabus reform geography would continue to be 'crowded out' (Baker, 124-5). In 1887, shortly after Tozer wrote, Halford Mackinder became the first reader in geography at Oxford, though the establishment of geography as an honour school was to take longer. This interest in broadening the university curriculum was typical of Tozer, who, unlike many contemporary fellows, was active in learned societies such as the Society for Promoting Hellenic Studies, was a corresponding member of Near-Eastern learned societies, and, as curator of the Taylor Institution in 1869-93, was active in broadening the scope of scholarly enquiry at Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 38074


Traherne, Thomas (c.1637-1674), poet and writer, was born within the walls of the city of Hereford, the son of a shoemaker, a master craftsman and freeman of Hereford who kept at least two apprentices, and who was very probably John Traherne ('fl'. 1629-1648), of the parish of All Saints. Nothing is known of the identity of Traherne's mother, but he had a younger brother, Philip (1640-1723), with whom he maintained a close relationship throughout his life, and who was to become chaplain to the Levant Company in Smyrna (1670-75), and subsequently minister of Wimborne Minster, Dorset (1684-1723). 
Traherne's writing powerfully recreates both the innocence of his infancy, in which he was 'Entertained like an Angel with the Works of GOD', and his fall, as he was 'made to learn the Dirty Devices of this World' ('Centuries', 3.2, 3). His experience was paralleled by that of Hereford; the royalist city, which had 'seemed to stand in Eden' (ibid., 3.3), was occupied for the first time in 1642 by parliamentary troops, and was finally captured for parliament in December 1645. John Traherne, who had fought as an officer in the local royalist militia, was taken prisoner, and paid a ransom of $4. His fortunes, however, seem to have revived, and in Michaelmas 1648 he completed the purchase of property in the parish of All Saints, almost certainly that in Widemarsh Street which was later to belong to Thomas and after his death to be settled on the city for use as almshouses. Hereford retained a parliamentary garrison, and the clergy of the cathedral and city churches were replaced by puritan nominees, some of whom would later support Traherne's presentation to a living. Probably too they influenced his education; he may have attended Hereford Cathedral school, and although 'Scholes were a Burden' he certainly received the equivalent of a grammar school training. But to the young Thomas, the world was a 'Comfortless Wilderness'; even as a child he had begun 'to long after an unknown Happiness', the attainment and communication of which was to be the object of his life (ibid., 3.14, 15). 
On 1 March 1653 Traherne was admitted as a commoner at Brasenose College, Oxford, a college governed with a zealous puritanism, to the requirements of which he must have conformed. He matriculated as a plebeian on 2 April 1653, was admitted to the degree of BA on 13 October 1656, created MA on 6 November 1661, and admitted BD on 11 December 1669. As a student he relished both the 'Beautifull Streets and famous colledges' of Oxford ('Select Meditations', 3.83), and 'the Taste and Tincture of another Education... Glorious Secrets, and Glorious Persons past Imagination'; but notoriously found that 'There was never a Tutor that did professely Teach Felicity' ('Centuries', 3.36, 37). His notes on his conventional undergraduate reading are to be found in his 'Early notebook' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Lat. misc. f. 45). He remained in Oxford at least until Lent 1657, when he took part in the disputations required of a determining bachelor. 
On 30 December 1657 Traherne was admitted by the commissioners for the approbation of public preachers to the rectory of Credenhill in Herefordshire, to which he had been presented by its patron, Amabella, countess dowager of Kent. He was supported by certificates from some of the county's leading presbyterian clergy, William Voyle, William Lowe, Samuel Smith, and George Primrose, preachers at Hereford Cathedral, who were all to be ejected after the Restoration. Traherne may well have received ordination from them since, although presbyterian classes were never established in Herefordshire, they ordained many ministers in the cathedral in an attempt to stem sectarianism, an aim with which Traherne would certainly have agreed. At this date, therefore, he is probably to be seen as having moderate puritan sympathies. When at the Restoration he sought episcopal ordination long before the eventual church settlement required it, it is not clear whether he did so out of doctrinal conviction, or in order to strengthen his title to his living. He was ordained deacon and priest at Launton, Oxfordshire, on 20 October 1660 by Robert Skinner, bishop of Oxford, the see of Hereford being vacant. On 18 August 1662, unlike his sponsors, he subscribed to the 'Act of Uniformity'. 
It seems to have been during this period of uncertainty for the church shortly after the Restoration that Traherne composed his 'Select Meditations' (first published in 1997), a series of short reflections on his own vocation 'to teach Immortal Souls the way to Heaven' (3.83), his devotional life, and its relationship to the political and ecclesiastical turmoils of the nation. It juxtaposes a fervent commitment to 'the Beautifull union of my Nationall church' and its 'External Flourishing' (1.85, 3.23) with an intense perception of spiritual realities, including an experience of the infinity of the human soul so powerful 'that for a fortnight after I could Scarsly Think or speak or write of any other Thing' (4.3). 
Traherne was to remain rector of Credenhill until he died in 1674; apart from some temporary absences he was, as his churchwarden reported in 1673, 'continualy resident amongst us' until early in the year of his death (Hereford County RO, registrar's files, 1673/488). His parish, 5 miles north-west of Hereford, was a very small one of about two dozen households, about half of them living close to the poverty line, and had neither school nor midwife. Traherne himself, with a living worth $50 a year, was relatively affluent, and there was only one house in the parish larger than his four-hearth rectory: he 'called his Hous the Hous of Paradice' ('Centuries', 4.22). Ecclesiastical records show him engaged in the usual round of a parish minister, reporting that he 'does duly visit the sick, Instruct the youth' (Hereford County RO, registrar's files, 1673/488), although Traherne did not always find such visiting easy: 'And when I enter into Houses, let me remember the Glory I saw in the feilds' ('Select Meditations', 2.100). His churchwarden thought him 'a goo[d] and Godlie man well Learned... and a good Preacher of gods word and a very devout liver' (Hereford County RO, registrar's files, 1667/349). On 28 May 1669 a Mr John Traherne was buried in the parish, perhaps his father. Later in his ministry Traherne also had ecclesiastical responsibilities outside his own parish; on 26 July 1667 he was appointed a surrogate for the dean of Hereford in his consistory court, and regularly presided there during 1671 and 1672. 
Traherne's church of St Mary, 'the Roffe well covered wth tyle, the wyndowes well glazed' was 'soe decentlie ordered as becometh the howse of God' (Hereford County RO, registrar's files, 1666/36), but of his liturgical practice little is known. Twenty-five years after his death, it was said by an anonymous acquaintance that he 'became much in love with the beautiful order and 'Primitive' Devotions of this our excellent Church', and 'never failed any one day either publickly or in his private Closet, to make use of her publick Offices' ('Serious and Pathetical Contemplation', sig. A4'v'). Such an affection for the Anglican liturgy must have developed gradually; after the Restoration Traherne had seen not the 'Book of Common Prayer', but the Lord's prayer as 'the Liturgie of His church' ('Select Meditations', 3.58b). His 'Church's year-book' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. th. e. 51), a collection of meditations and devotions on the liturgical calendar, which he began before 1670, may have been part of the process by which he familiarized himself with classic Anglican texts. 
It was probably at the beginning of Traherne's ministry at Credenhill that, having 'all my Time in mine own Hands', he took the momentous resolution to 'Spend it all, whatever it cost me, in Search of Happiness' ('Centuries', 3.46). This dedication may have been associated with a period of 'Close Retirements' lasting some years, in which he walked 'with God, as if there had been non other but He and I' ('Select Meditations', 3.69). As he progressed in 'the study of Felicitie', he achieved the perception which illuminates all his writing, that 'all things were Gods Treasures in their Proper places' ('Centuries', 3.52, 60), and this discovery in turn led to a burning desire to communicate his vision to others. Indeed, as his anonymous acquaintance remembered, Traherne was 'so wonderfully transported with the Love of God to Mankind' that 'those that would converse with him, were forced to endure some discourse upon these subjects, whether they had any sense of Religion, or not' ('Serious and Pathetical Contemplation', sig. A4'r'). 
The same acquaintance also recorded that Traherne spent 'most of his time when at home, in digesting his notions of these things into writing' ('Serious and Pathetical Contemplation', sig. A4'r'), an assertion amply verified by the quantity of Traherne's original works which survive in manuscript. Definite dates cannot be assigned to most of these works, a number of which remained unfinished at Traherne's death; many of them appear to have been written after the Restoration, and several, including 'Commentaries of heaven' (BL, Add. MS 63054) and 'The kingdom of God' (LPL, MS 1360) were composed at least in part after 1670. It is however primarily Credenhill which must be seen as the context of their composition. 
Traherne's major works vary widely in genre, ranging from the ecstatic lyric poems (first published in 1903), which celebrate 'the Old / And Innocent Delights' of Eden and childhood ('Eden', ll. 33-4), to 'Commentaries of heaven', an encyclopaedia of felicity in which 'EVRY BEING' is, with much ingenuity, 'Alphabeticaly Represented As it will appear In the Light of GLORY' (title-page). This latter work, conceived on a vast scale but completed only from 'Abhorrence' to 'Bastard', embraces not only theological topics, but also shows a keen interest in contemporary scientific discoveries and in political and ecclesiastical affairs. In 'Centuries' (first published in 1908) Traherne instructs a friend in 'those Truths you Love, without Knowing them' (1.1) by unfolding his own experience of felicity, both as a child and as an adult, through a series of meditations. 'The kingdom of God' is a physico-theological work, which moves from exploration of the attributes of God and the 'Glory & Perfection' of his spiritual kingdom (fol. 177'r'), to an account, often given in terms of the new philosophy, of the 'World of Mysteries' (fol. 258'v') comprehended within the created universe. 'The ceremonial law' (Folger Shakespeare Library, MS V. a. 70) is a biblical poem in heroic couplets, based on the events of 'Genesis' and 'Exodus', which combines a lively narrative of the journey of the Israelites through the wilderness with typological exposition. All of these works, through Traherne's vivid and often idiosyncratic style and vocabulary, embody his characteristic themes of the infinity of space, the limitless potential of 'This busy, vast, enquiring Soul' ('Insatiableness II', 1.1), our creation in the image of God, the necessity of free will, the 'Permanent and Steddy' treasures of Adam in Eden ('Select Meditations', 3.12), and their repossession in greater abundance by the redeemed. Although none of these works was published by Traherne, some of them show clear evidence of having been prepared for publication, 'Commentaries of heaven' in particular addressing 'Publick Persons' (fol. 17'r'. 2). 
Traherne however also had a more immediate and intimate audience of 'living Auditors' for his works ('Select Meditations', 2.45). The ten extant manuscripts of his writings, although chiefly autograph, also contain contributions in some six other hands. These show that a number of other people, one of whom has been identified as Traherne's brother Philip, worked with him in the production of the manuscripts, copying out his own work, making extracts from other authors under his direction, and perhaps occasionally adding short passages of their own selection or composition. The manuscripts also provide evidence that Traherne showed his work to friends for comment. The friend who read the unfinished 'Ceremonial law' responded enthusiastically, 'I like this mightily' (flyleaf), while the marginal annotations to 'A sober view of Dr Twisse his considerations', Traherne's survey of Calvinist and Arminian debate, take a more critical stance: 'all this is Good & True, but yu have said it over & over' (LPL, MS 1360, fol. 84'r'). 'Centuries' is addressed to a friend, and 'of the Soul' (Yale University, Beinecke Library, Osborn MS b. 308) written in response to a request. Writing was not a solitary activity for Traherne, and most of the manuscripts can be seen in some degree as communal productions. 
Traherne placed a high value on the possession of 'Intelligent Friends & Heavenly Companions', although many of the friends mentioned in his writing, such as the 'Knight, & a Traveller' from whom he heard 'som curious Observations' on ants, remain unidentified ('Commentaries', fols. 29'v' 2, 101'r' 1). Interestingly, in spite of his vehement attacks on 'Disobedient Hereticks' ('Select Meditations', 3.23), most of his known associates, including Sir Edward Harley, Thomas Barlow, Thomas Good, and Sir Orlando Bridgeman, were sympathetic to nonconformists, or were actively involved in attempts to comprehend them within the national church. Traherne apparently met John Aubrey, and possibly he also knew the devotional writer Susanna Hopton, who lived at nearby Gattertop, and whose niece and god-daughter Susanna Blount married Philip Traherne in August 1670. Traherne himself never married, but 'led a single and a devout life' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.531). He seems to have made a deliberate choice of celibacy: 'I would be Disentangled from all the World, but God alone. Free to Suffer & to follow Vertue' ('Inducements to retiredness', LPL, MS 1360, fol. 5'r'). 
Contemporary references speak highly of Traherne's character. Thomas Good thought him 'one of the most pious ingenious men that ever I was acquainted with' (Worcester Cathedral Library, MS D. 64), and he was remembered as 'a man of a cheerful and sprightly Temper... ready to do all good Offices to his Friends, and Charitable to the Poor almost beyond his ability' ('Serious and Pathetical Contemplation', sig. A4'v'). Traherne himself knew that he also suffered from the weaknesses of a sociable personality: 'Too much openness and proneness to Speak are my Diseas. Too easy and complying a Nature' ('Select Meditations', 3.65). A contrasting trait in his character was his obvious relish in his skill as a controversialist, as he described an intellectual skirmish in 'the 'New-Parks'' at Oxford with a 'Grave Person' committed to 'promoting Popery' ('Roman Forgeries', 1673, sig. B7'r'); recounted how he twice questioned the baptist John Tombes 'at his Amsterdam, his Heretical Church in Leominster', leaving that distinguished scholar 'as Blank, & mute as a Fish'; and boasted that 'it is the Easiest thing in the World to convince & confound a Jew, as I my self have done' ('Commentaries', fols. 194'r' 2- 'v' 1, 139'v' 1). 
During his residence in Credenhill, Traherne maintained contact with Oxford, returning to take his MA in November 1661 and his BD in December 1669; on both occasions he was dispensed from some of the statutory requirements. In 1664 he donated 20's'. towards the completion of the new library and chapel at Brasenose. On at least one of his visits he worked in the Bodleian Library, 'the Glory of 'Oxford', and this Nation', on his 'Roman Forgeries' (sig. B7'r'), a polemical tract exposing the alleged falsification by Roman Catholics of the councils of the first 420 years of the church; one scarce book he discovered in the collection of Thomas Barlow, Lady Margaret professor of divinity. Traherne emphasized the meticulousness of his research: 'I do not trust other mens information, but mine own eyes' (sig. B6'v'). He was working on 'Roman Forgeries' in the early 1670s, but described it in 'Commentaries' as complete, and 'fit to be published' (fol. 104'v' 2). In autumn 1673 he was in London arranging its publication. 

'Roman Forgeries' was entered in the Stationers' register by the bookseller Jonathan Edwin on 25 September and licensed on 24 November 1673, becoming, by the timing of its publication, a contribution to the anti-Catholic political ferment of that year. Its title-page attributes it simply to a 'Faithful Son of the Church of ENGLAND'. Traherne probably remained in London for some time: he may have made handwritten corrections to the printed copies of his book, and he was apparently absent from Credenhill on 17 October, when the incumbent of a neighbouring parish was acting as its curate. While in London he may have had contact with the latitudinarian divine Edward Stillingfleet, and more importantly with his future patron Sir Orlando Bridgeman, lord keeper of the great seal until his removal from office in November 1672. 'Roman Forgeries' dedicates to Bridgeman 'The USE and BENEFIT' of the author's 'Ensuing Labors' (sig. A2'r'), perhaps indicating a hope of employment in Bridgeman's service. 
Traherne was apparently back in Credenhill on 15 January 1674, but by 19 February he had 'removed out of the Country' to become domestic chaplain to Sir Orlando Bridgeman at Teddington, Middlesex ('Serious and Pathetical Contemplation', sig. A4'v'). How Traherne obtained such a position, which was a recognized step to preferment, is not known, although it could have been through the family connections of Sir Edward Harley. Bridgeman, a man with 'very serious impressions of religion on his mind' ('Burnet's History', 1.454), had since his dismissal lived in seclusion at his substantial villa in the fashionable village of Teddington, with his second wife, Dorothy, 'a woman that hath no good esteeme by any that knows her' ('Life... of Sir William Dugdale', 396), and their daughter, Charlotte. As chaplain Traherne would have taken prayers for the family and for the other employees of the house, but he was not the incumbent of Teddington, which was served by its perpetual curate. Nor would he have had any opportunity to take the prominent role in ecclesiastical politics played by Hezekiah Burton, Bridgeman's chaplain when he was lord keeper. He may, however, have met Burton and another former chaplain, Richard Cumberland, both of whom were close friends of Bridgeman, and who shared both his latitudinarian views and his opposition to Hobbes. 
The whole of Traherne's brief residence at Teddington was overshadowed by illness and death. His first recorded act in Bridgeman's service was to witness his will; by early May Bridgeman was seriously ill, and on 25 June 1674 he died. After his patron's death Traherne remained at Teddington with Lady Bridgeman, preparing his 'Christian Ethicks' for the press. This treatise offers a guide to 'the way of 'Vertue'' (sig. A2'v') neither by presenting moral conduct in terms of duty or expediency, nor by condemning vice, 'which is far the more easie Theme' (sig. A4'r'), but by making 'as 'visible', as it is possible for me, the lustre of its 'Beauty', 'Dignity', and 'Glory'' (sig. A3'r'). The work's connection with the Bridgeman household may be reflected both in its engagement with Hobbes's 'arrogant 'Leviathan'' (p. 519), and in that it envisages an audience of 'Birth and Breeding' (p. 11). 'Christian Ethicks' was entered in the Stationers' register by Jonathan Edwin on 6 August 1674, and was licensed for publication on 25 November, but the 'Author's much lamented Death' (sig. a8'v') had taken place before he had been able to correct the proofs. 
On 27 September 1674 Traherne was 'lyeing sick at the Lady Bridgmans house', and made a nuncupative will, commenting 'I have not soe much, but that I can dispose of it by word of mouth'. He had apparently already begun transferring his houses in Widemarsh Street to the corporation of Hereford for use as almshouses on 25 August. In his will he left a ring to Lady Bridgeman and to Charlotte, and small bequests to each of the Bridgeman servants. To his brother Philip, absent in Smyrna, he left all his books and 'my best hatt', telling his sister-in-law Susanna, who was present, 'I desire you would keep it for him' (TNA: PRO, PROB 10/1061). By 3 October Traherne was dead, although the exact date of his death is unknown. He was buried at Teddington on 10 October 1674 'under the reading Desk in the church, just entering into the Chancell he had no stone laid over him' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood F 45, fol. 40). 
At his death, Traherne had only a slight reputation as a scholar 'well read in primitive antiquity' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.531). Neither 'Roman Forgeries' nor 'Christian Ethicks' was widely read, and when in 1699 his 'Serious and Pathetical Contemplation' (now known as 'Thanksgivings') was published 'At the request of a Friend of the Authors', it was thought to be 'to no purpose' to identify its author (title-page, sig. A3'v'). His other manuscript works remained unpublished, although Philip abortively prepared a volume of poems for the press, and by the early nineteenth century they were widely dispersed. Traherne would have sunk into oblivion had it not been for the extraordinary rediscovery of his manuscript writings which took place during the twentieth century. This story began in winter 1896-7 when W. T. Brooke purchased two manuscripts, 'Centuries' and a folio volume containing poems and a commonplace book, from two London book barrows for a few pence. Thought at first to be by Henry Vaughan, they were subsequently identified as Traherne's through the detective work of Bertram Dobell, who published 'The Poetical Works' (1903), and 'Centuries' (1908). This led to several other discoveries, including some notebooks, and the identification of 'Poems of Felicity' in the British Museum (published in 1910). In 1964 'Select Meditations' was identified, and in 1981 'Commentaries of heaven' was recognized as Traherne's, having been rescued about 1967 from a burning rubbish tip in Lancashire, already partly scorched. In late 1996 and early 1997, exactly one hundred years after the first discoveries, two further manuscripts came to light: 'The ceremonial law', which had been in the Folger Shakespeare Library since 1958; and a large volume in Lambeth Palace Library, containing 'Inducements to retiredness', 'A sober view', 'Seeds of eternity', 'The kingdom of God', and a fragment on 'Love'. Given the fortuitousness of this sequence of discoveries, it is entirely possible that yet more manuscript works may be found. 
Partly as a result of the nature of the first discoveries, Traherne was seen for much of the twentieth century primarily as a poet, rather than as a prose writer, and as a radiant and sometimes facile mystic who 'was unaffected by the domination of either king or protector' (Iredale, 2). A tendency to associate his work with that of the earlier metaphysical poets seemed further to distance it from the concerns of the Restoration period in which he actually wrote. More recent major discoveries and changing critical tastes have led to a growing appreciation of the qualities, both literary and intellectual, of his prose, and an increased understanding of the depth of his engagement with the philosophical and political issues of his time. None the less a number of major works remain as yet unpublished, so that the comment written in a seventeenth-century hand on the flyleaf of the Lambeth manuscript still stands: 'Why is this soe long detaind in a dark manuscript, that if printed would be a Light to the World, & a Universal Blessing?' 


@@@@@


doc= 38075


Trapnel, Anna (fl. 1642-1660), self-styled prophet, was born in Poplar, Stepney, Middlesex, apparently the only child of William Trapnel (died before 1645?), shipwright, and a godly mother who exerted seminal influence by raising her daughter as a literate woman of middle rank and teaching her to think of herself as uniquely chosen. 
Anna experienced her first vision in 1642 at a sermon preached by John Simpson. The harrowing death of her mother, probably in 1645, was followed by an intense quest for salvation and truth, involving phases of suicidal Calvinist despair, fasting, trances, visions, and associations with various puritan congregations. In her pamphlet 'The Cry of a Stone' (1654) she records a Damascene illness in 1647 which gave rise to a sequence of successful prophetic visions: weeks prior to the New Model Army's bloodless entry into London on 6 August to quell counter-revolution and mob rule she predicted their 'coming-in 'Southwark'-way'; in 1650 she foresaw Cromwell's defeat of the Scots at Dunbar, 'a 'Gideon'' provided by God 'so surely should the 'Scots' be ruinated' ('Cry', sigs. A3'r', A3'v'). That year she joined John Simpson's millenarian Baptist congregation at All Hallows-the-Great and forged links with other radical ministers (Henry Jessey, John Greenhill, and Christopher Feake). In 1652 Anna predicted victory over the Dutch and the calling-in of the Jews preparatory to the apocalypse, and in 1653 Cromwell's dissolution of the Barebones Parliament, in which her fellow Fifth Monarchists sat: envisioning four days before it happened 'that suddenly 'Gideon'... and M[ajor] G[eneral] 'Harrison' came into the Parliament-house and desired removal of them' ('Cry', sig. B1'v'). Finally disenchanted with Cromwell when he declared himself protector on 16 December 1653 (which she claimed to have predicted), Anna accompanied Vavasor Powell, the fiery Welsh Independent minister, during his examination for treason at Whitehall, where, seized by the prophetic afflatus, she was taken to Mr Roberts's hostelry, there to rhapsodize in verse, 'lying in bed with her eyes shut, her hands fixed, seldom seen to move' for eleven days and twelve nights, in bursts of several hours, her inspirations being recorded by a scribe at the bedside, which was visited by sundry notable radical sectaries ('Cry', sig. A1'v'). Her prophecies included God's punishment of Cromwell's corruption, spiritual advice to merchants, promises to the 'saints' of becoming 'Potentates' in the coming millennium, and invective against universities and churches. The text was published in 'The Cry of a Stone'. 
Anna became a celebrity, viewed by the protectorate as seditious. In 1654 she published a spiritual autobiography, 'A Legacy for Saints'. Her authenticity was tested by sceptics, such as the anonymous letter-writer of 21 December 1654, who noted that she was 'so stiffened in her body... one would think her dead' and that 'she cannot make a verse when she is herself', persisting for eight days at a stretch without food, 'save once in twenty-four hours a little... small beer' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A21, p. 325). 
In her 'Report and Plea' (1654) Anna described her journey to Cornwall at the behest of God and the imprisoned millenarian ministers, Feake and Simpson, to liaise with Fifth Monarchist Captain Langden, MP in the Barebones Parliament, and local militants including John Bawden and Thomas Allen in Truro. She described interrogation while in a trance by JPs who 'pincht me by the nose and caused my pillow to be pull'd from under my head... but I heard none of all this stir and bussle' ('Report and Plea', sig. D3'r'). At her assize's trial she was accused of witchcraft, madness, whoredom, vagrancy, and seditious intent. Anna defended herself nervously but vehemently as a free single woman (and hence masterless), whose right to pray, publish, and travel were founded in common and divine law, backed by her rights as taxpayer. 
Following her arrest on 23 March 1654 Anna was sent, via Plymouth, by ship to Portsmouth and then to Bridewell, where she was cared for by women members of the All Hallows congregation, especially Ursula Adman, who 'kept me company seven weeks... she was a friend born for the day of adversity' ('Report and Plea', sig. G2'v'). Anna now set up as a martyr, writing inflammatory letters from prison, and the protectoral government found it prudent to release her on 26 July 1654. In 1656 she revisited Cornwall, canvassed Wales, and was said to be meditating an excursion to the continent. Trance doggerels of 1657 and 1658 were collected in a thousand-page printed folio volume, placed in the Bodleian Library, which, with 'A Voice for the King of Saints and Nations' (1658), records her dispute with the Quakers (often mistaken by contemporaries for Fifth Monarchists because of their ecstatic and anti-judicial stance). Scathing Quaker representatives were present at these sessions, at which Anna boasted her vintage as God's seasoned chosen prophet ('Poor Instrument hath found thee, Lord, / For fourteen years together'), urging the scribe to keep up and condemning the culture of literacy ('Antichrist's libraries') as inferior to the unmediated voice. Latterly dissociating herself from the violent militancy of Venner, she loudly espoused politically quietist millenarianism. 
Anna was a touchstone for interregnum female seers. Her writing style, close to the spoken word, is quirkily naive, rapturous, canny, and sublimely innocent of humour, with a vein of nature mysticism and a testamentary realism. Her catatonic trances negotiated the danger of criminal stigmatization as immodest, demented, or demonic, identifying her as the Almighty's supine 'handmaid', 'vessel', and mouthpiece: 'thy Servant is made a voice... a voice within a voice... even thy voice through her' ('Cry'). Anna dropped out of public knowledge after the Restoration. 


@@@@@


doc= 38076


Treffry, Joseph Thomas (bap. 1782, d. 1850), mining industrialist, was baptized Joseph Thomas Austen at St Andrew's Church, Plymouth, on 1 May 1782, the eldest child in the family of one son and two daughters of Joseph Austen (died 1786), of The Friary, Plymouth, brewer and sometime mayor of Plymouth, and his wife, Susanna (died 1842), daughter of Thomas Treffry of Place, Fowey, Cornwall. She and her sister Jane inherited the Treffry estate in Cornwall in 1779 following the death first of their father and then their brother, William Esco Treffry. After the death of her husband in 1786, Susanna and her children moved to Place. Her two daughters died young, Susanna aged sixteen and Sarah in infancy; but she herself lived long, until only eight years before the death of her son. 
Nothing is known of Austen's early education. He was at Exeter College, Oxford, from 1801 to 1804, but left without graduating. He returned to Place and became involved in the management of the small family estate, which had been badly neglected for many years. Taking advantage of high wartime agricultural prices he sought to improve the profitability of the estate's farms and acquired more agricultural land. From about 1815 he turned his attention to the more lucrative prospect of mining by adding to the estate's shareholdings in local copper and tin mines. By 1820 he had acquired control of Wheal Treasure, near St Austell, which was later combined with neighbouring mines and renamed Fowey Consols. At its peak in 1837 this was the second largest producer of copper in Cornwall. His other large copper mine, Par Consols, came into production in 1840. 
The success of Austen's mining ventures owed much to his investment in good transport facilities. He built and owned ships to handle his business and made a quay at Fowey, on the south coast. Being unable to link his mines to the port with a railway because of opposition from a landowner, he created an entirely new port at Par which was opened in 1833, complete with an inclined plane railway and canal to serve the nearby mines. He further diversified his business interests, though they remained local and related. He built his own smelting works at Par, and the port was later linked by railway to the Luxulyan granite quarries, which he also owned and developed. In 1836 he bought the pier and harbour of Newquay on the north coast of Cornwall; this was convenient for shipping the lead from the East Wheal Rose mine, and the china clay and stone from his quarries. He also sought to connect Cornwall with the main national railway system. From 1844 to 1846 he was chairman of the provisional committee established for the purpose, and he presided over the board of the Cornwall Railway from 1846 to 1850. 
As a young man, Austen entered forcefully into local politics and strengthened his position in the town by purchasing property and allying himself with the enemies of the unreformed municipal corporation of Fowey. While appearing a fiery radical, his politics were individual and never doctrinaire. Although his political activities gave way to business interests, he briefly entered the political arena at a national level in the early 1840s; this led to an unsuccessful campaign by Cornish mine owners against the proposed reduction of import duties on copper ore as part of Robert Peel's tariff reforms. 
Austen took great pride in the Treffry heritage, and in 1838 he fulfilled a long-standing wish to take the name Treffry. To ensure the continuation of the name he left the bulk of his estate to a cousin, the Revd Edward John Wilcocks, provided that he also took the family name. Treffry devoted much time to restore and develop Place, which had become partly derelict. The house was visited by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert in September 1846, though Treffry was too ill to receive them. Treffry also improved the estate with a substantial tree-planting programme. 
Treffry served as a magistrate and was high sheriff of Cornwall in 1838-9; he was also a committee member of the East Cornwall Agricultural Society, a patron of the Tywardreath Gardening Society, and vice-president of the Royal Cornwall Polytechnic Society from 1849 until his death. He died at Place, unmarried, on 29 January 1850, after several years of serious illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 38077


Treswell, Ralph (c.1540-1616/17), painter-stainer and surveyor, was the son of Robert Treswell, alias Baker, of St Albans, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Margaret Langley. His date of birth is not known, but the first reference to him at work is 1567-8, and he may therefore have been born about 1540. He was by trade a painter-stainer, a craft which in 1581 included face painters, history painters, arms (heraldic) painters, and house painters; Treswell was probably an arms painter, for he painted streamers and banners for several London companies. He must have become a fairly senior member of his own company, since he was one of the receiving trustees of Painter-Stainers' Hall in 1580, and one of those releasing the hall to others in 1605. He married three times. His first wife was Cicely Cresley, with whom he had three sons: Robert, who became Somerset herald in 1597, Ralph (also a surveyor), and Christopher. His second wife was Anne Kentish, and his third Elizabeth Bachelor. 
From at least 1580 Treswell was also drawing pictorial surveys, all of rural estates. These included estates in Northamptonshire of Sir Christopher Hatton, and lands of London institutions such as St Bartholomew's Hospital, Christ's Hospital (of which he was a governor from 1604 to his death), and the Clothworkers' and Leathersellers' companies. Other clients for single surveys included Magdalen College and Christ Church, Oxford. From at least 1607 he also drew up plans of properties in London to accompany leases of Christ's Hospital. In 1610-11 the hospital, and in 1612 the Clothworkers' Company, decided to obtain a comprehensive survey of their London estates. Both these surveys have survived, and they provide an important and unique view of housing conditions in the city before the great fire of 1666. 
Treswell, like other heraldic painters, transferred his skills to map making to meet the increasing demand for estate plans in the vigorous property market after the dissolution of the monasteries and the Reformation. Being in London, he could exploit both the court and the merchant community as patrons, and would have been exposed to the new developments in surveying in the published works of Leonard and Thomas Digges and others. He thus became one of the first modern land surveyors. 
From 1583 Treswell took part in the administration of Aldersgate ward in the city of London, where he lived; from 1606 he was the ward's senior common councilman. He died intestate between July 1616 and March 1617. 
John Schofield', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38078


Trevor, John (1855-1930), founder of the Labour church, was born on 7 October 1855 in Liverpool, the younger child and only son of Frederick Francis Trevor, linen draper, and his wife, Harriet, the daughter of John Cripps of Wisbech, a small grocer and linen draper. By the age of nine, he was an orphan; Trevor and his sister were brought up in Wisbech by their maternal grandmother, though eventually his sister went to live with her recently widowed paternal grandmother. 
Trevor's grandparents were kindly, but the idiosyncratic and severe Baptist sect to which they belonged left a permanent scar on his mind. After a dame-school and a fly-by-night boarding-school, he entered a second boarding-school that was physically rigorous and educationally sufficient to allow him to pass the Cambridge local examination. In 1870 he was articled for five years to a Norwich architect. After an interlude in Liverpool and a return to Norwich he suffered a physical collapse and eventually a loss of faith, though not of religious impulse. 
In 1877 Trevor travelled to Australia. He returned the next year by way of the United States, determined to be a minister, probably among the Unitarians, though he knew little about them. He had introductions to Brooke Herford and Robert Collyer (1823-1912), English Unitarian ministers in Chicago, and they directed him to Meadville Seminary in western Pennsylvania, where he spent a year. In 1879 he returned to England. After a spell at Manchester New College, London, and some experience of preaching, he began practice as an architect in Folkestone. On 28 July 1881 he married his first cousin Eliza, daughter of Franklin Stanley Cripps, a Wisbech shopkeeper; they had four sons, two surviving to adulthood. The Folkestone experiment having failed, in 1884 they moved to Ballingdon, Essex, where he tried but failed to write a novel, and in 1887 they settled in London, where he undertook another year-long course at Manchester New College. 
In 1888 Trevor became assistant minister to Philip Henry Wicksteed at the chapel in Little Portland Street. London gave him opportunities to study social problems (which also deeply engaged Wicksteed), and he began to see a relationship between politics and religion. In June 1890 he moved to Manchester to become minister at the fashionable chapel in Upper Brook Street. In April 1891, at a Unitarian conference in London, he heard Ben Tillett (1860-1943) deliver a harsh attack on the alienation of existing churches from the working man. Taking up the challenge, which echoed his own growing feeling about the Unitarians and his sympathy with the Salvation Army, he determined to found a labour church. The initial meeting was held on 4 October 1891 at Chorlton town hall. The initiative was sternly criticized in the Unitarian press, and the difficulty of his position at Upper Brook Street as his commitment to socialism became apparent led to his resignation in the same year. 
In 1892 Trevor founded a monthly publication, 'Labour Prophet', and began a series of tracts. In 1893 he became chairman of the Labour Church Union, and the movement spread with remarkable rapidity from Lancashire and Yorkshire to the midlands and south Wales and into Scotland, drawing primarily on upper levels of working men (and some women), with some representation from the lower middle class. There was considerable variation in practice from congregation to congregation: some had readings from secular sources and hymns; a few were licensed for marriages and there were even baptisms. But Trevor was unsuited to exert strong leadership, particularly as his life was darkened by illness and personal tragedy. By the end of the century the movement was in sharp decline. 
The loss of a second son in June 1894 was followed by the death of Trevor's wife; in 1895 he married Annie Jones Higham (died 1919), with whom he had two daughters. In 1897 he moved to a farm in Horsted Keynes, Sussex, where from 1899 to 1902 he encouraged young Labour church members to visit him for informal religious training in his 'school of natural religion'. This project met with little success, and he soon severed his formal ties with the church. In 1902 he lived briefly in Clerkenwell, London, where he tried to establish the Labour Church Settlement as a centre of intellectual and cultural life for what remained of the movement. 
In 1909 Trevor moved to Hampstead, working for several years as a professional photographer. In the same year he published a pamphlet, 'The One Life', which revealed his intense interest in questions of sexuality and his idea of forming an independent group modelled on the Oneida community, which he had visited on his American journey. 
He never finally severed links with the Unitarians, serving as a supply minister at Newbury in the early 1920s, but he became a lonely and isolated figure, increasingly disillusioned with all churches and convinced that God was working outside such institutions. Trevor died in London on 7 January 1930 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 38079


Turberville, Sir Thomas de (d. 1295), soldier and traitor, is of uncertain origins, but his father was probably Sir Hugh de Turberville (died 1293). It was probably Sir Thomas, not a namesake, who was a follower of John Giffard (died 1299) in the civil wars of the late 1260s, and who was rewarded for his loyalty to the crown with a grant of land in Northamptonshire. He was probably also the man of that name charged at the Wiltshire eyre of 1280/81 with robbery and homicide. Cleared of the former charge, he refused to plead to the latter, but was eventually cleared when it was found that the killing had been committed during the civil war. There was a strong tradition of royal service in the Turberville family: Hugh de Turberville had served Edward I with distinction since before his accession. Thomas de Turberville was certainly a royal household knight in 1282, when he took part in the Welsh war. In 1286 he accompanied Edward to Paris and on to Gascony. When war broke out between England and France in 1294 he served with a retinue of at least nine knights in John of Brittany's expedition to Gascony. Initial successes were considerable. Turberville was part of the force that occupied Rioms. In April 1295, however, the French seized the town after a riot among the English troops. John of Brittany and much of the garrison fled by ship, but Turberville was captured along with a dozen other knights. 
In August, Turberville returned to England, claiming that he had escaped from prison. It was soon discovered that he was in fact spying for the French. A messenger he had employed to take a letter to France revealed its contents to the king. In it Turberville informed the provost of Paris that Wales was now at peace. He reported that the Isle of Wight was not guarded, and that the king was to send a powerful embassy to the German king. Twenty ships were to be sent with grain supplies to Gascony, and an expedition there was to be headed by the earls of Lancaster, Lincoln, and Warwick, along with Hugh Despenser, later earl of Winchester (died 1326). Turberville claimed to have reached agreement with the recently defeated Morgan ap Maredudd that the latter should rebel again if the Scots would follow suit. He advised the French to send a powerful embassy to Scotland. The letter reveals that Turberville's sons had been kept in Paris as hostages, and that he had been promised $100 worth of land as his reward for treachery. 
The letter seems genuine. It is reasonably circumstantial, and the description of English plans is very plausible, even though Warwick and Despenser did not sail for Gascony, and no embassy as described went to Germany in 1295. It is inconceivable that Edward would, for propaganda purposes, have falsely implicated one of his own household knights in treason, and in any case he had set a spy upon Turberville, who appears to have tried to flee to Wales. 
Turberville was arrested on 24 September 1295, and was tried promptly, on 8 October. The chief justice of the king's bench pronounced the verdict. The guilty man, who was probably the first man in England to be executed for spying, was to be drawn on an oxhide to the gallows, where he was to be hanged; the sentence was executed the same day. News of the event was widely circulated, as a form of war propaganda, and it was also commemorated in a popular song or poem. 
Michael Prestwich', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38080


Turner, Sir Ralph Lilley (1888-1983), orientalist and academic administrator, was born on 5 October 1888 in Charlton, London, the second of the three sons and third of the four children of George Turner (1852-1929), schoolmaster, of Cambridge, and his wife, Bertha (1857-1952), daughter of William Eaden Lilley. He was educated at the Perse School under W. H. D. Rouse, who introduced him to Sanskrit, and at Christ's College, Cambridge (senior scholar). He obtained first classes in the classical tripos (parts one and two, 1909 and 1911) and the oriental languages tripos (1910); was awarded the Brotherton memorial Sanskrit prize; and was elected a fellow of Christ's (1912). In 1913 he entered the Indian educational service as lecturer at Queen's College, Benares. From 1915 to 1919 he served in Palestine and India with the 2nd/3rd Queen Alexandra's Own Gurkha rifles; he was wounded, awarded the MC, and twice mentioned in dispatches. From 1920 to 1922 he was professor of Indian linguistics at Benares Hindu University. On 3 November 1920 he married Dorothy Rivers (1892-1972), daughter of William Howard Goulty, solicitor; they had one son and three daughters. 
In 1922 Turner was elected to the chair of Sanskrit in the University of London (at the School of Oriental Studies), which he occupied until the age of retirement in 1954. He wrote many important articles (later republished as 'Collected Papers, 1912-1973', 1975) and 'A Comparative and Etymological Dictionary of the Nepali Language' (1931), meanwhile steadily accumulating the vast collection of word slips on which his later lexicographical work was based. In 1942 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. 
These achievements were the more remarkable because from 1937 to 1957 Turner was also director of the School of Oriental and African Studies (as it became in 1938) with heavy administrative responsibilities. The early years of his tenure saw the creation under Ida Ward of the first department of the languages and cultures of Africa in a British university, and the successful negotiation of the school's removal from the City of London to Bloomsbury. After the outbreak of war his frequent warnings that the forces were seriously under-provided with personnel trained in key Asian languages went unheeded until Japan attacked, when the school was called upon to train many hundreds of young servicemen (including some Americans) in Chinese and Japanese for intelligence work in eastern theatres of war. 
Meanwhile Turner was looking ahead to the post-war period. Largely through his patient, persistent advocacy, the government of Winston Churchill appointed in 1944 the Scarbrough commission, which, on the basis of evidence he submitted and marshalled, recommended a great expansion of the provision in British universities for the study of the languages, history, and cultures of Asia and Africa, and development of the school as the main centre. The government of C. R. Attlee accepted the recommendations; Turner's second decade as director was devoted primarily to implementing them, recruiting and training young scholars, including many whose interest had been aroused during war service in Asia or Africa, and building up strong academic departments. Self-effacing and reserved, he was nevertheless a resolute, wise, and far-sighted leader, universally respected and trusted. By 1957 the school was the pre-eminent institution in Europe in its fields of study. It had been a great directorship. 
Thereafter Turner began to write 'A Comparative Dictionary of the Indo-Aryan Languages' (1966), followed (1969) by indexes (by Lady Turner) and a phonetic analysis (1971). As an outstanding event in the history of Indian linguistic studies, it placed Turner alongside Sir William Jones and Sir George Grierson. He continued working until a week before his death and left virtually complete a large volume of addenda (published posthumously in 1985). 
Turner was knighted in 1950. His many honours included the Nepalese order of Gorkha Dakshina Bahu, honorary doctorates of the universities of London, Benares, Santiniketan, Katmandu, and Ceylon; and honorary fellowships of Christ's College, Cambridge, the School of Oriental and African Studies, and Deccan College, Poona. He rendered great services to the Royal Asiatic Society (president, 1952-5; gold medallist, 1953) and the Philological Society (treasurer, 1931-62; president, 1939-43). He died at his home, Haverbrack, Barrells Down Road, Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire, on 22 April 1983. 
J. R. Bracken', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38081


Turner, Richard (1790-1846), temperance activist, was born on 25 July 1790 in Bilsborough, the youngest of five children. He had poor sight following a childhood attack of measles. He became a spinner in a Preston cotton mill, but disliked the restricted life and left at the age of seventeen. On 25 November 1817 in Preston he married Betty Cook of Preston; the couple were unable to sign the register. Betty bore him two daughters. He became a plasterer, but left his wife in 1825 and became a fish hawker -- hence his nickname Cockle Dick. 
Early in the 1830s an alliance between progressive provincial middle-class reformers and respectable working men was seizing control of the London-based anti-spirits movement from its well-to-do leaders and converting it into a broader-based total abstinence crusade against all alcoholic drinks. Not entirely sober one evening in 1832, Turner entered a Preston temperance meeting for a joke but came out converted. He was among the pioneering 'seven men' of Preston who signed the pledge of total abstinence in that year. He became a Wesleyan Sunday school teacher and an enthusiastic if unsophisticated temperance advocate -- the sort of convert to respectability whose transformed life the new movement liked to advertise. His strong dialect and ungrammatical turns of phrase often made him unintentionally amusing, but his dark and ruddy complexion, coarse features, and shabby clothes gave him a hold over the type of working man the total abstainers sought to reach. 
It was on the teetotal platform in September 1833 that Dicky, as temperance reformers affectionately called him, won his modest place in British history. Dismissing the anti-spirits movement's idea of imposing a pledge only to moderation in wine and beer, he announced amid cheers that 'nothing but the tee-total would do' or, according to some accounts, 'I'll be reet down out-and-out t-t-total for ever and ever'. This gave the total abstinence movement the eye-catching label it needed. There was much subsequent controversy about who invented the word and how to spell its derivatives. Irishmen had long used it to denote 'complete' or 'permanent', and Irish labourers brought it to Lancashire; Turner did not invent the term, but merely gave it a new and more specialist application. Like many titles embraced by new reforming movements, it was at first thought rather vulgar. 
Turner suffered from asthma for many years, but persisted with his rather eccentric temperance lecturing. In later life he had to be subsidized by the teetotal movement and lived with his eldest sister. In August 1846 he walked from Preston to the World's Temperance Convention in London, preaching teetotalism on the way. On 27 October 1846 he died in Preston when he burst a blood vessel during a fit of coughing, and was buried in St Peter's churchyard, Preston. 
Brian Harrison', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38082


Turner, Richard (c.1798-1881), iron manufacturer and engineer, was the third son of Timothy Turner (died 1822) and his wife, Catherine Sisson. The Turners had long been associated with the ironmongery trade in Dublin. His great-grandfather was 'iron smith' to the Irish House of Commons and Trinity College in the mid-eighteenth century. Turner inherited from his uncle the family ironmongery business which was located at 4 St Stephen's Green. 
About 1816 he married Jane, daughter of Thomas Goodshaw of Collams Well, Leixlip. They had four sons and four daughters, as well as three children who died in infancy. Two of his sons, Thomas and William, were later to work with him. 
In 1833 Turner erected large premises called the Hammersmith Iron Works, south of Dublin in Ballsbridge. During this time he expanded the ironmongery business to include the manufacture of wrought-iron conservatories like those advocated by John Claudius Loudon, who invented the first wrought-iron glazing bar in 1816 (manufactured and later patented in 1818 by W. and D. Bailey of Holborn in London). Turner's earliest glasshouses closely followed the curvilinear designs illustrated in Loudon's 'An Encyclopedia of Gardening' (1822). One of Turner's earliest known wrought-iron conservatories was the range erected in 1836-7 at the vice-regal lodge in Phoenix Park, Dublin. Over the following four decades, his firm specialized in the manufacture of these buildings and erected many examples throughout Britain, including those at Marlfield, co. Tipperary; the wings of the palm house at Belfast Botanic Gardens (1839-40); the range at Killakee, co. Dublin; the curvilinear range in the Botanic Gardens (now the National Botanic Gardens), Dublin (1843-8 and 1868-9); the winter garden in the Inner Circle, Regent's Park, London (1845-6, 1870-71, and 1875-6, demolished 1932); the range at Haddo House, Aberdeenshire (1844-5); the Victoria Regia House, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (1852), and Woodstock, co. Kilkenny. 
The palm house at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, 1844-8, was Turner's greatest achievement. Designed in collaboration with Decimus Burton, it was based on Loudon's ideas for the best form and construction of a glasshouse. Its scale surpassed all other iron and glass structures at that time and it is famous as the finest example of a curvilinear wrought-iron and glass conservatory. Turner's significant contribution was the use of wrought iron, and in particular the adoption of a single rolled wrought-iron 'I' section of 'deck beam' as the primary structural member; the palm house was the first building to be erected in England with this type of section. The deck beam had been developed for use in shipbuilding and was patented in 1844 by James Kennedy and Thomas Vernon of Liverpool. In 1846 Turner patented its use in buildings and later incorporated different depths of deck beam in other buildings. 
The largest structure designed and erected by Turner was the station roof at Liverpool's Lime Street Station, 1849-50. It was the largest iron roof-span erected at that time, with arches composed of wrought-iron deck-beam spanning 153 feet 6 inches. Turner also utilized deck-beam sections in the roofs of Broadstone Station, Dublin (1847), York Road Station, Belfast (1848), and Galway Station (1851). With his architect son, Thomas, he entered the competition for the building for the Great Exhibition of 1851, receiving an honourable mention along with Hector Horeau. 
In the 1830s Turner had been in partnership with William Walker, and in the early 1860s the firm was known as Turner and Gibson. Turner's third son, William, worked with him from the 1840s and in 1863 assumed control of the Hammersmith Iron Works. Turner remained involved in the business until 1880, in particular over the additions to the winter garden at Regent's Park and those to the curvilinear range at the Botanic Gardens, Dublin. In 1872 Hammersmith Iron Works was closed and William Turner continued the business from the Oxmantown foundry on the north side of Dublin, until 1888 when it closed. Turner died in Dublin on 31 October 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 38083


Twining, Louisa (1820-1912), philanthropist, was born on 16 November 1820 at Norfolk Street, Strand, London, the youngest of nine children of Richard Twining (1772-1857) ['see under 'Twining, Richard (1749-1824)], tea merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Mary ('c'.1780-1866), daughter of John Smythies, rector of All Saints, Colchester. Elizabeth Twining and William Twining ['see under 'Twining, Richard] were her siblings. She was educated at home, mainly by her mother and sisters, and later attended lectures at the Royal Institution. She hated music, but showed considerable talent for drawing and had two books on Christian art published in the early 1850s, 'Symbols and Emblems of Early and Medieval Christian Art' (1852) and 'The Types and Figures of the Bible' (1854). 
In 1853, after visiting the Strand union workhouse to see an old nurse, Twining conceived the idea of systematic visits to the workhouse by neighbourhood ladies to say prayers and converse with the inmates. She was informed that unpaid and voluntary effort was not sanctioned by the poor-law board, which viewed it as unwarrantable interference. Undeterred, and with the encouragement of her friends, she began a campaign for workhouse visiting. She believed firmly that middle-class women had a natural aptitude for helping the poor, and that they should be permitted -- and encouraged -- to do so. In 1855 she published 'A Few Words about the Inmates of our Union Workhouses'. She began visiting other workhouses in London, the rest of England, and abroad. Through lectures, articles, and letters she earned a reputation as an expert on workhouses. She contributed a paper, 'The condition of our workhouses', the first public address on the subject, to the first congress of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science (NAPSS) in Birmingham (1857), and followed it up with a series of letters to the 'Manchester Guardian' and 'The Times'. In 1858 the poor-law board relented and the Workhouse Visiting Society, with Twining as honorary secretary, was set up, affiliated to the NAPSS. The following year she gave evidence to the royal commission on education on workhouse schools, advocating industrial training for girls. In 1861 she was instrumental in setting up a home for workhouse girls sent out to service, so that they would not have to mix with women of bad character. Other homes supported by Twining were made over to the Association for Befriending Young Servants in 1878. 
Reform of workhouse infirmaries was one of Twining's prime concerns, and at one time she considered training to be a nurse herself. The hardship and neglect suffered by the impoverished sick was confirmed by a report published by 'The Lancet' in 1866. Louisa Twining campaigned ceaselessly for the separation of the sick, the aged, and the able-bodied in workhouses. In 1879 she became secretary of the Association for Promoting Trained Nursing in Workhouse Infirmaries and Sick Asylums, which was founded to train and supply nurses and to secure the appointment of trained matrons. In 1885 she joined and promoted Florence Nightingale's scheme to send trained nurses to the homes of the urban poor, the District Nurses Movement. In 1875 women became eligible for election as poor-law guardians. Louisa Twining was chief financial supporter of the Society for Promoting the Return of Women as Poor Law Guardians and subsequently chairwoman. She was a guardian herself in Kensington (1884-90) and Tunbridge Wells (1893-6), where she lived after retirement. 
Workhouses were not Twining's only philanthropic interest. She taught classes for women in 1850 at the Working Men's College, assisted at a night school for boys, and was an adviser to the first woman inspector of pauper schools in 1873. With Angela Burdett-Coutts she established a house for art students in 1879. By 1895 she had attained the opening up of Lincoln's Inn Fields to the poor after years of campaigning. She pressed for prison reform and helped set up charitable houses for elderly, epileptic, and incurable women, to keep them out of the workhouse. She also helped set up a convalescent home for patients from the East End after the cholera epidemic of 1867. She established the need for, and secured, female matrons for London police courts and stations. She was involved in many church activities in London and abroad. A firm advocate of temperance, she believed that drink was the cause of much of the crime, vice, and misery of the poor. She was a strong supporter of women's participation in public affairs, believing that men and women should work together as equals. In 1904 she was president of the Women's Local Government Society. She was also a member of the National Society for Women's Suffrage. The presentation of an illuminated address to her in 1904 acknowledged her lifelong work in raising the whole standard of poor-law administration and in reducing prejudice against women in local government. Louisa Twining died, unmarried, at 68 Lansdowne Road, Kensington, London, on 25 September 1912, and was buried on 30 September at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 38084


Twort, Frederick William (1877-1950), microbiologist, was born on 22 October 1877 in Camberley, Surrey, the eldest of six sons and the second of the eleven children of Dr William Henry Twort, general practitioner, of Camberley, and his wife, Elizabeth Crampton, only child of Joseph Crampton Webster, engineer, of London. He was educated at Tomlinson's School, Woking, and St Thomas's Hospital, London, and qualified LRCP, MRCS, in 1900. 
In 1901 Twort became an assistant in the clinical laboratory at St Thomas's Hospital and in December that year was appointed assistant to William Bulloch, bacteriologist at the London Hospital, Whitechapel. Here he gained valuable experience and, though occupied with much routine work, commenced innovative research. His study of bacterial fermentation of glucosides won the London University Rogers prize (jointly) in 1908. He demonstrated bacterial variability and adaptability and formulated his lifelong belief that disease-producing organisms had evolved from non-pathogenic ancestors. He also showed that the glucoside ericolin acted as a selective inhibitor of bacterial growth, thus aiding the isolation of pure cultures. 
In 1909 Twort was appointed superintendent of the Brown Animal Sanatory Institution in London, where he remained until its destruction by bombing in 1944. Relative isolation suited his character and he followed his own ideas with considerable success. He demonstrated that supplementation of media with an 'essential substance' extracted from dead tubercle bacilli permitted growth of Johne's bacillus and possibly the leprosy bacillus. With his veterinary colleague George Ingram he wrote 'A Monograph on Johne's Disease of Cattle' (1913). 
Twort's most important contribution to microbiology was his discovery of bacteriophage. He noticed that colonies of micrococci had become transparent and that transfer of this material to a growing colony reproduced the condition. This transmissible lysis, later known as the Twort-d'Herelle phenomenon, is of central importance to molecular biology. A paper by Twort in 1915 illustrates his cautious approach to research, as he lists several possible explanations for the phenomenon, rather than risk premature judgement. Owing to war and limited facilities he left exploitation of his discoveries to others. In the First World War he served in the Royal Army Medical Corps as temporary captain in charge of the base laboratory at Salonika in 1916, and later in Northern Ireland as bacteriologist in 1918. He married Dorothy Mary, eldest daughter of Frederick J. Banister, an architect, in 1919. They had a son and three daughters. 
In 1929 Twort was elected FRS and in 1931 he became professor of bacteriology at London University. Brown Institution trust funds were never adequate, but Twort preferred impecunious independence. When, after fifteen years, a Medical Research Council grant was withdrawn, he unsuccessfully lodged a petition of right against the crown in 1937. 
Twort was a reserved and somewhat unworldly man. However, over scientific matters he could be roused to considerable passion and was often tactless. He constructed much of his own research apparatus, experimented with violin making, designed novel coils to improve wireless reception, and was a keen horticulturist. He died at his home, The Wilderness, Gordon Road, Camberley, Surrey, on 20 March 1950. 
K. G. H. Dyke', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38085


Vale, Samuel (1797-1848), actor, was born on 3 October 1797 in London, where his father was the proprietor of a toy shop. After finishing school he was placed in his father's shop, but was soon attracted to the theatre on seeing Edmund Kean perform at Drury Lane. In opposition to his father's wishes he began to study drama, and in 1813 he ran away from home and joined a small company under Harrison at Leatherhead. 
Under the name Dornton (after the hero of Holcroft's 'The Road to Ruin'), he made his stage debut at the age of seventeen, playing Realize in 'The Will'; the attempt was a failure, and again he ran away to try his luck by turns in Worthing, Arundel, and Portsmouth. After reaching Gosport he was first taken on by Nicholson to play -- not very successfully -- a long part in 'The Fishermen of Baghdad', and was then offered an engagement in 1815 by Thornton at Arundel. Now he dropped the name Dornton, and as Mr Brown played the first successful role of his career, Montalban in John Tobin's 'The Honeymoon', to the Juliana of Elizabeth Edwin. After this he steadily rose in popularity until his own father came to see him act (Count Virolet in Colman's 'The Mountaineers' and Charles in 'The Village Lawyer') and was forced to acknowledge his son's talents in his chosen career. A reconciliation followed, and Vale took an engagement under Henry at Minehead, Somerset, playing, 'inter alia', Young Norval, Selim in 'Blue Beard', and Young Malcolm. He then moved to Fisher's Exeter circuit, now using the name Vincent, and remained with the company for eighteen months. At Torquay he became very popular playing in 'John Bull, or, An Englishman's Fireside', and 'The Review, or, Jack of All Trades'. In January 1819 he used his own name for the first time when he opened in Norwich as Careless in 'The School for Scandal'. He remained on the Norwich circuit for two years, and then joined Crisp's Cheltenham circuit, touring Cheltenham, Worcester, and Ludlow. 
In October 1820 Vale made his London debut, as Buckingham in 'Rochester', at the Olympic under Barlow and Reeve; Vale's father had apparently exerted his influence to get the engagement for his son. At the end of the season, however, he retired to the provinces once more, and played Hawthorn to the Rosetta of Maria Tree at Cheltenham. Perhaps his most successful role in this period was Nicholas Twill in 'Too Late for Dinner', also at Cheltenham. He was back at the Olympic as Logic in 'Tom and Jerry' in October 1821, then migrated to Sadler's Wells under Egerton. He also performed at the Surrey, and is said to have sung 'The Good Old Days of Adam and Eve' at least 500 times. 
Vale achieved prominence on the London stage between 1831 and 1848, when he first took the part of Simon Spatterdash in Samuel Beazley's musical farce 'The Boarding House, or, Five Hours at Brighton', a role with which his name became closely identified. It prompted 'Sam Valerisms', idiosyncratic and illogical verbal comparisons -- ''Why here we are all mustarded', as the roast beef said to the Welsh rabbit' and ''When a man is ashamed to show the front of his face let him turn around and show the back of it', as the turnstile said to the weather-cock' -- for which Vale is remembered today, immortalized by Charles Dickens as Sam Weller in 'The Pickwick Papers' (1836). 
Vale went on to play many parts at the Royal Coburg Theatre and at the Surrey, his most popular role at the latter house being Dummie Dunnaker in Ben Webster's version of 'Paul Clifford, or, The Highwayman of 1770' (1832). In 1835 he joined D. W. Osbaldiston's company at Covent Garden, where he remained until 1837, playing in popular burlettas. Vale continued to act for the rest of his life, but the latter part of his career was undistinguished by any significant achievement. He died on 3 March 1848. 


@@@@@


doc= 38086


Valera, Cipriano de (c.1532-c.1606), theologian and translator, was probably born in Valera la Vieja in the Badajoz province of Spain; he graduated in logic and philosophy from the University of Seville and then entered the monastery of the Observant Hieronymites at San Isidoro del Campo near Seville. In the 1550s monks at San Isidoro, including Cassiodoro de Reina, as well as Valera, were taking up a protestant position. Faced with an investigation by the Inquisition in 1557, Valera and fellow protestants fled to Geneva, where they joined the Italian church in the city but were later given a place of worship of their own. Following Elizabeth's accession, Valera left Geneva for England, where he probably joined the Spanish congregation which met under the ministry of Reina in the London church of St Mary Axe. He was incorporated as BA at Cambridge on 9 February 1560. A royal mandate of 12 January 1561 made him a fellow of Magdalene. 
In Spain Valera was burnt in effigy by the Inquisition in April 1562 and he came to be listed in the Index as 'the Spanish heretic'. On 12 June 1563 at Cambridge he took the degree of MA, incorporated at Oxford on 21 February 1566. He served as college treasurer at Magdalene from 1564 to 1566, but between 1561 and 1568 he registered many more absences from college than any other fellow, and in 1568 he settled in London, where in January 1569 he was recorded as a member of the French protestant church. He married a woman named Anne, with whom he had a son, baptized Isaac, and two other children, one of them perhaps a daughter named Judith. He was listed as a schoolmaster in May 1571, and again in 1573, when he was named in the will of a Spanish refugee. He was poor, and he and his family received doles of money during the 1570s and early 1580s. By 1583 Valera, his wife, and son Isaac were recorded as members of the London Italian church and he was listed as a preacher in that year. 
In 1588, the Armada year, Valera published his first work, the anti-Catholic 'Dos tratados: el primo es del papa,... el segundo es de la missa' ('Two treatises, the first on the pope, the second on the mass'). It is possible that the earl of Leicester was the patron for this work. The fact that London was omitted as the place of publication and the name of the English printer Hispanicized suggests that the book was intended for import into Spain. In 1594 he published another 'tratado' ('Tratado para confirmar los pobres cativos de Berveria en la catolica fe') which, ostensibly intended to offer consolation to captives of the Barbary pirates, may have alluded to the persecution of religious dissidents in Spain. Some copies of this treatise also carry an attack, aimed at a Spanish-speaking readership, on bogus miracles that Valera alleged against the prioress of a convent in Lisbon. In 1596 came Valera's tribute to Calvin -- a translation into Spanish of Calvin's 'Catechism' -- and in the same year his 'El Testamento Nuevo de nuestro Senor Jesu Christo' (1596). This 'New Testament of our Lord Jesus Christ', with its publishing details once more concealed so as to reach a readership within Spain, was the first instalment of a revision of the 'Bible' in Spanish published by Reina at Basel in 1569. 
During the late 1590s Valera extended his work as a mediator of Calvinist protestantism in Spanish with his version of Calvin's 'Institutes', 'Institucion de la religion Christiana', published in London in 1597 and amended for Spanish readers. In 1599 he composed the preface for 'Catholico reformado', a Spanish translation of a work by William Perkins, and in 1600, anonymously, 'Aviso a los de la iglesia Romana sobre la indiccion del jubileo', an attack on the papal holy year then being celebrated in Rome. Finally he completed his revision of Reina, published in Holland as 'La Biblia, que es los sacros libros del Vieio y Nueuo Testamento, segunda edicion, revisita y conferida con los textos Hebreos y Griegos y con diversas translaciones, por Cypriano de Valera' ('The Bible, that is, the holy books of the Old and New Testament, revised and compared with the Hebrew and Greek texts and with various translations', 1602). The publication costs may have been met by Prince Christian I of Anhalt-Bernberg; the work was dedicated to Count Maurice of Nassau, the stadholder of Holland. Valera travelled to Amsterdam in November 1602 to supervise the printing and went on to Middleburg, but most probably returned to London where he died, probably about 1606. His work on the 'Bible' in Spanish can be considered his most lasting achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 38087


Neck, Sir Joshua van, first baronet (1702-1777), merchant and financier, was born in The Hague on 5 January 1702, one of the six sons of Cornelis van Neck, paymaster-general of the land forces of the United Provinces, and his wife, Anna de Greeff. Four of his five brothers followed their father into public service, most conspicuously Lambert, pensionary of Rotterdam, and Abraham, attorney-general of the province of Holland. In 1718 another older brother, Gerard, settled as a merchant in London, where Joshua joined him in 1722, first as assistant and later as partner. In 1732 van Neck married Marianne, daughter of Stephen Daubuz, a Huguenot merchant of London. They had two sons and four daughters, of whom Elizabeth married Thomas Walpole, MP and merchant of London, son of Horatio Walpole, first Baron Walpole of Wolterton; and her sister Margaret married his brother Richard Walpole, London banker and MP. 
The firm of Gerard and Joshua van Neck was a general merchant, but unusually active in placing the capital of fellow Dutchmen (and other continentals) in the British public funds and company shares. The sums so entrusted made it a power among London houses subscribing to public loans, particularly during the wars of 1744-63. Already one of the four leading underwriters in 1744, it was to be one of the two houses that arranged the closed subscription loans to the government in the difficult winters of 1745-6 and 1757 -- loans subsequently attacked by Sir John Barnard as too favourable to the promoters. In all known surviving lists of such subscriptions in the 1750s and 1760s (1757, 1759, 1767), the Van Neck firm took the largest share. It was also an important military remittance contractor during the Seven Years' War. 
The van Necks had developed valuable trading and political connections in France, particularly with the Parisian Protestant firm of Thellusson, Necker & Co., which was able to get them recognized as agents of the French court. Their greatest coup was the highly remunerative commission to buy tobacco in London in 1730-65 for the French tobacco monopoly (which then imported most of its leaf from Britain). So important was this and so adept were the participants that the farmers-general and the van Necks were able to persuade both the French and British governments to permit the continued shipment of British tobacco to France during the wars of 1744-8 and 1756-63. This traffic also permitted the firm to act as a channel of communications between the two governments in wartime. For his financial and other services Joshua van Neck was created a baronet on 14 December 1751. 
The childless Gerard van Neck died on 17 August 1750, leaving an estate estimated at $240,000, almost three-fifths of which went to his brother Joshua. In 1750 the firm was reorganized as a partnership between van Neck, his son-in-law Thomas Walpole, and D. J. Olivier. In 1765 Walpole broke with his father-in-law and set up his own firm, carrying off the French tobacco contract in the process. Even so, van Neck could be described at his death as 'one of the richest merchants in Europe' ('GM'). If, in the lifetime of Gerard, their family world appeared to be very much that of the Dutch Reformed and Huguenot expatriate communities in London, their social horizons expanded considerably after the Walpole marriages. Van Neck died on 5 March 1777 and was succeeded in the baronetcy by his elder son, Gerard. 
Jacob M. Price', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38088


Vansittart, Henrietta (1833-1883), engineer, was born in Ewell, Surrey, the third in the family of six daughters and two sons of James Lowe (1798-1866), a smoke-jack maker and inventor, and his wife, Mary (1804-1871), the eldest daughter of George Barnes of Ewell, builder. Her education is unknown, although both parents had connections with the Seymours of Syon House. By 1852 James Lowe was reduced to poverty and Bermondsey had become a slum. On 25 July 1855 in the British embassy, Paris, Henrietta married Frederick Vansittart (died 1902), a lieutenant of the 14th dragoons, the son of William Vansittart of the Shottesbrooke family of White Waltham. They had no children. He sold his commission in 1856 and bought 18 Clarges Street, London. Henrietta did not lose interest in her impecunious father and within two years she was with him aboard HMS 'Bullfinch' for the trials of his new screw propeller. By 1859 she and Edward Bulwer Lytton, first Baron Lytton (1803-1873) were having a secret affair. In 1860 Benjamin Disraeli thought she had such a hold on Lytton that it was affecting his attendance at the house. The friendship lasted until 1871. 
Following her father's death in October 1866 Vansittart carried on his pioneering work on the development of the screw propeller for steamships. In 1868 she obtained patent no. 2877 for the Lowe-Vansittart propeller. 'The Times' of 24 September 1869 reported the Admiralty trials of the propeller when fitted to HMS 'Druid', and the part played by Vansittart even though she was a married woman. In 1871 the Lowe-Vansittart propeller was awarded a first-class diploma at the Kensington exhibition, and similar awards followed worldwide. Meanwhile it had been fitted to many warships and liners, including the 'Scandinavian' and 'Lusitania'. 
Vansittart's obituary in the 'Journal of the London Association of Foreman Engineers and Draughtsmen' recalled that 'she was a remarkable personage with a great knowledge of engineering matters and considerable versatility of talent', and: 'how cheery and thoughtful for the happiness of others she was... she was the only lady, it is believed, who ever wrote and read a scientific paper, illustrated by diagrams and drawings made by herself, before the members of a Scientific Institution.' This referred to a paper presented in 1876.In September 1882 Vansittart visited the Tynemouth exhibition. She did not pay the $600 for renewal of her patent, and the day after it was due was ordered by magistrates to be detained in the county lunatic asylum at Coxlodge, Gosforth, near Newcastle upon Tyne, having been found wandering by the police. She died there on 8 February 1883 of acute mania and anthrax. 


@@@@@


doc= 38089


Vardon, Henry William (1870-1937), golfer, was born at Marais, Grouville, Jersey, on 9 May 1870, one of eight children of Philippe George Vardon, a gardener, and his wife, Elizabeth Augustine Bouchard. Harry, as he was always known, did little at school, but was drawn to golf when the course for the Royal Jersey Golf Club was laid out near his home in 1878. With friends he took up the game in a rough, ready, yet committed way and worked occasionally as a caddy. He left school aged just twelve, working first on a farm, then in the service of a local doctor, before being employed in 1887 as a gardener by Major Spofforth, captain of the Royal Jersey Golf Club. Spofforth encouraged the young man's golf, and Vardon quickly became the leading local artisan player. 
In 1890 Vardon was appointed professional to a new course established at Studley Royal, Yorkshire, prompted by his younger brother, Tom, himself an accomplished golfer who had already moved to the mainland. He quickly tired of the limited opportunities there and moved across the Pennines to Bury in Lancashire, where he was the professional until in 1896 he moved again to Ganton. He first entered the open championship in 1893 and gave warning of his ability by finishing sixth the following year. It was in 1896 that Vardon broke through to the highest level. He began by comfortably beating J. H. Taylor, open champion in 1894 and 1895, in an exhibition match before going on to win the open himself at Muirfield, beating Taylor in a play-off. He was to win the open five more times (at Prestwick in 1898, 1903, and 1914, and at Sandwich in 1899 and 1911), a feat still unmatched in 2000, and came second on four other occasions. In 1900 he won the US open championship, coming second on the two other occasions he entered -- most famously in a play-off to the young local amateur Francis Ouimet at Brookline in 1913 but also notably when aged fifty. Other significant successes came at the inaugural German open in 1911 and the 'News of the World' match play championship the following year at Sunningdale. 
The so-called 'triumvirate' of Vardon, Taylor, and James Braid dominated golf in Britain in the twenty years before the First World War, though the absolute peak of Vardon's golf was played between 1898 and 1903. After his second open victory his 'long-sustained spell of first-class form [was] little short of phenomenal' ('Golf', 17/427, 16 Sept 1898, 22), and in 1899 he was judged virtually unbeatable, going 'up and down the country winning tournaments and breaking records, trampling down all opponents in his juggernaut stride' ('The Times', 22 March 1937, 14). He was styled by some the Napoleon of Golf, more commonly the Greyhound. Such supremacy bore witness to a natural athleticism allied to an iron will. He practised assiduously until he had mastered every shot and on the course was 'Gifted with a rare control of himself which nothing could ruffle' (Taylor, 89), his powerful concentration allowing him 'to sink into the game' (Kirkaldy, 137). He championed two major innovations of technique: first, the use of the overlapping grip which had been developed some years before, such that it is now universally called the 'Vardon grip', and second, a much more upright swing than that favoured by the hitherto dominant Scots players, probably allowing him to hit down the line longer than most. His ball striking was rhythmic, authoritative, and pure; from both tee and fairway the straightness of his hitting was legendary. Bernard Darwin, the great observer of the game, could not 'imagine anybody hitting the ball better than Harry Vardon' (Darwin, 159). 
Vardon's supremacy could not last for ever, but its end was hastened by two factors. While winning at Prestwick in 1903 his health broke down seriously from tuberculosis. He spent many months recovering at Mundesley Sanatorium in Norfolk, and though he returned to competitive golf in 1904 ill health often dogged him thereafter. Second, his putting became highly erratic. If this had never been the strongest part of his game, after the turn of the century it became his undoing. In today's language he probably suffered from the 'yips', causing him to stab or jerk at short putts, though he himself believed it was caused by an old footballing injury to his right hand. After 1920 his game fell away markedly and he concentrated on teaching at the South Hertfordshire club at Totteridge, which he had joined as professional in 1902 and served happily until his death. 
In his prime Vardon was a great sporting figure, akin in stature to the cricketer W. G. Grace. He was, indeed, both a beneficiary of and a stimulus to the first great era of the growth of golf in England and the United States. An expanding middle class, with increasing amounts of time and money to spare, was embracing the game as never before, and a large railway network enabled thousands of spectators to witness championships and exhibition matches. That he was counted as an Englishman (although born and brought up in Jersey) challenging the Scots at their own game only added to the sense of occasion -- most piquantly in his famous challenge match against Willie Park jun. in 1899. Vardon was well aware of golf's widening appeal. He criss-crossed Britain and parts of Ireland and France, and made three long trips to North America, taking the game to old and new audiences by playing against other champions, local professionals, and leading amateurs. The effort in this was immense (and may have contributed to his ill health), yet he lost very rarely indeed. As a counterpart to this evangelicalism he also designed fourteen golf courses, several of them associated with flourishing polite resorts, as at Llandrindod Wells, or prosperous suburbs, as at Sandy Lodge. He reached a wider audience still by publishing successfully on the game. 'The Complete Golfer' went through thirteen editions from 1905 before a revised edition was issued in 1914. 'How to Play Golf' was published in 1912 and was followed by a chapter on driving in 'Success at Golf' (1913), 'Progressive Golf' (1922), and 'My Golfing Life' (1933). If these books are clear and effective, there is a hint of regret in each, perhaps for what might have been, but also at the introduction after 1900 of the modern rubber or Haskell ball, which he strongly believed had made the game less skilful. 
Golf was Vardon's life. Like many champions he had a prodigious determination. Yet to his peers there was little that was selfish or distant about him. Taylor noticed that he was 'Kindly and considerate and without harshness, he looked upon the world with tolerance and understanding' (Taylor, 117). Whether his wife agreed is uncertain. He married Jessie Bryant (1869/70-1946), an ironer of St Helier, Jersey, the daughter of John Bryant, ginger beer maker, on 15 November 1891 when she was already pregnant. Vardon was in England when his son, Clarence Henry, was born in June 1892, but saw the child die on 5 August. He was unable to persuade his wife to join him in England until 1896, but soon after their reunion she suffered a miscarriage. The marriage was to remain childless and appears to have been a detached one, his wife showing little interest in his achievements or in any social life. In the 1920s, after he had given up hope of further golfing triumphs, Vardon found some comfort with Gladys Matilda (Tilly) Howell (1892-1963), a dancer, with whom he had a son, Peter, born on 23 January 1926 (Howell). 
Vardon died at his home, 14 Totteridge Lane, Totteridge, near London, on 20 March 1937 and was buried in St Andrew's parish church, Totteridge, four days later. 'The Times' quickly published an obituary that was unstinting in its praise. 'He did what only a very great player can do; he raised the general conception of what was possible in his game and forced his nearest rivals to attain a higher standard by attempting that which they would otherwise have deemed impossible'. At his funeral, homage was paid by Taylor, Braid, Ted Ray, and Sandy Herd, between them winners of twelve open championships and two US open championships. 


@@@@@


doc= 38090


Varley, Henry (1835-1912), evangelist, was born on 25 October 1835 in Tattershall, Lincolnshire, the youngest of four sons and seven children of John Varley, brewer and maltster, of Tattershall, and his wife, Mary. He was educated at Lincoln until his mother's death in 1845 and then attended a boarding-school in Kibworth, Leicestershire (1845-6). At the age of eleven he went to London to work, eventually becoming a butcher employed by Thomas Pickworth, a staunch Calvinist. In 1851 Varley, whose mother had been a devout Anglican evangelical, experienced an evangelical conversion through the preaching of Baptist W. Noel, a well-known Baptist minister. He was baptized as a believer and joined Noel's church. In 1854 he emigrated to Australia where his early hopes as a gold-digger were disappointed, but where he prospered as a butcher near Melbourne, buying his own business in Geelong in 1855. On returning to England in 1857 he married, on 20 October, Sarah Pickworth, the third daughter of his former employer, and established himself as a successful butcher in Notting Hill, London. 
Varley's business success was soon eclipsed by his evangelistic preaching; his rapport with the working poor led him to establish a church for his converts. In 1860 Varley and Thomas Pickworth each gave $1100 to build a tabernacle in Notting Hill, which accommodated 1000 people. Varley was its unpaid minister until 1882 and experimented with various means of evangelizing and meeting the social needs of the poor. Particularly original among these was the annual Butcher's Festival. His ideas had a significant influence on the American evangelist D. L. Moody in 1867 and later in 1872. Varley often preached for C. H. Spurgeon and, like Spurgeon, declined ordination; unlike Spurgeon he refused to be identified as a Baptist. Many of his associates thought him close to the Open Brethren. In 1869 he sold his business and began preaching throughout Britain. In 1874 he toured Canada and the United States. This was the first of a series of overseas crusades: Australia and New Zealand (1876-8), America (1884), Cape Colony (1886), and Australia (1886-8). In 1888 he settled in Melbourne for health reasons but continued to travel widely, preaching repeatedly in Britain as well as in Singapore (1891), India (1892-3), America (1893-4, 1895, 1897-9, 1901-2), Canada (1897, 1898), Norway (1903), and Germany (1903). 
Varley was one of a number of itinerant lay evangelists who emerged after the 1858-9 religious revival. Gradually his sermons moved away from emotional appeals to more reasoned ones; in this he had much in common with such British 'gentleman evangelists' of his day as Brownlow North. His preaching reflected emphases then popular with British evangelicals: the controversial Holiness teaching promoted by the Keswick Convention, anti-Catholicism, temperance, opposition to Anglo-Catholic ritualism, and vehement campaigns against international prostitution rings. Varley embraced premillennialism, which reinforced his pessimistic view of the direction of Victorian society. He was fearless in his attacks on public figures whose actions he considered unconscionable. Varley was also known for his purity lectures, aimed at making men serious, sober, and sexually abstemious. He wrote many religious tracts and books, of which 'The Evangel of the Risen Christ' and 'Christ's Coming Kingdom' (3rd edn, 1893) had a notable success. Varley died at the Belvedere Mansion Hotel, 61 King's Road, Brighton, on 30 March 1912, and was buried in Brighton extra-mural cemetery on 4 April. He was survived by six sons and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 38091


Vaughan, John (1799-1868), ironmaster, was born in Worcester on 21 December 1799, a son of John Vaughan, subsequently at Sir Josiah Guest's Dowlais ironworks. He had at least two brothers. He joined his father as an ironworker in south Wales, progressing at Dowlais to become a foreman. 
About 1825 Vaughan took a post in Carlisle as manager of a small ironworks, and in 1832 he was appointed mill manager for Losh, Wilson, and Bell's Walker ironworks near Newcastle upon Tyne. In 1839 Vaughan and Henry W. F. Bolckow agreed to enter into partnership to exploit the iron trade, Bolckow to provide the initial $10,000 capital, and profits to be shared equally. The partners opened their works at Middlesbrough in 1841, making iron castings and wrought products. Vaughan in 1845-6 erected four iron blast furnaces at Witton Park in co. Durham. 
In 1850 Vaughan decided to mine the seam of ironstone cropping out on the Cleveland Hills east of Middlesbrough, soon erecting nine blast furnaces for its treatment and establishing the commercial viability of Cleveland iron. In 1855 the partners' output of manufactured iron exceeded 120,000 tons; they employed 4000 people and consumed 600,000 tons of coal. In succeeding years they continued to expand while others, attracted by their success, also produced iron in the district. 
Jacky Vaughan was one of the great 'working' ironmasters. From nothing he amassed a fortune estimated at close to $1 million by a combination of sustained hard work and practical technical ability. After 1855 his grip on the business slackened; in 1864, when the partnership was converted into a joint-stock company with industrial assets valued at about $1 million, Vaughan became deputy chairman of Bolckow, Vaughan & Co. Ltd. 
For many years Vaughan was a Wesleyan Methodist, but then he turned towards the Church of England. He joined the first board of Tees conservancy commissioners in 1852, and a year later was among Middlesbrough's first councillors, becoming the town's third mayor in 1855. He was appointed JP and a deputy lieutenant for the North Riding of Yorkshire. 
Vaughan was twice married, first, in the 1820s, to Eleanor Downing (or Downie) of Cumberland, with whom he had four sons but who died about 1834; and, second, to a widow, originally Anne Poole of Newcastle upon Tyne, sister of Henry Bolckow's first wife. The youngest son by his first marriage, Thomas, survived to inherit the major part of the estate, including Gunnergate Hall in Yorkshire. By his second marriage John Vaughan had no children of his own, but his wife's three children by previous marriages took his name. He died at his house, 1 Hyde Park Gate, London, on 16 September 1868. 
J. K. Almond', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38092


Verity, Hedley (1905-1943), cricketer, was born at Welton Grove, Headingley, Leeds, on 18 May 1905, the eldest of three children and only son of Hedley Verity (1874-1945), coal merchant, and his wife, Edith Elwick (1873-1964), a Sunday school teacher. After attending Yeadon and Guiseley secondary school, he served a long cricket apprenticeship, playing for ten years in the Yorkshire and Lancashire leagues at Rawdon, Accrington, and Middleton. He was a professional player by the time of his marriage on 7 March 1929 to Kathleen Alice Metcalfe (1903-1957), a bookbinder, daughter of Frederick Metcalfe, sales agent, of Horsforth, Leeds. They had two sons. 
In 1930 Verity followed Wilfrid Rhodes in Yorkshire's famed company of slow left-arm bowlers. Rhodes had held sway until his fifty-third year, and his dominance delayed Verity's debut for the county until 21 May 1930, the year of Rhodes's retirement. In 1931, his first full season with Yorkshire, Verity was one of the five cricketers of the year in 'Wisden', chosen in recognition of bowling performances which included his feat of taking ten wickets in one innings against Warwickshire at Leeds on his twenty-sixth birthday. This was followed in 1932 by his record-breaking figures of 10 wickets for 10 runs, including the hat-trick, against Nottinghamshire. On seven other occasions for Yorkshire he took 9 wickets in an innings, helping the county to win the championship in seven of the ten seasons when he played for them. 
Verity made his first test match appearance for England against New Zealand in July 1931. In his forty test match appearances, the last of which was against the West Indies at Lord's in June 1939, he took 144 wickets (at an average of 24.37). His most outstanding test match performance was against Australia at Lord's in June 1934, when he took 14 wickets for 80 runs on the third day, bringing about England's only victory over the Australians at Lord's in the twentieth century. His duels with Don Bradman stood out above all else. He was one of the few bowlers who refused to be overawed by the cricketing genius, whom he dismissed on ten occasions. During the controversial 'bodyline' series to Australia in 1932-3 he forged a resolute unity with Douglas Jardine, the England captain, after whom he named his second son. 
R. E. S. Wyatt, England's captain in 1934, commented: 'one of Verity's chief assets was his ability to make the ball lift on a wet wicket and bounce on a dry one. Batsmen frequently found themselves playing the ball in the air when they thought they had got well over the top of it. (Hill, 144)' His 'perching ball' brought the downfall of many rivals. According to Bill Bowes, a close friend and bowling partner, the essence of his art was a 'marvellous control of length' and a direction 'as straight as an arrow' (ibid.). He ran to the crease lightly and decisively over seven strides before delivering the ball at a pace quicker than most left-handers. He could contain batsmen, but was also devastating on helpful wickets. Jardine paid testimony to Verity's ability to place a field and bowl to it. During a decade dominated by batsmen, his ever present guile and acute brain brought a tally of 1956 wickets (average 14.90). 
Verity presented a tall figure, with frank, friendly eyes, and a shy fearlessness. Nothing unsettled his dignified bearing; he showed a conspicuous absence of elation in victory, or disappointment in defeat. His conduct was in keeping with his reputation as a conscientious and disciplined professional, who practised a spartan regime. In the Second World War he proved as good a soldier as he was a cricketer. As a captain in the Green Howards he displayed courage of a high order in fierce action against German positions in Catania, Sicily. He sustained chest wounds from which he died, a prisoner of war, at the Italian military hospital at Caserta, near Naples, on 31 July 1943. He was buried in the military cemetery at Caserta, built and maintained by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission. A memorial match was played at Roundhay Park, Leeds, in 1944, the proceeds going to endow a hospital bed bearing Verity's name at Leeds General Infirmary. In the following year a benefit match between Yorkshire and Lancashire for Verity's dependants took place at Bradford. 


@@@@@


doc= 38093


William Vertue (d. 1527) was also a master mason. Robert worked almost continuously as an ordinary mason on the nave of Westminster Abbey between 1475 and 1490. His standing must have risen greatly during the 1490s, for he is next recorded as the master mason for one of Henry VII's most important projects, the new riverside north range of Greenwich Palace, built in 1500-04 at a cost of $900. In 1501 and 1502 Robert was paid $100 for reconstructing the tower which contained the king's privy lodgings in the Tower of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 38094


Vidal, Alexander Thomas Emeric (1792-1863), naval officer and hydrographer, was the youngest of the three sons (there was also a daughter) of Emeric Vidal, a naval officer who served as secretary to three distinguished admirals (Sir Robert Kingsmill, Sir John Ross, and Robert Duff), and his wife, Jane Essex. The Vidals came originally from the Basque country. Vidal entered the Royal Navy as a first-class volunteer on the 'Illustrious' in 1803. On 22 May 1807 he joined the Royal Naval College in Portsmouth for eighteen months, after which, as a midshipman, he served in the 'Lavinia' in the Mediterranean and north Atlantic for more than three years. 
In 1814 Vidal sailed in the 'Conway' for the North American station, and later was detached to work under Captain W. F. Owen on a survey of the Canadian Great Lakes. Here he learned surveying, and on 6 February 1815 was promoted lieutenant. When Captain Owen commissioned the ship-sloop 'Leven' (24 guns) and the brig 'Barracouta' (10 guns) in 1821 for his survey of the east coast of Africa, Vidal was appointed first lieutenant in the 'Leven'. When the 'Barracouta''s captain died in 1823 Vidal was placed in command and confirmed in the rank of commander from 15 May 1823. Two years later, when Owen brought his ships home, Vidal was advanced to captain (4 October 1825). 
In the summer of 1830, as a consequence of a number of reports and unsuccessful searches for Aitkin's Rock, which was said to lie about 70 miles off the north-west coast of Ireland, two ten-gun brigs were placed under Vidal's orders to make a final search. In three months the area covered by the several reports was closely examined and this potential danger to shipping erased from the charts. 
In December 1835 Vidal sailed in command of the converted bomb-vessel 'Aetna' with twelve chronometers to measure the meridian distances from the Cape Verde Islands to a number of places on the west coast of Africa, and afterwards to carry out surveys of the coast. It was unpopular but useful work, which he completed despite ill health. From 1841 to 1846, closely associated with the authorities in Lisbon, he surveyed the Azores in the 'Styx'. He was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society and contributed papers on hydrographic matters to its journal. He became rear-admiral on 27 January 1854 and vice-admiral on 17 June 1859. He published a chart of the Salvage Islands, thirteen charts of the Cape Verde Islands, a chart of the coast of England, and one of Vidal Bank off the north-west coast of England. 
In October 1839, in Canada, Vidal married Sarah Antoinette (died June 1843), the daughter of Henry Veicht of Madeira; they had two sons, one of whom died at an early age and the other, Beaufort, became a general in the Canadian army. Vidal died at 13 Sion Hill, Clifton, Gloucestershire, on 5 February 1863. Several features in the different parts of the world he surveyed bear his name, notably Cape Vidal on the east coast of Africa. 
G. S. Ritchie', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38095


Wade, George Edward (1853-1933), sculptor, the youngest of six sons of the Revd Nugent Wade, rector of St Anne's Church, Soho, London, and later canon of Bristol, and his wife, Louisa, was born on 2 March 1853 and baptized in St Anne's on 17 April. He was educated at Charterhouse School, Surrey (1863-5), and later in Switzerland, becoming an intelligent scholar and good linguist with keen interests in cricket, fishing, and shooting. However, while reading for the bar, his health broke down and, following a period of recuperation in Italy and without formal art training, he took up painting, and an art patron, Sir Coutts Lindsay, provided him with a studio in London. Then in his mid-thirties and not entirely happy with his pictures, he turned to sculpture and was almost immediately successful with work in the round. His first exhibits at the Royal Academy were, in 1889, a bronze bust of Lieutenant-Colonel Myles Sandys MP; in 1890 a terracotta bust of his father; a terracotta statuette of a grenadier guard -- his most popular work -- of which a copy in bronze was purchased by Queen Victoria and one hundred others by the regiment; and a bronze statuette 'Il Penseroso' (one of a pair) which was also sold in large numbers. In 1889 he married Isabella Mary Josephine (Ella), eldest daughter of Lieutenant-General John Mackenzie Macintyre, Royal Artillery, of Fortrose, Ross-shire; they had two daughters. 
Wade then took over the studio of Sir J. Edgar Boehm and in 1891 his bust of the Polish pianist Ignacy Paderewski was so appreciated that 500 reproductions of it were ordered for the American market alone. Throughout his career he continued with a series of busts of well-known personalities such as W. E. Gladstone, and General William Booth of the Salvation Army, and appealing statuettes such as 'Aphrodite' (marble, exh. RA, 1891), 'The Dancer', and 'St George and the Dragon' (bronze, exh. RA, 1892). However, more of his time was taken up with monumental sculpture, such as the colossal bronze statue of the duke of Connaught for Hong Kong (exh. RA, 1892); those of Queen Victoria for Allahabad, India, and Colombo, Ceylon; William Rose Mansfield, first Baron Sandhurst, for Bombay; a Cameron highlander for Inverness; and Sir John A. MacDonald for the Canadian cities of Montreal, Quebec, and Hamilton and Kingston, Ontario. One of his largest commissions was the South African War memorial in Pietermaritzburg, Natal, a composition in marble and bronze surmounted by a winged figure; and he produced, among others, statues of Edward VII and Queen Alexandra, the equestrian statues of the maharaja Sir Chandra Shamshere Yung for Nepal and the first Earl Haig for the esplanade outside Edinburgh Castle, and a children's fountain for the Women's World Temperance Association, a replica of which was placed in Temple Gardens, London. 
With so many commitments it is understandable that Wade ceased rather early in his career to show his work in public exhibitions, but he still found time to pursue other interests. In the early days of aviation he made designs for aeroplanes and, later in life, took up golf and planned houses for himself and his friends in Berkshire. The popularity of his sculpture was probably due not only to the fact that it was always comprehensible but that it was both ennobling and restrained in equal measure. In portraiture he obtained at the same time a good likeness, much appreciated by the sitters and their families, and, in these works and in his more fanciful subjects, he engendered feelings of respect and admiration. It might be argued by some that his approach was too prosaic, but it would perhaps be more true to say that he cloaked classical ideals in the trappings of his own environment. His last major work was a war memorial in Stourbridge, Worcestershire, unveiled in 1931. He died at his home, 30 Hyde Park Street, London, on 5 February 1933. 
S. C. Hutchison', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38096


Waismann, Friedrich (1896-1959), philosopher, was born on 21 March 1896 in Vienna, the son of Leopold Waismann (died 1931), a manufacturer of hardware who was a naturalized Austrian of Russian origin, and his wife, Clara Schwarz (died 1929). Having taken his 'Matura' in 1917 as an external applicant, he entered Vienna University as a foreign student of Russian nationality. He took a degree in physics in 1922. In 1937 he received a doctorate for his philosophical publications. 
From 1922 to 1936 Waismann had a precarious career under the patronage of Moritz Schlick, professor of philosophy and founder of the Vienna circle. He taught at the Volkshochschule, from 1929 he was librarian of the philosophy faculty, and he gave private tuition. Throughout he served as Schlick's unofficial assistant, running his graduate seminar. 
Realizing that the conception of logic presented in the 'Tractatus logico-philosophicus' was of fundamental importance to logical empiricism, Schlick made contact with Ludwig Wittgenstein in 1927. Schlick came to envisage a more accessible presentation of Wittgenstein's ideas, and assigned this task to Waismann. From 1928 Waismann's efforts centred on gathering and expounding Wittgenstein's ideas under Schlick's general supervision. Waismann acted as the spokesman for Wittgenstein's point of view (notably at the Second Congress for Scientific Philosophy at Konigsberg in September 1930). Within the Vienna circle, Waismann sided with Schlick, who represented the conservative wing, against the radicals headed by Otto Neurath. The conservatives wanted the work of the circle to be politically neutral and to focus on the analysis of logic, mathematics, and the natural sciences, whereas the radicals urged active political engagement along Marxist lines, and directed attention to the social sciences. This split led to intellectual conflict and personal animosity. 
From shorthand notes of conversations with Wittgenstein, supplemented by dictations and typescripts, Waismann wrote lectures and articles on Wittgenstein's conception of mathematics, his view of logic, and his treatment of identity and probability. The culmination was to be a systematic presentation of his ideas on logic, language, and philosophy. Advertised in 1930 under the title 'Logik, Sprache, Philosophie', this book was to be the initial volume in the series 'Schriften zur Wissenschaftlichen Weltauffassung' (the series envisaged as a systematic exposition of the philosophy of the Vienna circle). Schlick wanted the book to give a perspicuous account of the conception of logic presented in the 'Tractatus', since he regarded that conception as the basis of logical empiricism. The project generated tension with Wittgenstein. He worried about its misrepresenting his current, rapidly evolving position. As a consequence he decided in 1932 to become co-author with Waismann, but then withdrew from co-authorship in 1934, promising to Schlick to continue to assist Waismann in the project. 
Deprivation of the librarianship and Schlick's murder in 1936 made Waismann's position untenable. He desperately needed to publish to obtain a secure post. He compiled a collection of Schlick's later papers ('Gesammelte Aufsatze', 1938). He completed 'Einfuhrung in das mathematische Denken' (1936), which developed some of Wittgenstein's leading ideas into an overview of the nature of mathematics. He signed a contract with Springer in October 1936 to publish 'Logik, Sprache, Philosophie'. Although it was finished in 1937, the text remained unpublished (probably because of the 'Anschluss'). A second attempt to publish it in the Netherlands was frustrated by the outbreak of war. 
Waismann went temporarily to Cambridge in October 1937. One term's funding was extended to two, whereupon the 'Anschluss' made him a permanent refugee. This created awkwardness when Wittgenstein himself returned to Cambridge from leave in Norway, since Waismann's lectures, based on his own two completed texts, expounded Wittgenstein's earlier ideas. Wittgenstein did nothing to soften the difficulties, allegedly banning his students from attending Waismann's lectures. Waismann felt bitter and depressed. 
In February 1940 Waismann moved to Oxford, where he remained permanently apart from a brief period of internment (as an enemy alien) at Paignton, Devon, from 22 July to 3 October 1940. Supported by funding for refugees and grants from Magdalen and All Souls colleges, he gave miscellaneous lectures. Eventually he became lecturer in the philosophy of science and mathematics in 1946, then successively senior lecturer (1948) and reader (1950) in the philosophy of mathematics, and finally reader in the philosophy of science in 1955. He took British nationality in 1950, and he was elected a fellow of the British Academy in July 1955. 
Waismann had close contact with some leading Oxford philosophers -- especially Henry Price, Isaiah Berlin, Stuart Hampshire, Herbert Hart, and Gilbert Ryle. His lectures and classes were a focus of excitement. One seminar saw the first exposition by J. L. Austin of his doctrine of performative utterances. Having, like Ryle, 'learned much from Wittgenstein', Waismann played a leading role in the post-war transformation of logical empiricism into 'Oxford philosophy'. In this way he was a protagonist in both main developments within analytic philosophy in his lifetime. 
Outside Oxford, Waismann's reputation rested on three papers, subsequently reprinted in 'How I See Philosophy' (ed. R. Harre, 1968). 'Verifiability' (1945) suggested modifications of the principle of verification to accommodate the essential indeterminacy of symbolism ('open texture'). This influential doctrine (prominent in Hart's legal theory) is that no empirical concept can be so precisely defined as to exclude all possible doubt about how it is to be applied in bizarre circumstances. 'Language-strata' (1953) explored the 'loose' logical relations between different domains of discourse (for example, between psychological concepts and descriptions of behaviour). 'How I see philosophy' (1956) distinguished philosophical arguments from demonstrations of theses, instead illustrating how to treat philosophical problems on the model of psychoanalysis: the patient must be led to acknowledge his own difficulties and to view things in new ways. 
All this work shows ambivalence towards Wittgenstein, deep indebtedness together with critical distance. Waismann built much on ideas that Wittgenstein later discarded (especially the concept of a 'hypothesis'), and he directed Wittgenstein's method of clarifying 'the grammar of our language' primarily to investigating changes in mathematical and scientific concepts where appeals to everyday use played no role. 
There are major posthumous publications. Transcriptions of shorthand notes of Wittgenstein's conversations with Waismann and Schlick in 1929-32 were published in 1967 as 'Ludwig Wittgenstein and the Vienna Circle'. Some later dictations and early drafts for 'Logik, Sprache, Philosophie' were being prepared for publication at the end of the twentieth century. An English translation of that book was completed in 1939, at least partly by Margaret (Ramsey) Paul, but it was first published only in 1965 under the title 'The Principles of Linguistic Philosophy'. This was presented (and misunderstood) as a secondhand rehash of Wittgenstein's work rather than the precipitate of seven years of co-authorship and collaboration. A reconstruction of the original German text appeared in 1970, with a fuller and more accurate account of its origins. 
Other publications include 'Philosophical Papers' (1977); 'Lectures on the Philosophy of Mathematics' (1982), which was reconstructed from notes and manuscripts; and 'Wille und Motiv' (1988; translated as 'Ethics and Will', 1994). Much remains unpublished: a book on the concept of causality, some early lectures and drafts of parts of 'Logik, Sprache, Philosophie', and a quantity of poems and aphorisms. 
Waismann's wife, Hermine Antscherl (born in Vienna in 1894), whom he married in 1929, committed suicide in 1943. So too, nine years later, did his only son, Thomas (born in Vienna in 1935). Waismann died at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 4 November 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 38097


Walker, Sir Herbert Ashcombe (1868-1949), railway manager, was born on 16 May 1868 at 75 Talbot Road, Paddington, London, the only child of Dr George Stephen Walker MRCS, and his wife, Ellen Frances Ley. He was educated at the North London Collegiate School, and studied medicine for one year at St Francis Xavier College, Bruges. It was intended that he should enter the medical profession but for financial reasons this became impossible, and when only seventeen he joined the office of the district superintendent of the line of the London and North Western Railway (LNWR) at Euston. He loved the work and soon grasped the essentials of railway operation. By 1910 he was outdoor goods manager for the large southern division of the LNWR and a year later became assistant to the general manager, Sir Frank Ree. 
In 1911 Walker was chosen to become general manager of the London and South Western Railway (LSWR) and remained there until 1923. At Waterloo, the LSWR headquarters, there was much to do; many platforms had to be replanned and the rebuilding of the terminus speeded up, but Walker saw at once that he must entice more commuters, and his electrification of the London suburban lines, which was to be pursued long after he was running the future Southern Railway, was of lasting significance. At the outbreak of the First World War, though not the most senior of chief railway officers, he was made chairman of the railway executive committee, which controlled all aspects of railway operation. With characteristic confidence and zeal Walker did both this exacting job and his work at Waterloo. He was knighted in 1915, and in 1917 was appointed KCB. 
The 'Railways Act' of 1921 called for the establishment of four groups in Britain. The southern group, which became the Southern Railway, included the LSWR. Walker emerged as its sole general manager, from 1923 to 1937. Walker knew what he wanted to do at Waterloo and he had the backing of the Southern board. Under his aegis the tentacles of the electrified lines stretched south and west. The port of Southampton was enlarged so that ocean-going liners were attracted to its facilities and in 1933 what was then the largest dry dock in the world was opened by King George V. The programme gave the Southern Railway the biggest electrified suburban system in the world. 
Though a firm manager, Walker was no dictator. He appointed able men, such as Alfred and Gilbert Szlumper, Alfred Raworth, E. C. Cox, and John Elliot. Walker fostered cross-channel traffic; in 1929 the Golden Arrow service was inaugurated which, in its prime, ran with almost French 'elan'. In 1931 the autocarrier with room for forty cars appeared, the vehicles being hoisted aboard from the quayside. Yet Walker also knew that railways were no longer omnipotent; he became associated with the Great Western Railway in running a coach service to the west and acquired for his company a financial interest in Imperial Airways. He also kept a watchful eye on channel tunnel plans as they came and went. Walker retired in 1937 and joined the Southern board, on which he sat until railway nationalization in 1947. 
Walker was physically well made, having stamina and a commanding presence. He looked what he was, a man who knew his job and meant to do it. He wore pince-nez spectacles, a round-ended stiff collar, and a moustache. On board days he would wear a tailcoat. He lacked social graces and had no small talk but this, to some extent, was compensated for by his unfailing memory. He was reputed to be able to stand by the footplate of a steam locomotive knowing at once the names of driver and fireman who, for their part, knew that he had a very good idea of what each did and how he did it. He had a taste for the theatre and when on the continent enjoyed a little gambling at a casino. He became a grand officer of the Legion d'honneur and a lieutenant of the City of London. A plaque in Walker's memory was erected at Waterloo Station after his death. 
In 1894 Walker married Ethel Louisa (1867-1909), daughter of John Robert Griffith, a solicitor, of Llanrwst, north Wales. After her death he married, in 1910, Lorina Elizabeth ('b'. 1874/5), widow of A. Shield, a member of the stock exchange. She was the daughter of Alfred Webb, mechanical engineer. There were no children of either marriage. Walker died on 29 September 1949 at 9 Maresfield Gardens, Hampstead, London. 
Colin Watson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38098


Walker, Robert (1801-1865), Church of England clergyman and physicist, was born in Dover, the third of at least five sons of Robert Walker, gentleman, and his wife, Elizabeth Mozier, both of Dover. On 20 January 1819 he entered Wadham College, Oxford, where he was an exhibitioner. He obtained a second class in 'literae humaniores' and a first in mathematics in 1822. He took holy orders as a deacon in 1826, and was ordained priest in 1827. Walker was appointed junior chaplain of Wadham College in 1826, but had to relinquish the post when he married, in 1831, Elizabeth Holdsworth of Alverstoke, Hampshire; they had at least two sons and two daughters, of whom the elder son, Robert Holdsworth Walker ('b'. 1834), followed his father to Wadham and into the teaching profession. 
As early as 1826 Walker served as a university examiner in mathematics, the first of many occasions. From 1828 until 1853 he was mathematics tutor of Wadham College, though he was never a fellow. He was elected FRS in 1831. In 1839 he succeeded Stephen Rigaud as reader in experimental philosophy (physics) at Oxford, becoming responsible not only for a well-established course but also for an extensive collection of apparatus with an endowment for its development. One of the first pieces that he added was the Oxford dry pile, an extremely durable battery. Walker's appointment as reader (upgraded to professor in 1860) was significant, for he was the first to hold the post in its own right, rather than annexed to a professorship in another subject. 
Inspired by the meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in Oxford in 1847, at which he was one of the local secretaries and president of the physics section, Walker, along with Henry Acland, Charles Daubeny, and Philip Duncan, launched a vigorous campaign for the reform of scientific education in Oxford. The eventual results were the creation of a new degree in natural science in 1850 and the building of a new scientific teaching centre, which became known as the university museum. Walker was one of the most active members of the steering committee appointed in 1853 to establish the museum; and as secretary of the British Association in 1859-61 he helped organize the Oxford meeting of 1860, which inaugurated the museum but became famous for its discussion of Darwinism. 
Walker was not an original physicist, but kept pace with the work of his great contemporaries in order to demonstrate their experiments to his students, and also to senior members of the university in the Ashmolean Society. He made his lecture demonstrations as lively as possible in order to capture the interest of the undergraduates. A brief account of them occurs in the memoirs of William Tuckwell. 
Walker's vocation as a clergyman was not eclipsed by his scientific career. He was one of the university's select preachers in 1840-42 and 1847-9, and became vicar of Culham, Oxfordshire, in 1848, moving with his family to Culham vicarage. He resigned this living in 1862. Little is known about Walker's personality, though Tuckwell describes him as cheery. He died at Rose Hill, Iffley, near Oxford, on 28 September 1865. 
A. V. Simcock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38099


Waller, Augustus Desire (1856-1922), physiologist, was born in Paris on 12 July 1856, the only son and younger child of Augustus Volney Waller FRS (1816-1870), physiologist, and his wife, Matilda Margaret Walls, daughter of John Walls, a solicitor. The family lived in turn in Paris, England, and Switzerland until the death of his father in 1870 when, with his mother and his sister, Matilda Amelia ('b'. 1845), he moved to Aberdeen. He was educated at the College de Geneve and entered the University of Aberdeen in 1874, where he graduated MB in 1878 and MD in 1881. He joined the department of physiology at University College, London, in 1879 as a research scholar of the British Medical Association. In 1883 he became lecturer in physiology at the Royal Free Hospital and in 1884 lecturer in physiology at St Mary's Hospital. He remained there until 1903, when he was appointed the first, and only, director of the newly founded University of London Physiological Laboratory, established in the former Imperial Institute in South Kensington mainly as a result of Waller's initiative. In 1885 he married Alice Mary (1859-1922), daughter of George Palmer, MP for Reading and founder of the biscuit manufacturers Huntley and Palmer. They had three sons and two daughters; there were no grandchildren. 
Waller's research interests started in the emerging field of electro-physiology, in which he made useful contributions to the study of fatigue in muscle and the nature of cardiac potentials. He made the first recording of the human electrocardiogram in 1887, an important advance which, in other hands, had widespread applications in medicine. He studied the physiological actions of volatile anaesthetics, stressing the importance of quantitative measurement. Other subjects included human energy metabolism, bio-electro phenomena in tissues, and psycho-physiology. He was dedicated to experimental work and wrote many scientific papers; he also wrote a manual of experimental physiology for medical students, and a major 'Introduction to Human Physiology' (1891). 
Physiology dominated Waller's adult life. He was ambitious to be recognized as a physiologist as successful as his father. But physiology was also a family activity; he had a laboratory at his spacious home in London. His wife and children took part in experiments, entertained visiting scientists, and travelled with him to conferences at home and abroad. He was a keen motorist, enjoyed skiing, skating, golf, and billiards, and kept a large family of bulldogs. One of these, Jimmie, was used by him for a harmless demonstration of the electrocardiogram at the Royal Society and became the subject of a famous parliamentary reply to a question from the anti-vivisection lobby ('Hansard 5C', 8 July 1909). Waller was argumentative, opinionated, and sometimes outspoken, but he had a sense of humour ('I am the Wallerian degeneration' in reference to his father's eponymous discovery) and he retained an unworldly delight in science throughout his life. 
Waller was elected FRS in 1892 and gave the Croonian lecture in 1896. Other honours included the Monthyon medal of the French Academie des Sciences (1888), the Prix Aldini from Bologna (1892), and honorary degrees from the universities of Edinburgh (1905), Western Australia (1914), and Tomsk (1914). He was Fullerian professor of physiology at the Royal Institution in 1897 and became a professor in the University of London in 1912. Waller died in London on 11 March 1922 and was buried in a family grave in Finchley cemetery. 
A. H. Sykes', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38100


Wallich, George Charles (1815-1899), military surgeon and oceanographer, was born on 16 November 1815 in Calcutta, India, the eldest of seven children of Nathaniel Wallich (1785-1854), a Danish-born surgeon and botanist, and his second wife, Sophia Collings. He was educated at King's College, Aberdeen, and at the University of Edinburgh, where he studied medicine and graduated MD in 1836; he became a licentiate of the College of Surgeons (Edinburgh) the following year. 
Wallich returned to India in 1838 as assistant surgeon in the Indian army and saw considerable active service during the next nineteen years, taking part in the Sutlej and Punjab campaigns of 1842 and 1847 and acting as field surgeon during the Santal rebellion of 1855-6. In 1851, during his single furlough spent in England, he married Caroline Elizabeth, daughter of Edmund Norton, a solicitor in Lowestoft. They had four sons and four daughters. Wallich returned to England on sick leave in 1857 and retired from the Indian army in 1859 with the rank of surgeon-major. 
During the homeward voyage Wallich collected a variety of marine organisms, thus beginning the study of oceanography which was to dominate the remainder of his life. His reports on the collections brought him to the notice of the British scientific establishment and led to his appointment as naturalist in HMS 'Bulldog' during a voyage under the command of Sir Leopold McClintock in 1860 to investigate a possible northern route for the proposed north-Atlantic telegraph cable. 
Wallich reported the results of the 'Bulldog' cruise in his most important publication, 'The North-Atlantic Sea-Bed' (1862), which included his general views on deep-sea biology and in particular a refutation of the 'azoic theory', put forward by Edward Forbes in 1843, according to which the depths of the ocean beyond a few hundred metres were devoid of life. Wallich based his refutation mainly on a 'Bulldog' sounding, at a depth of some 2300 metres, which brought up a number of brittle-stars entangled in the line. However, this evidence was generally regarded as inconclusive by the scientific world, and the credit for disproving the azoic theory went to Charles Wyville Thomson and W. B. Carpenter for their dredging results during the cruises of the 'Lightning' and the 'Porcupine' in 1868 and 1869. 
Wallich published several significant scientific papers during the 1870s and 1880s, mainly on the classification of foraminiferans and on the role of the lower organisms in the formation of geological deposits. He also became an accomplished photographer, publishing privately a volume of excellent portraits of contemporary scientists. But his main preoccupation during the latter part of his life was about obtaining the public recognition which he felt he had been denied. This led him into a series of acrimonious exchanges, both private and public, with several notable scientists of the day, but mainly with Carpenter and Thomson, whom he also accused of plagiarizing his results, particularly those dealing with the biology of the foraminiferans. The controversy culminated in 1877 with Wallich's unsuccessful demand that the Royal Society should censure his two opponents; he believed that the society had tacitly condoned their misdemeanours by publishing their results in its prestigious journal, from which Wallich was debarred since he was not a fellow. 
Although Wallich was never elected to the fellowship of the Royal Society, his work was recognized in 1898 by the award of the gold medal of the Linnean Society. Wallich undoubtedly felt that this recognition was too little and too late, and he remained bitter and resentful to his death, on 31 March 1899, at his home, 11 Nottingham Place, Baker Street, London. He was survived by his wife. 
A. L. Rice', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38101


Wallis, Henry (1830-1916), painter and ceramics expert, was born in London on 21 February 1830. His father's name and occupation are unknown. When in 1845 his mother, Mary Anne Thomas, married Andrew Wallis, a prosperous London property owner, Henry took his stepfather's surname. 
Wallis commenced his training at F. S. Cary's academy in Bloomsbury. He was admitted as a probationer in the Royal Academy on 7 January 1848 and enrolled in the painting school there on 31 March. He also studied in Paris in the atelier of M. G. C. Gleyre and at the Academie des Beaux-Arts, probably some time between 1849 and 1853. He first exhibited in England at the Royal Manchester Institution in 1853 and in London in February 1854 at the British Institution. 
By early 1855 Wallis was acquainted with the novelist and poet George Meredith. This led to Meredith's posing for the face of the dead poet Thomas Chatterton in Wallis's painting 'Chatterton' (Tate collection), which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1856. This picture made Wallis famous overnight: John Ruskin, for example, described it as 'faultless and wonderful' (Parris, 144). Its continuing fascination for the public owes much to the way in which it is inextricably linked with a real-life 'romance': in the summer of 1857, if not before, Wallis and Meredith's wife, Mary Ellen, daughter of Thomas Love Peacock, became lovers. Mary Meredith left her husband, and had a son with Wallis, Harold (Felix) Meredith (later Wallis) in April 1858. Mary Ellen died in October 1861. 
Contact with the melancholy sensibility and radicalism of Gleyre, as well as with the work of French realist painters, led Wallis to paint his masterpiece, 'The Stonebreaker' (1857; Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery), though his direct inspiration was Thomas Carlyle's 'Sartor Resartus'. Wallis's sombre and realistic image of a dead labourer is both pioneering and unique in British art. 'The Stonebreaker', exhibited in 1858, consolidated Wallis's reputation as a true Pre-Raphaelite. 
However, after his stepfather's death in 1859, when he came into a comfortable inheritance, Wallis never again made the same artistic impact, though he remained a Royal Academy exhibitor until 1877. He also exhibited with the Old Watercolour Society, of which he became a member in 1880. An interest in archaeology, ceramics, and Renaissance art took him increasingly abroad and he became a perceptive and quietly passionate writer on these subjects -- notably for the 'Art Journal' between 1882 and 1890. Always interested in contemporary artistic matters, he was also honorary secretary of the committee for the preservation of St Mark's, Venice, between 1882 and 1890. Wallis's most notable achievement between 1885 and 1899 was to publish in twenty slim volumes, most of them illustrated by himself, his researches into Persian, Egyptian, Greek, and Byzantine ceramics. 
A discerning collector, Wallis made a small but highly original contribution to the art and connoisseurship of his time. For all this, he remains an elusive personality: according to W. M. Rossetti he was 'a very agreeable companion, of solid character and open mind'. Wallis never married. He died on 20 December 1916 at his home, 1 Walpole Road, Croydon, Surrey, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 
Robin Hamlyn', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38102


Walsh, William Joseph (1841-1921), Roman Catholic archbishop of Dublin, was born at 11 Essex Quay, Dublin, on 30 January 1841, the only child of Ralph Walsh, a watchmaker and jeweller, of co. Kerry, and his wife, Mary Pierce, of a Galway family. He was educated at St Laurence O'Toole's Seminary School, Dublin, and entered the Catholic University of Ireland (then under the rectorship of John Henry Newman) in 1855. He entered St Patrick's College, Maynooth, in 1858, and after an outstanding academic career was ordained to the priesthood in 1866. In 1867 he was appointed professor of dogmatic and moral theology at Maynooth, in 1878 vice-president, and in 1880 president. He gave evidence in support of the claims of the tenantry before the Bessborough commission (1880) but he had already come to prominence when he performed brilliantly as an expert witness on canon law in the celebrated O'Keefe law case in 1875. 
Following the death of Cardinal Edward McCabe in February 1885, Walsh was elected vicar-capitular of the Dublin archdiocese. On 23 June 1885 he was appointed archbishop of Dublin by Pope Leo XIII. That this was done despite government intrigue in Rome -- Walsh's nationalist sympathies being well known -- was hailed as a triumph by Irish nationalists. For the next quarter of a century Walsh was the dominating personality in the Irish Catholic church. He built or renovated churches and schools, conducted a busy schedule of pastoral visitations, and promoted initiatives in the areas of sacred music, catechetics, and temperance. A champion of Catholic educational interests, through his service on a number of public bodies he contributed significantly to the development of the modern Irish education system. He served on the senate of the Royal University of Ireland (1883-4), the national education board (1895-1901), the intermediate education board (1892-1909), and the senate of the National University of Ireland of which, in 1908, he became the first chancellor. 
Walsh's life spanned the flood-tide of modern Irish nationalism. At the tender age of nine months he was enrolled by his father, a prominent nationalist, as a member of the Repeal Association, and while still a young boy he was introduced to Daniel O'Connell; in 1921 Eamon de Valera expressed gratitude for his 'ripe counsel... in any hour of need'. A constitutional nationalist like his father before him, Walsh was an advocate of home rule and agrarian reform. His support for the controversial Plan of Campaign earned him the displeasure of Rome and cost him the cardinal's hat. During the commission set up in 1888 to inquire into charges made by 'The Times' against Charles Stewart Parnell he provided crucial assistance to Parnell in exposing Richard Pigott as a forger. When the Parnell divorce crisis broke in 1890, he resisted pressure from both nationalist politicians and ecclesiastics, such as Cardinal H. E. Manning and Archbishop T. W. Croke of Cashel, to come out against Parnell. It was only when secret negotiations between Parnell and himself, conducted through an intermediary, failed to produce a compromise that he led the clerical attack on Parnell's leadership. In later life Walsh became disenchanted with the Irish Parliamentary Party, and in 1917 signalled his shift of allegiance to Sinn Fein. Though afflicted with poor health in his last years he continued to make an important contribution to political developments and served as a mentor to some Sinn Fein leaders. 
Walsh had a progressive mind, favoured women's rights to the vote and to university education, and advocated bimetallism. He was an early advocate of the use of arbitration to settle labour disputes, and for his successful mediation which brought to an end a protracted strike on the Great Southern and Western Railway in 1890 he was made an honorary freeman of the city of Cork. Aloof in temperament, in private life he was pious, charitable, and of a simple way of living. Aside from law and music he had many interests which reflected his modern outlook. He mastered the Pitman script, became an enthusiastic cyclist and amateur photographer, and was one of the earliest patrons of the motor car. He died on 9 April 1921 at 32 Eccles Street, Dublin, and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery on 14 April. 
D. A. Kerr David C. Sheehy', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38103


Hopton, Sir Walter of (c.1235-1295/6), justice, was probably born in or before 1235 in Shropshire, perhaps at Hopton Castle, which his family had held since at least the mid-twelfth century as major knightly tenants of the honour of Clun. He was the son of another Walter of Hopton and his wife, Joan. The first office he is known to have held (in 1256) was the purely local one of coroner, and in 1258 he was one of the four Shropshire knights appointed to investigate grievances in the same county under the provisions of Oxford. In 1267-8 he held the rather more responsible local post of sheriff of the twin counties of Shropshire and Staffordshire. By July 1270 he had been knighted. 
Hopton's first appointment as a royal justice came at the end of Henry III's reign. In 1272 he was a justice of the general eyre in Herefordshire, Staffordshire, and Shropshire. In 1274 he is to be found serving as a baron of the exchequer. Later the same year he was appointed a justice of king's bench. Hopton left king's bench in 1278 to become one of the justices of a court newly established after the treaty of Aberconwy to deal with litigation from Wales and the Welsh marches. He soon become senior justice of this court. After the completion of the Edwardian conquest of Wales the legal system was recast and Hopton ceased to be involved in Welsh legal affairs. 
In 1284 Edward I appointed Hopton to a commission sent to Ireland to audit accounts there. Hopton had previously participated in late 1278 and early 1279 in two eyres of the 'southern' circuit of the general eyre. He rejoined the same circuit in 1285, part-way through the visitation of Essex, and remained on the circuit until eyres were suspended in 1289. Like most of his judicial colleagues he was also appointed in 1285 to a vacation assize circuit, and acted as a gaol delivery justice. In February 1290 he received appointment as one of two commissioners to hear complaints against the king's officials in London, but later the same month was himself convicted, with his colleagues in the 1286 Norfolk eyre, of judicial misconduct for failing to take appropriate action on two presentments made at the eyre. Initially Edward was unsympathetic to the petition in which Hopton claimed that at the material time he had not been serving as a justice, because of a bureaucratic muddle over his appointment, but by December 1290 the king had agreed that the money Hopton had already paid towards his fine should count instead towards a fine he had made to secure the wardship of the lands of his late wife. Hopton received no further judicial or administrative appointments from Edward. 
With an unknown first wife Hopton had a son and heir, also named Walter. His second wife was Maud, the daughter of William Pantulf (died 1233), who by the time of her own second marriage, to Walter (in 1282 or 1283), was sole heir to the Shropshire barony of Wem. There were no children of this second marriage. Hopton was still alive and engaged in litigation in Michaelmas term 1295, but dead by 28 September 1296. 
Paul Brand', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38104


Walter, (William) Grey (1910-1977), neurophysiologist, was born in Kansas City, Missouri, on 19 February 1910, the only child of Karl Wilhelm Walter (1880-1965), a British journalist then working on the Kansas City 'Star', and his wife, Minerva Lucrezia (Margaret) Hardy (1879-1953), an American journalist. His parents had met and married in Italy, where they spent much of their lives. During the First World War they moved from the United States to Britain, where Grey Walter spent the rest of his life. He was educated at Westminster School (1922-8), where he specialized in classics and then in science, which he continued at King's College, Cambridge, from 1928. He took a third class in part one (1930) and a first class in physiology in part two of the natural sciences tripos (1931), and went on to do postgraduate research on nerve physiology and conditioned reflexes. His MA dissertation on 'Conduction in nerve and muscle' was accepted in 1935. 
Walter then joined Professor F. L. Golla, an eminent neurologist who was director of the central pathological laboratories at the Maudsley Hospital. Golla wanted to apply the new method of investigating the brain by recording its electrical activity (electroencephalogram or EEG) to clinical problems and was able to provide various types of patients for Walter to study. In 1936 a patient thought to be suffering from schizophrenia was found to have abnormal activity in the EEG and then discovered to have a cerebral tumour. Recordings done in the operating theatre confirmed that the activity was associated with the tumour. Between 1936 and 1939 many hundreds of patients were investigated; those with epilepsy were shown to have abnormal activity in the EEG between attacks. 
In 1939 Golla and Walter moved to Bristol to open the Burden Neurological Institute as a research centre in neuropsychiatry. There Walter made many novel instruments to analyse the EEG. On-line frequency analysis was developed in 1943, sensory stimuli used to provoke abnormal activity in the EEG in 1947, and the toposcope to analyse the frequency and phase structure of the EEG in 1950. The work on conditioning went on and in the early 1960s led to the discovery of the contingent negative variation, which became a subject of study throughout the world. 
Walter also developed models that mimicked brain systems and this involved him with Norbert Wiener and others in early work on cybernetics. His 'tortoises', displayed at the Festival of Britain in 1951, were designed to show the interaction of two sensory systems: light-sensitive and touch-sensitive control mechanisms (in effect, two nerve cells with visual and tactile inputs). These systems interacted with the motor drive in such a way that the 'animals' exhibited 'behaviour', finding their way round obstacles, for example. 
Walter was a fluent speaker and writer, on general as well as technical subjects. He was fluent in French, Italian, and German. He was the author of 170 scientific publications and gave a number of important lectures. He relished making broadcasts and giving talks; he was a frequent guest on BBC television's The Brains Trust. He wrote two books: 'The Living Brain' (1953), which was popular science and was the first introduction that many people had to the brain, and a science fiction novel, 'Further Outlook' (1956), which was not very successful. He was awarded an ScD by Cambridge in 1947, and in 1949 was made a professor of the University of Aix-Marseilles. In 1974 he was awarded the Oliver-Sharpey prize of the Royal College of Physicians. In 1975, the Electroencephalographic Society, of which he was a founder member, commemorated his achievements by striking a Grey Walter medal, 'to be presented... in recognition of outstanding services to clinical neurophysiology'. He was the first recipient of the medal. 
A member of the Cambridge Apostles from 1933, he was a communist supporter before and during the war but later became more sympathetic, first to anarchism, and then to syndicalism. He was an active member of the Association of Scientific Workers. He was involved in the peace movement, being a member of the Peace Pledge Union in the 1930s and the Bristol committee of 100 in the 1960s; but was never a pacifist, and he served in the Home Guard during the Second World War. A firm atheist, he was interested in, though unconvinced by, the paranormal, and also did research on hypnosis. 
In 1934 Walter married Katharine Monica ('b'. 1911), younger daughter of Samuel Kerkham Ratcliffe, a British journalist and lecturer; they separated in 1945 and divorced in 1946. They had two sons, Nicolas, who became a journalist and lecturer, and Jeremy, who became a physicist. In 1947 he married Vivian Joan (1915-1980), daughter of John Dovey, colour manufacturer. She was a colleague for many years. They separated in 1960; they had one son, Timothy (1949-1976). From 1960 to 1972 he lived with Lorraine Josephine, daughter of Mr Donn, property developer, and former wife of Keith Aldridge. In 1970 he suffered severe brain damage in a road accident which effectively ended his career. For forty years he had been at the forefront of research on the living brain, using its electrical activity to chart normal and abnormal function. He died of a heart attack at his home at Flat 2, 20 Richmond Park Road, Clifton, Bristol, on 6 May 1977 and was cremated on 12 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 38105


Warcup, Sir Edmund (1627-1712), magistrate, was born on 4 July 1627, one of twenty-one children of Samuel Warcup of English, near Henley, Oxfordshire, later bailiff of Southwark, and Anne Lenthall, sister of William Lenthall, speaker of the Long Parliament. Warcup himself was to have a large family after his marriage to Anne Hudson (1623-1713). It was Speaker Lenthall that (after Warcup's short stay at St Alban Hall, Oxford, and a sojourn aboard) used his influence to make him secretary to the parliamentary commissioners in the Isle of Wight in 1648. 
In 1651 Warcup was at Lincoln's Inn, where a number of memoranda show him engaged in litigation, trusts, and Welsh land deals. However in spring 1660 he vainly produced papers to George Monck, first duke of Albemarle, and others to form the basis of a bill setting out terms for the restoration of Charles II. In January 1660 he became a captain in the regiment (formerly Fleetwood's) of Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper (later first earl of Shaftesbury), and the connection continued after the Restoration, when Shaftesbury was chancellor of the exchequer and Warcup, among other financial concessions, was a farmer of the excise in Wiltshire and Dorset, as well as justice of the peace in London. Warcup also availed himself further of his relationship to Monck. In February 1664 he succeeded to his father's office as bailiff of Southwark. In the following years he was active in combating the effects of the plague alongside his fellow justice Sir Edmund Godfrey. Unfortunately, Warcup presumed too much on his use of the name of Henry Bennet, earl of Arlington, to cover his own corrupt financial transactions and in July 1666 he was committed to the Fleet prison. He was eventually released about August 1666. Nevertheless Warcup was soon climbing into office again. Once more on the fringes of the court, he was involved in fruitless attempts to reconcile first John Maitland, first duke of Lauderdale, and then Thomas Osborne, first earl of Danby, with Shaftesbury in 1676 and 1677. 
It was in the Popish Plot of 1678 that Warcup found most notoriety. A JP of Middlesex and Westminster for many years, he searched for papists and for popish books. He was noted as having a great zeal for the protestant religion, and his stated political views included a dislike of France and the activities of the duchess of Portsmouth in particular. In the aftermath of Oates's revelations, Warcup was employed by the committee of the House of Lords for the examination of witnesses, dominated by Shaftesbury. He subsequently claimed to have taken the information of over 100 witnesses, both English and Irish. Many of his activities are detailed in his private journal of 1676-84, and he was in contact with most of the major informers of the day. As long as Shaftesbury was lord president of the council, Warcup found no difficulty in reconciling his loyalties, and even after Shaftesbury's dismissal in October 1679 he was used, following an hour's private conversation with the king alone in the royal bedchamber, in trying to bring Charles II and the earl together again. But in February 1681 many witnesses began to see more advantage in making themselves acceptable to the government than to the whigs, and in stating that attempts had been made to suborn them to give evidence. In that same month Warcup had several meetings with the king and his ministers Laurence Hyde, later first earl of Rochester, and Sir Leoline Jenkins; and on 4 March the council ordered him $1500 by privy seal for his expenses. His dealing with the witnesses now had a different purpose, and he was employed to sift their information as they related to the alleged treason of Shaftesbury, sitting alongside the government solicitor Richard Graham. 
After Shaftesbury's acquittal it was Warcup's turn to face counter-accusations of conspiracy to suborn witnesses, as well as (he said) being burnt in effigy with the pope, libelled in pamphlets, and assaulted in the streets. Reaction against Warcup's part in such affairs had already led him to make a strategic withdrawal to Oxfordshire in 1682. Indeed he spent most of that year there on his estate, Northmoor, near Eynsham. As compensation for his troubles he was knighted on 15 December 1684. Thereafter he spent most of his time peacefully employed with the expansion of his estates and his family (whose female members often proved quarrelsome), and in supporting the military careers of his two sons, Edmund and Lenthall, both of whom were killed in action at the battle of Steenkerke in 1692. Warcup had welcomed the accession of James II, but given his former politics he applauded the revolution of 1688, emerging politically in the 1690s as a church tory. Edmund Warcup died at Gaunt House, Northmoor, on 1 May 1712, and was buried in the family vault in the church of St Denys, Northmoor, leaving his wealth and estate to his wife, daughters, and grandchildren. 
Warcup was typical of the many minor figures of his day in that he all too easily became involved in the Popish Plot and its politics. While he undoubtedly played fast and loose with the plot witnesses during his association with Shaftesbury, he soon switched sides when he thought it prudent. In his youth, about which little is known, Warcup had suffered from scrofula, until he was cured during the 1640s. According to Pepys, the affliction was said to have left Warcup allergic to roses, and for sport he could prove this to companions by touching his nose with the flower and bringing up a number of welts on his skin. In other respects, politics especially, Warcup was to prove equally as sensitive to the ebbs and flows of his age. 


@@@@@


doc= 38106


Wardell, William Wilkinson (1823-1899), architect and engineer, was born on 27 September 1823 at 60 Cotton Street, Poplar, London, the second of the four children of Thomas Wardell ('c'.1800-1864), baker, and his wife, Mary Dalton ('b'. 'c'.1800). His parents subsequently became master and matron of Poplar union workhouse. Following a spell at sea, he served in the offices of Mr Morris, surveyor to the commissioners of London sewers, and W. F. East, an architect. While surveying land for new railways, he began measuring and drawing medieval buildings. Simultaneously the influence of A. W. N. Pugin drew him to the Roman Catholic church, into which he was received in 1846. On 5 October 1847 he married Lucy Anne ('c'.1820-1888), daughter of William Henry Butler, wine merchant, of Headington, near Oxford. They had five sons and six daughters. 
Wardell designed about thirty Catholic churches, principally in London and the south-east, in a Gothic revival style almost indistinguishable from Pugin's, as well as presbyteries, convents, and schools. His town churches at Clapham (1851), Greenwich (1851), Commercial Road (1856), and Brook Green (1853) rank among the finest work of the 1850s. During these years he was elected FRIBA (1850), freeman of the City of London (1851), member of the Company of Fishmongers (1852), and associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers (1858). 
Owing to the state of his health, Wardell sold his practice to Messrs Hadfield and Goldie of Sheffield, and emigrated to Australia with his family in 1858. As inspector-general of public works in Victoria from 1861, he was responsible for such undertakings as docks and harbours, as well as government buildings. Holding also the right of private practice, he designed churches and schools in and around Melbourne, principally St Patrick's Cathedral, finally consecrated in 1897. His career in Melbourne ended abruptly when all principal officers were dismissed on 'black Wednesday' 1878 in a government upheaval. He then moved to Sydney, where he confined himself to private practice, designing churches, houses, clubs, and banks in a variety of styles -- renaissance, Gothic, and vernacular -- and becoming thereby a significant figure. 
Wardell's principal contribution to his age lay in his church work. His article in the 'Weekly Register' (1849-50) demonstrates his concern for building within reasonable financial limits, his care for responsible historicism, and above all a strong commitment to the revived Gothic style. Never as fanatical as Pugin, however, Wardell compromised his commitment to Gothic with Italianate designs at St Mary in Hampstead, Sts Peter and Edward in Westminster, and Government House in Melbourne. His drawings of his English work, which survive in the Mitchell Library, Sydney, demonstrate also his competence in designing such furnishings as altars, screens, fonts, and stained glass. 
Despite suffering from tuberculosis, Wardell worked energetically and efficiently. The advice of A. S. Hamilton in 1869 'to rest your exhausted brain' (de Jong, 9) suggests a busy lifestyle of endless examinations, commissions, reports, surveys, and designs. With hindsight, his dismissal in 1878 was a blessing. Throughout those stormy years, however, he had refuted criticisms of his work with patience and gentle good manners. Formative influences here were his happy marriage and his staunch commitment to his Catholic faith. Wardell died at his home, Upton Grange, Sydney, on 19 November 1899 and was buried at Gore Hill cemetery, Sydney. 


@@@@@


doc= 38107


Warltire, John (1725/6-1810), public lecturer, was born in Switzerland of unknown parentage. Nothing is known of his early life, but he probably spent an extended period at Palmyra in Syria. Indeed, M. H. Miller later recorded that Palmyra was among Warltire's 'favourite subjects, [owing to his] having lived many years among the Arabs' (Miller, 217). Warltire arrived in England, possibly to escape religious persecution, in the 1750s. He began work as a valet at Ashover, Derbyshire, but at Michaelmas 1760 started teaching at Ashover Hill School at $9 a year. He left in August 1762, having there 'improved himself in his studies' (White Watson). In November 1762 he married, at Wolverhampton, Mary Stringer ('c'.1743-1790), apparently a housekeeper in the residence where he had been valet. His age was recorded as twenty-three, probably incorrectly. 
Warltire started his new career as an itinerant science lecturer in 1763. Over eighty advertisements for his courses have been located throughout the English provinces, in an area bounded by Plymouth, Chester, Manchester, Leeds, and Norwich. His first lecture course was at Lutterworth, where his eldest son was born in October 1763. He then lectured in many towns in that area, already giving special courses for women, demonstrating with orrery, air-pump, and solar microscope. His first emphasis was astronomy and he issued a 'Short Account of the Solar System' in 1764 (seven editions with changing titles and emphases to post-1769). He later issued many other equally ephemeral publications, chiefly to accompany his lectures. By 1766, when he gave a course of lectures at Salisbury, his teaching covered the whole range of experimental philosophy and included 'new experiments in electricity' ('Salisbury Journal', 14 April 1766). In 1769 Warltire added a new course in chemistry, recording in his lecture notes that 'the Atmosphere is composed of two distinct Sorts of fluid Matter'. 
In 1771 Warltire was emphasizing the utility of his scientific lectures. In that year his course at Ashbourne was attended by Samuel Johnson (1709-1784), who was much stimulated by its metallurgical and mineralogical content. At Shifnal in 1772 Warltire carried out experiments on air in the blood of a live sheep. These were soon followed by other frigorific experiments, involving a thermometer placed in an air-pump, all for Erasmus Darwin (1731-1802). In 1773 Warltire gave lectures at Warrington and from 1774 assisted Joseph Priestley (1733-1804) with experiments and chemicals at Calne on dephlogisticated air (oxygen). By 1775 his 'Apparatus was equal to any in the Possession of a private Person in Britain' ('Exeter Flying Post', 21 April 1775) and his charges had increased to a half-guinea for ten lectures. 
In 1776 Warltire advertised courses of 'New Experiments upon Air' ('Bristol Journal', 7 Sept 1776), in which he had been helped by William Withering (1741-1799); the price was now 1 guinea for twelve lectures. Between 1777 and 1781 Priestley printed descriptions of some of Warltire's experiments, including one of 1776 when Warltire also noticed the deposit of moisture produced on the inside of a tube after the explosion of a mixture of air and inflammable gas (hydrogen). This contributed to the intense debate on the composition of water, and who had discovered it. 
In 1777 Warltire first delivered lectures about Stonehenge at Salisbury, having observed the local source for sarsen stones and how the Friar's Heelstone marked where the sun rose on the longest day. Probably in the same year, Warltire's Bristol lectures stimulated William Gregor (1761-1817), the discoverer of titanium, to take a first interest in chemistry. In 1778 Warltire subscribed to a book by fellow lecturer Thomas Malton. He gave a Wolverhampton address, suggesting that his long-suffering wife, at least, continued to live there. The following year, Warltire gave a new course on agricultural chemistry at Tamworth and he was now employed as personal chemistry tutor to John Wedgwood (1766-1844) and Robert Waring Darwin (1766-1848) at Etruria. In 1780 Warltire started another new course on metallurgy and mineralogy at Birmingham and was soon performing chemical analyses for friends. He was elected an early honorary member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society in 1782. 
In 1783 Warltire performed a vital piece of industrial espionage for James Watt (1736-1819), when he obtained a drawing of Jonathan Hornblower's new compound steam engine at Radstock while lecturing nearby. His observation that Exeter was built on an extinct volcano seems the first properly geological observation to be reported to the Chapter House Philosophical Society in London, in 1785. In 1786 Warltire gave lectures at Salisbury with his travelling mineral collection. In 1791 these led to renewed, if abortive, attempts to find coal at Shaftesbury in Dorset. 
Warltire took a long interest in Stonehenge, which he thought 'a vast Theodolite for observing the motions of the heavens' (J. Britton, 'Beauties of Wiltshire', 2, 1801, 121). By 1786 he and his son William had made accurate cork models, as it then was and as it had first been. Warltire brought Roman pavements near Warminster to public attention in 1786. In 1790 Warltire's wife died at Wolverhampton, and no lecture notices have been traced from then until 1797, when his health was reported in decline. His silence may have arisen from the danger of his association with Priestley, whose laboratory -- when destroyed in 1791 -- included equipment constructed by Warltire. 
Warltire returned to lecturing from 1798; his last known course was given at Ashbourne in 1809. He died at Bonehill, Tamworth, in August 1810 at 'a very advanced age' ('Derby Mercury') and 'in great poverty' (Miller); burial records gave his age as eighty-four. The 'Derby Mercury' unavailingly hoped for 'Memoirs of this distinguished and very useful character... and the publication of his very curious and original papers' (which John Farey (1766-1826) quoted with approval in 1813). Warltire was the itinerant science lecturer most closely associated with, and who reported the work of, the Lunar Society. His claimed Scottish degree has not been confirmed, but his MSS and fine apparatus passed into the hands of Richard Dalton of York, another itinerant lecturer of the next generation, who had lost many by 1827. Warltire was buried at Tamworth church on 23 August 1810. 


@@@@@


doc= 38108


Warner, Walter (c.1558-1643), mathematician and natural philosopher, was born in Leicestershire. He had at least one brother. He was educated at Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1579. Originally a protege of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, Warner entered the household of Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland, as a gentleman servitor in 1590, and became a pensioner in 1617. Although he was a servant, Warner dined with the earl and his friends, and was a constant companion. While at Syon House, Warner's duties largely concerned the purchase and care of the earl's books and scientific instruments. He accompanied the earl on his military mission to the Low Countries in 1600-01, travelling back and forth across the channel as his confidential messenger. 
While Northumberland was imprisoned in the Tower of London (1605-21), Warner brought his books from Syon, and joined in with the learned discussions of the earl and his other mathematical and scientific clients -- Thomas Harriot, Robert Hues, and Nathaniel Torporley. Warner's unpublished natural philosophical writings date mainly from this period, and deal with such diverse topics as logic, psychology, animal locomotion, atomism, time and space, the nature of heat and light, bullion and exchange, hydrostatics, chemistry, and the circulation of the blood (which Warner claimed to have discovered before William Harvey). Warner was best known for his work on optics and mathematics. His tract on the sine law was published posthumously as part of Marin Mersenne's 'Universae geometriae synopsis' (1644), and his unpublished logarithmical tables were widely held to be a great advance on those of Henry Briggs. 
After 1620 Warner lived at the Woolstable in Charing Cross, London, and at Cranborne Lodge, near Windsor, with Sir Thomas Aylesbury, who sponsored his continued work on optics and mathematics. In 1631 Aylesbury encouraged Warner to edit and publish Harriot's treatise on algebra, the 'Artis analyticae praxis', and wrote on his behalf to Northumberland for a reimbursal of expenses. The earl died shortly afterwards, and the tenth earl, his son Algernon Percy (1602-1668), discontinued Warner's pension. From 1632 until his death, Warner continued to work over Harriot's papers, and collaborated with the young mathematician John Pell, on his logarithmical calculations. 
In 1635 Warner sought the patronage of William Cavendish, first duke of Newcastle, and his brother Sir Charles Cavendish, to whom he sent tracts on telescope construction and concave and convex glasses, for which he received a reward of $20. Warner corresponded with other members of the Welbeck circle, including Robert Payne and Thomas Hobbes, whom Seth Ward accused of plagiarizing Warner's ideas. Hobbes ousted Warner as a Cavendish client by writing to the earl of Northumberland and belittling his abilities. Despite the assistance of Aylesbury, Warner was impoverished when he died, unmarried, on 28 March 1643. Some of his papers fell into the hands of Seth Ward, Sir Justinian Isham, John Collins, and Herbert Thorndike, but in 1646 Pell lamented that most of his papers had been 'unmathematically divided between sequestrators and creditors'. 
Stephen Clucas', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38109


Warr, John (fl. 1648-1649), political and legal pamphleteer, stands out among the polemicists of the civil war for his radical thinking and his elegant and vivid prose. 'Even truth itself will jostle its adversary in a narrow pass' he wrote ('Priviledges of the People', Sedley and Kaplan, 76). His three surviving pamphlets, all published within the space of two years by the radical bookseller Giles Calvert, constitute all that is known about him. They give evidence of a classical education and some experience of litigation; but his contempt for the legal system -- 'when the poor and oppressed want right, they meet with law' -- makes it unlikely that he was a lawyer. A John Warre is found in the 1650s buying up sequestrated royalist estates; but, although such a trajectory would not have been unique among civil-war radicals, there is no evidence that this was the same man. 
Warr's stance in the contest between monarchy and parliament was that neither form of government would offer the common people freedom. That must come from the natural reason that every individual possessed: 'There are some sparks of freedom in the minds of most, which ordinarily lie deep and are covered in the dark as a spark in the ashes' (Sedley and Kaplan, 79). But the constitutional foundation of freedom, he argued, using a phrase that was not to come into its own until the age of the French and American revolutions, was neither monarchical authority nor a property-based franchise but 'people's rights'. 
Warr's first known publication, 'Administrations Civil and Spiritual' (1648), although on the face of it a theological tract, begins to grapple with the conflict between what he calls the 'darkness' of formal religion and imposed social order and the inner light of spirituality and reason. In it he invokes the everlasting gospel -- the twelfth-century millenarian heresy that had resurfaced in the German peasants' revolt of 1525 and was to re-emerge in William Blake's epic poems, forecasting an era of human equality and justice. In doing so Warr perceptibly follows the road, well-trodden in this period, from spiritual to secular radicalism. 
It was in his next and arguably finest pamphlet, 'The Priviledges of the People', published about the time of the execution of Charles I in early 1649, that Warr completed the transition. Although he acknowledged 'a beauty in monarchy, duly circumscribed, as well as in other forms of government' (Sedley and Kaplan, 84) he now argued that the natural and rational order of society was egalitarian, not authoritarian. The purpose of law, he argued, was not to constrain the common people but to liberate them by constraining 'the mighty': ''Tis not possible for a people to be too free' (ibid., 80). Between rulers and ruled there was 'an irreconcilable contest... which will never cease till either prerogative and privilege be swallowed up in freedom or liberty itself be led captive by prerogative' (ibid., 79). He no longer looked to a divine scheme. Nor did he believe any longer in an ordained outcome: 'He which hath the worst cause may sometimes have the best success' (ibid.). 
From authority and equality Warr turned in his third pamphlet, 'The Corruption and Deficiency of the Laws of England', published in the summer of the same year, to the law. The view of the legal system as a ruinous snare for ordinary people was widespread in this period; but Warr, while adding his voice to the denunciations, went beyond and behind the present state of things, memorably locating the demand for rational laws in 'a spirit of understanding big with freedom and having a single respect to people's rights' (Sedley and Kaplan, 92). 
Warr does not slot readily into any faction. His antipathy to land tenures -- 'slavish ties and badges upon men' -- as well as his use of botanical imagery may suggest an affinity with Gerrard Winstanley and the Diggers. His egalitarianism echoes that of the Leveller Thomas Rainborowe in the Putney debates of 1647. But Warr's work is better seen as one elegant strand in a long skein of English radicalism, reaching back to the mysticism of the everlasting gospel and forward, through the great democratic revolutions of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, to the universalism of democratic theory and human rights. 
More immediately, when in 1657 Cromwell became lord protector his oath of office included 'the maintenance and preservation... of the just rights and priviledges of the People'. If Warr was still alive he must have enjoyed the irony of an autocracy co-opting his project of turning privilege, and the world with it, upside down. 


@@@@@


doc= 38110


Wasbrough, Matthew (bap. 1753, d. 1781), engineer and inventor of steam engines, born at 3 Narrow Wine Street, Bristol, was baptized on 18 November 1753, the son of Mary and William Wasbrough. William Wasbrough was originally a barber-surgeon and peruke maker, who was in partnership with Roger Rice in a brass-founding and clockmaking business in Narrow Wine Street. Matthew Wasbrough had at least three older brothers. On 23 January 1776 he married Elizabeth Dowell at St Peter's, Bristol. 
Taking an early interest in his father's work, Wasbrough constructed a steam engine with which to drive all the lathes and other machines; in order to do this, he had to convert the reciprocating movement of the Newcomen-type beam engine into rotary motion. He achieved this by using a ratchet and pawl mechanism to produce the rotary motion, combined with a flywheel which reduced the otherwise excessive variations in the speed of rotation. 
On 10 March 1779 Wasbrough was granted patent no. 1213 for a machine which made use of this mechanism. It was, however, not robust or reliable enough in constant use: it seems that, after he completed an engine to drive a mill owned by James Pickard at Snow Hill in Birmingham, it was found to be unsatisfactory, and a crank was substituted -- an idea probably taken from James Watt, and enterprisingly adopted by Wasbrough and Pickard. In the words of John Farey: 'The engine then answered so much better than anything which had been tried before that the same principle has been followed ever since'. This was probably the first successful application of the crank to a steam engine in order to produce rotary motion. 
A patent granted to Pickard on 23 August 1780 for a 'new-invented method of applying steam engines to the turning of wheeles, whereby a rotative motion is performed, and the power of the engine is more immediately and fully applied... than by the intervention of water' was worded loosely and failed to define the method involved. There was apparently an agreement between Pickard and Wasbrough allowing the latter to use the crank, and the engine builder who was most incensed at the patenting of a device which he maintained had been known for centuries was James Watt. In any case, Wasbrough benefited little from either his invention or his arrangement with Pickard. He had entered into negotiations with the commissioners of his majesty's victualling office for the erection of an engine to drive a corn mill, and manufacture of the parts was well advanced, when for some reason they turned to John Smeaton for an opinion, and he recommended a pumping engine and water-wheel. This disappointment, coming at a time when he was already in a precarious state of health, is said to have accelerated Wasbrough's death from fever on 21 October 1781. He was survived by his wife. 
A notice of Wasbrough's death in the 'Bristol Journal' supports the view that had he lived he would have made an even greater mark as an engineer: 'The public have to deplore in him the loss of one of the first mechanics in the kingdom, whose early genius brought to perfection that long-wished-for desideratum, the applying the powers of the fire-engine to rotular movements' ('N&Q', 293). 
Ronald M. Birse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38111


Wastell, John (d. c.1518), master mason, was probably born 'c'.1460. He first appears in 1485 in Cambridge with 
In the early 1490s Wastell designed the central tower of Canterbury Cathedral for Archbishop John Morton (died 1500), whose links with Wastell may have been established when bishop of Ely. The great tower, completed before 1509, underwent dramatic changes during construction, resulting in a doubling of its height after Easter 1494. Two years later Wastell was styled master mason for the cathedral when admitted to its monastic confraternity. By this time, essential work was required on the nave, including the strainer arches and the recasting of the eastern piers. Wastell's last contribution to the tower was the fan vault, a work of consummate beauty and strict control. It resembles closely the vaults of the eastern chapels, or New Buildings, at Peterborough Abbey, after 1496, and the tiny Redmount Chapel, Bishop's Lynn, 'c'.1506 both probably attributable to Wastell on stylistic grounds. 
While in Cambridge in 1506, Henry VII determined to complete the chapel of his uncle Henry VI's scheme at King's College. Before leaving the city, Henry gave a reward to John Wastell, who was presumably present. Work began in 1508 and over the next seven seasons, the antechapel was built almost from the foundations, the choir completed, the vaults made, and the exterior finished. The work is recorded in a series of fixed-term, fixed-price contracts that make clear Wastell's architectural authorship and supervisory responsibility. The elevational design for the antechapel was inherited from the work of the first master mason, 
King's College chapel was completed in July 1515, by which time Wastell was perhaps fifty-five. His state of health may have been bad -- references within several of the contracts make provision for his death or possible infirmity -- and he seems to have undertaken no new major works after King's, though he designed a tomb for the duke of Norfolk in mid-1516, to be housed at Thetford Priory (lost). Other works attributable to Wastell on firm stylistic grounds include the south aisle of Great Barton church, Suffolk, 'c'.1490, the nave of Lavenham church, after 1502 (perhaps a workshop product), St James's Church at Bury, from 1503, and the tomb of Archbishop William Warham (died 1532), erected in Canterbury Cathedral in 1507. 
Wastell had at least two sons and several daughters with his wife, who was probably called Margaret. One son, Thomas, is mentioned in the Cambridge contracts in connection with possible profit sharing in the event of his father's death. Another boy, John, apparently the architect's son, was a student of civil law at Cambridge from 1503/4 -- Henry VII paid his exhibition in 1506 by way of reward. Judging by his will, the younger John died in 1515, recently married but with no children. He owed money to London and Cambridge booksellers and made bequests to several known Cambridge academics plus a gift for the adornment of King's College chapel. As for his father, in 1518 a 'widow of John Wastell' was permitted to settle in Westgate (St Dunstan's), Canterbury. In the same year the architect was described in Bury records as recently dead; it is possible that he was buried at St Mary's Church, Bury. As his widow lived within the archbishop's manor, her new residence may have been arranged by Archbishop Warham. 


@@@@@


doc= 38112


Waterston, John James (1811-1883), physicist and physical chemist, was born in 1811 in Edinburgh, the sixth of nine children, at least five of them sons, of George Waterston, a manufacturer of sealing-wax and stationery requisites, of Edinburgh, and his wife, Jane Blair of Dunkeld. He was educated at Edinburgh high school, was a pupil in a firm of civil engineers, and attended lectures at the university in mathematics, physics, and other subjects. 
At the age of twenty-one Waterston moved to London, working briefly as a civil engineer before joining the Admiralty hydrographer's department. From 1839 he worked as a naval instructor in Bombay, which left him time for his main interest, the study of science. Waterston's ideas were advanced but, being outside the scientific establishment, he was not always taken seriously. His theory of the meteoric bombardment as the source of the sun's heat was, through its being taken up by William Thomson, quite influential for a short time. His most significant paper, in which he developed much of the kinetic theory of gases, was refused publication by the Royal Society in 1845. Some years later better-known physicists developed similar ideas, which gained acceptance rapidly. Waterston, never interested in personal glory, did not try to claim priority, but J. W. Strutt, third Baron Rayleigh, rediscovered the paper and had it published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1892, with an introduction which belatedly gave Waterston due credit. Between 1845 and 1868 Waterston published papers in various journals, on the nature of heat, the behaviour of gases and liquids, related chemical topics, and on astronomical matters. Other of his papers, however, were rejected. 
In 1857 Waterston returned to Edinburgh to live an agreeable bachelor life among his family and friends. Through his family he was closely connected with the Sandemanian church but he does not seem to have been a member. On 18 June 1883 he left his lodgings and disappeared. It is surmised that he fell into the sea near Leith, perhaps overcome by the giddiness to which he was prone following an attack of sunstroke in India. 
C. N. Brown', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38113


Watts, Susanna (bap. 1768, d. 1842), writer and translator, was born in Leicester, and baptized on 5 July 1768, the youngest of three daughters (the two elder of whom died young from tuberculosis) of John Watts, the last of an impoverished genteel family (related to Alaric A. Watts), and his wife, Joan 'nee' Clarke (died 1807), an 'uneducated country girl' whom he had married for her beauty. Susanna's father died when she was a baby. To support her mother, she learned French and Italian in order to teach and translate. Her remarkable landscapes composed of feathers won a medal from the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce. 
Susanna Watts's first book was 'Chinese maxims, translated from '[Robert Dodsley's]' The oeconomy of human life, into heroic verse' (1784). Specimens of her verse translations of Tasso, 'Jerusalem Delivered', and Verri, 'Roman Nights', circulated to warm critical praise; but 'unforeseen circumstance' prevented their publication. She wrote a scholarly life to preface the Tasso, and clearly identified with his confinement and melancholy. She wrote for public occasions and for magazines, 'fagging and scribling whole summers & winters' (Watts, 'scrapbook', 2.166). Her 'Original Poems, and Translations, Particularly Ambra, from Lorenzo de'Medici' (1802) includes some items by others. Her pioneer guidebook, 'A Walk through Leicester' (1804), remained anonymous until her death. Maria Edgeworth mentions, in 1802, that Watts had sold a four-volume novel (untraced) to William Lane for 10 guineas and that Richard Lovell Edgeworth doubted her talent too much to recommend her to the publisher Joseph Johnson; Watts seems to have kept a copy of Maria Edgeworth's condescending letter. 
About 1806 Susanna Watts's mother became insane; next year a relative of her friend Elizabeth Heyrick secured her $20 from the Royal Literary Fund. Her mother died soon afterwards. She supported herself by teaching little girls, and, with Heyrick, won local fame for philanthropy: when slaves were emancipated in 1834, she was feted. She published in many forms (often with wit and playfulness) against slavery and cruelty to animals, and founded ('c'.1828) and held office in a Society for the Relief of Indigent Old Age. Her anthology of poems for children, 'The Selector' (1823), ranges eclectically from Alexander Pope to Lord Byron and Jane Taylor. A well-kept secret until recently has been Watts's 'The Wonderful Travels of Prince Fan-Feredin, in the Country of Arcadia' (1799), well reviewed in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. She translated this from the French of 1735 (reprinted 1788) of G. H. Bougeant. The book is a spirited and intricate blend of romance and mock romance. Watts's anti-slavery periodical, the 'Humming Bird' (twelve numbers, 1824-5), shows equal panache. The professed editors are the three sisters Truth, Common Sense, and Philanthropy; when the magazine passes comment on pro-slavery views, Philanthropy is represented as so angry that Common Sense has to censor her. With Elizabeth Heyrick, Watts initiated an abolitionist sugar boycott in Leicester in 1824 -- canvassing grocers rather than consumers -- and by June 1825 almost one quarter of Leicester's population had given up sugar. 
On Watts's death an anonymous memoir appeared in a volume of her 'Hymns and Poems' (1842). A better picture of her lively intellectual life emerges from her scrapbook. This begins with her Tasso and diverges into immense variety -- from poems (manuscript and printed, by herself and many others), mementoes, statistics, portraits (many of women writers), and data on Hindu and Arabic languages, to diagrams of the hold of a slave ship. She died in Leicester on 11 February 1842 and was buried at St Mary de Castro Church on 15 February. She was unmarried. 
Isobel Grundy', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38114


Webb, Benedict (b. 1563, d. after 1626), clothier, was the third generation in the trade, following his grandfather, a small clothier (who died in Kingswood, Wiltshire, in 1558), and a father and uncles who were more substantial men, collecting aulnage in Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, and Bristol, exporting undressed cloth, and importing logwood. Benedict worked under his father until he was sixteen; he was then apprenticed to a London linen draper and merchant in the French trade, and went abroad. For four to five years he was in Paris and Rouen, with occasional visits to Italy. He admired the quality of foreign workmanship and noted all new techniques. He had two foreign looms copied, and returned to England, setting up business in Taunton, where in 1589 he experimented with a multicoloured Spanish cloth, called medley, or 'Webb's' cloth. In or before 1595, following his father's death, Webb moved to Kingswood to take over the business, married Alice Trobridge, and had many daughters, and one son, Benedict. He traded with France in salt and cloth, and had landed and farming interests in the Vale of Berkeley and the Forest of Dean. His cloth trade encompassed a large annual contract with George Mynne, the London draper, for which he hired 500 additional workers. Webb expected in normal years a clear trading profit of $400, though his contracts with Mynne were the subject of lengthy dispute and actions at law which cost him dearly. He successfully negotiated the repeal of a clause in the statute of 4 & 5 Philip and Mary, c. 5, which seriously prejudiced west-country clothiers' interests (43 Eliz., c. 10), and was one of three who visited France to persuade the French to repeal, in February 1606, a decree prohibiting the import of English tentered cloth. 
This French visit gave Webb the idea of growing rapeseed for oil to dress cloth. He brought the model of a French oil mill to England, and set up a copy at Kingswood in 1605. In 1611 he was consulted by Londoners setting up the Londonderry plantation in Ireland, and showed positive interest in joining an oil-milling venture there. Milling at Kingswood expanded about 1618, and in December 1624 Webb received a fourteen-year patent of monopoly, claiming that he was the first inventor. His design of mill may have been original, but others had long been growing rapeseed in East Anglia and milling rapeseed around London. A lawsuit in 1625 disclosed that Richard Warner, a soap-boiler of Bristol, had a mill in Caerleon, Monmouthshire, and by offering double wages, had secured some of Webb's workers to build it. Webb was then growing at least 550 acres of rapeseed, and milling 20 gallons of oil a day. In 1626 senior west-country clothiers strongly commended Webb's oil, for cheapness, economy, and effectiveness, even on their best quality cloth. Webb, and others, stressed the amount of work he gave to the poor. 
Webb was an immodest publicist of his achievements, and amassed wealth but also large debts. Local creditors included his nephew, John Smith or Smyth of Nibley, who preserved Webb's autobiography among his papers. He was still alive in 1626. 
Joan Thirsk', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38115


Webster, George (1797-1864), architect, was born in Kendal, Westmorland, on 3 May 1797, the second of the three sons and third of the seven children of Francis Webster (1767-1827), mason, builder, and architect of Kendal, and his first wife, Janet (1771-1805), daughter of George Slater, yeoman of Kirkby Lonsdale, Westmorland. Where he received his training is not known -- an apprenticeship in a professional architect's office away from Kendal seems likely -- but as he did not attend the Royal Academy Schools it was probably elsewhere in the north rather than in London. On returning to become a partner in his father's business, he designed his first recorded work, Read Hall, near Whalley, Lancashire, in 1818 at the age of twenty-one and quickly appears to have become the principal architect member of the firm. He evidently then left his father to concentrate on the production of marble chimney-pieces and funerary monuments, which were his speciality. Thereafter during the 1820s and 1830s he greatly expanded the firm's architectural side -- following his father's death in 1827 he devoted his time entirely to architecture, leaving the management of the marble works to his younger brother, Francis -- and established a substantial practice in the north-west and the adjacent parts of Yorkshire. In 1827 he married Eleanor (1804-1867), daughter of George Lowrey of Ulverston, Lancashire: they had one son and four daughters, of whom one died young. 
Many of Webster's earliest works, including Read Hall and Rigmaden (1825), near Kirkby Lonsdale, are in an orthodox neo-classical manner which was also used by his father, but his principal contribution was as a pioneer in the scholarly revival of the Jacobean style. Two of his country houses, Eshton Hall, Yorkshire (1825-7), and Underley Hall, near Kirkby Lonsdale (1825-8), are among the very earliest examples of this idiom, as well as being notably accomplished productions which were singled out for praise in the preface to Henry Shaw's 'Specimens of the Details of Elizabethan Architecture' (1839). Subsequent examples included Moreton Hall, Whalley (1829; dem.), while a further dimension of his work was the occasional introduction of details of a localized vernacular derivation -- as in his unexecuted designs for a house in Rydal, Westmorland, for William Wordsworth (1826), which incorporated the cylindrical chimneys characteristic of traditional building in the Lake District. From the early 1820s onwards he also designed a number of churches in a conventional Gothic style, but in some of his later works, such as his alterations to Broughton Hall, Yorkshire (1838-41), and Flasby Hall, Yorkshire (1840), he experimented with the picturesque Italianate manner. 
In 1845 Webster took into partnership his assistant Miles Thompson, who had been with the firm since the 1820s, and shortly after that he virtually retired from active business. From 1836 he visited Italy on more than one occasion, but these travels appear to have been prompted more by recreational than professional pursuits -- he made a collection of Roman coins, medals, and other antiquities -- and perhaps also by the state of his health. In 1829-30, like his father before him, he served as mayor of Kendal, and in addition to the house he had built for himself in the town ('c'.1823) he had a country property at Lindale, Lancashire, which he inherited from his father, and he later built an occasional residence in nearby Grange-over-Sands. Webster died at his home, Ellerhow, Lindale, on 16 April 1864, leaving an estate of under $25,000, and a collection of his architectural drawings. He was buried in Lindale churchyard. 
Peter Leach', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38116


Welch, (Maurice) Denton (1915-1948), writer and painter, was born in Shanghai on 29 March 1915, the youngest of the four sons (there were no daughters) of Arthur Joseph Welch, a wealthy English rubber merchant, and his American wife, Rosalind Bassett. After spending an itinerant early childhood he was educated first at an eccentric preparatory school intended for the sons of Christian Scientists, St Michael's in Uckfield, Sussex, and later at Repton School, from where, at the age of sixteen, he ran away. When he was seventeen he returned to China for several months. 
Welch's original ambition was to be a painter, and in 1933 he enrolled at Goldsmiths' College School of Art. Welch's spell as an art student came to an abrupt end, however, in 1935, at the age of twenty, when he was knocked off his bicycle by a motorist. He sustained appalling injuries, including a fracture of the spine. Long periods of enforced solitude as a semi-invalid threw him back on the resources of his own imagination, and after reading 'Hindoo Holiday' by J. R. Ackerley, he resolved to write a semi-autobiographical novel, based on Repton and China. The result, 'Maiden Voyage' (1943), was acclaimed by Edith Sitwell, who contributed a foreword in which she wrote: 'This is a very moving and remarkable first book and the author appears to be that rare being, a born writer.' Welch's second novel, 'In Youth is Pleasure', recalling a summer holiday at the age of fifteen, was published two years later, and was dedicated to the memory of his mother, who had died when he was eleven. A number of Welch's short stories, all in effect autobiographical, were published during his lifetime, by Cyril Connolly in 'Horizon', John Lehmann in Penguin 'New Writing', and Peter Quennell in the 'Cornhill Magazine'. Within the space of only eight years, although desperately ill, and while painting and illustrating as well, he completed some sixty short stories, all published posthumously, three novels, and a quarter of a million words of journals. 
Because Welch was so isolated physically, and knew only a handful of fellow artists -- his friends did include John Minton, with whom he collaborated over the line drawings for 'Vogue's Contemporary Cooking', by Doris Lytton Toye, Keith Vaughan, and Graham Sutherland, a near neighbour in Kent -- Welch never attached himself formally to any school of painting, yet he became an almost unconscious and very prolific exponent of the neo-Romantic movement. He provided quixotic endpapers for his own first editions, which later became collectors' items, and his paintings, in oils, watercolours, and pencil, crayon, and gouache, were exhibited in the 1940s at the Leicester Galleries. After his death many were given away or sold for a few pounds, and he was largely ignored as a painter until in 1987 six examples of his work were loaned to an exhibition entitled 'A paradise lost' at the Barbican Art Gallery, devoted to the neo-Romantic movement. There are self-portraits in the National Portrait Gallery in London and at the University of Texas in Austin. 
The quality, quantity, and character of Welch's output as a writer were inevitably circumscribed by his relative immobility, and the restrictions this placed on the acquisition of new material and experience. But he was in any event fascinated by his childhood and adolescence, and by the time he died this juvenile field had been fruitfully tilled and probably exhausted. It is his interest in the minutiae of life and his shrewd and perceptive descriptions of people, places, and events that have left the most indelible impression on his admirers. His journals in particular constitute a moving memorial to a young man of integrity and moral courage, whose determination not to succumb to pain and humiliation was at times heroic. It took him four years to write his third, and posthumously published, novel, 'A Voice through a Cloud' (1950), an account of the accident itself and his struggle to convalesce. The manuscript was found beside his bed, complete except for about half a dozen pages, when he died, on 30 December 1948, at his home, Middle Orchard, Crouch, near Sevenoaks, Kent. During the last four years of his life he had been nursed by Eric Oliver, his partner for those years. 
Michael De-la-Noy', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38117


Werner, Alice (1859-1935), teacher of Bantu languages, was born in Trieste, then part of the Austrian empire, on 26 June 1859, one of seven children in the family of Reinhardt Joseph Werner (1817-1874) of Mainz, teacher of languages, and his wife, Harriett (1822-1904), daughter of John Taylor, a baker. The Sinologist Edward Theodore Chalmers Werner (1864-1954) was her younger brother. Alice's father, a naturalized British subject since 1852, indulged his wanderlust during Alice's first fifteen years, and thus she experienced a constant change of scene and sound, living in New Zealand, Mexico, the United States, and Europe, until the family settled in Tonbridge in 1874. 
Alice Werner was educated privately, and then attended Newnham College, Cambridge, from 1878 to 1880 as a Goldsmiths' scholar, but left, with no tripos, in order to teach at Truro high school. She also wrote for periodicals and undertook translating. From 1893 to 1895 she visited the Church of Scotland mission in Blantyre, Nyasaland, to do linguistic work and prepare school textbooks, and Pietermaritzburg, Natal, where she acquired Zulu and Afrikaans. Following the outbreak of the South African War in 1899 she gave private classes in London in these languages -- classes which were transferred to King's College, London, in 1901; in 1910 these were formally recognized by the University of London, the first British university to promote the teaching of Bantu languages (Swahili had been taught in Berlin since 1887). From 1911 to 1913 Alice Werner visited British East Africa on a Mary Anne Ewart travelling scholarship from Newnham. She spent much of her time in Swahililand, where she met the poet and scholar Muhammad Kijumwa al-Bakry, who provided her with manuscripts and information about the language and literature of the Swahili-speaking people. From 1913 she held a two-year research fellowship at Newnham, while continuing to teach at King's. 
After the School of Oriental Studies opened in 1917 Alice Werner was appointed lecturer and subsequently reader in Swahili and other Bantu languages (with her sister Mary as lecturer from 1918 to 1930). In 1919 she completed her London doctoral thesis (submitted in 1929), 'Introductory sketch of the Bantu languages', drawing on her first-hand knowledge of south, central, and east Africa. In 1922 she was promoted professor in Swahili and the Bantu languages, the first such chair in the British Isles; she then established the school's diploma in Swahili studies (1924), the first qualification of this kind in a British university. She was awarded a DLitt in 1928 by London University. When she retired in 1930, having served the school devotedly for its first twelve years, she was appointed CBE, and was awarded the silver medal of the African Society. 
Werner's editions of 'Utendi wa Ayubu' ('The life of Job'), subsequently reprinted in a Dar es Salaam newspaper, became the first of the Swahili epics to reach a wide public both in Europe and along the east African coast. Her publication of 'The Advice of Mwana Kupona' in 1934, a poem from northern Swahililand, was the first literary composition by 'an East African native woman' to be published in Great Britain. 'Myths and Legends of the Bantu' (1933) was probably her most popular book. 
Werner never met W. E. Taylor, whose obituary she wrote; while not rivalling his mastery of Swahili, she excelled him in her wide command of Bantu languages. Werner died at her home, 74 Parkway, Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire, on 9 June 1935. She was unmarried. 
P. J. L. Frankl', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38118


Wharton, Goodwin (1653-1704), politician and autobiographer, was born on 8 March 1653, the third and youngest son (there were also four daughters) of Philip Wharton, fourth Baron Wharton (1613-1696), and his second wife, Jane, daughter of Arthur Goodwin (d. 1643) of Winchendon, Buckinghamshire. His mother died when he was five. After a private education in France, which included a year at the protestant academy in Caen (1663-4), Wharton briefly sat as an MP in the parliament of 1680 as member for East Grinstead, before a hotheaded pro-exclusionist speech forced him to lie low. He became involved in business ventures, such as wreck-salvaging and deep-sea diving, though these proved unprofitable. 
On his father's death in 1696 Wharton inherited estates in Buckinghamshire. He had meantime become a JP, serving in that role until his death; he was elected MP in 1690 for Malmesbury and in 1695 for Cockermouth, and subsequently knight of the shire for Buckinghamshire, sitting until his death. Belligerently anti-French and anti-Catholic, he was a vocal supporter of William III, an energetic champion of whig principles, and a ferret of Jacobite plotters. Appointed first a lieutenant-colonel of horse in Lord Macclesfield's regiment, and then a lord commissioner of the Admiralty, he saw active service in the channel during the Nine Years' War before a stroke in 1698 put a premature end to his military career and probably hastened his death. He never married, but had an illegitimate son, Hezekiah Knowles. Though eclipsed by his elder brother, Thomas Wharton (later first marquess of Wharton), and cutting less of a dash than his two other brothers -- William (by his father's third marriage), the wit and gallant, slain in a duel, and Henry, the soldier politician who died young while campaigning in Ireland -- Goodwin Wharton nevertheless played no small part in post-1688 whig politics. 
If his public life was typical of the whig grandees of his day, Wharton lived a private life (at least in his head) that was bizarre in the extreme. An unpublished autobiographical memoir, kept from 1686 until near his death and running to some half a million words, reveals a florid fantasy life. He records his fury at being treated 'like a slave' and swindled by his family, while enjoying ambiguous sexual relationships with his stepmother, Anne Carr Popham, Lady Wharton, and also with Anne Wharton, the wife of his brother Thomas. He describes persecution by government agents during the reign of James II. He relates a lasting erotic liaison with a certain Mary Parish, an astrologer, cunning woman, and medium, with whom he lived in Long Acre, and by whom he claimed to have had progeny numbering 106. His autobiography tells of expeditions to Hounslow Heath, on the advice of Major John Wildman, to dig up buried treasure, of programmes of alchemical experiments, and of meetings with dignitaries from the fairy kingdom of the Lowlanders (whose queen, Penelope, he believed he married). He recounts his illicit amours with Mary of Modena, Queen Mary, and Queen Anne. Absorbing his father's deep piety, he believed himself to be in direct communication with angels and with the Lord himself, who had predestined him to be 'King of Kings and Solar King of the World', sent to repopulate his nation. Wharton's autobiography ranks high in the annals of psychopathology. He died on 26 October 1704. 
Roy Porter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38119


Whinfield, John Rex (1901-1966), textile chemist, was born on 16 February 1901 at Brambletye, Cavendish Road, Sutton, Surrey, the son of John Henry Richard Whinfield, mechanical engineer, and his wife, Edith Matthews. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School and Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he received a third class in part one of the natural sciences tripos (1921) and a second in part two in 1922 (chemistry). In the latter year, on 1 November, he married Mayo Elva (died 1946), daughter of the Revd Frederick William Walker. 
At Cambridge, Whinfield had studied the chemistry of man-made fibres, and on leaving university spent a year working, without pay, in the London laboratory of C. F. Cross and E. J. Bevan, who had first made viscose rayon in 1892. In 1923 he joined the Calico Printers' Association as a research chemist, at a time when the search was on in many laboratories for new synthetic fibres. 
In the late 1930s, with Wallace H. Carothers's nylon nearing manufacture, Whinfield looked for other classes of polymer which might yield a textile fibre. Assisted by James Dickson, he discovered how to condense terephthalic acid and ethylene glycol to yield a substance which could be drawn into a fibre. (Carothers had thought of investigating this route but had eventually concentrated on his polyamides.) The Whinfield-Dickson patent was filed in July 1941, but was suppressed for wartime reasons until 1946. It was then examined for commercial potential by both ICI (who eventually marketed it under the name Terylene) and DuPont (who called it Dacron). World manufacturing rights eventually fell to ICI. 
During the Second World War Whinfield served as an assistant director of chemical research in the Ministry of Supply. He joined ICI in 1947, first in its plastics division and then in the fibres division, a position which involved worldwide travel. 
Despite the importance of Terylene and its universal use as a textile fibre, Whinfield received little public honour for his discovery, his appointment as CBE (1954) seeming hardly adequate for his achievement. Possibly he might have published more, and not been content with the record of work provided by patents. His colleagues honoured him, however, by honorary fellowship of the Textile Institute (1955), and the Perkin medal of the Society of Dyers and Colourists (1956). The University of York gave his name to its chemical library and created some Whinfield travelling fellowships. Following the death of his first wife Whinfield married, on 31 July 1947, Nora Eileen Dawes ('b'. 1906/7), former wife of Reginald John Dawes, and daughter of Eric Hodder, architect. She survived Whinfield, who died at his home, 2 Castle Gardens, Dorking, Surrey, on 6 July 1966. 
Frank Greenaway', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38120


Whitaker, Laurence (1577/8-1654), politician, was, according to Anthony Wood, 'a Somersetshire man born' (Wood, 1.300), but he bore arms associated with the Whitakers of Lancashire. He may have been the son of Lawrence Whitaker and his wife, Cicely, widow of Robert Beale of Peterborough, Northamptonshire. He matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1593, graduated BA in 1597 and MA in 1600, and was incorporated at Oxford in 1603. He wrote verses for 'Crudities' and 'Crambe' (1611), by Thomas Coryate, and was associated with the Mermaid literary club ['see 'Patrons of the Mermaid tavern]. By 1611 he was secretary to Sir Edward Phelips, master of the rolls, who appointed him a clerk of the petty bag, a post he held until Phelips's death in 1614. He entered the Middle Temple in 1614 and went into the service of the earl of Somerset in the same year. His new patron was disgraced in 1615 and Whitaker may have suffered by association. From 1619 he was again in favour, securing a grant from James I of fee-farm rents in sixteen counties (1619-24) and then an appointment as clerk extraordinary to the privy council in 1624; he remained in office until 'c'.1642. Whitaker married, after 1613, Margaret (1577-1636), daughter of Sir John Egerton of Egerton, Cheshire, and widow of Thomas Hall of London. They had no children. 
Elected as MP for Peterborough in 1624, 1625, 1626, and 1628, Whitaker resided in Drury Lane (becoming a JP for Middlesex and Westminster) and Turnham Green, Chiswick, from 1624. In 1635 he missed out on promotion to the post of clerk to the privy council in ordinary, but a variety of commissions from the king and council provided many opportunities for him to pry into economic activities, maintain monopolies, and exact fees. Although a court agent, a consistent thread of his parliamentary career was his abiding anti-Catholicism and puritanism. Whitaker was a vestryman of St Giles-in-the-Fields from 1622 and supported a fund for building a new church. The threat from Catholics was constantly raised by him in parliamentary debate. In a speech on 25 June 1625 he linked the failures of foreign policies with the activities of domestic papists. On 6 June 1628 he raised the bogey of their 'flocking' in the suburbs, claiming that in his neighbourhood of Covent Garden they outnumbered protestants by three to one and had set up an autonomous community (Keeler, Cole, and Bidwell, 151). Again on 17 February 1629 he declaimed against this 'colony of papists' that was 'too strong' for 'we the ministers of justice' to 'cast out' (Notestein and Relf, 219-20). He opposed the Arminians and gave evidence (1628-9) to the Lords as one who had heard the notorious sermon at St Giles by the king's chaplain, Roger Maynwaring. His zeal earned him the nickname Holy Lawrence. Yet on more overtly political issues he was moderate. 
Whitaker's first wife having died on 1 February 1636, he married, by a licence of 6 February 1638, Dorothy (died 1671), daughter of Charles Hoskins of Holborn, Middlesex. In January 1641 he was returned as MP for Okehampton. The king thought he was as big a monopolist as those later expelled from the Long Parliament, but despite his earlier favour at court his puritan sympathies probably inclined him towards the parliamentary side and he soon turned away from the court. He signed the protestation in May, but was sent to the Tower for a week in July when his seizure of the papers of Sir John Eliot thirteen years earlier was brought up. Forgiven and rapidly advanced by the Commons' managers, he joined the important recess committee in September and chaired the inquisitorial information committee in January 1642. He continued to serve on commissions and committees, notably helping to draft the New Model Army ordinance in 1645, chairing the committee on church government in 1645-6, and agreeing to try the king, although he did not sit on the trial commission in 1648. An MP who fled to the army in August 1647, a member of the Rump Parliament, and a dissentient from the crucial vote for further negotiations with the king in 1648-9, he served the regime continuously in Middlesex and Westminster, supervising money raising and defence from 1643 to 1652 and 'judging scandal' ('DNB') in Suffolk in 1647. Whitaker kept a diary of proceedings in the house, mainly giving the sense of the Commons from 1642 to 1647, now in BL, Add. MS 31116. 
Whitaker died on 15 April 1654 aged seventy-six and was buried in St Giles, where memorials to him and his first wife were erected. He left a modest fortune, chiefly property and rents, to his wife. 
Valerie Pearl', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38121


White, Christopher (c.1650-1695?), chemist and laboratory technician, was probably born in Oxford, though his origins remain obscure. He is, however, known to be the boy 'Kitt' who in 1663, with his (unnamed) father, assisted in the experimental chemistry courses given privately at Oxford by the German alchemist Peter Stahl, under the patronage of Robert Boyle. He remained a trainee assistant to Stahl for about three years, and then served as Boyle's assistant for ten years, moving to London with him in 1668. 
Having returned to Oxford, White became on 21 April 1676 a privileged (tradesman) member of the university, championed by the mathematician John Wallis. His business was (and remained) making chemical medicines, but he was soon designated to run the university chemical laboratory projected as part of the Ashmolean Museum. Begun in 1679, the new institution was opened on 21 May 1683. White himself chose, and perhaps helped to design, some of its apparatus and furnaces. 
As 'operator', or university chemist, White's main duty was to demonstrate experiments and techniques in extension of lectures by the professor of chemistry -- Robert Plot until 1689, and then Edward Hannes. The first course began in September 1683. In addition, White was authorized to run a public dispensary from the laboratory, where he maintained a storeroom of chemical preparations. He was also in charge of a small library, to which he presented his copy of Joannes Zwelfer's 'Pharmacopoeia' (1653). 
In 1686 White was one of the stewards of the Oxford and Oxfordshire feast, and when the university went in ceremonial procession to meet James II the following year he deputized for the superior bedel of arts. From at least 1688 he was an acquaintance of John Aubrey, who lodged with him whenever he visited Oxford. Among references to White in Aubrey's letters, mentions of 'a rare medicine that he hath for the stone' (1689) and in 1694 of 'a good lusty vomit' (Powell, 209, 232) offer some insight into the nature of his pharmaceutical practice. 
From an early age White had been moulded into a new kind of professional chemist, combining the skills of the alchemist, the apothecary, and the 'philosophical' experimenter. This is reflected in his use of the new occupational title 'chemist'. He inspired the creation of Oxford's earliest ancillary scientific post, becoming in effect the first professional laboratory technician. A contemporary account describes him as 'skilful and industrious'. He did well financially, through the sale of medicines, yet there must have been disappointment, even before his untimely death, at the lack of real academic achievement in his laboratory. 
With his wife, Elizabeth (died 1724), White had two sons and two daughters. He trained both sons as chemist apothecaries, the older, Christopher, succeeding to his university post. No record of White's death or burial has survived. When he made his will in Oxford on 27 August 1695 he was already seriously ill, and he probably died shortly after. He was buried at St Cross Church, Oxford. 
A. V. Simcock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38122


White, Terence Hanbury (1906-1964), novelist, was born on 29 May 1906 in Bombay, the only child of Garrick Hanbury White, a district superintendent of police in the Indian police service, and his wife, Constance Edith Southcote Aston, the daughter of a judge on the Indian circuit. His parents later divorced, and at the age of five White was sent to England to be brought up by his maternal grandparents in St Leonards, Sussex. In 1920 he went to Cheltenham College, where the terrifying beatings had a permanent effect on his sexual development. In 1925 he went up to Queens' College, Cambridge, to read English. He obtained a second class (division two) in part one of the English tripos (1927) and a first class with distinction in part two (1929). 
After contracting tuberculosis White spent a year in Italy thanks to a fund raised by his tutor and lifelong friend, L. J. Potts, and he began to write a satirical novel, later published as 'They Winter Abroad' (1932), under the pseudonym James Aston. He returned to Cambridge and completed his degree course in 1929, submitting a thesis on Malory's 'Morte d' Arthur'. In the same year he published 'Loved Helen, and other Poems', started in 1926. For two years he taught at St David's, a preparatory school in Reigate, before being appointed head of the English department at Stowe School in 1932 by the school's headmaster, J. F. Roxburgh. White excelled in this role and for the rest of his life retained many of the attributes of the old-fashioned schoolmaster. He was a bachelor with sadistic fantasies, melancholy and prone to drinking bouts, but with an enormous capacity for new interests and enthusiasms. ('The best thing for being sad', Merlyn says in 'The Sword in the Stone', 1938, 'is to learn something.') It was during his Stowe years (1932-6) that White took flying lessons and acquired his passion for hunting, shooting, and fishing. Two early novels ('Earth Stopped', 1934, and 'Gone to ground', 1935), the satirical 'Burke's Steerage' (1938), and 'England have my Bones' (1936) all have hunting and shooting themes. When he resigned from Stowe in 1936 in order to become a full-time writer, White spent two years in a cottage near the school at Stowe Ridings where he fell in love with a young girl, and experimented with falconry, describing the latter episode in his most successful book, 'The Goshawk' (1951). 
In 1938 White published 'The Sword in the Stone', selected by the American Book of the Month Club, the first instalment of what was to become an Arthurian tetralogy entitled 'The Once and Future King' (1958). It was a brilliantly imaginative, and in parts satirical, account of the boyhood of King Arthur, loosely based on the work of Sir Thomas Malory. White put himself into the character of Merlyn, passing on to the young king his knowledge of wildlife and hunting. He wrote the second instalment, 'The Witch in the Wood' (1940), in Ireland, where he spent a fishing holiday at the beginning of 1939, invited by the novelist David Garnett, his mentor and friend. In the event he stayed there for six years, immersing himself in the special atmosphere of rural Ireland, which he found greatly sympathetic. At one time he half-seriously intended to become a Catholic. White's Irish impressions are to be found in 'The Godstone and the Blackymor' (1959), illustrated by Edward Ardizzone, and 'The Elephant and the Kangaroo' (1948), a fantasy about a second flood, with White as Noah. 
White agonized about helping the war effort and in 1941 applied to join the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve but his attempts failed, thereby exacerbating his sense of guilt and isolation. It was then that he decided to turn his Arthurian series into a satirical pamphlet attempting to establish the bases for a peaceful society: 'I have suddenly discovered that the central theme of 'Morte d'Arthur' is to find an antidote to war' (letter to L. J. Potts, Gallix, 'Letters', 117). Calling himself a 'Nostalgic Tory', he abhorred the post-war labour government and in 1947, after a surprise windfall of $15,000 when his children's book 'Mistress Masham's Repose' (1946) was chosen as the book of the month in the USA, exiled himself in Alderney, one of the Channel Islands. 
White completed two books of historical essays, 'The Age of Scandal' (1950) and 'The Scandalmonger' (1952), a translation of a medieval bestiary ('The Book of Beasts', 1954), on which he had laboured for seventeen years, and his 'Stevenson book for children', 'The Master', in 1957. In 1959 'The Once and Future King' was adapted for the stage as a musical called 'Camelot', by Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe. Starring Richard Burton and Julie Andrews, it opened in New York on Broadway and was an immediate hit. It was followed by Walt Disney's successful cartoon 'The Sword in the Stone' (1963). This sudden acquisition of wealth finally put an end to White's writing career and he became more and more morose. In 1962, he published a limited edition of 100 copies of 'Verses' (privately printed). Following a highly successful three-month lecture tour of America in 1962, described in 'America at Last' (1965), he was found dead in his cabin on 17 January 1964 at the port of Piraeus while crossing the Mediterranean. He was buried in the protestant cemetery in Athens on 20 January. He was unmarried. 
White was a tall, distinguished, bearded figure, 'looking like one of the Sikhs at Queen Victoria's funeral' (his own description). As the child of a drunkard father and a hysterical over-possessive mother he suffered all his life from sadistic impulses, guilt, and irrational fears. He was a natural recluse who found most human relationships difficult, and was deeply attached to his dogs. However, until his final period, he rose triumphantly above his handicaps. He was a master stylist, a sharp, satirical observer of the social scene with an unfailing capacity for taking up a variety of interests, and the ability to persuade his readers to share his enthusiasms, however out-of-the-way. The great success of the posthumous publication of 'The Book of Merlyn' (1977) -- which was on the 'New York Times' bestseller list for twenty-four weeks -- marks the beginning of a fairer appreciation of his novels in which intertextuality plays a very important part. 


@@@@@


doc= 38123


Whitelegge, Sir (Benjamin) Arthur (1852-1933), factory inspector, was born on 17 October 1852 in Manchester, the son of Henry Whitelegge, gentleman, of Tideswell, Derbyshire, and his wife, Ann Mason Carrington, of Carrington Hall, Cheshire. He was educated at Tideswell grammar school and from 1870 at University College, London. He took the London University BSc in 1874, and qualified MRCS in 1876. There followed a series of clinical appointments: as house surgeon to the Manchester Hospital for Children, then medical officer to the St Pancras Smallpox Sanitarium, and finally medical officer to the Sheffield Fever Hospital. 
Meanwhile Whitelegge continued to study, proceeding MB in 1878 and MD in 1881. He was particularly interested in infectious diseases and public health, and in 1881 he took the Cambridge University diploma in public health. In 1884 he was appointed medical officer of health for Nottingham. In 1889 he became county medical officer of health for the West Riding of Yorkshire, a post he combined from 1894 with the position of chief sanitary officer to the West Riding Rivers Board. In 1885 he married Fanny Marian, daughter of the painter John Callcott Horsley RA. They had two sons. 
In 1886 the Local Government Board appointed a commission to investigate Louis Pasteur's claims to have found a cure for rabies. Whitelegge's brother-in-law Victor Horsley served on the commission, and Whitelegge supplied him with pathological specimens from rabid dogs caught around Nottingham. He subsequently gave evidence to a House of Lords committee on muzzling dogs, which he had found effective in controlling the Nottingham outbreak. He went on to conduct epidemiological studies of the transmission and variation of several other epidemic diseases, which established his reputation as an authority in this area. In 1890 the first edition of his 'Manual of Hygiene and Public Health' appeared, and in 1891 he was appointed lecturer on hygiene and public health at Charing Cross Hospital medical school. He delivered the 1893 Milroy lectures to the Royal College of Physicians on changes of type in epidemic disease, and he served as examiner in state medicine to the University of London from 1895 to 1897. 
Whitelegge's knowledge of epidemiology, and his experience of public health administration in industrial districts, recommended him at this time to the Home Office, which was being pressed to reorganize its industrial health work. From 1893 he served on a departmental committee to review the collection and publication of factory statistics, and from 1895 on a committee of inquiry into anthrax among wool sorters. In 1896 he was appointed chief inspector of factories and workshops, the first medical man to hold this position. Under his guidance the factory inspectorate was greatly expanded and systematically reorganized, and the districts assigned to inspectors were redrawn to encourage closer co-operation with local authority health services. He served on the royal commission on arsenical poisoning in beer (1901), and on the Home Office committee on the lighting of factories (1913). In 1902, when the annual meeting of the British Medical Association first ran a section of industrial hygiene and diseases of occupation, Whitelegge presided over that section, and in 1913 he was elected a vice-president of the Royal Sanitary Institute. Whitelegge was appointed FRCP in 1898, CB in 1902, and KCB in 1911. 
By the time he retired in 1917, Whitelegge had proved himself a hard-working administrator. Punctilious and at times pedantic, he could appear abrupt and unfriendly. He was not physically robust and his main recreation was playing bridge and parlour games. He died on 25 April 1933 at Westminster Hospital, London, and was buried three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 38124


Whiteside, John (bap. 1679, d. 1729), museum curator and experimental philosopher, was born in Kirkham, Lancashire, and baptized on 2 November 1679, the son of George Whiteside, glazier, of Kirkham, and his wife, Margaret. He entered Brasenose College, Oxford, on 16 May 1696, and graduated BA in 1700 and MA in 1704. He took holy orders, and was subsequently chaplain of Christ Church, Oxford (from 1713), and absentee vicar of King's Walden, Hertfordshire. 
On 14 December 1714 Whiteside was elected keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. His dedication to his duties, and his cultivation of friends and benefactors, helped to consolidate the museum's reputation, both antiquarian and scientific. He restored its administrative and accounting systems and revived (though not thoroughly) the documentation of its collections, all of which his predecessor had neglected. He took special interest in the numismatic collection, rehung the museum's pictures, and made the library more useful and accessible to scholars. 
In the museum's lecture room about 1715 Whiteside began to hold courses of experimental philosophy, similar to those recently pioneered by John Keill in Oxford and William Whiston in London. For this purpose he built up at his own expense a large collection of apparatus, which by 1723 he valued at $400. In that year he extended his syllabus by adding architecture, magnetics, and astronomy to the standard topics of mechanics, hydrostatics, pneumatics, and optics. He was a keen astronomer, and two of his observations were communicated to the Royal Society by Edmond Halley. On at least one occasion, in 1720, he also taught a chemistry course. 
Whiteside was elected FRS on 3 July 1718. In 1721 he was an unsuccessful candidate for the chair of astronomy at Oxford. He was highly esteemed as an experimental philosopher: his courses had considerable influence, and were continued after his death by James Bradley. He was thus the founder of physics teaching at Oxford University. 
Whiteside moderated his obvious industriousness with a love of convivial drinking, gossip, and good humour. From 1715 he was a close friend of the diarist Thomas Hearne, who recorded various insights into his character. He never married, notwithstanding his 'great Affection' for Deborah Wrench. He died in Oxford on 22 October 1729, as a result of gangrene following a fall from his horse during a visit to his Hertfordshire parish, though he blamed his illness on 'drinking a pretty deal of bad small beer'. He was buried in Christ Church Cathedral. 
A. V. Simcock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38125


Wickes, George (bap. 1698, d. 1761), goldsmith, was born in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, and baptized there on 7 July 1698, the fifth of the six sons and the eighth of ten children of James Wickes, upholsterer, of Bury St Edmunds, and his wife, Dorothy Burton. No record exists of his education: he may have attended the grammar school at Bury St Edmunds or a charity school in nearby Hawstead maintained by a kinsman, Sir Dudley Cullum, who became his brother-in-law in 1710. 
Wickes was apprenticed on 2 December 1712 to Samuel Wastell, a London goldsmith, and made free of the Goldsmiths' Company by service on 16 June 1720. By 3 February 1722, when he registered his first maker's marks at Goldsmiths' Hall, he had set up in Threadneedle Street, a move made possible by his marriage on 9 January 1722 to Alder (died 1774), wealthy daughter of Samuel Phelpes, gentleman merchant, and his wife, Mary Aldworth, descendant of merchant princes linked with the East India Company and the Society of Merchant Adventurers of Bristol. 
In the early 1730s Wickes joined John Craig, jeweller, in Norris Street, Haymarket. The partnership was dissolved in June 1735 when he was appointed goldsmith to Frederick Louis, prince of Wales, and moved to Panton Street. He was made a liveryman of the Goldsmiths' Company on 13 March 1740. His ledgers, housed in the Victoria and Albert Museum, the only eighteenth-century working goldsmith's ledgers extant, date from 1735. They record purchases by clients, among them Sir Robert Walpole and Robert Butts, bishop of Ely, first cousin to Wickes's mother. This prodigious output engendered a network of subcontractors. 
Wickes's own 'oeuvre', lacking perhaps the soaring inspiration of Paul De Lamerie or Paul Crespin, nevertheless places him in the first rank. His Bristol ewer and basin of 1736 are two of the most original and historically important pieces of early English rococo silver. The great Leinster dinner service of 1747 was his swansong: no silver bearing his mark appears thereafter. That year he was joined by Edward Wakelin, who took charge of the workshop. He did not take Wakelin into partnership with him: that the childless Wickes reserved for his protege, Samuel Netherton, in 1750. The death of the prince of Wales in March 1751 dashed their hopes of royal preferment. 
Wickes retired on 11 October 1760 and was succeeded by his former apprentice John Parker in partnership with Edward Wakelin. Accompanied by his wife and Netherton, he moved to Thurston, Suffolk, where he died on 31 August 1761. He was buried in St Peter's Church, Thurston, where a memorial stone was erected. His firm continued to flourish. Robert Garrard joined it in 1780, followed by three sons: it became known as Garrard, the crown jewellers. 
Elaine Barr', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38126


Wilde, Henry (1833-1919), electrical engineer and inventor, was born in Manchester. He may be the Henry Wilde who was the son of Horatio Wilde and his wife Hannah, and who was baptized on 17 February 1833. At the age of sixteen, he was left without parents in charge of a younger brother and sister. After being educated in private schools, he was apprenticed to a mechanical engineer, and before the age of twenty-one had attained a position of responsibility in the works. At this time he was already experimenting with voltaic cells, electrical machines and kites, and the electro-deposition of metals. 
In 1856 Wilde established a business in Manchester as an electric-telegraph and lightning-conductor engineer, and spent some years on the development of a magneto-electric alphabetic telegraph, which was demonstrated at the international exhibition in London in 1862. In December 1863 he patented a twin-armature machine in which a magneto-electric generator provided excitation current for the field winding of another generator. These machines were made in quantity by Wilde & Co., but in use they had the disadvantage of becoming very hot. In 1867 he patented an entirely different type of multipolar machine, which was used for electro-deposition and arc lighting. Among his other patents was one in 1875 for the making of copper rollers for calico printing. 
Wilde nearly discovered the principle of self-excitation, but other inventors achieved it first, notably Charles Wheatstone and the Siemens brothers. In 1898, having since 1871 styled himself 'electrical engineer', he was elected an honorary member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, and the following year contributed the sum of $1500 to a benevolent fund for the benefit of their members. At the same time, he thought it desirable to submit to them an autobiographical statement, which was published in the 'Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers'. 
Wilde published many other papers in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society' and elsewhere, especially after his retirement in 1884, on a wide variety of subjects, including the magnetization of iron, atomic weights, the spectrum of thallium, the moving force of celestial bodies, aerial locomotion, and the velocity with which air rushes into a vacuum. He made arclights as searchlights for the Royal Navy (1874); after the 'Titanic' disaster in 1912 he strongly urged that mercantile vessels should be fitted with searchlights. He invented the magnetarium for reproducing the phenomena of terrestrial magnetism and the secular variation of the mariner's compass (1890). 
He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1866, and was awarded the Albert gold medal of the Royal Society of Arts in 1900. He had an honorary DSc from the Victoria University of Manchester (1900), and a DCL from Oxford University (1903). He was a liberal benefactor, during his lifetime and in his will, of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, the University of Oxford, and the Academie des Sciences, Paris. He died of heart failure 'accelerated by want of medical attention' at his residence, The Hurst, Macclesfield Road, Alderley Edge, Cheshire, on 28 March 1919. He had been a widower for twenty-six years, and had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 38127


Willans, Peter William (1851-1892), engineer, was born on 8 November 1851 in Roundhay, Leeds, the second of three sons and third of five children of Obadiah Willans, woollen manufacturer, of Leeds, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Tetley, farmer, of Topcliffe, Yorkshire. His early childhood was spent in Leeds; after a period at a dame-school he went to Leeds grammar school at the age of ten, leaving in 1867 to become an apprentice with the engineering firm of Carrett and Marshall of Hunslet, Leeds. 
Willans then moved to London in 1872, joining John Penn & Sons, a leading marine-engine builder, as a draughtsman. While at Penns he designed a high-speed steam engine which had all its working parts totally enclosed and splash-lubricated, a radical departure from contemporary practice. As Penns was not prepared to develop Willans's engines, he first formed a partnership to license other manufacturers, and then in 1876 joined Hunter and English of Bow, London, to develop and market the engine for marine use. However, boat builders were reluctant to install such novel machinery. 
Willans married Edith Ellen ('b'. 1854/5), daughter of Kyrle Money, a minister, on 11 December 1880; they had at least three children. Willans left Hunter and English and in 1880 went into partnership with Mark Robinson and founded the Ferry Works, Thames Ditton, Surrey, to build both engines and boats. The rise of the electricity industry created a new market for his engines, which proved so well suited to driving dynamos that by the time of his death over half the country's electrical power was generated by them. During this time Willans improved his designs and adopted advanced manufacturing techniques, pioneering the rapid assembly of engines from standardized, interchangeable components. He also conducted extensive tests on his engines, which demonstrated their high efficiency and gained him a reputation as a highly scientific engineer. 
Willans was a heavily built man with a satirical sense of humour, whose chief recreations were skating and fishing. Although staunchly against trade unionists after a strike in 1889, he introduced profit-sharing schemes for his workforce. 
Willans was awarded the Institution of Civil Engineers' Telford medal in 1885, and was elected a member in 1886. In 1888 he was also awarded their Watt medal for his paper 'Economy trials of a non-condensing steam engine'. He died on 23 May 1892 at his home, The Wilderness, Frimley Lock, Pirbright, Surrey, after being thrown from his dog-cart while driving to Brookwood Station. He was survived by his wife. 
Peter Turvey', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38128


Ste Barbe, William de (c.1080-1152), bishop of Durham, had obscure antecedents. He was presumably a Norman from Ste Barbe-en-Auge in Calvados ('arrondissement' of Lisieux, canton of Mezidon). He occurs at York as clerk and canon during the 1120s in the entourage of Archbishop Thurstan (died 1140); about 1135 he became dean of York, presiding as such in June 1141 when William Fitzherbert (died 1154) was chosen to succeed Thurstan. The reforming monastic prelates in the province, convinced that royal interference had imposed an improper candidate, fiercely impugned Fitzherbert's election. In March 1143 Pope Innocent II ('r'. 1130-43) decreed that its validity was to depend on Ste Barbe's swearing that it had been canonical; he had not made this oath by February 1146, when Eugenius III ('r'. 1145-53) suspended Fitzherbert. 
The political overtones to this imbroglio reflected the need of King Stephen to control the northern sees during the civil war, for David, king of Scots, the ally of the Empress Matilda, reinforcing his acquisitions in England north of Tyne, had in 1139 secured the earldom of Northumberland for his son Henry. When Bishop Geoffrey Rufus of Durham died on 6 May 1141, the Scots tried to intrude David's chancellor, William Cumin (died 1160), as his successor, and Cumin immediately seized Durham Castle and the bishopric's temporal resources. But a pertinacious local opposition, headed by Prior Roger of Durham and Archdeacon Ranulf (the nephew of Bishop Ranulf Flambard) persuaded Innocent II to order a free election, and to enjoin David to stop supporting Cumin. Escaping to York, the Durham electors there chose William de Ste Barbe as bishop on 14 March 1143, while he was absent attending the legatine council in London that excommunicated Cumin. Ste Barbe was consecrated in Winchester Cathedral on 20 June, and in August made his way to his diocese. At first he was sheltered at Bishopton, north-east of Darlington, by Roger de Conyers, the constable of the bishopric, and then moved to St Giles's Church at Durham; but Cumin's men were too strong, and Ste Barbe withdrew, first to Bishopton, then to a fortress at Thornley, near Kelloe, a few miles south-east of Durham, and finally to Lindisfarne. His difficulties in his bishopric caused him to excuse himself from the consecration of Fitzherbert in late September. Only on 18 October 1144, after gradually winning over Earl Henry and the local lay barons, could Ste Barbe be enthroned in Durham by Fitzherbert; it had been a savage struggle, though lurid partisan denunciations of Cumin's atrocities are probably exaggerated. 
Henceforward Ste Barbe depended on the sometimes exigent tolerance of the Scots, who still dominated the area politically. When it came to electing a successor to the deposed Archbishop Fitzherbert at Richmond in the North Riding on 24 July 1147, Bishop William opted for Henry Murdac (died 1153), favourite of the Yorkshire reformers, against King Stephen's candidate, though his ability to involve himself in the York election dispute was limited by the depredations of Earl William of York (died 1179). Ste Barbe's episcopacy was continuously troubled by local disorders, and he failed to attend the Council of Rheims, for which he was suspended by the pope. It was presumably Archbishop Murdac who released him from his suspension; grants to the Cistercians of Newminster and Augustinians of Guisborough, made 'at the intervention' of Eugenius III, show Ste Barbe opening his diocese to the influence of reformed monasticism, apparently to the alarm of the monks of Durham. Seventeen 'acta' survive from his episcopate, not all of them free from later tampering. Recording such acts as the settlement of a dispute over precedence between the prior and the archdeacon of Durham, a grant of land in Sherburn to the Durham hospital of St Mary Magdalen, and the dedication of the church of Finchale, they help to explain how, when he died on 13 November 1152, the bishop was in good repute for charity, learning, and prudence. However, a politically ineffective figure, Ste Barbe was less notable for those masterful qualities demanded by the circumstances of his exposed see. 


@@@@@


doc= 38129


William the Englishman (fl. 1179-1185), master mason, is known only from references to his appointment as master mason in the treatise 'De combustione' by Gervase of Canterbury. In this unique eyewitness account of the rebuilding of a major medieval church, Gervase details the process of reconstruction of the east end of Canterbury Cathedral following the disastrous fire of 1174. He recounts how masons were summoned from France and England to advise the bereaved community, and how from among these the monks chose a certain 
However, in the following year the Frenchman despaired of recovery and returned to France, to be succeeded by another architect, 'William by name, English by nation, small in body, but in workmanship of many kinds acute and honest' ('Works of Gervase of Canterbury', 1.21). William the Englishman's toponym was thus acquired to differentiate him from William de Sens and the fact that he did not succeed the latter directly suggests strongly that he had not worked previously at Canterbury under the French architect. Nothing is known of William's life before his appointment at Canterbury in 1179, nor after the completion of the building campaign in 1185. Attempts to identify him with other Williams with the same toponym who appear in documents of the period, such as William the Englishman who was the carpenter in the king's service in 1214, or William the Englishman who left 40's'. to Canterbury Cathedral priory in the same year, are speculative and provide no secure basis for his subsequent career. Nor have any other buildings been convincingly attributed to him on stylistic grounds, following his work at Canterbury. 
There is no reason to doubt Gervase's account in respect of the allocation of the parts of the church constructed by each of the two Williams. This firmly establishes the responsibility of William de Sens for the monks' choir and the presbytery, and of William the Englishman for the Trinity Chapel and corona. There is, however, continuing controversy over their respective contributions to the design of the building. According to one view, William the Englishman is seen as having sole responsibility for the design and the exceptional splendour of the Trinity Chapel, and he, therefore, should be credited with the principal stylistic innovations in this seminal building. It is argued that his work in the Trinity Chapel indicates familiarity with the latest developments in north-eastern France, the area in which both architects had worked, or even trained, and from where both architects brought sculptors and glaziers. The degree of accomplishment in the handling of the emerging Gothic style is seen in the open, skeletal structure of the outer walls; in the paired, classically proportioned, columns of the main arcade; in the treatment of the middle storey of the elevation as if it were a triforium passage, rather than openings into the dark roof space above the aisles as in the choir and presbytery; and in the use, albeit tentative, of flying buttresses, which are among the earliest securely datable examples. It is claimed that all these show William the Englishman's work to be more French than that of his predecessor. The unusual horseshoe plan provided a conveniently spacious ambulatory for pilgrims to circulate around the shrine of Thomas Becket; and the raising of the level of the floor of the Trinity Chapel allowed the shrine to be visible over the high altar, thereby forming a spectacular climax to the cathedral: a focus which was greatly enhanced by the lavish use of Purbeck marble, even for the arcade piers and the paving slabs on the floor. 
Against that interpretation, however, strong arguments have been put forward more recently that most of the architectural features in the part constructed by William the Englishman have their origins in the choir and presbytery built by William de Sens, and that the layout of the Trinity Chapel, at least, must have been designed by the Frenchman before his fall. The horseshoe form of the Trinity Chapel seems to be based on a nine-sided polygon -- the same geometrical configuration as the apse of Sens Cathedral -- and some of the crucial changes of intention concerning the projected form for the rebuilding of the old Trinity Chapel, as revealed by the archaeological evidence, can be shown to belong to the time of William de Sens. Moreover, the decision to raise the floor of the Trinity Chapel had such important implications for the prominence to be given to the shrine of the newly canonized Thomas Becket, that it could only have been made by the clergy, and is very unlikely to have been made by either architect. William the Englishman may thus have done little more than update some of the details in the execution of the existing designs of his predecessor. 


