@@@@@


doc= 38130


Brailes, William de (fl. c.1230-1260), manuscript artist, whose signature, W. de Brail', appears in two illustrated manuscripts of the mid-thirteenth century, is almost certainly identifiable as the William de Brailes named in five Oxford property deeds of 'c'.1230-1260. Although the documents do not specify William's trade, one deed names him as witness along with three illuminators, three bookbinders, and a parchment maker. He lived in Catte Street, approximately on the present site of All Souls College chapel, within the area around St Mary's Church where the Oxford book trade was concentrated. Differences of style within the manuscripts containing the signature show that he worked with several other artists. Art historians have concluded that William de Brailes was the head of a workshop of manuscript artists based at his tenement in Catte Street. 
Brailes's name implies that he came originally from Upper or Lower Brailes (Warwickshire), near Shipston-on-Stour. His signature in the manuscripts accompanies a depiction of a tonsured figure who does not wear the habit of any religious order. William was probably a clerk in minor orders. One of the Oxford documents mentions that he had a wife, Celena. 
Brailes and his assistants decorated about a dozen surviving manuscripts. These include several 'Bibles'; a psalter; sets of illustrated leaves which probably originally belonged to two psalters; and the earliest surviving fully illustrated English book of hours. The decoration of this group of manuscripts comprises full-page pictures, mostly of 'Old' and 'New Testament' scenes; historiated and ornamental initials; and colourful line-fillers which occasionally include representations of animals, birds, and fish. Characteristic of the workshop are long ornamental extensions to the initials. The extensions occupy the borders and frame the accompanying text. The figure style of the workshop is vigorous if somewhat coarse. Colours are subdued, with dark and light blue, brown, and pink predominating. 
Brailes also decorated one page of a psalter possibly made in London, and may therefore have spent part of his career away from Oxford. Paintings of four apostles and an angel on the vault of the chapter house of Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, are in his style. These may show that he occasionally worked as a wall painter, or at least supplied designs for wall paintings. 
William de Brailes and his workshop exemplify a significant development in later medieval book production. In the thirteenth century the decoration of manuscripts was passing out of the hands of the religious houses to artists who were grouped together within the towns and who worked for patrons both lay and ecclesiastical. The William de Brailes workshop in Oxford is the first workshop to which a name and a definite location can be assigned and whose products can be identified. 
Timothy Graham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38131


Williams, Evan James (1903-1945), physicist, was born on 8 June 1903 in Cwmsychbant, near Lampeter, Cardiganshire, the youngest of the three sons of James Williams, stonemason, a zealous Congregationalist, and a winner of many prizes for Welsh lyrics at local eisteddfodau, and his wife, Elizabeth Lloyd. Educated at Llanwenog national school and at Llandysul county school, he won a scholarship in 1919 to Swansea Technical College, which became the University College of Swansea in 1920, and where he gained first-class honours (1923) and, in 1924, an MSc degree. Winning a fellowship of the University of Wales in 1925 he went on to work with W. L. Bragg in Manchester, where he was awarded the degree of PhD in 1926. Then, with an 1851 Exhibition scholarship, he went to Cambridge, becoming a PhD there in 1929, and a DSc (Wales) in 1930. After a further spell in Manchester, a year with Niels Bohr in Copenhagen, and another in Liverpool with James Chadwick, he moved in 1938 to the chair of physics at Aberystwyth. 
Williams's research was mainly in atomic physics, where his theoretical studies of the impact of elementary particles on atoms were steps towards the discovery of the meson. Equally adept as an experimenter, he built high performance cloud chambers at Liverpool and Aberystwyth, and obtained some of the earliest photographs from which the mass of the meson could be deduced. The brilliance of his contributions was recognized by his early election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1939. 
In 1940 Williams joined the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough to develop new physical methods of detecting submerged U-boats from the air. In March 1941 as principal scientific officer he joined P. M. S. Blackett in the operational research section at Coastal Command, where his task was to improve the methods of finding and sinking U-boats. To attack a U-boat an aircraft had first to sight it on the surface. It was then the practice to drop depth charges with a setting of 100 feet on the assumption that the U-boat would often have had time to submerge. Williams showed that it would be much more lethal to concentrate on attacking U-boats which could still be seen on the surface with a depth charge setting of 25 feet, and ignore those which had time to submerge, because of the uncertainty in knowing their exact position. 
In 1941 Williams became director of operational research at Coastal Command. There he was particularly concerned with such questions as the size of convoys, which he successfully made larger, and the concerted offensive against U-boats in the Bay of Biscay on passage to and from their shore bases. Blackett later wrote that probably the anti-submarine campaign in 1943 was waged under closer scientific control than any other campaign in the history of the British armed forces. It gave rise to the term 'slide-rule strategy' and Williams was one of its foremost creators. 
Ebullient, and with a broad grin, Williams early sensed his own powers -- at sixteen he told a friend that he would have a fellowship of the University of Wales, an 1851 Exhibition scholarship, a DSc, and a fellow of the Royal Society by his middle thirties. All these came about, and such was his nature that this seeming conceit offended none. He had a special sympathy for the underdog, and he enjoyed hobnobbing with all and sundry. Of stocky build and great physical strength, and with blue eyes, bushy eyebrows, and dark brown hair, he had a passion for cricket and a lasting propensity for practical jokes, which may well have contributed to his success as a scientific strategist. 
In 1944 Williams learned that he had cancer. After a second operation in January 1945 he nevertheless visited Washington in connection with the Far Eastern war and, although dying, he wrote a scientific paper for the sixtieth birthday tribute to Niels Bohr. He died unmarried on 29 September 1945 at his parents' home, Brynawel, Cwmsychbant, near Lampeter, Cardiganshire. 
R. V. Jones', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38132


Williams, (Owen) Alfred (1877-1930), poet and writer on rural and industrial life, was born in South Marston, near Swindon, Wiltshire, the fifth of eight surviving children and the youngest of four sons of Elias Lloyd Williams (1849-1899), a decorative woodworker from Conwy, Wales, and his wife, Elizabeth (1850-1917), daughter of Joshua Hughes, tanner and smallholder of South Marston, and his wife, Ann. Alfred Williams's birth certificate gives his date of birth as 6 February 1877, but his mother always insisted that 7 February was in fact the correct date. His father left home when Williams was three, and his mother took on additional jobs, enabling her children to attend the village school. At eight he began working part-time on a local farm, and three years later left school to go there full-time. In 1892 he went to work in the Great Western Railway works in Swindon, principally as a hammer-man, and remained there until 1914. 
Williams began studying in his spare time in 1897 and taught himself Latin and Greek, enrolling in a correspondence course in English literature at Ruskin Hall, Oxford, in 1900. He married his childhood friend Mary Maria Peck (1880-1930), daughter of William Peck, moulder, on 21 October 1903. They had no children. In 1903-4 he started writing, and by 1907 his poems were appearing in anthologies. He received the patronage of Lord Edmond Fitzmaurice (E. G. Petty-Fitzmaurice) and published several volumes of poetry, notably 'Songs in Wiltshire' (1909), 'Poems in Wiltshire' (1911), 'Nature and other Poems' (1912), and 'Cor cordium' (1913). His best poetry is in his 'Selected Poems' (1926). 
In 1914 ill health forced Williams to leave the railway works, and he took up market gardening. He volunteered for army service in 1916, and served from 1917 to 1919 in India, where he taught himself Sanskrit. In 1920-21 he and his wife built their own house, Ranikhet, in South Marston, and the last decade of his life was spent writing and market gardening. Several awards from the Royal Literary Fund and the Royal Bounty Fund did a little to alleviate their poverty. 
Williams's most enduring work, his account 'Life in a Railway Factory' (1915), is informed by a keen sense of the cruel, alienating regime of the factory. In his books on folk life -- 'A Wiltshire Village' (1912), 'Villages of the White Horse' (1913), 'Round about the Upper Thames' (1922), 'Folk-Songs of the Upper Thames' (1923), and 'The Banks of Isis', serialized in the 'North Berkshire Herald' in 1925 -- he left, as he had hoped to do, 'a permanent record of the language and activities of the district in which I find myself'. They show an intense awareness of a fast disappearing way of life. His translation of 'Tales from the Panchatantra' -- illustrated by the future novelist Margiad Evans -- was published posthumously in 1930. 
A shy, self-effacing man, Williams was self-taught, and he showed an independent and determined intellectual curiosity. He had a good ear for language, and was a talented scholar, translator, and lyric poet. He received a civil-list pension in March 1930. Alfred Williams died of heart failure in the early hours of 10 April 1930, at his home in South Marston, after visiting his dying wife in hospital the previous day. He was buried in the South Marston churchyard on 15 April, as was his wife less than two months later. Memorials to him were raised on Liddington Hill in 1938 and on Barbury Hill in 1939. 


@@@@@


doc= 38133


Williams, Thomas (1737-1802), industrialist, was born on 13 May 1737, the eldest of the five sons (there were no daughters) of Owen Williams of Cefn-coch in Llansadwrn in Anglesey, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Thomas Lloyd of Hendre Hywel. He was put to the law, training as an attorney, and his brother John went into the church, indicating a family of means. Williams married Catherine, daughter of John Lloyd of Llanfihangel Tre'r-beirdd, about 1763. They had two sons and three daughters. 
Williams's early career in Anglesey was remarkably successful; he acted as attorney and man of business for important local families, especially for Sir Nicholas Bayly, for whom he was also political agent. In 1761 copper mines had been opened on Bayly's lands at Parys Mountain near Amlwch, but significant progress was only made from 1768, when a mass of easily worked copper was located which was soon worked under lease by Charles Roe & Co. of Macclesfield. A major lawsuit arose over part of the mineral area jointly owned by Bayly and by a lesser gentry family, whose entail devolved on the Revd Edward Hughes's infant son (later first Baron Dinorben). Williams represented the lesser family against Bayly, and his legal skill and tenacity were influential in obtaining a favourable chancery decision. Bayly's part of the jointly owned mine was by 1778 leased to a partnership of the Revd Edward Hughes (a 'sleeping' partner), Williams, and the London banker and East India director, John Dawes. From the outset Williams dominated. 
The full extraction of profits from the mine was hampered by the existence in the copper industry of a most powerful cartel, the Associated Smelters, who had controlled prices and profits and dominated the mining interest of Cornwall, the main copper-producing area, for decades. Williams broke the hold of the cartel by founding his own smelting, manufacturing, and sales establishment, with smelters at Middle Bank in south Wales and Ravenhead in Lancashire and powerful rolling mills and battery plant at Holywell in north Wales. In the early 1780s Birmingham experts working for him solved the problem of making hard cold-rolled copper bolts, and this patented invention in turn solved the problem of galvanic action in copper-sheathed ships which were iron-fastened. A great threatened market was thereby secured. The capture of the huge East India contract signalled Williams's market success over the cartel, just as Sir Nicholas Bayly's successor, Henry Paget, first earl of Uxbridge (father of the first marquess of Anglesey), decided to exploit the mines originally discovered with Williams as managing partner, thus giving the lawyer management of all the Anglesey mines. 
Oppressed by the low ore prices given by the Associated Smelters, the Cornish copper mines, led by John Vivian, with the assistance of Matthew Boulton and John Wilkinson (concerned for the steam-engine market at the mines), revolted against the smelters' power and founded the Cornish Metal Company, a cartel to purchase, arrange for smelting, and sell all the smelted ores of Cornwall. To avoid competition with Anglesey an agreement was signed between the company and the Anglesey companies on prices and a division of markets. Thus 1785 saw a revolution in the copper trade. By 1787 the Cornish Metal Company was virtually insolvent, due to gross business inefficiency, and Williams effectively took it over, controlling it until its articles of agreement expired in 1792. For five years he consequently exercised a remarkable monopoly of the national copper market. Declining mine output in Anglesey, opposition by Birmingham consumers, and an improving international copper market prevented the monopoly persisting, but Williams continued to influence the industry strongly until his death, and his activities were looked at by the select committee on the copper trade of 1799. At that time he admitted controlling an industrial capital of $800,000. In business terms his power was greater than any of the other industrialists of the period. 
Apart from the two Anglesey mining companies, their subsidiaries and branches, including a sulphuric-acid plant, he directly owned factories on the Thames, founded again with the Revd Edward Hughes as sleeping partner, and the Chester and North Wales Bank. He also operated a small fleet of ships, issued the largest and arguably the finest British token coinage, purchased the two-member pocket borough of Great Marlow, for which he was MP from 1790, and built there Temple House, designed by Samuel Wyatt. Williams died on 29 November 1802 in Bath, worth about half a million pounds. 
J. R. Harris', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38134


Williamson, James, Baron Ashton (1842-1930), linoleum manufacturer, was born on 31 December 1842 in Lancaster, the third of five sons (three of whom died in infancy) and the fourth of six children of James Williamson (died 1879), originally of Keswick, painter, decorator, and later oilcloth manufacturer of Lancaster, and his wife, Eleanor, daughter of Leonard Miller, innkeeper of the Blue Anchor, Lancaster. He was educated at the Royal Grammar School, Lancaster and at a private school in Cheshire. 
Williamson entered the family business, assuming personal control in 1875. He quickly expanded the business, which was based on linoleum, and he was the first to see the potential of the mass-production of this product as a cheap, effective floor covering. Cork linoleum was produced in Lancaster from 1887, and the firm rapidly became the largest of its type in Britain, with important overseas interests, including a factory in Antwerp, and major colonial markets. The Lune Mills factory in Lancaster grew to employ more than 4000 hands. Williamson's relations with his workforce were ambivalent. He behaved as a benevolent autocrat, but was reluctant to delegate, being suspicious and secretive. He kept hands in work after their most productive years and was reluctant to dismiss them when trade was slack. But his concern for profit margins kept wage levels low and he prevented the trade unions from recruiting among his workforce. He fought many battles with the early Labour Party in Lancaster, and it was alleged that he discriminated against socialist employees. 
Williamson used some of his vast wealth to provide permanent evidence of his beneficence. He developed the park donated by his father and provided an imposing neo-Georgian town hall in 1909. His best-remembered gift was the impressive domed Ashton memorial built on a site dominating Lancaster. Williamson donated more than $500,000 to Lancaster and about $100,000 to Lytham St Anne's, where he spent an increasing amount of time after 1913. 
Williamson's political career was not extensive. He served on Lancaster town council from 1871 to 1880 and was MP for the Lancaster division of North Lancashire from 1886 to 1895, when he retired to accept a peerage (as Baron Ashton), allegedly in return for a contribution of $10,000 to Liberal Party funds. He became high sheriff of the county palatine in 1885 and constable of Lancaster Castle in 1921. While in the Commons he was a staunch, if silent, Gladstonian Liberal. He later became a Conservative. 
From about 1913 onwards Williamson became a reclusive eccentric, shunning both London and local society. He was married three times. In 1869 he married Margaret, daughter of Joseph Gatey, draper, of Keswick, Cumberland; two daughters were born before she died in 1877. Three years later he married Jessy Henrietta Hume, widowed daughter of James Stewart of Clapham, Yorkshire, who died in 1904. His third wife, whom he married in 1909, was Florence Maude, daughter of the Revd Robert Daniel of Osbaldwick, Yorkshire, and widow of Colonel J. Lawson Whalley. Williamson died intestate on 27 May 1930 at his home, Ryelands, Lancaster, leaving a fortune of 9.5 million pounds, the largest intestate legacy in British history to that point. 
Eric J. Evans', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38135


Willys, Sir Richard, first baronet (bap. 1614, d. 1690), royalist army officer and conspirator, was baptized on 13 January 1614 at All Saints' Church, Hertford, the second son of Richard Willys (died 1625), lawyer, of Fen Ditton, Cambridgeshire, and the Inner Temple, London, and his wife, Jane (died 1629), daughter of William Henmarsh of Balls, Hertfordshire. The manor of Fen Ditton had been granted to Willys's grandfather Thomas Willys by James I in 1605. Educated at St John's School in Hertford, and Christ's College at Cambridge, matriculating in 1631, Willys was admitted to Gray's Inn in the same year. He had, however, already embarked on a military career in the Dutch service. He distinguished himself at the siege of Breda in 1637 and in 1639 was back in England, serving in the bishops' wars of that and the following year. He was made a member of the king's guard at Whitehall in 1641-2. 
Knighted at Shrewsbury, the headquarters of Prince Rupert, in October 1642 for his conduct in a cavalry skirmish, Willys was then appointed colonel of horse under Viscount Grandison, surrendering with him at Winchester in December and, like him, breaking his parole. By the autumn of 1643 he was major-general to Arthur, Lord Capel in Cheshire. Captured in a raid on the royalist camp at Ellesmere in January 1644, he spent nine months in the Tower of London before being exchanged. He returned to Oxford in October and by January 1645 he had joined Prince Rupert near Bath. 
In May, Willys was appointed governor of Newark and colonel-general of Nottinghamshire, Lincolnshire, and Rutland. But his enjoyment of this licence to plunder one of the richest parts of England was short-lived. In October the king arrived, pursued by Rupert, whom he had dismissed his service and forbidden his presence. Willys, in defiance of the royal wishes, marched out to welcome his old commanding officer. After scenes of tension memorably recounted by Edward Hyde, first earl of Clarendon, Willys was replaced as governor by John, Baron Belasyse, whom he at once challenged to a duel. He finally withdrew with Rupert and, like him, was at length formally reconciled to the king, being pardoned on 3 April 1646 and created baronet on 11 June. He then went abroad, mostly to Italy, returning to Fen Ditton in the summer of 1652. 
Willys's claim to fame, or infamy, rests on his membership of the Sealed Knot, the inner ring of six royalist conspirators, all of them, except Willys, aristocrats. Two indeed were peers, one the Lord Belasyse with whom Willys again quarrelled fiercely, perhaps even sending him a second challenge. The Knot came into existence about November 1653 and throughout its six years of intermittent activity achieved less than nothing. Younger, more daring conspirators, such as John (later Viscount) Mordaunt, regarded it with contempt if not positive suspicion. Willys, who was imprisoned in 1654 and 1655, in fact reached an understanding with John Thurloe, Cromwell's chief of intelligence, almost certainly by the autumn of 1656 and on his own admission by March or April 1657. In exchange for information Thurloe undertook that no royalist life should be taken as a result of it. The operation of the system is strikingly instanced in the secret visit to London of James Butler, marquess of Ormond, one of the king's chief advisers, in January 1658. He conferred with Willys, who duly informed Thurloe of his whereabouts, having first warned Ormond to change his lodgings, so enabling him to keep one jump ahead of the pursuit. In or before 1659 Willys married Alice (died 1684x8), daughter and heir of Thomas Fox of Warlies, Waltham Holy Cross, Essex. They had at least two children. 
On 3 July 1659 Willys was placarded on the Exchange as a traitor to the king. A few weeks later Samuel Morland, one of Thurloe's assistants, betrayed Willys to the king and Hyde, sending over letters whose hand they recognized. Willys was instantly denounced but many ardent royalists, including three of his colleagues in the Knot, refused to accept his guilt. Morland, a notoriously untrustworthy man, openly boasted of his skill as a forger. But the weight of evidence, including Willys's own defence, is overwhelming. His motives, on the other hand, remain anything but clear. On 15 May 1660 Willys was condemned but pardoned, on condition of never again coming into the king's presence or entering the verges of the court. He lived on quietly at Fen Ditton, where he was buried on 9 December 1690. His will, proved in December of that year, shows him to have been in easy circumstances. 
Richard Ollard', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38136


Wilson, Effingham (1785-1868), bookseller and publisher, was born on 28 September 1785 at Kirkby Ravensworth in Yorkshire, one of at least five sons of Joseph Wilson ('b'. 'c'.1734) and his wife, Jane Hutchinson. His father, the son of a Yorkshire grazier, had at one time been a journeyman packer in London. Wilson was named from his family having farmed under the earl of Effingham. He was originally intended for medicine, and was in part brought up by his uncle, the phrenologist Dr Thomas Hutchinson of Knaresborough. In London by 1802, he married Martha Hunt on 23 July 1804. He worked with James Asperne, of the 'European Magazine', Thomas Hurst, of Longmans, and perhaps Thomas Tegg, who witnessed Wilson's admission to the Clothworkers' Company on 7 February 1810. 
Wilson began in business for himself first near St Paul's, but by 1812 was firmly established at the Royal Exchange (where he remained for the rest of his career, apart from an enforced absence during the rebuilding of 1838-44). He became the determined champion of a free press: 'It is like the air we breathe: if we have it not, we die' ('In Memory', 36). Soon a familiar figure in radical circles, he assisted his fellow bookseller William Hone in preparing the famous defence to the triple libel trial of 1817. He published the notorious 'Church-of-Englandism' (1818) and the 'unpublishable' 'The Elements of the Art of Packing' (1821), both by Jeremy Bentham. He brought out T. Perronet Thompson's assaults on the corn laws, the 'revolting heresies' of William Godwin, and the social visions of Robert Owen. His edition of 'The Extraordinary Black Book' (1831) by John Wade, the 'Reformers' Bible', presaged the passing of the 'Great Reform Act' of 1832, for his services to which cause Wilson was granted a testimonial. His first wife having died, he married Maria James on 16 November 1822. 
Wilson also built a business as a specialist publisher of financial pamphlets and texts that continued under his son William and lasted until taken over by Sir Isaac Pitman & Sons in 1932. His list was wide-ranging enough to include illustrated books and travel books, as well as the first regular publications of both Alfred, Lord Tennyson ('Poems, Chiefly Lyrical', 1830) and Robert Browning ('Paracelsus', 1835). An advocate of progress in all forms, early in his career Wilson was the first in his area to illuminate his premises with gaslight, 'to the terror of his timid neighbours, and in spite of their prophetic remonstrances' ('In Memory', 29). He was on the first train into London and founded the earliest 'Railway Magazine' in 1835. He was also closely involved with George Birkbeck and the popular education movement, contending that each child should 'have that given to it which nobody can take away' (ibid., 28). 
Wilson was a fit and powerful man, a sportsman who also published the first cricketing classic -- John Nyren's 'The Young Cricketer's Tutor' in 1833. He boasted sixty years in London without a headache. Publicly a man who 'shrank instinctively from compromise' ('In Memory', 39), his private life was one of kindliness, friendship, and moving generosity. A particularly notable characteristic was his tenderness towards his many children (perhaps fifteen in all, of whom a son and five daughters of the first marriage, and two sons, including Henry Schutz Wilson (1824-1902), and two daughters of the second marriage are certainly known). Wilson died at 38 Mildmay Park, Islington, London, on 9 June 1868 and was buried at Highgate cemetery, on 15 June 1868. His obituary in the 'City Press', 18 July 1868 (reprinted with other tributes as 'In Memory of Effingham Wilson', 1868), claimed for him 'the longest career, and, we believe, the most independent, public-spirited, and fearless career, of any publisher of his time' ('In Memory', 7). 


@@@@@


doc= 38137


Wilson, George (1630/31?-1711), chemist, lacked, by his own account, 'the great blessings of academical education' save what he had 'fetched out of the fire' in his laboratory (Gibbs), and virtually nothing is known of his origins. His date of birth has to be inferred from the preface to the third (1709) edition of his 'A Compleat Course of Chymistry', in which he says that he was then seventy-eight. This work contains an engraved portrait showing aquiline features, evidently drawn in middle life. Wilson first emerges shortly before 1665, when he was established in London at the sign of Hermes Trismegistus, in Watling Street, as a maker of chemicals, largely medicinal. Later, from about 1690, he operated at the sign of Hermes Head in Well Yard, West Smithfield. He catered for 'Doctors of Physick, Apothecaries, Chirurgions, and others Studious of Physick or Curious in Chymical Operations' (Gibbs). 
During the plague of 1665 Wilson was kept busy supplying the potions -- many containing arsenic, antimony, and sulphur -- with which physicians sought to control the disease. Some of his colleagues succumbed, among them George Starkey, from whom he had acquired the recipe for his famous 'compound soap pills', which found their way into the 'London Pharmacopoeia' in 1746. The 'soap' was a mixture of salt of tartar and turpentine, blended with opium. In the 1670s Wilson developed a very popular 'anti-rheumatick tincture', initially to relieve his own affliction. Through these two remedies he attracted distinguished custom. That of James II, exercised through Wilson's patron, William Paston, second earl of Yarmouth, proved a mixed blessing. In December 1688 the mob destroyed Wilson's laboratory, believing, as he said, that he 'was preparing the Devil's Fireworks, purposely to burn the City and Whitehall' (Gibbs). 
From about 1690 Wilson also supported himself by giving courses of lectures on chemistry, mainly to physicians and medical students, claiming to have instructed 'many Eminent Physicians now living in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Italy, Germany, and Swedeland, etc.'. As a complement to these he published in 1691 his 'Compleat Course of Chymistry', rather similar to N. Lemery's 'Cours de chymie' (1675). Illustrated with engravings of chemical apparatus, it went through many editions and is a landmark in the transformation of alchemy, with its strong mystical element, into chemistry as an exact science. It was highly thought of by the natural philosopher Stephen Hales, and as late as 1746 it was revised by the pharmaceutical chemist William Lewis, then a fellow of the Royal Society, who recorded that he 'frequently had recourse' (Gibbs) to the earlier editions. 
Wilson is known to have married, for his wife, Mary, helped him and continued the business for a time after his death, but nothing is known of her origins or ultimate fate. His son Edward, who also for a time sold the 'anti-rheumatick tincture', died young. Wilson died in August 1711, probably on the 15th, and was buried in the parish church of St Bartholomew-the-Less on 17 August, but following an eighteenth-century reconstruction there is now no trace of his grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 38138


Wilson, George Washington (1823-1893), miniature painter and photographer, was born on 7 February 1823 at Brownside croft, Alvah, Banff, Scotland, the second son of the eleven children of George Wilson (1777-1848), a crofter from Banff, and his second wife, Elspet Hurd (1798-1883). He was educated in the local parish school (1830-35), but left at the age of twelve to be apprenticed to a local carpenter and house builder. During this time he developed an interest in art so strong that he gave up his secure job in 1846 and moved to Edinburgh with the intention of becoming a painter. Where he studied and with whom remain unknown, but when he moved to London in 1849 he became a pupil of Edward Henry Corbould, who had recently been appointed instructor of historical painting to the royal family. Following a brief visit to Paris in 1849, he returned to Aberdeen to establish himself as a portrait miniaturist. It was a brave choice of profession, as photography was beginning to have a profound impact upon this branch of the arts, being more fashionable, cheaper, and offering the promise of greater veracity. 
Wilson's debut as a photographer was in a brief partnership with his friend John Hay, the son of an Aberdeen carver, gilder, and frame-maker. Together they established a studio in Aberdeen, offering sitters a choice between painting and photography for their portraits. In the year they began -- 1853 -- Queen Victoria laid the foundation stone of her new highland home, Balmoral. Both she and Prince Albert believed wholeheartedly in the value of photography and through their patronage encouraged its early popularity. They commissioned Wilson and Hay to record building progress at Balmoral. This began a long association between the royal family and Wilson, who, over the years, undertook several commissions. A number of Wilson's photographs were used as the basis for the line illustrations of Queen Victoria's 'Leaves from the Journal of our Life in the Highlands' (1868); there was also an edition of the 'Leaves' illustrated with forty-two of Wilson's photographic prints. In recognition of this work he was granted a royal warrant in 1873. 
Wilson's skill as a photographer and entrepreneur lay in his understanding of the potential of the medium for providing ever-increasing numbers of tourists with photographic souvenirs of their travels. Initially he concentrated on Scotland, where the impact of railways had effectively opened the country for the first time to a large number of visitors. Once established in this field he began photographing throughout Britain, concentrating upon popular haunts and picturesque spots beloved by tourists. However, he rarely ventured into Wales, as this was the commercial domain of the photographer Frances Bedford. A combination of aesthetic judgement and technical virtuosity produced Wilson's celebrated views of the loch of Park, in 1859, which for the first time successfully rendered sky and foreground in a single exposure. Capturing motion in a photograph was a goal for many photographers: Wilson's views of Princes Street, Edinburgh, also of 1859, revealed to an enchanted audience pedestrians and traffic stilled by his camera. 
Critical acclaim at the 1862 International Exhibition in London and reviews in the leading art and photographic journals boosted sales of Wilson's photographs throughout Britain and overseas, and his was a household name when the craze for stereoscopic views was at its height. Unlike many other photographers who still regarded photography as a handicraft, Wilson applied the methods of the factory to the production of his prints. In 1864 he made and sold over half a million prints. Such was his success that he built new premises on the outskirts of Aberdeen in 1876 to cope with the increased demand. There he kept 45,000 negatives on file and a large staff, producing an annual output of several million prints. Despite constantly adapting to the market, the future of the company was threatened by the new printing technology which made it possible to print half-tone reproductions of photographs as postcards. It went into voluntary liquidation in 1902, nine years after Wilson's death. 
With one Isabella Johnstone, Wilson had two illegitimate sons in 1841 and 1844; although he and Isabella never married Wilson raised and educated the elder boy, Alexander Johnson Wilson (1841-1921), who became a well-known economist in London. On 15 December 1849 Wilson married Maria Ann Cassie, daughter of an innkeeper in Banff; the couple had five sons and four daughters. Wilson died on 9 March 1893 at Queens Cross, Aberdeen, and was buried in Nellfield cemetery there. He was survived by his wife. The largest collection of his work -- containing some 27,000 negatives -- is the George Washington Wilson Photographic Archive at the University of Aberdeen. 


@@@@@


doc= 38139


Wilson, Thomas (1792-1869), shipowner, was born in Hull on 12 February 1792, the youngest of at least nine children of David Wilson, lighter owner, of George Yard, Hull, and his wife, Elizabeth Gray. He was baptized at the Dagger Lane Independent Chapel. Apprenticed to John Wilson (no relation) of Wilson, Wilkinson & Co., iron merchants of 47 High Street, Wilson was a junior clerk and then a traveller in the Sheffield district, promoting the sale of iron ore to the local industrialists. In 1814 Wilson married Susannah, daughter of John West, wine and spirit merchant. They had nine sons and six daughters. In 1820, with a growing family, he decided to set up his own business. He opened a yard to receive consignments of iron ore, which he had arranged through an agent in Sweden, and contacts from his time employed as a salesman were invaluable in developing his trade. 
In 1821 Wilson joined in partnership with John Beckinton of Newcastle and set up an office at 14 Salthouse Lane, next door to the Hull branch of the Bank of England. The firm of Beckinton, Wilson & Co., iron merchants, was dissolved in 1836, but by this time he was investing in a fleet of sailing ships to carry his own cargoes. In a new partnership -- Wilson, Hudson & Co. -- he began a regular mail and passenger service to Goteborg, inaugurated on 2 June 1840. This was his first venture into steam, using vessels chartered from the St George Steam Packet Company. In 1850 his eldest son, David, became a partner and soon six brothers were to be involved in the firm in various capacities. His second son, John West Wilson, was a resident agent in Goteborg and eventually became a naturalized Swede. Charles and Arthur Wilson were made full partners in 1867 and were by this time effectively running the company, which they transformed from a major European enterprise into an international one with routes to North America and India. 
Thomas Wilson was first chairman of the Hull Underwriters' Association, founded in 1867, and spent much of his last years in various charitable enterprises. In 1863 he had given $1500 to the endowment fund of the Hull Seamen's Orphanage and he was appointed chairman in 1866. In 1869 he presided over its annual general meeting, his last public engagement before he died, a week later. Following the purchase of a rival company (Bailey and Leetham) in 1903 the Wilson Line became the biggest privately owned steamship company in the world. Wilson died on 21 June 1869 at his home, Park House, Cottingham, Yorkshire, and was buried in Hull general cemetery, Spring Bank. One son, Charles Henry Wilson (1833-1907), Liberal MP for Hull for twenty-five years, was elevated to the peerage in 1904 as first Baron Nunburnholme. Another son, Arthur Wilson (1836-1909) ['see under 'Wilson, Charles Henry, first Baron Nunburnholme (1833-1907)], master of the Holderness hunt, frequently entertained the prince of Wales at his home, Tranby Croft, scene of the baccarat scandal in 1890. 
Arthur G. Credland', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38140


Winnicott, Donald Woods (1896-1971), paediatrician and psychoanalyst, was born on 7 April 1896 at 17 Gordon Terrace, Plymouth, the youngest of three children and only son of Sir (John) Frederick Winnicott (1855-1948), merchant, twice mayor of Plymouth and later freeman of the city, and his wife, Elizabeth Martha (died 1925), daughter of William Woods. Winnicott's sisters, Kathleen and Violet, were five and six years older. The children grew up in an emotionally and financially secure family. Relationships with Richard Winnicott, Frederick's elder brother, and his wife, three sons, and two daughters, all living across the road, were close, and contributed to the liveliness and vivacity of family life. Sir Frederick had a simple but deep Wesleyan religious faith. 
Winnicott was educated at the Leys School and Jesus College, Cambridge, beginning his pre-medical training in biology, physiology, and anatomy in 1914, and graduating BA with third-class honours before starting his medical studies. Some Cambridge colleges had been turned into military hospitals and in Winnicott's first year as a medical student he helped in the work there. Despite being exempt from wartime service he interrupted his studies in 1917 and joined the Royal Navy, to serve on a destroyer as a surgeon-probationer. An experienced medical orderly helped to compensate for Winnicott's limited training. When the ship was in action there were casualties, but Winnicott had sufficient free time to tackle the novels of Henry James. 
On leaving the navy Winnicott continued his medical studies at London's St Bartholomew's Hospital, joining in a social life that included singing, playing the piano, dancing, swimming, rugby football, and listening to opera at the back of the 'Gods'. He worked hard, especially at children's medicine (not yet called paediatrics). Winnicott discovered Freud and decided to make psychoanalysis part of his life's work. He qualified MRCS LRCP in 1920, served for a year as casualty officer at Bart's, was admitted in due course MRCP, and in 1923 was appointed consultant at the Queen's Hospital for Children, where the London county council's rheumatic and heart clinic was based and of which he took charge for the next ten years. Winnicott first married, on 7 July 1923, Alice Buxton (1891-1968), potter and artist, daughter of John William Taylor, professor of gynaecology at the University of Birmingham. After studying at Newnham College, Cambridge, and war work, Alice trained at several London art schools. In the mid-1930s she acquired the Upchurch pottery, Kent, and produced the Claverdon range of tableware; as a painter she exhibited at the Royal Academy while her bronze bust of T. E. Lawrence is in the collection of the National Library of Wales. The couple were divorced in 1949 and Donald Winnicott then married, on 28 December 1951, (Elsie) Clare Nimmo ['see 'Winnicott, (Elsie) Clare Nimmo (1906-1984)], daughter of James Nimmo Britton, a Baptist minister. She later became director of child care studies at the Home Office. There were no children of either marriage. 
The year 1923 was an eventful one for Winnicott, as he was also appointed consultant at Paddington Green Children's Hospital and, furthermore, began his ten-year analysis training with James Strachey. In 1936 his work was supervised by Melanie Klein, whose influence in the British Psychoanalytical Society was substantial, and he underwent some further training from her close supporter, Joan Riviere. Winnicott was attracted to many of Klein's ideas but, characteristically, needed to think them through for himself in the light of his own clinical experience. In the process, ideas he valued, whether Klein's or not, often underwent alteration. Winnicott remained, as always, an independent thinker. He qualified as a psychoanalyst in 1934, and became a training analyst in 1940. However, in the early 1930s it became evident that child psychoanalysis in Vienna and London, under the leadership of Anna Freud and Melanie Klein respectively, was developing along different lines, and exchange visits failed to resolve disagreements. When the Nazis threatened to invade Austria, many psychoanalysts left for the United States and Great Britain. Klein's eminent position in London was threatened, a situation intensified after the 'Anschluss', when Anna Freud came to Britain with her father. A few analysts remained independent of either group, but tension and deep differences within the society led to the 'controversial discussions' beginning in 1941 and ending without agreement in 1945. 
Winnicott was regarded as a Kleinian at the start of the debate, but as time went on Klein was increasingly dissatisfied with his strong independence of mind, which became ever clearer. When, on reorganization of the institution, a split in the society was avoided, and contending (formalized) groups found a way of working together, Winnicott became unequivocally a member of the 'middle' or independent (unaligned) group -- a body diverse in its members' opinions. For all that, his influence within the society was wide and his freedom of action and association was demonstrated years later in an unforgettable dialogue with Anna Freud on a child patient, witnessed by an enthralled audience at her clinic. 
Winnicott's paediatric practice was strongly influenced by psychoanalytic thinking. A child, whether physically ill or not, was a person, motivated by thoughts, feelings, and fantasies, many of which were outside conscious awareness. Children understood Winnicott uncommonly well, and he engaged and played with them by using the child in himself, his open outlook, and his sense of fun, to turn a diagnostic interview into a mutually enriching experience. It has been said with only slight exaggeration that Winnicott didn't play with children: they played with him. 
Winnicott's complex theory of human development, often couched in a language of his own, defies brief summary, but one or two principal points may be made. Among these is the concept of 'primary maternal preoccupation' that, developing gradually, lasts for some weeks before and some weeks after a child's birth. For the mother, the baby is part of her and, in relation to it, she is in a state of heightened sensitivity. Emerging from this condition, and often completely forgetting it, she becomes an ordinary devoted mother whose mothering, in spite of her anxieties, is good enough: she is sufficiently in tune with the baby's needs to be able to meet them. To begin with, said Winnicott, 'there is no such thing as a baby', only a mother-baby unit, owing to the baby's total physical helplessness. The mother provides a 'facilitating environment', fostered through 'holding' (physically and metaphorically), that will see her child through the succeeding stages: through his growing awareness of the mother's part in meeting his needs to a sense of increasing separateness and independence. For all the importance Winnicott attached to the mother's facilitation, his views were rooted in observation and devoid of sentimentality and idealization of the mother's role. The father supports the mother in her creation of this environment, and also, as time goes by, has his own special functions in relation to the child. 
One of Winnicott's most enduring concepts is that of the 'transitional object'. His starting point was the clinical and everyday observation that a bit of cloth, a pillow, a rag doll, or similar object could become an indispensable possession for the small child. This inanimate companion provides an intermediate stage, by way of the thumb as surrogate nipple, between the mother's breast and the outside world. It is a move away from the mother, while still providing the comfort and pleasure that, hitherto, only her body could give. It can be stroked, cuddled, bitten, torn, and dirtied without fear of complaint or rejoinder. To the infant it not only has a reality but a vitality of its own. The 'ordinary devoted mother' knows well enough that the transitional object must not be changed or given up, except by the infant. In spite of further psychological growth, the object persists until, gradually abandoned, it is neither forgotten nor mourned. Its functions are increasingly taken over by what Winnicott saw as the whole intermediate territory lying between inner psychic reality and the external world. 
It is in this intermediate area, too, that play begins and, to this extent, is an extension of transitional phenomena. The child becomes preoccupied with his play; he manipulates phenomena and objects in the service of imaginative fantasy and creativity that is essentially satisfying. Playing involves the capacity to be alone in the presence of others. The child moves on to shared playing, and then to experience of, and interchange with, the culture around him. What happens if the mothering is not devoted and the environment not facilitating? If, say, independence is not encouraged and the mother impinges on the child's development by insisting that he follow her wishes and ignores his own, he may develop a false self, compliantly 'be' what he thinks others want him to be, and have no true sense of personal identity. Other possible dysfunctions are many. 
Winnicott was twice president of the British Psychoanalytical Society, president of the paediatric section of the Royal Society of Medicine, and, 'inter alia', president of the Association for Child Psychology and Psychiatry. He was awarded the James Spence medal of the British Paediatric Association in 1968. He was sparely built, had an aquiline nose, a strong chin, blue eyes, and large, attentive ears. He could be somewhat quirky, often endearingly so. He could be fun, but offended a few when he spoke his mind. Winnicott died of heart failure at his home, 87 Chester Square, London, on 25 January 1971. He was cremated, following a secular funeral, at Golders Green crematorium, on 29 January 1971. 
Winnicott contributed in many other fields, adolescence and delinquency among them, and his influence both within and outside psychoanalysis, in Britain and overseas, has been considerable. Many of those who work with children in the caring professions have found his ideas on child development of great value, and his striking apothegm quoted above -- 'there is no such thing as a baby' -- is still heard in many contexts. He was a pioneer of the 'therapeutic interview' with children and devised a method of engaging his young patient by drawing what he called a squiggle. This was an irregular line on a sheet of paper which the child was invited to turn into any kind of drawing he wished. This simple device was remarkably effective and widely adopted, and after Winnicott's death his wife, Clare, formed a highly successful group to commemorate and perpetuate his work, called the Squiggle Foundation. Open to a wide body of professionals, it is still very active. The concepts of the false self and the transitional object remain in wide use, and Anna Freud always expected the staff of her children's clinic to know, in a child under assessment, in what form a transitional object, if present, existed. The Winnicott Trust was set up posthumously to promote Winnicott's work by furthering the publication of those many papers that had not hitherto seen the light of day and by supporting the Winnicott research unit at Cambridge University, later moved to the University of Reading. 


@@@@@


doc= 38141


Wisden, John (1826-1884), cricketer and almanac editor, was born at Crown Street, Brighton, on 5 September 1826, the son of William Wisden, builder, and his wife, Mary. He was baptized at St Nicholas, Brighton, on 11 October 1826. Little is known of his early life, except that he had a brother, William, and a sister, Johanna Pechell, and went to Middle Street School, Brighton. In 1838 he went to work as pot-boy for Tom Box, the well-known wicket-keeper. He was quickly involved with cricket, first as a boy earning pennies as a longstop on the Montpellier ground, Brighton, and in 1838 he played for Eleven Youths of Brighton against Lewes. In 1845 he played his first 'great' match, for Sussex against Kent, and, on its formation in 1846, he became a member of the famous All-England eleven, the original and most reputable of the great exhibition teams. In 1852, with Jem Dean, he founded a rival combine, the United England eleven, and with George Parr he leased the Leamington Spa cricket ground in 1849. In the same year he became engaged to George Parr's sister Annie, but, unfortunately, she died. He played county cricket for Sussex (82 matches and 578 wickets), but also once for Kent and three times for Middlesex. With George Parr he organized the first English overseas tour to the USA and Canada, thus opening cricket's 'oceanic stage'. 
A tiny, slight figure -- hence his sobriquet the 'Little Wonder', after the diminutive 1840 Derby winner -- Wisden developed into a 'very fast and ripping' right-handed round-arm bowler. He took 681 wickets in first-class cricket, including all ten in an innings (amazingly, all were clean bowled) for the North against the South in 1850. But much of his work was done in minor cricket, and, for instance, in the seasons 1848-51 it has been calculated that he took no fewer than 1307 wickets, including 455 in forty-one matches in 1851. During his American trip he took six wickets in six balls, bowling underarm against teams composed of twenty-two men from the USA and Canada. 
Wisden retired in 1863, by which time he had earned the nickname of the Cardinal. Like other well-known professional cricketers of the age, he had already embarked on a small-scale business venture. He was cricket coach at Harrow School from 1852 to 1855, and secretary of the Cricketers' Fund Friendly Society from 1857 to his death. He was also to own The Cricketers public house at Duncton, near Petworth, Sussex, and in 1866 published 'Cricket and How to Play It'. 
However, Wisden's chief venture was the opening in 1855 of a cricketing and cigar business at 2 New Coventry Street, London, initially (until 1858) with Fred E. W. Lillywhite. It was from this 'Mecca for cricket lovers' that the first 'Wisden Cricketer's Almanack' was published in 1864, although that introductory offering was of a very general nature. In the next annual, all first-class scores were published for the first time; in 1867 the convention began of including the births and deaths of cricketers; and in 1870 descriptions of matches were contained in the almanac. There were competitors, but eventually 'Wisden' outstripped these rivals and emerged as the cricketer's bible. His reputation was a pleasant one. He combined considerable business acumen with a kindly disposition towards relatives, colleagues, and employees. 
John Wisden, who remained unmarried, died after a painful illness of cancer on 5 April 1884 at his home, 21 Cranbourn Street in Westminster, London, to where his business had moved in 1872. He was buried at West Brompton cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 38142


Witherings, Thomas (d. 1651), postal administrator, was the second surviving son of Thomas Witherings, a yeoman of Overton, Staffordshire, and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of John Fearne. Nothing is known of his early years or education but by the late 1620s he was apparently trading as a mercer in London, and like his uncle and his elder brother he acted as one of the harbingers to the royal court at Whitehall. This was a lucrative business which helped establish him in an estate in Essex, as well as a larger property in Northamptonshire. It also provided him with the opportunity to ingratiate himself in pursuit of further profit and favour. In 1632 he obtained letters patent for the office of postmaster for foreign posts through the patronage and friendship of one of the principal secretaries of state, Sir John Coke. Operating originally in partnership with William Frizell, and then alone from 1634, Witherings markedly improved the system for dispatch of the English posts on the continent, setting up fixed and regular posts where previously carriage had been entrusted to single operatives who travelled the whole distance themselves in order to make their deliveries. 
With Coke's support, Witherings in 1635 submitted proposals for the reform of the inland posts. These were aimed at greatly improving the speed of the service by the introduction of more horse posts, and also made carriage by the royal posts available for the first time to the paying public. In 1637, having overcome the opposition of the patent-holding master of the king's posts, Charles, second Baron Stanhope, Witherings was granted a new commission on 2 June as master of the letter office of England. He was authorized to implement some of his proposed reforms on key strategic routes, greatly improving communications between London, Dublin, and Edinburgh. Under the auspices of Coke's secretaryship, Witherings now held monopolies on the carriage of inland and foreign posts. 'So profitable and powerful a monopoly, however efficiently administered, could not last for long' ('DNB'): in 1640, with Coke's retirement, the financier Philip Burlamachi supplanted Witherings, who was accused of corruption. At the bidding of Robert Rich, earl of Warwick, the Long Parliament took up the former postmaster's cause, and he obtained restoration to the foreign posts. But in the event the inland posts were acquired from Burlamachi by Edmond Prideaux, who operated the postal system by statutory authority from 1644, exploiting its tremendous tactical potential to the advantage of factional interests aligned with the middle group and the Independents at Westminster. 
In 1649 and 1651 Witherings was accused of complicity in Lord Goring's revolt and the naval mutiny of 1648, as well as conveying money, letters, and intelligence to royalists overseas. He was acquitted on both occasions and it is clear that in the meantime he had resumed some formal role in the overseas postal service. His expertise was called on by the council of state, which sought his advice in connection with the establishment of postal communications with the continent. He died on 28 September 1651 while on his way to church in Hornchurch, Essex, and was buried in the chancel of St Andrew's, Hornchurch, beneath a memorial tablet 'Sacred to the memory of Thomas Witherings Esq. Chiefe Postmaster of Greate Britaine'. He was survived by his wife, Dorothy Oliver ('bap'. 1607), and by a son, Thomas, and a daughter, Dorothy. After his death his wife claimed recompense for the large part of her own personal fortune which she claimed had been laid out by her late husband in purchasing and developing the foreign letter office. 


@@@@@


doc= 38143


Witney, Thomas (fl. 1292-1342), master mason, is first recorded working as a mason on the building of St Stephen's Chapel in Westminster Palace in 1292-3 and 1294. He probably came from Witney, Oxfordshire, a manor of the bishop of Winchester, which may have been significant for his career. By 1311 Thomas and his wife, Margery, were living in Winchester and they acquired 6 acres of meadow at Michelmersh, 7 or 8 miles west of the city, which in November 1313 Witney granted to the cathedral priory, perhaps as a premium for a corrody. Some time between 1309 and 1327, a 'Master T. de W.' entered into an indenture with the prior and convent concerning the repair of the presbytery of the cathedral church. This must be Witney, for the feretory bay, with the eastern arcade and feretory screen, can be attributed to him on the strength of detailed comparisons with his documented work at Exeter Cathedral. 
A 'Master Thomas de Winton', who is assumed to have been Witney, visited Exeter in June 1313 to advise on timber for a new bishop's throne. On the strength of comparisons with more securely attributed work, the details of the surviving throne suggest that Witney was its designer. By Michaelmas 1316 he was master mason at Exeter Cathedral and until 1324 he was provided with a rent-free house. He also advised on the repair of the king's castle in the city, serving as one of two viewers of the works in 1323 and 1324. In the cathedral he was responsible for completing the crossing and building the nave, for the reredos and sedilia (1316-25), and for the pulpitum (1318-25), all of which share design features and moulding profiles. His work reveals on the one hand a pragmatic responsiveness to the existing fabric and, on the other, great originality in the design of vaults and tracery and in the manipulation of geometrical forms on different scales. 
Witney's fees of $6 13's'. 4died a year were paid until Michaelmas 1342, but by 1347 he had been succeeded by William Joy. In 1328 or 1329 the bishop of Exeter, John Grandison (died 1369), wrote to the prior of Winchester to obtain for Witney payment of a daily corrody and yearly pension which were due to him and in arrears. Grandison described him as a 'dearly loved member of our household and a valuable and willing servant to us and to our church of Exeter' (Harvey and Oswald, 339); and next year wrote to the abbot and convent of Sherborne to commend to them a young man called J. Sparkeforde, the son of Master Thomas Witney, 'whose industry is of special value for the repair and in part new building, by his skill, of the fabric of our church of Exeter' (Harvey and Oswald, 340). 
It has been argued on stylistic grounds that Witney was also the designer of the octagonal lady chapel in Wells Cathedral, which was in existence by May 1326 and probably built in the immediately preceding years. The innovative star vault and the tracery pattern recall aspects of his work in these fields at Exeter. As supporting circumstantial evidence, a 'Thomas le Masun', who may have been Witney, witnessed a document with members of the Wells chapter in 1323 and, in 1327, was a well-to-do resident in the town. By 1329 William Joy had been appointed master mason at Wells Cathedral. That Joy may also have succeeded Witney at Winchester, and certainly did so at Exeter, perhaps suggests a professional partnership. On stylistic grounds (vault patterns and tracery designs), Witney and/or Joy may also have worked at Malmesbury Abbey. 
The documentary and architectural evidence gives an unusually full picture, for the period concerned, of a master mason and his practice. In a career of at least fifty years, Thomas Witney was responsible for some of the most original building of the English Decorated period in the south and west of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 38144


Witt, Richard (1567/8-1624), mathematician, was baptized on 27 March 1568 at St Clement, Eastcheap, London, the only and posthumous child of Richard Witt (died 1567), salter, and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Dickenson, butcher. He was descended from a Northamptonshire farming family, his grandfather probably being William Wytt of Dene. His father died in November 1567, leaving his mother pregnant and in debt. In February 1570 she married William Smyth, embroiderer, of London. They had five children, two of whom were admitted to Christ's Hospital. Witt's own education is obscure. He may perhaps have been the Richard Whit or White who matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in 1584. He later became a freeman of the Salters' Company, like his father, but it is probable that his only occupation was as a mathematical practitioner. His continuing care of his mother was acknowledged when, in 1605, Anne Smyth, now a widow again, made her will, Witt being the main beneficiary: 'And whereas I do owe and am indebted unto my said son, Richard Witt, in the sum of seven pounds, which he at divers and sundry times disbursed and lent unto me in my want and necessity, and hath been alway a careful loving and kind son towards me, I do therefore give unto him...' In 1610 Witt joined with seven other London mathematicians in recommending a new book on accountancy and arithmetic, William Colson's 'A General Tresury... of Accounts for All Countries in Christendome', which was published in 1612 and contained the earliest tables of compound interest to appear in an English book. 
Possibly Colson's limited venture into this field inspired Witt to write his own much more comprehensive book, both the first to be written in English, and the first to be published in England, dealing solely with compound interest. Entitled 'Arithmeticall Questions, Touching the Buying or Exchange of Annuities' (1613), it delved deeply into the subject in a very practical way. The book was examined and corrected at the press by the author himself. It contained accumulation and discount tables based on 10 per cent per annum interest, which was the rate of interest usually charged on loans, together with a range of tables based on lower rates. The book contained 124 worked examples, the solutions to some of which were extremely elegant. In particular these demonstrated a knowledge of the equation of payments (whereby one series of payments has to be equal in value to a different series) which has since come to be a fundamental concept in actuarial work. They also showed a clear understanding of the difference between, for example, rates of 10 per cent per annum and 21/2 per cent per quarter. Witt made some remarks about the usefulness of arithmetic, pointing out that, although some businessmen managed to get by without such knowledge, 'it is as true that the blind drink many a fly'. The book was also one of the earliest publications to use a form of decimal arithmetic. A second, revised edition was published in 1634. 
On 3 August 1613 Witt married Helen Pennaunt, 'nee' Berry (died 1631), a widow about two years younger than himself, in the parish church of St Stephen, Coleman Street. He moved into her home, 'a small low messuage or tenement', on the corner of Coleman Street and London Wall. They had no children. Unfortunately the house had to be rebuilt about 1619 and this cost the couple almost all their estate -- $290. 
Witt died on 4 November 1624, presumably in London, and was buried next to his mother in St Clement, Eastcheap, four days later. In his will, written in his own hand, he donated some of his books to Oxford University and bequeathed to his servant, Thomas Painter, 'all my books and papers of Arithmetic and Geometry in English and all my copies written and printed and all mine instruments of geometry'. Many of his relations were left a copy of Calvin's 'Institutions' or a bible. He left $8 to the Salters' Company, for a supper on the day of his burial. 


@@@@@


doc= 38145


Wolf, Lucien (1857-1930), journalist and lobbyist, was born on 20 January 1857 in London, the elder son of Edward Wolf, pipe manufacturer, and his wife, Celine ('nee' Redlich). On his father's side Bohemian, on his mother's Viennese, Wolf may have spent his working life in London but it was critically informed throughout by his Jewish, central European roots. And not just socially. The central European revolutions of 1848, in which his father had participated and from which on their failure he had fled to Britain, remained the guiding force in Wolf's own political thinking. Economic and political liberalism combined with religious freedom and tolerance of the stranger were not only the forces which Wolf espoused as essential for general progress but were also the specific route by which minority groups such as the Jews could be emancipated, assimilated, and enabled to make the fullest contribution to society. For Wolf, Britain, the country of his father's asylum, was the model for this European, if not broader development (Mowschowitch, 'Life'). 
These convictions persisted throughout Wolf's journalistic career, which began while he was still in his teens. Educated at the Athenee Royal in Brussels as well as in Paris, he quickly developed an expertise in foreign affairs. Fluent in German and French and painstaking in his efforts to develop contacts in the chancelleries of Europe, he built up a formidable reputation from the 1890s onwards, particularly with the 'Daily Graphic', to which he contributed a regular 'Foreign office bag' column. He also wrote as Diplomaticus for the 'Fortnightly Review', for which he was later described as the foreign affairs spokesman for Lord Salisbury. His own boast that he was sometimes less an observer of foreign affairs than an instigator of them had a certain ring of truth: for instance, in 1898 he placed suggestions with Paul Lessar, a diplomat at Russia's London embassy, ostensibly approved by the foreign secretary, Lord Salisbury, for resolution of an incipient Anglo-Russian dispute over Manchuria. Wolf had his finger on the pulse of Europe's otherwise often very secretive and highly manipulative 'fin de siecle' diplomacy. And his articles were read in high places. 
Ironically, it was this insider knowledge at a juncture when British foreign policy was moving in a radically new direction towards engagement with the European pre-1914 alliance system which also ensured Wolf's journalistic downfall. Entirely and very publicly out of sympathy with Whitehall's growing pro-Russian, anti-German orientation, Wolf found himself increasingly unwelcome in the corridors of power and suspected of being too close to the German interest. At the outbreak of the First World War the charge was much more forcefully taken up in the right-wing press with accusations that Wolf was actually in German pay. Less public insinuations also had him as a spy, leading to his investigation by the special branch. These charges proved unfounded, but too late for Wolf's journalistic career, his twenty-five years of service with 'The Graphic' and 'Daily Graphic' being rapidly terminated. 
Paradoxically, this personal catastrophe triggered the most important and productive period in Wolf's life. He had always been closely involved in Anglo-Jewish life, most notably as editor from 1906 to 1908 of the 'Jewish World'. But for several years before 1914 he had also been giving expert advice to the Conjoint Foreign Committee, a patrician-led, Anglo-Jewish pressure group whose remit, primarily through behind-the-scenes diplomatic intervention, was to combat antisemitism, particularly prevalent at this time in Russia and Romania. Anxiety about the number of Jews fleeing to Britain from these countries was also a powerful goad to the committee's activity, and was discussed in his article 'Anti-Semitism' in the eleventh edition of 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1911). Now, in 1914, Wolf was effectively subsidized by the committee's two presidents, Claude Goldsmid Montefiore and David Lindo Alexander, to run the committee and to prepare for it an Anglo-Jewish foreign policy agenda for the expected peace conference. 
Dependent on the goodwill of a British Foreign Office unwilling to intercede with its Russian ally in favour of Russian-Jewish emancipation, Wolf tried another tack. He proposed in 1916 that the British government declare in favour of Jewish settlement and colonization in Palestine. This was a rather odd proposal coming from Wolf. Its tenor was clearly Zionist. Yet Wolf, in Jewish circles, was known as much for virulently opposing Zionism as for his more general opposition to the Anglo-Russian entente. True, he had briefly given his personal support to Theodore Herzl's Zionist programme in the late 1890s and had also supported Israel Zangwill's efforts in 1905 to seek a territory -- not necessarily Palestine -- somewhere in the world, where fleeing Jews could be settled 'en masse' under their own political jurisdiction. But when he had come face to face with some of the underlying ideological premises of the movement, particularly that assimilation was both incompatible with and contrary to the spirit of Jewish nationalism, Wolf became one of Zionism's most trenchant critics. His Palestine proposal of 1916 was thus primarily a clever subterfuge by which to gain the British government's ear and to bring it back to what he believed to be the central Jewish issue of the time, the security and well-being 'in situ' of its eastern European masses. Ironically, the British government did go on to take up his suggestions on Palestine though now as advocated by genuine Zionists led by Chaim Weizmann. The result, in November 1917, was the Balfour declaration. Meanwhile Wolf's Conjoint Foreign Committee suffered censure and closure from the British Jewish board of deputies, the more democratic of its two parent bodies, for its opposition to the declaration. 
Amazingly Wolf's position was actually strengthened early in 1918 with the creation of a new Joint Foreign Committee, this time with himself officially recognized as its foreign secretary. Not only was the Anglo-Jewish community unable to dispense with his expertise but in effect tacitly recognized his view that the Balfour declaration could not alone deal with the problem of eastern European Jewry. Wolf's reformulated peace agenda this time, notably influenced by his Russian adviser David Mowschowitch, included the proposal that Jews and other minorities in the newly envisaged post-imperial states of eastern Europe should be guaranteed rights of cultural autonomy as well as political citizenship. Throughout the Paris peace conference of 1919 Wolf laboured to have this formula recognized. A growing 'rapprochement' between himself and members of the British conference delegation, most notably James Headlam-Morley, who sat on the key new states committee, ensured that Wolf played a -- perhaps the -- critical role behind the scenes in formulating minorities treaties. It was undoubtedly his finest hour. 
Implementation was another matter. Wolf's last years were spent attempting to strengthen the juridical mechanisms by which the League of Nations might respond more rapidly and effectively to an ever increasing number of infractions of the treaties. He also laboured -- in vain -- to gain for minorities a direct right of appeal to the League secretariat. Even so, his diplomatic skills were sufficiently recognized that in 1925 he was called to Warsaw to act as intermediary in a dispute between Jewish parliamentary deputies and the Polish state. Dogged for years by almost complete blindness, Wolf was able to carry on working in this final decade through the support of his secretary, Margaret Kavanagh. From 1880 until her death in 1912 Wolf had been married to Frances Moses, daughter of Moses Moses of Maida Vale, London; they had four sons and three daughters. In 1923 he married Margaret. At the time of his death, in London on 23 August 1930, Wolf was due to succeed Fridjhof Nansen as president of the advisory committee of the League's high commission for refugees, a committee of which he had been a co-founder. 
Wolf is remembered as a controversial figure in both Jewish and more general society. Disliked by many British establishment figures for daring to criticize British foreign policy, his telling critique of Zionism also brought him bitter enmity from those like Weizmann who accused him of defending the undemocratic interests of 'the grand dukes' of which he supposedly was one (Wolf, 69; Weizmann, 199-202). Neither accusation was correct. Wolf was very much his own man. He openly supported the radical Russian-Jewish socialist Bund during the revolution of 1905 against the advice of Lord Rothschild, and mortified many more in the Anglo-Jewish establishment by helping the self-consciously maverick Zangwill to create the Jewish Territorial Organization, ITO. Nor was Wolf actually a wealthy bigwig but rather a member of an up-and-coming Anglo-Jewish professional elite which was making its own quite distinctive cultural mark on the late Victorian and Edwardian communal scene. His major contribution in this field was as co-founder in 1893 of the Jewish Historical Society of England, for which he wrote many articles and which locate him as the first serious exponent of Anglo-Jewish history. Many of these appeared posthumously in 'Essays in Jewish History' (1934) accompanied by an unattributed memoir of Wolf, largely written by his long-time assistant, David Mowschowitch. 


@@@@@


doc= 38146


Wolff, Gustav Wilhelm (1834-1913), shipbuilder, was born at Hamburg, Germany, on 14 November 1834, the son of Moritz Wolff, merchant, and his wife, Fanny Schwabe. In 1819 his parents, along with other members of the Jewish family, had been baptized into the Lutheran church. 
In 1849 Wolff left Hamburg to live with his uncle, Gustav Christian Schwabe, a partner in the Liverpool shipping line of John Bibby & Sons. He attended Liverpool College before being apprenticed to the well-known Manchester engineering firm of Joseph Whitworth & Co. He proved so able that he was chosen to represent the firm at the Paris Exhibition of 1855. On his return he joined B. Goodfellow Ltd of Hyde, on the outskirts of Manchester, as a draughtsman. 
In 1857 Wolff's uncle secured him the post of personal assistant to Edward Harland, the manager of Robert Hickson's shipyard on Queen's Island, Belfast. In 1861 he became a partner in the enterprise, which was named Harland and Wolff. Both his uncle and his mother made substantial loans to the new firm, which was already engaged in a large contract for John Bibby & Sons. At first Wolff's duties were to manage the yard and provide engineering skills; but later, through his links with the Jewish community in Britain and Hamburg, he was to bring a large amount of business to the yard. 
Wolff shared in the firm's success up to Harland's death in 1895, playing his part in the extension of the yard, particularly the construction of the engine works in 1879-80. When Harland and Wolff was converted into a limited company in 1888, he became a director or principal. By this time he played little active part in the business, devoting his attention to the management of the Belfast Ropeworks, which he had helped to found in 1872-3 with W. H. Smiles, the son of Samuel Smiles. Under Wolff's chairmanship, from 1876, the firm had grown quickly to become a serious competitor of the Clyde-based Gourock Ropework Company, the largest rope makers in the world. 
After Harland and Wolff extended the system of building on a cost-plus basis to the majority of their established clients, Wolff was influential in securing a connection with the Hamburg-Amerika Line, managed by the Jewish Albert Ballin. At the same time Wolff personally bought into the ailing Union Steamship Company, with its services to South Africa, becoming a director and winning its custom for the yard. He helped to negotiate the merger in 1900 with the Castle Line of Sir Donald Currie. He retired formally from Harland and Wolff in 1906, although effectively he had been a sleeping partner for over ten years. 
A Unionist in politics, Wolff was elected MP for East Belfast in 1892, and was returned unopposed at the next four general elections, until his retirement in 1910. In parliament he was a determined opponent of home rule. He was a very modest man, refusing to take any credit for the enterprise that bore his name. Although he came from a Jewish family, throughout his life he was a committed member of the Church of Ireland, giving generously to local charities. He never married and died at his London home, 42 Park Street, on 17 April 1913. 
Michael S. Moss', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38147


Wontner, Arthur (1875-1960), actor and theatre manager, was born in London on 21 January 1875, the eldest in the family of four sons and one daughter of Thomas Arthur Smith (1848-1920), partner in Wontner, Smith & Co., stocktakers in the City of London, and his wife, Emily Mary (1848-1923), daughter of Thomas Taylor Wontner, stocktaker. He was educated at the North London Collegiate School. His early life was regulated by strict discipline, his only contact with art being the family orchestra, to which each member contributed by playing a different instrument. His father intended him to follow his trade but, to his chagrin, his son chose to become an actor, supported by the odd pound from his mother. His father gave him nothing. 
Giving up the family name (confirmed by deed poll in 1909), he called himself Arthur Wontner and started his career in the theatre in Ryde, Isle of Wight, on 18 April 1897, in 'The Sorrows of Satan'. No manager or salary were recorded but he managed on his mother's contributions and joined Miss Sarah Thorne at the Theatre Royal, Margate, Kent, where he played thirty leading parts in eight months. He opened in London in 1898 in 'The Three Musketeers', and then toured for four years, adding fifty new parts to the first thirty. He was engaged by Herbert Beerbohm Tree to act in Australia, where he played in 'The Eternal City' (1903-5), and he returned to London with 100 parts ready for performance. The first was 'Raffles' (1906). He moved away from mere professionalism towards the art of a leading man in plays that required first-rate acting, performing in plays by Shakespeare, Oscar Wilde, H. G. Granville-Barker, Sir J. M. Barrie, and Ibsen. In 1929 Wontner went into management with Lady Mary Wyndham and then on his own. By his retirement in 1955 he had performed in over 200 plays. He also pursued a career in radio, television, and films, and he became famous in the role of Sherlock Holmes. His theatrical power emerges from the portrait by Alfred Cope at the Garrick Club of Wontner as Joseph Fouche in the Italian play 'Napoleon'. 
Wontner was twice married. In 1903 he married Rosecleer Alice Amelia Blanche Kingwell from Totnes, Devon, whom he met on the voyage to Australia. Her stage name was Rose Pendennis and she was the daughter of Henry Alfred Kingwell, who had an export business in New Zealand. They had two sons and one daughter. Rose died in 1943, and in 1947 he married Florence Eileen (died 1970), daughter of Thomas Lainchbury, businessman. Wontner died on 10 July 1960 at his home, 177 Holland Park Avenue, London. 
Marius Goring', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38148


Wood, John Turtle (1821-1890), archaeologist, was born on 13 February 1821 in Hackney, Middlesex, the only child of John Wood ('b'. 1779), from a Shropshire landowning family, and his wife, Elizabeth Turtle. He was educated privately and at Rossall School, and went on to study architecture under a tutor at Cambridge. In 1850 he was studying in Venice. After his return to Britain he was articled to H. E. Kendall, and practised as an architect in London, at Victoria Square, Grosvenor Place. In 1853 he designed a house in Oatlands Park for J. T. Darke. In the same year he married his first cousin Henrietta Elizabeth (1830/31-1906), daughter of Samuel Wood. 
In 1858 Wood accepted an appointment as architect to the Smyrna and Aidin Railway in western Turkey, designing stations on that line. But his great ambition was to discover the remains of the famous temple of Artemis (or Diana) at Ephesus, south of Smyrna, which had completely disappeared from sight in the middle ages. 
Accordingly, in 1863 Wood resigned his appointment and began his search. The British Museum agreed to get him a permit and to give him a grant, in return for any antiquities he might discover. In 1867, while excavating in the ancient theatre at Ephesus, he found an inscription in Greek referring to some gold and silver statuettes, which, on festive days, were carried from the temple to the theatre by way of the Magnesian gate. If he could find this gate, he reckoned that there would be a paved road leading to the temple. Late in 1867 he found the gate and the road. Following its course, on 2 May 1869, he found the wall of the temple enclosure. He now bought the site on behalf of the British Museum and set out to find the temple. He found it on the last day of 1869 under nearly 20 feet of sand. The excavation was far from easy. The ground was waterlogged, necessitating constant pumping, so that progress was very slow; but by April 1874 the job was considered done. The temple was a sad ruin, but Wood managed to recover a quantity of very broken sculptures and architectural features, which he sent back to Britain. 
In 1874 Wood returned to Britain. For eleven years, loyally assisted by his wife, he had worked under almost intolerable conditions. He suffered constantly from fever; he was frequently threatened by bandits and once nearly murdered; he was injured several times; he endured hot summers and cold winters and periodical earthquakes. In 1875 he gave four lectures on his discoveries at the Royal Institution, and 1877 saw the publication of his book 'Discoveries at Ephesus'; a second book, 'Discoveries on the Site of Ancient Ephesus', published posthumously in 1890, added little to the earlier work. He returned briefly to Ephesus in 1883, without, however, achieving any significant results. In addition to his architectural and archaeological activities, he was also an accomplished artist, and frequently exhibited at the Royal Academy. 
Wood was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1875, a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) in 1874, and an honorary fellow of the RIBA in 1878. In 1875 the British government awarded him a pension of $200 per annum in recognition of his discoveries at Ephesus. He had one son, who died aged thirty-two in 1889. This domestic tragedy probably hastened his own death from heart disease on 25 March 1890, at home at 66 Marine Parade, Worthing, Sussex. He was buried in the churchyard of Christ Church, Worthing 
R. A. Higgins', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38149


Wood, Nicholas (1795-1865), civil and mining engineer, was born at the farm of Daniel at Sourmires in the parish of Ryton, co. Durham, on 24 April 1795, the son of Nicholas Wood, tenant farmer. He was of a delicate constitution in early life, and lived with his uncle at Hallgarth, near Winlaton. As a pupil at the village school in Crawcrook, his abilities were so marked as to attract the attention of his father's landlord, Sir Thomas Liddell (later first Baron Ravensworth). It was to Liddell's collieries in Killingworth, Northumberland, that Wood was sent in April 1811 to learn the business of a viewer or colliery manager. 
George Stephenson was also at Killingworth at that time. He was fourteen years older than Wood, and the two were soon drawn into a lasting friendship by their common interests and ambitions. It was a tribute to Stephenson's opinion of him that his son Robert was apprenticed to Wood from 1819 to 1821 at Killingworth. Wood assisted Stephenson in the development of his safety lamp, which was first tested in 1815. He was closely associated with Stephenson in his experiments with steam locomotives, and in 1821 accompanied him to Darlington, where they met Edward Pease and discussed the projected Stockton-Darlington railway line. 
As a result of his experience and observations Wood was able to publish in 1825 'A Practical Treatise on Rail-Roads, and Interior Communication in General', a classic work of early railway literature, in which he discussed the various types of 'motive power' then in use: self-acting planes, fixed steam-engine planes, horses, and locomotive steam engines. The work appeared in three subsequent editions, in 1831, 1832, and 1838, considerably enlarged and brought up to date. In 1827 Wood's reputation in railway matters was such that he was invited to give evidence before committees of both houses of parliament on the 'Liverpool and Manchester Railway Bill'. In 1829 he was one of the three judges for the Rainhill locomotive trials on the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, won by the Stephensons' 'Rocket'. In 1845 he joined the 'battle of the gauges', taking sides with the Stephensons and the 'narrow-gauge' lobby. 
Wood's knowledge of coalmining and the geology of the north of England coalfields was such that his assistance was frequently called upon by mine owners and speculators, and he acquired interests in a number of mines in the area. Until 1844 he lived at Killingworth, but he then moved to Hetton Hall, co. Durham, and assumed the management of the collieries belonging to the Hetton Coal Company, in which he was a partner. He took a prominent part in official investigations of the coal industry, most notably with regard to safety. He reported to the select committee on accidents in 1835 that using men instead of children would, in many cases, mean that collieries could not be worked at a profit. He contributed to improvements in underground haulage technology, and was involved in the discussions leading to the 'Mines Inspection Act' of 1851. In 1855 he examined all the candidates for the new mining inspectorate. 
Wood was elected the first president of the North of England Institute of Mining Engineers (to which he subsequently read many papers) on its formation at Newcastle in 1852. He became a member of the institutions of Civil Engineers (1829) and Mechanical Engineers (1858), and a fellow of the Geological Society (1843) and the Royal Society (1864). Critical of the Royal School of Mines and its failure to link theory with mining practice, he attempted to establish a college of his own in the north-east in the 1850s, 'for the improvement and teaching of mining science, especially as applicable to coal mines' (C. Knight, 'The English Cyclopaedia', 1856). This unfortunately failed because of lack of financial support. Wood's most prominent characteristics were plain, practical good sense, perseverance in his pursuits, thoroughness in his investigations, and an equanimity of temper. Wood married Maria Forster, daughter of Collingwood Forster Lindsay of Alnwick, clerk to the magistrates of Northumberland. He and his wife had four sons and three daughters; but Wood was a widower some years before his own death on 19 December 1865 at 49 Sussex Gardens, Hyde Park, London. He was buried in the churchyard at Hetton. 
Ronald M. Birse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38150


Woodforde, James (1740-1803), diarist and Church of England clergyman, was born on 16 June 1740 at the parsonage, Ansford, Somerset, the sixth child in the family of four sons (one of whom died in childhood) and three daughters of the Revd Samuel Woodforde (1695-1771), rector of Ansford and vicar of the neighbouring parish of Castle Cary, and his wife, Jane Collins ('bap'. 1706, died 1766). She belonged to a family domiciled in that part of Somerset for at least two centuries. The Woodfordes, on the other hand, came originally from Northamptonshire, making the transition from small, open-field farmers to professional men in the seventeenth century; their association with the Anglican church was already three generations old when James was born. 
After attending two preparatory schools Woodforde was admitted as a scholar on the foundation of Winchester College in 1752. In his final year, 1758, he was seventh on the roll 'ad Oxon' which regulated the transfer to the sister foundation of New College, Oxford. As his place there was not assured, he was provisionally enrolled at another college, Oriel, and his father apparently helped out with a little judicious bribery. On 21 July 1759 he was able to celebrate by writing the first line of a diary: 'Made a Scholar of New-College.' In 1763 he was ordained and graduated BA, proceeding MA in 1767, and BD in 1775. 
For ten years after graduation Woodforde worked as a curate in Somerset, most of that time assisting his father. He never married but in his thirties was sufficiently attracted by Elizabeth, or Betsy, White, a relative through marriage, to make her a cautiously guarded proposal. When he returned to university in 1773 it was with the intention of claiming the first suitable benefice in the gift of New College to become vacant. But Betsy did not wait for this, and married a man far richer than himself. Woodforde's reaction reveals less sorrow or grief than a sort of irritated pique. 'She has behaved to me like a mere Jilt', he told his diary. Meanwhile he became sub-warden of his college, and a pro-proctor. Late in 1774 he was presented to the living of Weston Longville, Norfolk, a well-endowed preferment worth some $400 a year. In April 1776 he resigned his fellowship and went to live there, residing in the parish for the rest of his life, a quiet existence interrupted only by journeys to see his relatives in the west, on average once every three years. He was a gregarious, hospitable man, and kind-hearted, although his charities represented only an inconsiderable fraction of his income, largely derived from tithe. He seems not to have possessed a markedly religious temperament, and most of his concerns were those he could share with lay people, although his closest friends were fellow clerics. 
Woodforde was a very ordinary man. He read little, and his exclusively classical education left only the faintest impression on his mind. His one outstanding characteristic is that he wrote his diary, the work of a lifetime. After the first few weeks he settled down to making an entry each day, and kept this up for forty-three years. The diary was unknown until selections were published by Oxford University Press under the title 'The Diary of a Country Parson' (5 vols., 1924-31). In this edition Woodforde was made into a semi-comic figure, acquiring a reputation he has never quite lost. Food and drink were given so much editorial prominence that an unwary reader might well be left with the impression that Woodforde produced little more than a chronicle of gluttony. Later work on the diary has shown that its great virtue lies in its value as primary source material for the social and domestic history of its era and, for the general reader, in the incomparably vivid picture of country life and manners. Woodforde's manner of writing -- one hesitates to call it a style -- is the opposite of the antithetical, heavily Latinized literary prose of its time. It is very plain, simple, and lucid, having more in common with the speech rhythms of its day than with the elaboration of fine writing. 
Although Woodforde has much to say about trivial indispositions, he was a healthy man until well past fifty. In 1797 he was afflicted by a more serious disease, possibly a stroke, from the effects of which he never recovered, although he continued to write his diary every day. It ends with an incomplete entry for 17 October 1802, appropriately noting: 'Dinner to day rost Beef' (Winstanley). He died at the parsonage on 1 January 1803 and was buried on 5 January inside Weston Longville church, beneath the chancel. 




@@@@@


doc= 38151


Woods, Samuel Moses James (1867-1931), cricketer, was born at Glenfield, near Sydney, Australia, on 4 April 1867, fourth son in the family of five sons and seven daughters of John Woods and his wife, Margaret. His parents came from co. Antrim and, after their marriage in 1853, decided to seek their fortune in Australia. John Woods prospered in business and settled in Sydney, where Sammy received his first education at Royston College and Sydney grammar school. He soon developed a passion for cricket: his most remarkable feat at school was to take seven wickets in seven balls. 
Their father took Sammy Woods and a younger brother, Harris, to Britain in 1884, when Sammy was sixteen. He went to Silwood House School in Tunbridge Wells and on to Brighton College. There his all-round sporting prowess flowered from a base provided for him by a banker friend of his father's, Gilbert Burrington of Bridgwater, who became in effect Sammy's guardian. It is not clear how he got into Cambridge in 1888 for he was, notoriously, not at all bookish and had been turned down by Oxford. After four years' residence -- 'four of the jolliest years of my life' (Woods, 30) -- he left the university without taking a degree (1891). But as an undergraduate at Jesus College he had an immediate impact on university cricket, winning four cricket blues and playing a decisive role in three Cambridge victories. He took thirty-six wickets at an average of less than 9 and Oxford scarcely managed an innings over 100 in any of the matches in which he played. While still an undergraduate he played three test matches for Australia against England (1888) and eight matches for the Gentlemen v. the Players. In 1891, playing for Cambridge, he took fourteen Surrey wickets for 11 runs each. His rugby football prowess was also outstanding; he was a Cambridge rugby blue 1888-90, and played thirteen times for England between 1890 and 1895, leading England to the triple crown as captain in 1895. 
It is as a Somerset cricketer that Woods is now best remembered. Between 1886 and 1910 he played in 299 matches for the county. He, virtually alone, ensured first-class status for Somerset and led them through their difficult early years. He scored 12,637 runs for his county, took 556 wickets, and was a brilliant fielder. Many of his finest performances were against the best sides, notably Yorkshire, Surrey, and Sussex: in 1895 he scored 215 against Sussex in two and a half hours. He played three tests for England in South Africa in 1895-6, thus joining the small band of men who have played test cricket for more than one country. He toured abroad under Lord Hawke to America twice, South Africa, and the West Indies. One of the greatest amateur fast bowlers during cricket's 'golden age' at the turn of the twentieth century, with a deadly yorker and a deceptive slower delivery, he had career statistics of 1040 wickets (at 20.82) and 15,345 runs (at 23.42). 
Woods was famous for his sportsmanship (he loathed draws and always went for a win), his courage, his cheerful manner, and, standing over 6 feet tall and weighing 131/2 stone, his fine physique. Gilbert Jessop called him 'the personification of pluck and good fellowship' (Woods, 6). His inability to settle down to a gainful occupation which would support him as an amateur player caused Somerset to appoint him assistant secretary, at a salary of $200 a year, in 1898. His playing career was ended by arthritis in 1911. At the outbreak of the First World War he was in his forty-eighth year and had difficulty persuading the army to take him. Eventually a friend at headquarters got him a commission in the Somerset light infantry; later he was transferred to the 20th Devons and served in the labour corps. Somerset made him club secretary in 1920. Paperwork was not his forte and an outcry among the members following an increase in subscriptions to meet a deficit led to his resignation in 1923 to make way for a new secretary 'with a business-like head' (Roebuck, 141). 
Gradually Woods's accumulated injuries began to afflict him. Arthritis was made worse by the heavy drinking he so much enjoyed. Having no real home, he took rooms in pubs and hotels in Taunton and reputedly drank a bottle of whisky a day to alleviate his pain. His conviviality was unimpaired, however, and his stock of anecdotes and capacity to entertain never ran dry. He was a familiar sight in the streets of Taunton chatting with friends and often surrounded by children. Robertson-Glasgow said that everyone loved Sammy 'for the whole world's manliness and generosity seemed to have gathered in his heart' ('46 Not Out', 1948, 129). Yet he had very few close relationships and, though fond of female company, he never married. Early in 1931 a London specialist diagnosed inoperable cancer of the oesophagus. Woods died in Taunton on 30 April 1931 and was buried on 4 May in St Mary's cemetery, Taunton, within sight of his beloved Quantock hills. A superb sportsman, without swagger, Woods 'was just a big man child' (Roebuck, 38). 


@@@@@


doc= 38152


Wordsworth, Dorothy (1771-1855), writer, was born on 25 December 1771 in Cockermouth, Cumberland, the third among the five children and the only daughter of John Wordsworth (1741-1783), attorney, of Cockermouth, and his wife, Ann (1747-1778), daughter of William Cookson, linen draper, of Penrith. She was the sister of William Wordsworth (1770-1850) and Christopher Wordsworth (1774-1846). She was educated at a boarding-school in Hipperholme, near Halifax, and then at a day school in the same town. But personal circumstances were much more important than formal education in shaping her life and disposition. Her mother died in 1778, her father in 1783, and she grew up, happily or otherwise, with a succession of relatives at Halifax, Penrith, and Forncett rectory, near Norwich, home of her uncle William Cookson. There she helped with parish work and ran a Sunday school under the eye of Cookson's college friend William Wilberforce, whom she met again at Rydal many years later. When her uncle was installed as a canon of Windsor (1792), she went to stay there with the family. It was her sole introduction to fashionable society. She was eventually reunited with William at Windy Brow, Keswick, in 1794, and thereafter she devoted her life to looking after him, reviving his poetic powers and love of nature after his withdrawal from the French Revolution. 'She, in the midst of all, preserved me still / a Poet', Wordsworth later recalled in 'The Prelude' (1805 edn, x.919-20). In 1795, with the help of a legacy from Raisley Calvert, they set up house together at Racedown Lodge, Dorset. Two years later they moved to Alfoxden House on the Quantock Hills in Somerset, in order to be near Coleridge at Nether Stowey, and there she met Charles Lamb and William Hazlitt. Her taste in landscape (like 'a perfect electrometer', according to Coleridge) is revealed for the first time in her 'Alfoxden journal' (1798), where the interplay between her impersonal records of the sights and sounds of nature and the poems of Wordsworth and Coleridge is already apparent. It was the first fruit of the creative partnership between brother and sister which is celebrated at the climax of Wordsworth's 'Tintern Abbey' during their tour of the Wye. 
Dorothy Wordsworth's hopes for their return to the Lake District were finally realized 'home at Grasmere' in 1799, in the workaday setting of Dove Cottage, where they were soon joined by the Coleridges, Robert Southey and his wife, and later Thomas De Quincey. After William's marriage to Mary Hutchinson in 1802, Dorothy remained an indispensable member of his household, enduring the death of the 'sailor brother' John in the wreck of the 'Abergavenny' (1805), and the loss of her investment in its cargo, which deprived her of financial independence. Further troubles followed, including the breach with Coleridge in 1810 while the family was living at Allan Bank, and in 1812 the death of two of William's children after the move to the rectory, while the parents were absent. But amid the vicissitudes of family life, Dorothy stayed true to her deepest instincts, proving that her role as transcriber of his poems, housekeeper, and devoted aunt to his children was not incompatible with her own imaginative life. The 'Grasmere journal' (1800-03) mingles William's poetry with the comings and goings of a rural society, joining the sublime to the matter-of-fact, and reveals her intense response to the seasonal appearances of nature, and the life of beggars and wayfarers on the open road whose circumstances were unchanging. She always directs attention away from herself to her surroundings. Her human sympathies are perhaps best reflected in her narrative of the deaths of George and Sarah Green in a snowstorm, written to raise money for the orphans (1808, published 1928). 
When the family moved to Rydal Mount (1813), Dorothy's pursuits remained largely unchanged, and she shared her brother's growing circle of friends and visitors. She cultivated lasting friendships through her correspondence, which mirrors the conditions under which the lake poets worked; her natural and unaffected letters, which reveal her personality more directly than her 'Journals', played an indispensable part in holding the wider Wordsworth circle together. Particularly dear to her were her schoolfriend Jane Pollard, who married John Marshall, the Leeds industrialist, and Catherine Clarkson, wife of the abolitionist Thomas Clarkson, of Playford Hall, Ipswich. She stayed with both families from time to time. A later friend was Henry Crabb Robinson, whose Rydal diaries chart the course of her physical and mental decline. The generosity of spirit that invariably shines through her letters seemed to mark all her human contacts. 
The 'Journals' describe many of Dorothy Wordsworth's travels. A winter at Hamburg and Goslar in Germany (1798-9), an excursion to Calais during the peace of Amiens to visit Annette Vallon and William's 'French' daughter Caroline in 1802, and in 1820 a continental tour to Switzerland and the Italian lakes after the Napoleonic wars, comprised her journeys abroad with her brother. She visited Scotland twice, in 1803 and 1822, the first time in his and Coleridge's company, when they passed some days with Sir Walter Scott. Her 'Recollections' of the tour, which form her most ambitious piece of writing, are best read alongside William's 'Memorials' of the same journey. She also visited the Isle of Man on her own in 1828. But she was happiest among her 'Hutchinson' relatives in the Welsh border country; at Coleorton, the estate of Sir George Beaumont in Leicestershire in 1806-7 and thereafter, where she returned to keep house for her nephew John Wordsworth, at Whitwick rectory (1828-9); or with Christopher at Cambridge, where she held her own in academic society. Her tastes were easily satisfied, and a walk under the stars, an excursion over the fells, or a coach ride by moonlight furnished her mind with unforgettable impressions. As De Quincey wrote, 'She was content to be ignorant of many things, but what she knew and had really mastered lay where it could not be disturbed -- in the temple of her own most fervid heart' (De Quincey, 239). 
Dorothy Wordsworth found fulfilment in ways which elude precise analysis. Onlookers were impressed by the vivid presence of the poet's 'exquisite' sister, as Coleridge called her, but she had few views or wishes of her own, being content to follow her brother's lead in literary, political, and religious matters. Her few poems are unremarkable, though William thought five of them good enough to be included in his own volumes. But in her 'Journals', unpublished in her lifetime and unknown outside her own circle, she found a unique outlet for her genius without competing with the writers who surrounded her. She had no desire to set herself up as an author, and seemed relieved when Samuel Rogers failed to secure publication of her Scottish 'Recollections'. 'I have not those powers which Coleridge thinks I have', she protested to Lady Beaumont, 'My only merits are my devotedness to those I love, and I hope a charity towards all mankind.' ('Letters of William and Dorothy Wordsworth', 1.525). 
In 1835, after several years of illness, Dorothy Wordsworth succumbed to a form of pre-senile dementia with only rare moments of remission, during which she resumed her journal; for the last two decades of her life she was confined to the house and terrace of Rydal Mount. No likeness of Dorothy Wordsworth in her prime has survived. Neither the early silhouette at Dove Cottage nor the much later portrait at Rydal Mount (1833) gives any hint of the 'wild eyes' and impulsive nature glimpsed by De Quincey, or the paradox which her personal appearance had originally presented to Coleridge: 'if you expected to see a pretty woman, you would think her ordinary -- if you expected to find an ordinary woman, you would think her pretty!' ('Collected Letters', ed. Griggs, 1.330). She died on 25 January 1855 in the care of her sister-in-law, surviving William by five years, and was buried beside him in Grasmere churchyard on 31 January. 
Dorothy Wordsworth's life was comparatively uneventful and she never married, finding her true self in devotion to others and in the 'appropriate form' of her 'Journals' and letters. No other observer was so close to Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge during their most productive years together at Alfoxden and Grasmere; and no one else had such an eye for the landscapes which inspired them, or could provide them with living materials for poetry out of her own observations. Coleridge is reported to have said that they were three persons, but one soul. 
Although De Quincey believed that Dorothy Wordsworth was worthy of a biographical memoir in her own right, she was largely overshadowed by her more famous brother. A separate account of her own achievements, and of her intangible contribution to William's visionary world seemed almost impossible, and she was not accorded her own entry in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. It was only after her 'Journals' and 'Letters' were progressively published in complete editions in the twentieth century that she was taken seriously as a woman writer and as a notable figure in the English Romantic movement. In the later twentieth century feminist critics opened up new lines of enquiry into her work, but in the longer term it seems unlikely that any one approach will fully explain the elusive nature of her genius, or the fascination it continues to exert on her readers. 


@@@@@


doc= 38153


Worsley, Benjamin (1617/18-1677), physician and projector, was the eldest son of Francis Worsley of Kenton, Warwickshire, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Shipman Hopkins of Coventry. He was probably brought up in London. The only certain detail concerning his formal education is his admission as a pensioner at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1643 at the late age of twenty-five. He claimed to possess a degree from Trinity College. He entered public service under Thomas Wentworth, first earl of Strafford, lord lieutenant of Ireland, and was in 1643 surgeon-general in the army in Ireland. 
Worsley's career as a projector began in 1646 when his scheme for the manufacture of saltpetre attracted attention, primarily on account of its value for gunpowder production. He capitalized on this opportunity by making the saltpetre project the centrepiece of a programme for revitalization of the British economy and the development of an integrated manufacturing and trading system embracing an expanding colonial empire. He published little, but elaborations of his proposals for the exploitation of technical innovation and the regulation of trade are found in abundance in such archives as the Hartlib papers and Shaftesbury papers, and his views were seriously regarded, even though his reputation suffered as a result of a bitter controversy with William Petty. 
At first Worsley was ahead of Petty. In 1646 his saltpetre scheme impressed the young Robert Boyle and brought patronage from Boyle and his sister, Lady Ranelagh. Worsley was the prime mover in the Invisible College established at this time -- a group of intellectuals exchanging ideas by correspondence, motivated by utopian aspirations, and particularly engaged in promoting science and technology. This agency brought him into association with Samuel Hartlib. Worsley was reappointed surgeon-general to the army in Ireland in 1647, but seems not to have taken up the post. Between 1647 and 1649 he was based in the Netherlands, where he acted as a major source of intelligence on economic and scientific affairs. In 1649 his hopes revolved around a scheme for developing the economy of Virginia. With the promise of a situation in America he returned to England and his efforts contributed to the council of state's decision to establish a council of trade, presided over by Sir Henry Vane the younger, a patron of Worsley's. The council's main achievement was the 1651 'Navigation Act', of which Worsley claimed to have been 'the first sollicitour'. He also wrote at this time 'The Advocate' (1652), in defence of the act, and a related economic tract, 'Free Ports' (1652). 
Renewed prospects opened up for preferment in Ireland. Between 1651 and 1653 Worsley served as secretary to the commissioners in Ireland and commissioner-general for the revenue, and then, having failed to be selected to join the embassy to Sweden, he returned to Ireland as surveyor-general of forfeited estates. He remained in this post until 1658, but the real work was undertaken by Petty, for whom Worsley developed a deep jealousy. Petty responded with venom in his history of what became known as the 'down survey'. Having failed as surveyor-general, Worsley made an unsuccessful attempt in 1659 to secure the Post Office farm surrendered by John Thurloe. His tenuous hold on office was reduced to his positions as justice of the peace in Queen's county and commissary-general of musters. In 1656 he married Lucy, daughter of William Cary of Dartmouth, Devon. 
After the Restoration, Worsley, who was living in Tuthill Fields, was inhibited from his more radical schemes for social and religious reform. He played no part in the newly founded Royal Society or the College of Physicians, although at this time he began to describe himself as an MD. He concentrated on economic issues, especially on American colonial affairs. Repeating the pattern of 1650, in 1660 he was involved in the establishment of the council of trade. He continued to write on general policy questions, but he also tried to turn his knowledge to profit. For instance, in 1666 he was granted a licence for the cultivation of senna in the plantations. The continuing strength of his reputation is witnessed by his involvement between 1668 and 1673 in the revival of the committees involved with trade and plantations. After serving as a commissioner of trade between 1668 and 1669, he was appointed assistant secretary of the council of foreign plantations in 1670, and in September 1672 he was promoted to the post of secretary and treasurer of the council of trade and foreign plantations, under the presidency of his patron Anthony Ashley Cooper, first earl of Shaftesbury. He resigned on account of the 'Test Act' in September 1673, being succeeded by John Locke. A catalogue of his fine library was published in 1678, revealing a huge collection of nonconformist, and especially Socinian, religious literature. Worsley died in 1677. 
Charles Webster', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38154


Wren, Percival Christopher (1875-1941), novelist, was born on 1 November 1875 at 37 Warwick Street, Deptford, London, the son of John Wilkins Wren (1847-1907/8), schoolmaster, and his first wife, Ellen, 'nee' Lasbury (1845/6-1887). Reliable reference works such as 'The Oxford Companion to English Literature' state that he was born in 1885 in Devon. In this they have been deliberately misled. In other contexts Wren is described as a sailor, an explorer, a trooper in a British cavalry regiment, and a recruit to the French Foreign Legion. There appears to be no credible evidence for any of these suggestions. He married Alice Lucie Shovelier, formerly Alice Lucy Shoveler ('b'. 1870), daughter of Crispin Shoveler, on 23 December 1899. At this time he was still signing himself as Percy, but at some stage he changed his name to Percival, and was later known as Christopher. 
There appears to be no reliable evidence to explain Wren's motives for falsifying his past, but by adding his assumed middle name he perhaps hoped to indicate a genealogical relationship to Sir Christopher Wren (1632-1723); or he may simply have enjoyed hoodwinking the public about his background. Whatever his reasons, when Wren applied to join the Indian educational service (IES), to which he was appointed in 1903, he was forced to reveal his real date and place of birth; he also gave the information that he was educated at West Kent School, studied as a non-collegiate student at Oxford, and graduated BA in 1898. From then until 1903 he worked as a schoolmaster. From 1903 to 1910 he was headmaster of Karachi high school, and in 1904-6 he was also educational inspector for Sind. In 1910 he became assistant to the director of public instruction in Bombay, and after a period of war service, from December 1914 to October 1915, he took up his last post in the IES as principal of Elphinstone high school, Bombay; he retired in November 1917. 
Wren did not limit his activities to teaching. Between 1910 and 1912 he published four textbooks, including one on teaching English, one as a guide to the theory and practice of education, and one entitled 'Indian School Organization' (1911). These books reveal at least one aspect of his character: he was not lacking in self-assurance. For instance, in the preface to 'Indian School Organization' he explained: 'It is hoped that this book may be found useful... by teachers in general and headmasters in particular and may prove suggestive to Indian educationalists whose experience happens to be less varied than that of the author'. During the First World War Wren suffered a period of ill health. His war service as a captain in the Indian army reserve of officers, infantry branch, was interrupted by sick leave from February to October 1915; and in Bombay in 1917 he had another period of nine months' sick leave before retiring from the IES. 
Wren's first novel, 'Dew and Mildew', set in India, was published in 1912. Between that year and 1941, the year of his death, he published over thirty more novels. The most popular were those with a setting based on the French Foreign Legion, the earliest of which, 'The Wages of Virtue', appeared in 1916, and his most notable success, 'Beau Geste', in 1924. The latter was filmed three times, in 1926, 1939, and 1966, and was televised by the BBC in 1984. It was remarkable for its clever opening. While travelling from Kano to Lagos, an officer of the French army recounts to a British member of the Nigerian civil service the mysterious circumstances in which, going to the relief of a desert fort, manned by legionnaires, surrounded by rebel Tuaregs, he reaches his objective only to find no sign of a battle or siege, but a fort defended by corpses. 
Two other of Wren's novels were filmed: 'Beau Sabreur' (1926) in 1928 and 'Beau Ideal' (1928) in 1931. Wren's last novel, 'Odd -- but even so', was published in 1941. He died at Moor Court, Amberley, near Stroud, Gloucestershire, on 22 November 1941. He was survived by his wife, Isabel, who was probably his second wife, and a stepson, R. A. Graham-Smith, of Marbleton rectory, Heathfield, Sussex; with his first wife, Alice, he had had at least one child, Estelle Lenore (1901-1910). 


@@@@@


doc= 38155


Wright, Francis Beresford (1806-1873), iron manufacturer, was born on 21 December 1806, probably in Derbyshire, the second son in the family of three sons and four daughters of John Wright (1758-1840) of Lenton Hall, Nottinghamshire, ironmaster, and his wife, Elizabeth. His father was co-founder of the iron manufacturing Butterley Company, and his mother was the daughter of another co-founder, Francis Beresford of Osmaston, near Ashbourne. 
Little is known of Wright's early years, but in 1830, on the retirement of his father, he became the senior partner in Butterley, which he dominated for the next forty-three years. He applied himself to business with intense seriousness of purpose. 'Ad rem' was his family's motto. On 12 August 1830 Wright married Selina, daughter of Sir Henry FitzHerbert, baronet, of Tissington Hall, Derbyshire. They had five sons and six daughters. 
The company prospered under Wright's direction, and by the time of his death Butterley was the biggest industrial concern in Derbyshire and one of the greatest in the country. The company had been valued in 1830 at $30,000; by 1858 its capital stood at $436,000. The original coal and iron concerns of Butterley were expanded, and engineering work was undertaken for the railways. The company constructed Vauxhall Bridge over the Thames, the railway bridge at Trent Junction, and the railway viaduct over the Derwent. Perhaps Wright's success is best symbolized by the construction in 1869 of the roof of St Pancras Station, a 240 foot tied arch of cast iron, weighing 9000 tons, with no intermediate structure, probably then the largest single span of its kind in the world. 
The outward sign of Wright's success was the building of a great country house, Osmaston Manor, outside Ashbourne, in 1846-9. Measuring 333 feet by 192 feet, it had stables for seventeen horses, rooms for twenty servants, a brewhouse, a bakehouse, and a central tower standing 150 feet high. It was said to be the first house since Roman times to have central heating: over 3 miles of piping were used but there was no chimney in the house itself. A hydraulic lift ran up the mansion's four storeys. It was the showpiece of the county. A parapet round the clock bore the significant words 'Work while it is Day'. 
Wright was a high-minded evangelist who made Butterley into a model employer. The company organized a sick fund for its workers and built, at Ironville, a school for about two hundred of their children. Among Wright's many charitable actions was the building of the church of St Martin at Osmaston (because he disapproved of the high-church tendencies of the parish church) and the founding of Trent College in 1866, one of whose houses was named after Wright. A chapel there was built in his memory in 1875. His puritanical streak led him as lord mayor to attempt to ban the 'demoralizing pleasure fair' in Ashbourne and to outlaw Shrovetide football. 
Francis Wright was a magistrate, high sheriff of Nottinghamshire (1842), a fine horseman, and a lover and planter of trees. He died on 24 February 1873 at Osmaston Manor and was buried in Osmaston parish church. 
Robert Pearce', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38156


Wright, Mehetabel (1697-1750), poet, was born in Epworth, Lincolnshire, the fifth child and fourth daughter (of ten children who survived early childhood) of Samuel Wesley (bap. 1662, d. 1735), rector of Epworth and Wroot, and his wife, Susanna Annesley (1669-1742) ['see 'Wesley, Susanna]. Her brothers John Wesley and Charles Wesley founded the Methodist movement; her eldest brother Samuel Wesley the younger ['see under 'Wesley, Samuel (bap. 1662, d. 1735)] was also an Anglican clergyman and poet. Hetty, as she was known throughout her life, was strikingly intelligent, and was given the same education as her brothers. She was said to be able to read the 'Greek Testament' at the age of eight. 
Hetty grew into a young woman of 'mirth, good humour and keen wit. She indulged this disposition so much, that it was said to have given great uneasiness to her parents' (Clarke, 2.284). By her mid-twenties she had apparently received several offers of marriage; she formed one strong attachment, but her father opposed this match to 'an unprincipled lawyer'. In 1725 she eloped on at least two occasions, and eventually returned home several months pregnant. Her despairing parents forced her to marry William Wright, a plumber and glazier of Louth, Lincolnshire, at Haxey, on 13 October 1725. She moved to Louth with her sister Molly as companion. Her husband, doubtless attracted to the marriage by the offer of a dowry to set up his own business, was a good tradesman but 'a man utterly unsuited to her in mind, education, manners' (Clarke, 2.287). Her daughter was born on 18 February 1726, but died in December. Several other children all died in infancy, these deaths attributed by Hetty to the lead works which formed part of her husband's business. 
Family disputes continued. In August 1726 Hetty's brother John caused offence in one of his early sermons by criticizing their father's treatment of her. Her attitude to her father remained impenitent, and he spoke of having disowned her. In 1727 she set up a school, but this failed, and in January 1728 Hetty and her husband were settled in London, where he established a successful business in Frith Street, Soho. 
By 1729 Hetty had re-established correspondence with her father, and from 1743 she became increasingly influenced by John's religious views. This increased following a visit to friends of the Wesley family at Bristol to recuperate after a serious illness in 1744. 
According to Clarke, the family historian, 'she had a naturally fine poetic genius, which, though common to the whole family, shone forth in her with peculiar splendour' (Clarke, 2.285). Hetty's poems display real quality, ranging from memorial verses to acerbic lines on her wretched marriage. She writes movingly on her grief at the death of a child. The poems appeared sporadically in magazines, and were not collected until the nineteenth century. In 1903 her life was recorded in A. T. Quiller-Couch's eponymous historical novel. A visitor recalled Hetty towards the end of her life as 'an elegant woman, with great refinement of manners; and had the traces of beauty in her countenance, with the appearances of being broken-hearted' (Clarke, 2.298). She died on 21 March 1750. 


@@@@@


doc= 38157


Wright, Stephen (d. 1780), architect, may have been born in Oxburgh, Norfolk, to the poor of which village he left $20 in his will, and he appears to have begun his professional life as a clerk or assistant to William Kent. He was probably the 'Stephen' referred to in letters from Kent to Richard Boyle, third earl of Burlington, in 1738-9; he received a legacy of $50 under Kent's will, dated 1748; and the following year he was in possession of some of Kent's drawings. In 1746 he was appointed to a post in the office of works, as clerk of the works at Hampton Court, presumably through the influence of Burlington; and his subsequent career was based on that institution and the patronage of one leading public figure, Thomas Pelham-Holles, first duke of Newcastle. 
How and when Wright's link with Newcastle was established is not clear -- it may have been through his employment to complete the London house which Kent had designed for the duke's brother Henry Pelham (1695-1754), after Kent's death in 1748 -- but there is plentiful evidence of the connection. In 1758, four years after he had added the clerkship of Richmond New Park Lodge to that he held at Hampton Court, when the comptroller of the works, Thomas Ripley, was dying, he wrote to Newcastle to apply for his post; and although in the event the preferment went to Henry Flitcroft, it was by Newcastle's 'immediate appointment' that Wright was promoted to the posts of master mason and deputy surveyor vacated by the latter. Equally, the greater part of the work in his small private practice came from the duke and his successor. Newcastle employed him at Claremont, Surrey (1752), and as chancellor of Cambridge University secured his employment to design the university library (1754-8); while for the second duke he worked at Clumber House, Nottinghamshire (1768-78; dem.), and designed the bridge in Newark in the same county (1775). The Cambridge library, his most important work, is an accomplished Palladian composition in the manner of William Kent, while in his additions to Milton Hall, Berkshire (1764-72), he provided some attractive interiors in the Kentian Gothic style. 
'An honest and worthy man', in the words of his office of works colleague Kenton Couse, he died after 'a lingering tho' not very painful illness' ('History of the King's Works', 5.89) on 28th September 1780. He was buried in the churchyard at Hampton, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 38158


Wyatt, Lewis William (bap. 1777, d. 1853), architect, was baptized on 25 August 1777 in Weeford, Staffordshire, the second of the four sons of Benjamin Wyatt (1745-1818), land surveyor and occasional architect, of Weeford, later agent to the Penrhyn estate, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of William Ford, brewer, of Burton upon Trent. From 1795 to 1800 he was apprenticed to his uncle Samuel Wyatt, during which time (in 1797) he started exhibiting at the Royal Academy. In the beginnings of his career he was indebted in different ways to both Samuel and his other architect uncle, James Wyatt. In 1800 he became assistant to the latter, who at the same time gave him a post in the office of works as labourer in trust at Carlton House and also employed him in connection with his work as surveyor of the ordnance; his first recorded works -- minor country-house commissions in Staffordshire (1803-5) -- were designed in James's office for execution by the Wyatt family building business; and in 1805 he submitted designs for Downing College, Cambridge, after those by James had been severely criticized by Thomas Hope, perhaps in an attempt to salvage the commission for the family. Then, after setting up in practice on his own 'c'.1806, he was employed at Heaton Hall, Lancashire, where both James and Samuel had worked previously; and on Samuel's death in 1807 he completed two of his commissions, Tatton Park, Cheshire, and Hackwood Park, Hampshire, and in effect succeeded to his practice in the Cheshire area. 
Wyatt's subsequent work was primarily as a country-house architect and 'improver', although he competed unsuccessfully for a number of major public commissions and in 1816 published 'A Prospectus of a Design for Various Improvements in the Metropolis', in which he made radical proposals for replanning the West End. In 1813, however, he succeeded James Wyatt as architect to the Middlesex Hospital, a post he held until 1829, and he also made some further progress in the office of works: in 1818 he was promoted to the clerkship of the works for the eastern division, before transferring in 1829 to Hampton Court, but he then lost his position in the reorganization of the office in 1832. In 1815 he visited Paris, in 1820 he made a six months' visit to Italy, and in 1825 he was in Paris again, having been sent to supervise repairs at the British embassy. 
The predominant feature of Wyatt's architecture is a marked stylistic eclecticism. A number of works, including his finest, Willey Hall, Shropshire (1813-15), are in a monumental neo-classical manner developed from the late work of his uncles Samuel and James; at Cuerden Hall, Lancashire (1815), he experimented with a 'picturesque classicist' mode reminiscent in part of the work of Sir John Vanbrugh and in part of the contemporary 'primitivist' idiom; while at Cranage Hall, Cheshire (1828-9), he used the Tudor style and at Sherborne House, Gloucestershire (1829-34), produced a convincing copy of an Elizabethan design. Similarly skilful pastiches of interior decorative styles included work at Hackwood (1807-13) and Lyme Park, Cheshire (1814-17), in an English late seventeenth-century manner, and at Hawkstone Hall, Shropshire (1832-4), and elsewhere in the Louis XIV mode particularly associated with his cousins Benjamin Dean Wyatt and Philip Wyatt. 
The death of his father in 1818 left Wyatt quite a wealthy man, able to indulge a taste for connoisseurship and collecting works of art. He married late in life, and in 1833 his wife, Louisa Wyatt, a cousin, died in childbirth (the baby also died). About two years after this tragedy and after a series of professional reverses, notably the discovery of defective work at Sherborne House, which led to a costly negligence award against him, Wyatt gave up architectural practice. He then retired to a small property near Ryde on the Isle of Wight, where he spent his later years carrying out improvements to the grounds and where he died on 14 February 1853. 
Peter Leach', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38159


Wyatt, Samuel (1737-1807), architect and engineer, was born on 8 September 1737 at Blackbrook Farm, Weeford, Staffordshire, the third of the seven sons and two daughters of Benjamin Wyatt (died 1772), farmer and timber merchant of Weeford, who also practised as a builder and architect, and his wife, Mary Wright. Samuel began in his father's business as a carpenter, thus earning the nickname the Chip. In 1760 he was employed, first as carpenter and then as clerk of works, at the building of Kedleston Hall, Derbyshire, under Robert Adam, an experience which constituted his architectural education. In 1768 he returned to Weeford; he was first employed as an architect in 1769, on an addition to Blithfield Hall, Staffordshire. He began a close association with his younger brother James Wyatt (1746-1813) after the latter's return from an Italian grand tour, notably at the Pantheon in Oxford Street, London (1769-71), where the domed interior put into practice on a larger scale constructional lessons learned in the saloon at Kedleston. After the death of their father in 1772, the family firm passed to their eldest brother, William; in 1774 Samuel and James each set up independent practices as architects in London. 
Samuel Wyatt's career included business as a building contractor and timber merchant as well as architecture, in which he was predominantly concerned with medium-sized country houses: Doddington Hall, Cheshire (1777-98), Hooton Hall, Cheshire (1778-88; dem.), Herstmonceux Place, Sussex (1777), and Belmont Park, Kent (1787-92). He was also extensively employed in designing and building London houses, and made a speciality of the design of model farm buildings, including nearly fifty at Holkham for Thomas William Coke of Norfolk, first earl of Leicester. Other ambitious farm buildings by Wyatt can be found at Sandon, Staffordshire, Thorndon, Essex, and Somerley, Hampshire. During the 1780s he was manager and principal promoter, as well as builder and architect, of the Albion flour mill at Blackfriars. This was the most advanced industrial building of its time, designed to be steam-powered (with engines supplied by Samuel's partners in the enterprise, Matthew Boulton and James Watt). It was one of the first such buildings to incorporate a brick raft foundation, here intended to spread the downward load on the soft Thames bank. The street frontage incorporated Wyatt's own house. The mill burnt down in 1791. Wyatt was appointed surveyor of Trinity House, and clerk of works at Chelsea Hospital in 1792, and surveyor of Ramsgate harbour in 1794. In 1793 he was appointed surveyor to the Royal Mint, but was dismissed in 1794 for inattention to duty. 
Wyatt's architectural work was predominantly in a chaste neo-classical manner, with the use of domed segmental projections; in his interiors he made play with geometrical plans, displaying a liking for oval and octagonal spaces which derived originally from Adam. In some of his later work, such as Trinity House at Tower Hill, London (1793-6), his finest urban building, and Hackwood Park, Hampshire (1805-7), he developed a simpler and more monumental style. He saw himself as an engineer architect, and designed a number of lighthouses, three of them -- Longships, Cornwall (1792), St Agnes, Isles of Scilly (1806), and Flamborough Head, Yorkshire -- as part of his lighthouse duties, one at Dungeness, Kent (1792), for a private client, Thomas Coke of Norfolk, and one (dem.) for Ramsgate harbour, where he was responsible for a series of buildings on the quayside. He experimented with cast iron, and made extensive use of Coade stone and also of slate -- from the Penrhyn quarries managed by his brother Benjamin (died 1818) -- for cladding and other purposes. He invented a 'sympathetic hinge' by which both leaves of a double door opened simultaneously, and in 1787 devised a prefabricated 'movable hospital' for use in the colonies. In 1799 he was consulted about a tunnel under the Thames, and in 1800 he submitted a proposal for a cast-iron replacement for London Bridge. 
An unsympathetic contemporary, Humphry Repton, described Wyatt as 'slow, plodding, heavy in carriage, dull in conceiving the ideas of others and tedious in explaining his own' (H. Repton, 'Autobiography', BL, MS 62112, fol. 198), a portrait which was something of a libel on this progressively minded architect. Wyatt became a member of the Society for the Promotion of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce, and of the Society of Civil Engineers. He was a close friend of many of the pioneer midlands industrialists, notably Matthew Boulton, whose house at Soho, Birmingham, was designed by James and Samuel Wyatt. In spite of the Albion mill disaster, he achieved his proclaimed ambition of making a fortune, largely out of his building business. In 1765 he married Ann Sherwin, daughter of the land agent at Kedleston Hall. They had no children, but on the death of his brother William in 1780 he adopted William's four-year-old daughter. Wyatt died suddenly of an 'apoplexy' at the surveyor's house, Chelsea Hospital, on 8 February 1807 and was buried in the hospital cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 38160


Wynford, William (d. 1405), master mason, is first recorded in 1360, working as one of two wardens of masons at Windsor Castle under 
Wynford's employment at Windsor occurred while the clerk of works there was William Wykeham (died 1404). Whether the latter's influence brought about Wynford's rapid promotion is not known, but personal links forged between the two men in 1360-61 must lie behind Wykeham's decision to entrust to his erstwhile colleague the prodigious series of works he undertook after his elevation to the see of Winchester. The 1377-8 accounts for the reconstruction of the episcopal manor house at Bishop's Waltham, Hampshire, contain a reference to Wynford as master mason for all of Wykeham's works, a position which he appears to have held continuously until the bishop's death in 1404. The earliest of Wykeham's three most important undertakings, New College, Oxford, was mostly built between 1380 and 1386. It betrays heavy influence from the upper ward at Windsor, not only in respect of the planning of its main quadrangle, which Wykeham as patron could perfectly well have stipulated, but also in terms of its detailed treatment, which is far more likely to reflect the preferences of the architect. The building accounts are lost, but the design can with confidence be attributed to Wynford, as it shows the closest stylistic kinship with Wykeham's next major project. This was Winchester College, begun in 1387, for which Wynford was certainly the master mason. Both colleges exhibit a sober elegance of treatment which is carefully modulated to underline the hierarchy of functions within a rigorously integrated ensemble. New College was to exert a strong influence on Oxford college architecture during the rest of the middle ages and beyond. Wynford built much for Wykeham at his numerous episcopal residences, but the only well-preserved survival is the manor house at East Meon, Hampshire, of 'c'.1395-7. 
Wykeham's and Wynford's last and greatest undertaking was the remodelling of the nave of Winchester Cathedral, begun in 1394. Alongside the nave of Canterbury Cathedral, this is the outstanding surviving work of late fourteenth-century English church architecture. Wynford hit on an ingeniously minimal method of modernizing a Romanesque fabric, namely the cutting away of the angles of the old piers to form diagonal planes. Although abnormally bulky, the resulting supports incorporate enough verticals, and possess enough variety of modelling, to give a convincing approximation to Perpendicular aesthetics. If the aim of this singular procedure was economy, it must be judged a failure, since many parts of the Romanesque facework could not be recut and had to be replaced with new masonry. The stylistic character of Wynford's design is broadly similar to that of the works of Henry Yevele (died 1400), his leading contemporary, but it shows a less complete adherence to the formal repertory developed in the 1330s by the pioneer of Perpendicular in the south-east, William Ramsey (died 1349). It is possible that Wynford's approach at Winchester was influenced by his experience of refashioning the Romanesque church of Abingdon Abbey, in progress 'c'.1375-6 (destroyed). 
When Wynford died in Winchester in 1405, probably on 25 July, it is likely that only that part of the cathedral nave which incorporated Wykeham's chantry chapel had been completely remodelled. Better than any other extant work, the chantry shows Wynford's skill in small-scale decorative architecture. That Wykeham regarded his architect highly is evident from the inclusion of a representation of him in the east window of Winchester College chapel. The carpenter Hugh Herland (died 1406?) appears in the same window in a less honorific position behind Wynford, but no other fourteenth-century English architects are known to have been commemorated in this way. 
In 1365 Wynford became master mason to Wells Cathedral, possibly through the influence of Wykeham, who had been a prebendary there until 1363. The upper stages of the south-west tower, built 'c'.1385-95, are probably lower and plainer than those intended by the architect of the 150-year-old work which they surmount. Nevertheless, Wynford's design, followed in the early fifteenth-century north-west tower, provides a wholly convincing termination to this grandest of English Gothic cathedral facades. 


@@@@@


doc= 38161


Yeoman, Thomas (1709/10-1781), millwright and surveyor, was probably born in Somerset. Although his origins and early life are obscure, his career embraced many different aspects during a formative phase of the early industrial revolution, and he became one of the most prolific and influential civil engineers of the period and a founding father of the profession. He is first encountered as the wheelwright skilled in 'turning iron & Brass, & making machinery for grinding' (Birmingham Reference Library, Johnson MS 185602), who was recruited by Edward Cave to operate the first water-powered cotton-spinning mill at Northampton in 1741, using the system patented by Lewis Paul. At the time of his recruitment, Yeoman was probably employed at Abbey Mills in Bromley, one of several mills located on the complex of streams on the tidal reaches of the River Lea. 
Moving to Northampton about 1742, Yeoman soon began to take an active role in the commercial, cultural, and religious life of the town. While working as 'Operator for Mr Cave's Cotton Engines' ('Northampton Mercury', 5 Dec 1743), he first established himself as a millwright in St Mary's Street. From there he advertised his services, including the construction of a range of machinery such as John Wyatt's weighbridge and the ventilator invented by Stephen Hales, which provided a regular source of employment throughout the 1740s and 1750s. Yeoman corresponded frequently with Hales on this and related subjects and fitted ventilators into numerous buildings throughout the country, including the town gaol in Northampton and the infirmary, newly founded in 1743. He became president of the Northampton Philosophical Society, one of the earliest and most important provincial societies, which met in his house and numbered among its members Philip Doddridge and William Shipley, who later founded the Society of Arts. Yeoman built and sold scientific instruments from his new premises in Gold Street, and in 1746-7 he undertook a series of scientific lecture demonstrations in Northampton, Coventry, and Birmingham, with exhibits of electrical apparatus. He continued to operate an 'Experiment room' in his house and in 1748 he advertised proposals for 'Uranographia Britannica', a celestial atlas by the astronomer John Bevis, an ambitious and ultimately unsuccessful venture. 
Yeoman was evidently already married when he moved to Northampton; the birth of a son, Samuel, was recorded in October 1742, but his wife, Sarah, died in 1746. On 18 August 1747 he married Anne (1707/8-1793), the sister of Joshua Remington, a wealthy grocer of the town. Two further children were born: a son, Thomas, in August 1748 and a daughter, Anne, in January 1752. In 1752 another son, James, was apprenticed to John Neale, a maker of scientific instruments in London and an occasional partner of Yeoman. 
For all of his adult life, Yeoman was a Baptist and, during his time in Northampton, a prominent member of the College Lane Baptist Church. The Baptist minister, John Gill, an influential high-Calvinistic theologian, wrote to Yeoman in 1745 to promote his forthcoming 'Exposition of the New Testament'. Yeoman subscribed not only to this but to all Gill's major works between 1746 and 1769. On a number of occasions he acted on behalf of the church, and he discharged his social obligations by supporting the infirmary; several times he acted as a house visitor and from 1746 to 1752 he was a member of the committee of governors. It was probably in this social context that Yeoman came to the attention of the local whig grandee Lord Halifax who, as president of the Board of Trade and later first lord of the Admiralty, was able to secure him preferment with the Admiralty. 
Yeoman's interests diversified considerably while he was in Northampton and his career blossomed. Commensurate with this, his social status rose as he moved first to Gold Street and finally, in 1755, to Bridge Street. He continued to construct ventilators, for both land and sea use, and in 1751 he was commissioned to install machines in four merchantmen at Rotterdam. Work on marine ventilation was to lead to further employment by the Admiralty, first in 1756, in the naval hospitals, and later installing ventilators into vessels of the fleet itself. Yeoman's work as an engineer was reported and advertised not only locally but also nationally, through the pages of the 'Gentleman's Magazine', published by Edward Cave. During this period Yeoman also turned to surveying, both for local estate owners and for turnpike trusts. He first surveyed the River Nene in 1744 and his work in this field developed to become the major occupation of his later career. In 1756 he gave evidence to the parliamentary commission for the navigation of the River Nene, and in 1758, as the work was in progress, he was several times engaged by the commissioners to act as both surveyor and consultant engineer. 
When the cotton mill declined and finally closed about 1756, Yeoman moved to London, where he established himself first in Little Peter Street, Westminster, and continued his work as a surveyor and engineer. In Thomas Mortimer's 'Universal Director' (1763) Yeoman was credited with the ventilation of the Drury Lane Theatre and the houses of parliament, and for the first time he was described as a civil engineer. In 1760 he was elected to the Society of Arts, and he continued to play an active part in its proceedings until the late 1770s. He proposed numerous new members between 1760 and 1776, including a number of other surveyors and engineers. From 1763 he was chairman of the committee of mechanics and in 1768 he presented the society with a model of the Hales ventilator. In 1764 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, but he seems to have participated little in its activities. 
During the 1760s and 1770s Yeoman's main occupation was as a surveyor and engineer of canal and river navigations and of drainage schemes. Besides the River Nene, he worked on the rivers Ivel, Stort, Chelmer, Lea, Stour, Stroud, Medway, and Thames; on the Aire and Calder Canal, and the Clyde Canal; on the draining of the level of Ancholme and of Deeping Fen; and he appeared a number of times to give evidence before parliamentary committees. He published several engineering reports, though no books; a manual for the instruction of millwrights that he was preparing in the 1740s was never completed. Probably his greatest surviving achievement is the Limehouse cut, linking the River Lea to the Thames upstream of the Isle of Dogs, which he completed, as John Smeaton's assistant, in 1770. 
By about 1769 Yeoman had moved to Castle Street in Leicester Fields, Westminster, and he continued a Baptist as a member of the Grafton Street church, where he served as both deacon and secretary to the church. In 1766-7 he played a prominent part in an acrimonious dispute which ended with the congregation dismissing its minister, William Anderson, and replacing him with Benjamin Messer. 
From 1770, then in his sixties, Yeoman was increasingly employed as a consulting engineer, and in recognition of his standing in the embryonic profession he was elected in 1771 the first president of the Society of Civil Engineers. His final illness was recorded in the society's minutes in April 1780; his will had been written in the previous year. In it he made provision for his widow and four surviving daughters, and listed properties in London and Trudoxhill, Somerset. Yeoman died at his home in Castle Street on 23 January 1781, and was buried on 31 January in Bunhill Fields. His wife Anne survived him until 6 November 1793, and was then buried in the same grave; the grave no longer exists, but the inscription has been preserved. 


@@@@@


doc= 38162


Yockney, Samuel Hansard (1813-1893), civil engineer, was born in St Martin's Lane, London, on 12 October 1813, the eldest son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Samuel Foyster Yockney, West India merchant, and his wife, Laetitia, daughter of Luke Hansard. He was educated at Mill Hill School under Dr Thorowgood and was not intended for any profession until family losses made it necessary. At the age of twenty-four he began an apprenticeship with Stothert & Co. of Bath, civil engineering contractors. 
Soon afterwards, in 1838, Yockney was appointed engineer and manager on the construction of the Box Tunnel on the Great Western Railway (GWR). He acquitted himself so well that he attracted the favourable notice of Isambard K. Brunel, so that on the completion of the tunnel he joined the engineering staff of the GWR. He was first put in charge of the tunnels and other works between Bristol and Bath, as well as being responsible for the manufacture of coke at the company's Bristol works, where he initiated several important improvements. He married in 1840 Frances Emily (1818/19-1889), daughter of Captain Edward Holmes RN. 
Yockney moved in 1846 to south Wales, where he was involved in the construction of the Newport Tunnel and the Usk and Chepstow viaducts, on the railway line from Newport to Chepstow. On the completion of this he was placed in charge in 1851-2 of the heavy engineering works on the Oxford and Wolverhampton line, including high timber viaducts and the Dudley Tunnel. In late 1853 he moved to Paris, where he was engaged on bridges and embankments of the Seine, and on railways in and around the city. He then surveyed for a French company a number of railway lines in Italy and Switzerland before returning to England, where he worked on the Birmingham, Wolverhampton, and Dudley Railway and the Kennet and Avon and Stourbridge canals. 
In 1858-9 Yockney was in the service of the Admiralty, before returning to south Wales, where for ten years he was engineer-in-chief and general manager of the Sirhowy tramroad, which he converted into a standard railway. During this time he introduced cast-iron brake blocks of the type which later came into general use. In 1868 he moved back to London, where he set up in practice at 46 Queen Anne's Gate as a consulting civil engineer, in association with his son Sydney William Yockney. Together they designed and supervised a large number of contracts, including the Wye Valley Railway, the Guernsey tramway, the Cardiff and Penarth tramway, the East Worcestershire waterworks, and Totland Bay pier, as well as acting as engineers to the West Bromwich sanitary commissioners. Yockney became a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1860, and was also a fellow of the Geological Society (1865). He died of diabetes at his son's home, Wye Cottage, Tidenham, Gloucestershire, on 29 December 1893 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Ronald M. Birse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38163


Yonge, Sir Walter, third baronet (bap. 1653, d. 1731), politician and friend of John Locke, was baptized on 8 September 1653 at Sandford, Devon, the first surviving son of Sir Walter Yonge, second baronet ('c'.1626-1670), politician, of Colyton, Devon, and his wife, Isabella ('bap'. 1631), daughter of Sir John Davie of Sandford, Devon. He matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, in 1670, and in that year succeeded as third baronet. His background was presbyterian, his great-grandfather Walter and grandfather Sir John having been on the parliamentarian side in the civil war. Yonge's father sat in Richard Cromwell's parliament and at the Restoration was active for religious comprehension. In 1677, by a licence dated 19 April of that year, he married Gertrude (died 1679), daughter of William Morice, an MP with presbyterian inclinations. They had no children. 
Yonge first stood for parliament at Newport, Cornwall, in 1678, but was unsuccessful and soon turned to the family seat of Honiton, where he was the leading proprietor. He was MP for that town in eleven parliaments from 1679 to 1708, and once for Ashburton in 1689-90. He was moderately active for Anthony Ashley Cooper, first earl of Shaftesbury, in the exclusion parliaments and was a member of the Green Ribbon Club. To dissenters he was 'sober', to tories a 'fanatic' (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90'). He withstood the intrusion upon Honiton corporation by the high-churchman Sir Thomas Putt. Yonge also held a number of local offices, being commissioner of assessment for Devon in 1677-80 and 1689-90, deputy lieutenant for Devon from 1688 onwards, and colonel of militia foot from about 1697. He was also made a freeman of Lyme Regis in 1680 and of Plymouth in 1696. 
In the 1680s Yonge's position was ambiguous. One historian places him with the revolutionary underground: he entertained the duke of Monmouth in 1680, was considered as a potential ally by the Rye House plotters in 1683, and was briefly arrested in 1685. But another historian calls him one of James II's 'Whig collaborators': he avoided Monmouth's rebellion, distrained on three rebel tenants, and in 1688 was appointed JP and nominated by James's electoral agents as a candidate for parliament. Yonge was sufficiently tainted that in the election to the convention of 1689 he had to fall back on the borough of his brother-in-law Richard Duke, Ashburton. However, he was soon busy in parliament demanding redress against the agents of 'popery and slavery', and sat on the committee for the 'Toleration Act'. His first wife having died in 1679, on 18 June 1691 Yonge married Gwen, daughter of Sir Robert Williams, baronet, of Penrhyn, Cornwall. They had one son and four daughters. 
John Locke called his west-country friends 'the Row', their estates running from north to south: Edward Clarke of Chipley near Taunton; Yonge, who built a new house at Escott, near Colyton, in the 1680s (he also had a London house in Bedford Row, Westminster); and Richard Duke of Otterton. In 1686 the Yonges and Dukes visited Locke in the Netherlands. Yonge received presentation copies of three of Locke's publications, and in the 1690s Yonge, with Clarke, John Freke, and John Somers, was part of Locke's 'college' of parliamentary advisers. Yonge was a reliable drafter of legislation, though no orator. He interested himself in fiscal, banking, transport, and trade policy. He supported the 'Triennial Act' and a bill for security of tenure of judges. He and his circle were active in defending the west-country textile industry. In the early 1690s he joined the steady assault on tory ministers, which bore fruit in the whig accession to power in 1694. In this year he was appointed a customs commissioner, a post he held until 1701 and again from 1714 to 1731. He remained loyal to Somers and the junto whigs, although in 1697 he opposed the government over wine duties, preferring to defend the west-country textile trade with Portugal. He became politically less active in the new century. He remained a consistent whig, opposing the occasional conformity bills and supporting the impeachment of the high-church clergyman Dr Sacheverell. He lost his seat in the tory landslide of 1710. 
Yonge died on 18 July 1731, and was buried at Colyton. His son, Sir William Yonge, fourth baronet, was one of the most loyal and unpopular supporters of the prime minister Sir Robert Walpole. 


@@@@@


doc= 38164


Young, John (1585-1654), dean of Winchester, was born in Seaton, Forfarshire, on 25 June 1585, the sixth of eight sons and the eighth of twelve children of Sir Peter Young (1544-1628), tutor to James VI of Scotland, and his first wife, Elizabeth Gibb (died 1593). He attended St Andrews University and took his MA by 1606, when he was incorporated at Cambridge and elected a fellow of Sidney Sussex College. He is alleged to have been one of the first Scots to take a degree at Cambridge. He was ordained priest in December 1610 by Bishop George Abbot of London, had received his BD by 1611 and his DD by 1613, and for a time was tutor to Lord Wharton's son. 
As son of the king's tutor and brother of Patrick Young, the royal librarian, Young enjoyed excellent court connections, which explains his steady preferment after 1611. He was created chancellor of Wells Cathedral in 1611 by Bishop James Montagu, and probably received a canonry at York in 1613; he became a royal chaplain, and in 1616 dean of Winchester. He and his heirs were granted free denization in 1616, and he became rector of Over Wallop in Hampshire in 1620. About 1615 Young married Sarah (died before 1652), daughter of Andrew Bourman of Wells. They had three sons and two daughters, all of whom were to predecease him except his youngest son, John. 
As dean of Winchester, Young was an active servant of James I. Between 1616 and 1621 he made repeated visits to Scotland on royal business, accompanying the king in 1617, and attending the general assembly in Perth in 1618 in support of the king's five articles of ceremonial reform. Young's Scottish background, Calvinist convictions, and diplomatic skills made him an ideal emissary, and he was praised by the archbishop of St Andrews, among others, for his persuasive performance. 
During the Synod of Dort (1618-19) he was an important intermediary between Samuel Ward (died 1643), one of the British delegates, and the king, whom he persuaded to moderate the British position on the universality of divine grace. In 1622 he was ordered to interview the archbishop of Spalato, a convert on the point of returning to Rome, and letters between the two survive. Young could reasonably have expected a bishopric, but he was repeatedly passed over and in 1626 apparently offered $15,000 for the vacant see of Winchester. In 1633 Young was tipped to become bishop of the new see of Edinburgh but the post eventually went to William Forbes; although he remained a royal chaplain until at least 1644, Young evidently did not enjoy the same regard from Charles I or Archbishop William Laud as he had from James I. His activities as dean of Winchester are recorded in his diary, preserved in Winchester Cathedral. He regularly urged the chapter to attend prayers, observe the preaching rota, and practise collegiality. In the 1630s, in particular, he presided over a fractious chapter, divided by personal and some ideological conflict. 
Young took little part in the civil war, but was ejected from his deanery in 1645 and retired to Over Wallop, where he lived until he died on 20 July 1654. He was buried in Exton, Hampshire. His will, dated 2 August 1652, was proved on 18 September 1654. 


@@@@@


doc= 38265


Banks, Sir John, baronet (bap. 1627, d. 1699), merchant and financier, was baptized at the parish church of All Saints, Maidstone, Kent, on 19 August 1627. He was the eldest in the family of two sons and one daughter of Caleb Banks of Maidstone and his wife, Martha Dann, of Faversham. His father was a prosperous woollen draper and former mayor of Maidstone. In 1644 John Banks was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge. By 1652 he had become a member of a syndicate engaged in victualling the navy. In 1654, building upon his father's connections with the London business world, he married Elizabeth, daughter of John Dethick, a leading London merchant who became lord mayor in 1655 and was knighted by Oliver Cromwell in 1656. Banks then moved ahead rapidly in trade and finance, becoming a shareholder in the East India Company and a member of the Levant Company. Despite his earlier links with the parliamentary cause (he was MP for Maidstone in 1654-9) he pursued a moderate royalist line at the Restoration and in 1662 was made a baronet. 
During the 1660s Banks's trading ventures were overshadowed by involvement in naval finance. He advanced money, in ever-growing sums, especially during the second and third Anglo-Dutch wars, and showed great skill in securing repayment, in discounting operations, and in profiting from the high rates of interest which the government had to pay for ready cash. When the stop of the exchequer was forced upon the government in 1672 he received favourable treatment in the resulting settlement. 
Banks did not resume his role as a major lender until after 1689 but meanwhile he had blossomed into a Kentish landowner and re-entered parliament. He invested his business gains in building up an estate, purchasing as a country seat the former Carmelite priory of Aylesford. He became a director of the East India Company in 1669 and served as its governor in 1672-4 and again in 1683. He was also a director of the Royal African Company and its sub-governor in 1674-6. In the course of the 1670s he bought a town house on the grandest side of Lincoln's Inn Fields, as well as spending lavishly on extensive rebuilding at Aylesford. He was re-elected to parliament in 1679 for Rochester, and sat for that borough until 1690; thereafter, until 1694, he represented Queenborough and finally Maidstone again in 1695-8. 
Of Banks's five children, Martha (1658-1675) and John (1668-1669) died young. His eldest surviving daughter, Elizabeth, was married in May 1678, complete with a portion of $10,000, to Heneage Finch, who became solicitor-general in 1679-86; he was the second son of Heneage Finch (later first earl of Nottingham), the lord chancellor. Despite this association with one of the central families of the emerging tory party Banks soon showed himself willing to extend his financial activities to the post-Revolution whig governments. Throughout the 1690s he advanced substantial sums through various channels. His moneylending activities also included loans to members of the Finch family and their political connections. In 1693 his second daughter, Mary, was married to John Savile, of Methley, a member of an important Yorkshire tory family. The substantial portion of $18,000 doubtless reflected 'inter alia' the disparity of age: Mary Banks was thirty, John Savile twenty-two. 
Banks's concern with naval matters led to a friendship with Samuel Pepys. Like Pepys, he had interests wider than finance and administration. In 1668 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, becoming thereby one of the very few businessmen in that body. He served on the society's council in the 1670s; and in 1677, after consulting various fellows of the society, Banks appointed John Locke to act as tutor to his surviving son, Caleb (1659-1696), during the latter's stay in France in 1677-8. 
Shrewd, methodical, and determined, Banks combined business acumen with political trimming. Although filling such conventional offices as JP and deputy lieutenant for Kent, he generally preferred profits to power. His few surviving letters show that he brooked no nonsense from the unbusinesslike; his domestic relationships indicate a generous regard for his family; and his record of successful money-making, from Cromwell to William III, suggests that he learned well the lesson that adaptability is one of the crucial conditions of business survival. 
By 1698 Banks's health was failing and he died on 19 October 1699. His meticulously kept accounts reveal a landed income of about $5000 per annum and total assets at death worth about $180,000, a sum which if translated roughly into modern values would put him into the multi-millionaire category. His wife and his son Caleb having both died in 1696, the baronetcy became extinct, and most of his wealth passed to Elizabeth and Heneage Finch who, in 1714, was created earl of Aylesford. The only remaining visible signs of Banks's life are a set of almshouses in Maidstone, built in accordance with his will, and a massive baroque tomb in Aylesford church. 
D. C. Coleman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38266


Davison, Charles (1858-1940), mathematician and writer on seismology, was born on 1 May 1858 in Bishopwearmouth, co. Durham, the second son of Edwin Charles Davison (1818-1902), fleet paymaster, Royal Navy, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Joseph L. Spence of Swayfield, Lincolnshire. He went to the College of Physical Science, Newcastle upon Tyne (1874-7), and then to Emmanuel College, Cambridge (1877-81), where he became a scholar in 1879. He obtained a BA in mathematics (thirteenth wrangler) in 1881 and an MA in 1885. 
In January 1884 Davison became senior mathematics master at Blairlodge School, Stirlingshire; in January 1885 he was appointed mathematical master (later head of mathematics) at King Edward's High School, Birmingham, where he remained until his retirement in March 1920. On 14 April 1886 he married Margaret Blanche (1855-1948), daughter of James Harris, schoolmaster, of Great Chart, Ashford, Kent; they had one son and two daughters. 
Between 1892 and 1931 Davison wrote nine mathematical textbooks for schools (one as co-author with R. Levett and one with C. H. Richards), covering aspects of plane and solid geometry, trigonometry, algebra, and calculus. He was, however, best known for his work as a writer on the history of British earthquakes and seismology in general, and his books on these topics remain useful sources of reference. He also published numerous papers in 'Nature', the 'Philosophical Magazine', the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', and the 'Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America'. Always on the lookout for periodicity in the frequency of shocks, Davison was one of the first to apply the analytical technique of Fourier analysis but his claim to find evidence of diurnal and lunar effects, in addition to one-, eleven-, and nineteen-year periods, was not supported when sensitive, continuous, recording techniques became available. 
Despite a shy and diffident manner, Davison was a hard-working and gifted teacher of endless patience, from whose classes many able mathematicians went on to university. In 1895 he became secretary to the British Association seismological committee for study of earth tremors and the following year he and the seismologist John Milne, newly returned from his pioneering work in Japan, became joint secretaries of its newly established subcommittee for seismological investigation, until Davison retired from this position in 1899. He had become ScD (Cambridge) in 1896. 
Davison died at his home, 70 Cavendish Avenue, Cambridge, where he lived following his retirement, on 28 April 1940. He was survived by his wife. He was buried on 1 May at St Andrew's Church, Cherry Hinton. 
Richard J. Howarth', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38267


Stroudley, William (1833-1889), mechanical engineer, was born in Sandford, Oxfordshire, on 6 March 1833, one of three sons of William Stroudley, machinist in a local paper mill, and his wife, Anne. After education at a primary school he commenced work with his father at a paper mill and then, again with his father, at a Birmingham printing works. In 1847 he was apprenticed to John Inshaw, who had a small engineering business in Birmingham. His engineering training continued from 1853 to 1854 under Daniel Gooch, locomotive superintendent of the Great Western railway. He completed his training in 1855 on the Great Northern railway at Peterborough and became locomotive shed foreman. In 1861 he was appointed manager of the Cowlairs works of the Edinburgh and Glasgow (later North British) railway and in 1865 locomotive superintendent of the newly formed Highland railway at Inverness, where he rebuilt existing locomotives to make them more suitable for use over its heavily graded lines. 
In 1870 Stroudley was appointed locomotive and carriage superintendent of the London, Brighton, and South Coast railway at a time when its locomotives, rolling-stock, and workshops were in poor condition. He rapidly set about building new and well-equipped workshops at Brighton and introduced new and more powerful locomotives for main-line and suburban passenger and freight services. All were of excellent design and construction and of elegant outline, enhanced by their bright yellow livery. His new passenger carriages were also impressive, with polished mahogany bodies. He was a pioneer in the introduction of train electric lighting, applied to a Pullman car only two years after the invention of the incandescent lamp by Thomas Edison in 1879. He was also responsible for the design of marine engines for the company's cross-channel steamers and patented a successful design for paddle wheels. 
Stroudley was an active member of the institutions of Civil and Mechanical Engineers and in 1884 was awarded the George Stephenson medal and Telford premium for his outstanding paper 'The construction of locomotive engines'. Previously, in 1878, one of his Terrier class 0-6-0 tank locomotives was awarded a gold medal at the Paris Exhibition, and in 1889 his Gladstone class locomotive of 0-4-2 type received a similar award. After the exhibition this locomotive took part in high-speed trials with a number of French locomotives. The locomotive 'Gladstone' is preserved in the National Railway Museum, York. 
While he was a firm disciplinarian Stroudley had the reputation of being scrupulously fair in dealing with his men, by whom he was much respected. He encouraged their interest and enthusiasm by allocating locomotives to individual drivers, whose names were painted in gold letters in the driving cab. He was short-sighted, broad, and stocky, with a dapper appearance. 
Stroudley was married twice, first about 1860 to an unknown person who died in 1865, and second in 1877 to Elise Lumley Brewer, from a family engaged in finance. There were no children. Stroudley died from pneumonia at the Hotel Terminus, rue St Lazare, Paris, on 20 December 1889, following a severe chill after the testing of his locomotive. He was buried in the extramural cemetery in Brighton, where his wife was also later interred. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38268


Wilson, Ernest Henry (1876-1930), plant collector and writer, was born on 15 February 1876 in Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire, the eldest of the six children of Henry Wilson, railway worker, and his wife, Annie Curtis. The family moved to Shirley, Warwickshire, to set up a floristry business, and Wilson was educated at Shirley Schools, before being apprenticed at the Solihull nurseries of Messrs Hewitt. In 1893 he took up a post under W. B. Latham in the Birmingham Botanic Gardens, studying at the technical school in Birmingham, where he won the Queen's prize in botany. In 1897 he obtained a post at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, and planned to enter Imperial College, London, with a studentship in 1898, intending to become a botany teacher. But instead he was chosen, at the recommendation of Sir William Thiselton-Dyer, to be a collector to bring back seed of the dove tree, 'Davidia involucrata', and worked at the Coombe Wood nursery of Harry Veitch, before leaving for China in 1899. 
Wilson first went to Yunnan, to meet the collector Augustine Henry for details of the location of the only known specimen of 'Davidia'. He then went up to Ichang (Yichang), which became his headquarters, and, since Henry's tree had been felled for timber, he located and collected 'Davidia' material in Hupeh (Hubei). In England again, on 8 June 1902 he married Ellen 
(Nellie; 'c'.1872-1930)
, daughter of Edwin Ganderton, jobbing gardener, of Edgbaston, Warwickshire. From 1903 to 1904 he was in China again to collect the yellow poppy, 'Meconopsis integrifolia', returning to England in March with 510 seed samples and 2400 herbarium collections. In 1906 he was appointed botanical assistant at the Imperial Institute. 
Wilson's success as a collector led to his being invited by C. S. Sargent of the Arnold Arboretum at Harvard University to make another visit to China, in 1907-9. During his last Chinese expedition in 1910, when he successfully introduced 'Lilium regale', he broke his leg when his palanquin was swept over in a landslide, and he was lamed for life (he called it his 'lily limp'). In 1911 he returned to the arboretum at Harvard, helping in the preparation of 'Plantae Wilsonianae', which was edited in three volumes by Sargent (1911-17) but partly written by A. Rehder and other specialists. During the First World War Sargent sent Wilson to Japan, principally to collect flowering cherries. He was shown the Kurume azaleas, which he later did much to popularize, and also collected in Korea and Taiwan. This second expedition yielded 30,000 specimens representing 3000 species. He was appointed assistant director of the Arnold Arboretum in 1919 and in 1920 travelled to Australia and New Zealand (where he criticized forestry policy in both), Java, Malaya, India, and tropical and South Africa, returning in 1922. After Sargent's death, Wilson was appointed keeper of the Arnold Arboretum in 1927. 
Wilson wrote a large number of botanical and horticultural articles and books, his experiences in China being contained in 'A Naturalist in Western China' (1913) and 'Plant Hunting' (2 vols., 1927). These presented a rather rosy account of his travels, not dwelling on his exhaustion, his demoralization, or his high-handed attitude towards the Chinese, all of which are clear from his manuscript journals. Like many of his books, they were illustrated with his own photographs: he always carried a Sanderson plate camera and portable darkroom on his plant-hunting expeditions. 
Wilson's chief contribution to botany and horticulture was in the exploration of China. A born collector, with good health, strong physique, great will-power, and a deep love of plants, 'Chinese Wilson' probably brought more first-class woody plants into cultivation than has any other individual collector. He introduced more than a thousand species previously unknown in horticulture and made some 18,000 herbarium gatherings, the top set of which is preserved at Harvard. Besides bringing the 'Davidia' into cultivation, his greatest introduction was perhaps 'Lilium regale', the most widely cultivated lily in the USA, nearly 7000 bulbs of which he arranged to have imported in 1910. Many other familiar garden plants were his introductions too, including 'Artemisia lactiflora, Clematis armandii', 'Kolkwitzia amabilis' (beauty bush), 'Lonicera nitida' (the common hedge-plant), 'Malus hupehensis', 'Parthenocissus henryana', 'Rubus tricolor', and 'Sinacalia (Senecio) tangutica', and numerous cherries, lilacs, maples, and species of 'Berberis', 'Primula', 'Rhododendron', and 'Viburnum', as well as the Chinese gooseberry (or kiwi fruit), 'Actinidia deliciosa', later a major fruit crop. Wilson's major misfortune was that the firm of Veitch declined rapidly before 1914, when the stock was sold off before many of his new plants had been propagated or distributed; the Arnold Arboretum had fewer difficulties with his later collections. Apparently never close to the Chinese (he never learned the language and travelled in some style with a large retinue of porters), he wrote little about the people and rather drily on the landscape and plants. Indeed he was relaxed only among close friends, but in later life he was much in demand as a lecturer in the USA. 
Besides several gold medals for his services to horticulture, notably the Veitch memorial medal (1906) and the Victoria medal of honour (1916) of the Royal Horticultural Society, Wilson received an honorary MA from Harvard (1916) and an honorary DSc from Trinity College, Hartford, Connecticut (1930); he was elected a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. A genus of trees, 'Sinowilsonia', is named after him, and about sixty species and varieties of plants also bear his name, notably 'Magnolia wilsonii'. He and his wife (who had suffered ill health all her life) were killed in a car crash near Worcester, Massachusetts, on 15 October 1930. They were survived by their daughter, Muriel Primrose ('b'. 1906). Their cremated remains were buried in Mount Royal cemetery, Montreal, at her request, on 'British' soil. In 1984 the Wilson Garden was set up in Chipping Campden as a memorial to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 38269


Sutton, Robert (bap. 1708, d. 1788), surgeon, apothecary, and smallpox inoculator, was baptized in Kenton, Suffolk, on 12 February 1708, the son of Robert Sutton, gentleman. He was apprenticed in September 1726 to John Turner of Debenham, Suffolk, apothecary. In October 1731, shortly after completing his apprenticeship, he married Sarah Barker of Debenham. The first of their eight sons, Robert, was born in 1732 and in the same year Sutton returned to Kenton to start his own practice as surgeon and apothecary. There were also three daughters of the marriage. 
Sutton then worked for many years as a country doctor, during which time his son Robert nearly died from smallpox inoculation performed by a 'surgeon of his acquaintance'. This experience determined Sutton 'to dedicate his thoughts solely to the Small-pox; to... investigate a means whereby... that distemper might be lessened and danger, if possible, prevented by inoculation'. Following a lengthy period of study he evolved a plan for inoculation. This he tested on a single patient in 1755. The results were favourable and there began a series of trials which 'convinced him that he had made some valuable discoveries'. 
In the spring of 1757 Sutton opened an inoculation house staffed by nurses where patients stayed for one month. So successful was this venture that two further houses were opened in September. A fourth house was opened in the summer of 1758. By the autumn of 1760 he had agents in sixteen towns and villages in Suffolk, south Norfolk, and north-east Essex. In 1761, probably as the result of competition from a rival inoculator, Sutton reduced his top fee from 7 to 5 guineas, with easier terms 'for the... lower Class of People'. 
By December 1761 the observations and modifications of several years' practical experience led Sutton to believe he had perfected his method. Earlier English inoculators had made deep cuts with the lancet and inserted large amounts of material from mature smallpox pustules, believing that protection was not obtainable unless the patient suffered a pronounced smallpox attack. As a later inoculator pointed out, 'little difference was perceived between the natural Smallpox, and that conveyed by inoculation'. This was rejected by Sutton, who reverted to the original Graeco-Turkish technique of superficial scarification using small amounts of lymph. Even more important was his use of lymph taken from a smallpox pustule in its early stage of development, rather than from a mature pustule which was likely to be contaminated with a variety of organisms. The severity of symptoms in inoculees was thereby much reduced and the risk of a healthy patient's dying almost eliminated. In brief, the Suttonian method comprised treatment which was almost painless and relatively mild in its effects, while the greatly decreased number of pustules lessened disfigurement. 
In the nine months from December 1761 to September 1762 Sutton performed a further 365 inoculations, all successfully. In the autumn of 1762 two inoculation houses were opened in Barrow, near Bury St Edmunds, under the control of his son Robert. About the same time his second son, Daniel Sutton, who had been working as an assistant to an Essex doctor, joined the practice, which was then at its zenith. A disagreement over patients' preparation and post-operational recovery regime resulted in Daniel's leaving his father in 1763 to set up on his own at Ingatestone, Essex. Thereafter Sutton was overshadowed by his ambitious, avaricious, and energetic second son, who was to amass a fortune by publicizing and exploiting the Suttonian method of inoculation. Sutton died in 1788 and was buried on 13 April in Thetford, Norfolk. 
J. R. Smith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38270


Zaharoff, Basil (1849-1936), arms dealer, was born on 6 October 1849 at Mugla, Anatolia, the only son and eldest of the four children of Basilius Zacharoff (died 1878) of Constantinople, a notary, commodity dealer, and importer of attar of roses, and his (reportedly blind) wife, Helena Antonides (died 1879). Afterwards he lied promiscuously about his antecedents: sometimes he claimed a Polish father and French-Levantine mother; he bamboozled the British ambassador at Paris into believing that he was an Oxford University-educated Russo-Greek; when intriguing in Romania he persuaded the British minister at Bucharest 'that he was born at Jassy of a Roumanian mother 'nee' Mavrocordato, and that he has revisited Roumania since his early youth' (Sir H. Dering, dispatch 580, 31 Oct 1922, TNA: PRO, FO 371/7698). Supposedly when young he worked as a brothel-tout and as an arsonist for the Constantinople firemen, who made money on salvage. 
Masquerading as a Russian officer called Prince Gortzacoff, General de Kieff, he went to London, where he married, on 14 October 1872, Emily Ann Burrows ('b'. 1845?), daughter of John Burrows, builder, of Bristol. He was the first man extradited from Belgium to Britain under a new treaty in 1872 and was prosecuted for embezzlement of merchandise worth $1000 and securities exceeding $6000. Released on his own recognizance of $100 after offering compensation, he fled in 1873 to Cyprus, where (using sundry aliases) he set up as a storekeeper and boldly unscrupulous contractor. He settled in the USA in 1881 and became interested in ranches and railroad-building. Exposed after a bigamous marriage to an heiress, Jeannie Frances Billings, in New York in 1885, he assumed the name of Basil Zaharoff. 
Known to intimates as Zedzed, Zaharoff began selling armaments for the Anglo-Swedish firm of Nordenfelt in Greece in 1877, and he developed the notorious 'systeme' 'Zaharoff' in which he played off one country against another to create a demand. Having sold one of the world's first submarines to Greece in 1885, he sold two to Turkey in 1886. (These prototypes proved too unsafe to use.) Quick-firing guns were, however, his chief commodity in the 1880s and 1890s. Bribery was a formal preliminary rather than a determinant of the arms trade in the markets where he concentrated. A brilliantly adaptable linguist, he had a truly cosmopolitan outlook. Having engineered Nordenfelt's merger with the rival company of Hiram Maxim in 1888, he visited Russia to sell the new Maxim machine-gun, and then Chile, Peru, and Brazil in 1888-9. When the Vickers steel company acquired the Maxim-Nordenfelt Guns and Ammunition Company, he was retained by the new combine in 1897 and for thirty years acted, in the phrase of its financial comptroller, Sir Vincent Caillard, as 'our General Representative for business abroad' (Caillard to Sir A. Chamberlain, 23 April 1925, TNA: PRO, FO 371/10604). 
Maxim-Nordenfelt had a Spanish light-armaments works called Placencia, of which Zaharoff became a director in 1896; from this starting point he 'created' Vickers' business in Spain (Zaharoff to G. Sim, 18 Feb 1929, CUL, Vickers MSS, Vickers microfilm R333). Vickers not only sold weaponry to the Spanish armed forces but in 1909 formed a new naval arsenal in collaboration with the state. Zaharoff's connection with Spain was intensified by a long-standing amour with a royal duchess, the paternity of whose three daughters was attributed to him. In Russia too he did much business. During 1902-4 Vickers, Sons, and Maxim paid him a total of $109,000; in 1905, at the time of the Russo-Japanese War, Vickers disbursed $86,000 to him in commission. He exercised limited, mercenary influence at the Spanish and Russian courts before 1914 but had no political importance in London or Paris. T. P. O'Connor described his first meeting with 'Zed' in 1913: 'there entered with brisk step a very tall thin man with the air of a great fencer, with a long thin face, a slight grey moustache, and eyes of blue grey, steely almost in their strength, their penetration, and their courage' (Fyfe, 236-7). Osbert Sitwell found him 'both evil and imposing about his figure' and likened him to a vulture: 'the beaky face, the hooded eye, the wrinkled neck, the full body, the impression of physical power and the capacity to wait, the sombre alertness.... He was in outlook merely a super-croupier. And once... I heard him introducing himself to a millionaire friend of mine with the startling phrase, 'I am Basil Zaharoff: I have sixteen millions!' (Sitwell, 267-8)' Zaharoff was a mountebank who indulged in self-mystification and encouraged fabulous rumours. He lived sumptuously in Paris (with a famous set of gold dinner plate afterwards sold to King Farouk of Egypt), took French citizenship in 1908, and became a shareholder in the Banque de France. As early as 1891 he founded the Express Bank, a bureau de change in place de l'Opera in Paris, and in 1918 he jointly formed the Banque de la Seine, which dabbled in Mesopotamian oil diplomacy (and set up the Banque Commerciale de la Mediterranee at Constantinople in 1920) but was wound up in 1925. 
Zaharoff's international mischief-making was as much egotistical in motive as commercial or political. In 1912 he instigated an offer of the Portuguese throne to Prince Christopher of Greece, to whom he confided: 'I have been lucky all my life; if I hadn't been, I should have been murdered long ago, or else serving a life sentence in some prison' (Prince Christopher, 115). Zaharoff was used by the British government to induce neutral Greece to join the allied cause in 1915, and with the cognizance of David Lloyd George he was sent to Switzerland to bribe Enver Pasha and other Turkish leaders with $10 million in gold to declare an armistice in 1917. His reports of this expedition are melodramatic if not mendacious. He was created GBE in 1918 and GCB in 1919: George V, who detested him, resented his use of titles, which, as a French citizen, were only honorary. For some years Zaharoff subsidized the Greek politician Eleutherios Venizelos, who in turn helped him in dealings with foreign powers, but ultimately the two men quarrelled. He was believed to have financed the Greek expedition which landed at Smyrna in June 1919, and was reviled for his part in promoting the Graeco-Turkish War which ended in such bloody humiliation in 1922. Like his interventions in oil diplomacy, his influence has been exaggerated. 
Zaharoff was indubitably impressive. His poses convinced so worldly an Englishman as Viscount Bertie of Thame, who wrote: 'He owns half the shares in Vickers Maxim, is the largest shareholder of the Monte Carlo Casino and has big holdings in American Railways and Steel Trust shares; I am told on excellent authority that he is worth over ten millions sterling. He is a personal friend of Walter Long, Bonar Law and Steel-Maitland and knows most of the present British Cabinet. He is said to have many of the leading French politicians in his pocket. I have known him for over ten years. I believe him to be a very just man though hard. He is anti-semitic and his numerous enemies accuse him of being a poseur and to be prone to exaggeration.... I have a great personal regard for him. (Lord Bertie of Thame, memorandum on Zaharoff, 24 June 1917, TNA: PRO, FO 800/175)' Most of these claims were bogus or overblown: his holdings in Vickers were small; though he had apparently made financial loans to the casino, his syndicate only took control in 1923 and reduced its investment by 1926. He had some small French newspaper interests. Together with Steel-Maitland and Sir Leander Jameson he briefly had a financial stake in the 'Sunday Times' before it was bought by William Berry in 1915; during 1922 he teased Sir Campbell Stuart with a plan to buy 'The Times' after Lord Northcliffe's death. The ambassador to Berlin, Edgar Vincent, Viscount D'Abernon, told Stresemann in 1923 that Zaharoff 'was the modern Monte Christo, and was, or had been, fabulously rich. Everything he touched had turned to gold' (Viscount D'Abernon, 2.282). Zaharoff donated $28,000 to the Sorbonne in Paris to found a chair of aviation (1909) and endowed similar chairs at Petrograd and the Imperial College of Science and Technology, London (1919). To celebrate the armistice he endowed with $25,000 the Marshal Foch chair of French literature at Oxford University, and received an honorary DCL in 1920. 
In 1924 Zaharoff finally married his mistress, Marie del Pilar Antonia-Angela-Patrocinio-Simona de Muguiro y Beruete (1868-1926), recently widowed by the death of Francisco Maria Isabel de Borbon y Borbon, duke of Marchena, and in that year created duchess of Villafranca de los Caballeros in her own right. After her death, which made him dangerously ill, he adopted her two surviving daughters, who inherited his fortune. Later in the 1920s gout restricted his travelling and he became very deaf. 
An unauthorized biography by Richard Lewinsohn issued by Victor Gollancz in 1929 excited the interest of other investigative journalists. As part of the campaign against private manufacturers of armaments, radicals such as Fenner Brockway in 'The Bloody Traffic' (1933) attacked Zaharoff and his fellow merchants of death as fomenters of war. After reading the Union of Democratic Control's pamphlet, 'The Secret International', Zaharoff wrote that '25% of the facts and 75% of the conclusions are incorrect, yet many of its allusions are correct' (Zaharoff to Sir M. W. Jenkinson, 28 July 1932, CUL, Vickers MSS, Vickers microfilm R338). His reputation became an embarrassment to Vickers, particularly during the deliberations of the royal commission on the private manufacture of and trading in arms (1935-6). 
Zaharoff died of heart failure on 27 November 1936 at the Hotel de Paris, Monte Carlo, Monaco, and was interred in a mausoleum in the grounds of his chateau at Balincourt, Arronville, near Pontoise (Val-d'Oise), France. There are disobliging allusions to him in Ezra Pound's 'Cantos', and he is the anti-hero of Michael Edwardes's novel 'The Man from the other Shore' (1981). 


@@@@@


doc= 38271


John fitz Geoffrey (c.1206-1258), justiciar of Ireland and baronial leader, was the son of Geoffrey fitz Peter, fourth earl of Essex, justiciar of England (died 1213), and his second wife, Aveline, daughter of Roger de Clare, earl of Hertford, and widow of William de Munchensi. In 1227 John fitz Geoffrey gave the king 300 marks to have seisin of the lands that had descended to him by right of inheritance from his father. Geoffrey fitz Peter had intended these to be extensive, for King John had granted to him and his heirs from his marriage with Aveline the castle and honour of Berkhamsted. This grant, however, never came to fruition, and Berkhamsted, after Geoffrey's death, remained in the hands of the king. Thus, with the earldom of Essex passing to the descendants of Geoffrey's first marriage, John had to make do with such manors as Aylesbury and Steeple Claydon in Buckinghamshire, Exning in Suffolk, and Cherhill and Winterslow in Wiltshire, the last the only part of the honour of Berkhamsted that he obtained. John was a substantial magnate but, in terms of land held in hereditary right, not one of the first rank. Probably this situation, and the example of his father, who had risen in the king's service from humble origins to the earldom of Essex, was the spur to his long career in the royal administration. 
John began that career as sheriff of Yorkshire between 1234 and 1236. Then, in 1237, at the request of a parliament that conceded the king taxation, he was added to the king's council along with William (IV) de Warenne, earl of Surrey, and William de Ferrers, earl of Derby. If this elevation to the highest level reflected John's standing with his fellow magnates, in the ensuing years he gained and retained the confidence of the king. From 1237 until 1245 he seems to have acted as one of the stewards of the king's household, a post that he combined with the sheriffdom of Gloucestershire (1238-46) and more briefly with the office of chief justice of the southern forests (1241-2) and the seneschalship of Gascony (1243). He was thus well fitted for his long period in office as justiciar of Ireland (1245-56), where he had private interests through the dower of his wife, Isabel (daughter of Hugh Bigod, earl of Norfolk), who was the widow of Gilbert de Lacy of co. Meath. In 1254 Ireland was made part of the endowment of Edward, the king's son, and John fitz Geoffrey, between 1254 and 1258, became the prince's leading councillor. He also retained his place on the council of the king. His rewards from the latter, over his long career, had included the manors of Whaddon, Buckinghamshire, and Ringwood, Hampshire, the wardship of the land and heirs of Theobald Butler in Ireland (for which he paid 3000 marks), and 'for his immense and laudable service' the whole cantred of the Isles in Thomond. 
In the political crisis of 1258, however, John fitz Geoffrey was one of the king's chief opponents. Indeed, a later chronicle, the Westminster 'Flores historiarum', named him and Simon de Montfort as the ringleaders of the revolution. Certainly he was one of the seven magnates whose confederation in April 1258 began the process of reform. He was then one of the twelve chosen by the barons to reform the realm, and one of the council of fifteen imposed on the king by the provisions of Oxford. On 23 July 1258 he went with Roger (III) Bigod, earl of Norfolk, and Simon de Montfort to demand that the Londoners accept 'whatever the barons should provide for the utility and foundation of the realm' ('Cronica maiorum et vicecomitum Londiniarum', 38-9). John's sudden death on 23 November 1258 thus deprived the new regime of one of its bastions. The Westminster 'Flores' ascribed John's conduct to resentment at being removed from the justiciarship of Ireland. Like other leading magnates he was also provoked by the behaviour of the king's Poitevin half-brothers. His place in Edward's councils was threatened by their growing influence over the prince. In addition, he was engaged in a fierce dispute over the advowson of one of his manors -- Shere in Surrey -- with the youngest of the brothers, Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke and bishop-elect of Winchester. This reached a climax on 1 April 1258 when Valence's men attacked John's at Shere and killed one of them. When John demanded justice, the king refused to hear him. This episode helped spur the revolutionary action taken against the king at the Westminster parliament which opened a week later. Indignation at John's treatment spread the more easily because his brothers-in-law were Roger Bigod, earl of Norfolk, and Hugh Bigod, who was later appointed justiciar by the provisions of Oxford. Both were his colleagues among the seven original confederate magnates. 
John fitz Geoffrey was evidently a man of considerable parts, respected both by his fellow magnates and by the king. Indeed, despite his role in the revolution of 1258, when Henry III heard of John's death he ordered a solemn mass to be celebrated for his soul and donated a cloth of gold to cover his coffin. John was succeeded by his son, John fitz John, who became a leading supporter of Simon de Montfort. 
D. A. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38272


John, Sir, fitz John (c.1240-1275), baronial leader, was the son of John fitz Geoffrey (c.1206-1258), justiciar of Ireland, and his wife, Isabel, the daughter of Hugh Bigod, third earl of Norfolk, and the widow of Gilbert de Lacy of Meath. John fitz Geoffrey was a prime instigator, with Simon de Montfort, of the political revolution of 1258. In February 1259 John fitz John undertook to pay $300 for seisin of his father's lands while still under age. He thus acquired a substantial magnate inheritance centred upon Buckinghamshire, where he was lord of Aylesbury, Whaddon, and Steeple Claydon. 
In 1261 John fitz John, as part of the abortive attempt to prevent the overthrow of the provisions of Oxford, the revolutionary programme imposed in 1258, became sheriff of Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire in opposition to the sheriff appointed by the king. Two years later he joined Simon de Montfort when the latter returned to England and reimposed the provisions. While others deserted, John fitz John remained with Montfort to the end, bringing with him several Buckinghamshire and Northamptonshire knights. In July 1263 John's local influence was acknowledged and increased when Montfort's government made him keeper of the peace in Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire; in December, with the other Montfortians, he accepted Louis IX's offer to arbitrate on their quarrel with the king. When Louis's verdict condemned the provisions of Oxford outright, the Montfortians refused to accept the verdict and prepared for war. In March 1264 John was involved in the seizure of Gloucester. Next month he led the pillage of the Jews in London. He killed the most famous, Kok son of Abraham, with his own hands and was less than pleased when Montfort made him share part of the spoils. John then took part in the siege of Rochester (17 April) before being knighted in London (4 May), just before Montfort marched out of the city to bring the king's army to battle. However, according to the Dunstable annals, John fitz John had been knighted earlier at Gloucester. 
At the battle of Lewes (14 May 1264) John fitz John commanded the 2nd division of Montfort's army with Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester, and William de Munchensi. 'He fought strenuously in the battle', the annals of Worcester recorded, 'smashing steel helmets and taking many of his adversaries prisoner' ('Ann. mon.', 4.452). In Montfort's subsequent regime, although involved in negotiations with the marcher barons and with the increasingly disaffected Gilbert de Clare, John's role was in the provinces rather than at court, perhaps in part because of his comparative youth. As castellan of Windsor (from June 1264) he dragooned the local population into providing a garrison and munitions for the castle. In addition, when his brother-in-law Robert de Vieuxpont died in June 1264, he became custodian of Vieuxpont's lordship of Westmorland. After the desertion of Gilbert de Clare and the escape of Edward, the king's son, from captivity, John fitz John was with Montfort on his final campaign and was captured at the battle of Evesham (4 August 1265), being saved from death by the royalist Roger de Clifford, who had married his niece. 
Roger de Clifford was not the only royalist to whom John fitz John was related, for he himself had married a daughter of the king's justiciar, Sir Philip Basset. Basset's eldest daughter, however, had married Hugh Despenser, one of Montfort's closest associates, and perhaps that tie, together with the role of his father in 1258, influenced John's political sympathies. He was also one of a group of young and warlike men (Robert de Vieuxpont and William de Munchensi were others), called contemptuously 'the junior boys of England' ('Ann. mon.', 4.133) by the chronicler Thomas Wykes, who were attracted to Montfort's side, quite probably by the glamour of his military reputation. 
John fitz John's career after Evesham provides a good example of how former Montfortians could be rehabilitated. In July 1266 he was pardoned by the king for his past trespasses. Some of his lands had meanwhile been occupied and doubtless protected by royalist kinsmen -- by Roger de Clifford and by William de Beauchamp of Elmley, who had married one of John's sisters. The bulk of his lands had been given to Gilbert de Clare and, under the terms of the dictum of Kenilworth, had to be repurchased by John at five times their annual value. Perhaps the financial strain is reflected in John's sale of Ringwood Manor, Hampshire, for 2250 marks; but he was on good terms with Clare, and appeared as a member of his entourage in and after 1267. Later John gained the favour of Edward I and, in 1274, he represented the king at a great council at Lyons. His death (childless) in November 1275 caused grief to both king and court. 
John fitz John had given vigorous military support to the cause of Simon de Montfort. His career permits a glimpse of both the virtues and the vices of the medieval 'miles strenuus'. 
D. A. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38273


Lynch, Eliza Alicia (1835-1886), mistress of Francisco Solano Lopez, marshal-president of Paraguay, was born in co. Cork, Ireland, on 3 June 1835, the youngest daughter of John Lynch ('b'. 'c'.1808), a medical doctor and country squire, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Lloyd. Relatively little about Lynch's childhood has surfaced, though she clearly enjoyed an affluent status. According to her later testimony, her father, a Roman Catholic, was related to two bishops 'and more than seventy magistrates' (Lynch, 6). He had graduated from Trinity College, Dublin, and while he never practised as a physician, he married into a family of well-placed protestant landowners. His wife's family were of Welsh descent, and owned considerable property not only in Ireland, but also in England and on the French coast opposite Dover; they included naval officers who had served under Nelson. 
In later years Lynch described her time in Ireland in nostalgic and idyllic terms. The reality was almost certainly different. She was ten years old when the famine devastated the island. Her ambition for wealth and security, which later observers thought so exaggerated, doubtless had its origin in what she saw happen to her poorer neighbours. That she dreamed of becoming a princess represented more than just a childish fantasy; it brought a measure of escape from the uncertainties she witnessed in Ireland. These took a personal turn when her father suddenly died when she was still 'very young' (probably in the mid-1840s). Her mother then removed the adolescent girl from Ireland, taking the family to live at Boulogne; Lynch received most of her education in France. 
Aged fourteen, Lynch made the acquaintance of a French army pharmacist, Xavier Quatrefages ('b'. 1813), who arranged with Lynch's mother to marry the young girl. The marriage took place at the parish church, Folkestone, Kent, on 3 June 1850, her fifteenth birthday. Her new husband was twenty-two years her senior, and could boast a solid, petit-bourgeois background (his father, Pierre Quatrefages, was a merchant) and some years of service in the army. An image of her at this time reveals a young girl of surpassing beauty, with alabaster skin, blue-grey eyes, slim waist, and a sparkle of maturity far beyond her years. She displayed, moreover, considerable charm and effervescence. The qualities that led Lynch so easily into marriage quickly led her out of it. The piquant tales that her political enemies circulated many years afterwards had her involved in a series of passionate affairs with her husband's commanding officer, a Russian archduke, an English banker, and a Spanish aristocrat whom she met after the newly wed couple arrived at Quatrefages's posting in Algiers. The details of each of these supposed affairs remain obscure. What is known is that Lynch fell ill in the desert environment, and took the first opportunity to move to Paris where she cut herself free from her husband. Though she always stayed on good terms with Quatrefages, she never lived with him again. Instead she dedicated herself to finding a more suitable partner. 
Eliza Lynch had a natural command of the art of flattery so highly prized in the Parisian 'demi-monde'. The modest allowance she received from her family kept her alive. Meanwhile, her flair for languages, her broad reading, her choice of fine furnishings and the best of wines, and her skill at telling gentlemen callers what they wanted to hear made her an outstanding presence in the lesser salons of the Second Empire. She knew many suitors, but was constantly on the lookout for a permanent protector, which she found in the person of Francisco Solano Lopez (1826-1870), whom she claimed to have met at a ball in Paris early in 1854 ('The Times', 15 May 1871, 14). Son of the Paraguayan president, Lopez had come to Europe to seek diplomatic support for his little-known country and to obtain armaments for its fledgling armed forces. Queen Victoria and the British foreign secretary treated Lopez with all the seriousness due to the offspring of a foreign head of state. In France he was presented to Napoleon III and Empress Eugenie. With his sensual features and over-elaborate uniforms, Lopez appeared to some casual observers as more savage than statesman, and he felt out of his depth in the glitter of Old World receptions. Yet he spent lavishly, a habit that always attracted a following, including Madame Lynch, as she now styled herself. 
In short order, Lynch joined Lopez as his travelling companion to Italy and Spain, though Pope Pius IX refused to receive Lopez so long as he flaunted his affection for a common courtesan. By now Lynch had become not only the Paraguayan's lover but also his most trusted confidante, his chief adviser, and the only person not afraid to directly challenge his opinion. In November 1854 they travelled separately back to South America: he went aboard the Paraguayan warship 'Tacuari' and she aboard a passenger ship, reaching Buenos Aires in January 1855, when she gave birth to their son Panchito. 
Lynch's arrival at the port of Asuncion in Paraguay, after a 1000-mile journey upriver, occasioned curiosity in the town. Many poor Paraguayans felt dazzled by her glamour and show of Parisian fineries, as witnessed by a British resident, George Frederick Masterman. President Carlos Antonio Lopez was less impressed by Francisco's choice of a partner, not least because her marriage to Quatrefages had never been annulled. The president forbade his son from living outright with Lynch, and within the family it was understood that she might act as unofficial consort, but never as wife. Even so, all nine of the children she bore Francisco Solano Lopez received their father's surname and his claim to respect and authority in Paraguay. 
The irregularity of Madame Lynch's connection with Lopez made her few friends among the society ladies of Asuncion. Her paramour indulged her with money, properties, and luxuries of all kinds. Soon she was the richest woman in Paraguay, but she still craved respectability. Feeling profoundly isolated, Lynch made some friends among the foreign community, busied herself with her children, and promoted education in the country. She encouraged the government to employ instructors and cultural advisers from abroad. She sponsored literary contests and advised journalists. She created a salon of sorts in Asuncion that included many members of the foreign community. Eliza Lynch influenced Paraguayan culture in basic ways. She introduced jewelled coiffures and straw hats decorated with flowers, and imported perfumes, tulles, and belts, thus breaking accepted conventions in fashion. She did the same for music and dance. She imported one of the first pianos in the country and one of its first sewing machines. She popularized the polka and the London 'karape'. The open way in which she broke with the established high culture influenced a younger generation. Members of the Paraguayan elite began to see themselves almost as Europeans in consequence, and, like the 'madama', they became ambitious. In the case of Francisco Solano Lopez himself, it meant transforming Paraguay into a major force in South American politics. When his father died in 1862 the general succeeded to the presidency and set out to fulfil what he saw as his country's destiny. 
During his father's lifetime Solano Lopez had been given carte blanche to launch a programme for the rapid modernization of Paraguay, especially the country's military. He had contracted the Blyth brothers of Limehouse, London, to make available European engineers and machinists to build an iron foundry, merchant fleet, and railroad. Armaments were imported and a huge fortress in the south at Humaita (which foreigners frequently compared to Sevastopol) was constructed. By the time of his succession to the presidency Lopez could point to a formidable army, one of the largest in South America. 
In 1864 Lopez retaliated against Brazilian incursions in the Banda Oriental of Uruguay by seizing the southernmost districts of Brazil's Mato Grosso province. He had thought to make common cause with his supporters in Montevideo, and the following year he rashly sent an expeditionary force across Argentine territory to aid those potential allies. This senseless provocation caused an unlikely triple alliance of Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay to spring into existence against him. The bloody war that followed lasted five more years. 
Opponents of Eliza Lynch have claimed that she encouraged Lopez to assume the rank of marshal and launch the war in expectation that Paraguay would emerge as an acknowledged great power. He would then become emperor and their children would be recognized as princes. There is less to this tale than meets the eye. What is true is that she stayed close to Lopez throughout the conflict, from the long siege of Humaita (1866-8) to the terrible retreat to the north (1868-70). He took other mistresses during these years, and she made him suffer publicly for it. Still, their basic partnership and mutual affection never seriously wavered. 
The war proved the most brutal conflict ever seen in South America, and brought enormous suffering to the uncomplaining Paraguayans. Food was scarce and became more so. Casualties were extremely high, especially after cholera and smallpox spread from among the ranks into the civilian population. Over half of all Paraguayans perished, leaving 28,000 adult males out of a total prewar population of 450,000. As these terrible events unfolded, Lopez lost his grip on reality. He imagined treachery on all sides, and ordered the execution of some of his most trusted advisers. Only Madame Lynch seemed capable of calming his rage. She herself saw much of the war, tending to the sick, and giving encouragement to the troops, among whom she was always popular. Detractors argued that she ran an espionage organization that carried out some of the worst atrocities. No evidence supports this calumny, though it is clear enough that Lynch remained a strong partisan of the national cause long after it was obviously doomed. She several times offered to command female troops, and though this offer was rejected she evidently wore a uniform of sorts, complete with riding crop as symbol of authority. 
Asuncion fell on 1 January 1869 at about the same time that the starving remnants of the Humaita garrison struck their flag. Lynch and Lopez fled inland as the allies installed a puppet government. Though he now commanded only a tiny force of children and old men, the marshal fought on. Eventually the allies grew tired of his raiding and mounted a new campaign to root out and destroy his followers. Lynch and Lopez, accompanied by a few faithful officers, drew back into the forests of northern Paraguay. During these last months on the run Marshal Lopez slaughtered many of his remaining cohorts, including his own brother. He had his own mother flogged. On 1 March 1870 the Brazilians caught up with Lopez near the Aquidaban river at Cerro Cora. Called on to surrender, the defiant marshal was fatally lanced by a cavalryman. Lynch was on a nearby trail moving up by carriage together with Panchito, now at fifteen a colonel in the army. As the Brazilians approached, Panchito, like his father before him, refused to surrender. He, too, was lanced to death. His mother, covered in his blood, was permitted to scoop out a grave for both her first-born son and his father. 
Lynch received deferential treatment from her Brazilian captors, but not from the Paraguayans. The surviving society women of Asuncion petitioned the new government to demand that she relinquish the jewels that Lopez had stolen. Allied troops guarded her house after she disembarked at the capital, but there was never any doubt that they intended to expel her. She vehemently denied possession of any stolen property, and demanded the right to face her accusers. When she sought formal British diplomatic protection, on the ground that she was a British-born subject, the Foreign Office in London denied her claim, since her marriage to a French subject deprived her of British nationality. However, the British envoy at Buenos Aires was advised to request that the local authorities offer her protection. At Buenos Aires, she transferred aboard a British vessel, the 'City of Limerick', and sailed to Europe together with her remaining children and those that Lopez had fathered with other mistresses. Arriving at Southampton in July 1870, she divided her time between homes in Paris and London. Still a relatively young woman, Eliza Lynch spent her remaining years trying to clear her name and that of the dead marshal. She had managed to get some money out of Paraguay during the early stages of the war, though not nearly as much as some later claimed. She now loudly insisted that her children deserved their full inheritance, no matter what slanders the allied propaganda machinery invented about the family. Lopez, she truthfully insisted, had formally assigned her all his worldly goods, and now she and her children intended to get what was theirs. She was involved in lawsuits brought in Edinburgh (May 1871) and London (May 1872), calling many of her former acquaintances from Paraguay to testify as to her good character. 
Lynch returned to South America in 1875 to pursue a legal settlement over the vast properties that the marshal had transferred to her name a decade earlier. She issued 'Exposicion y protesta' in Buenos Aires to explain her position to a less than sympathetic public. Tired and depressed, she returned empty-handed to Europe and left her remaining Paraguayan affairs to her sons, Enrique Venancio, Carlos Honorio, and Federico Morgan Lloyd. She may have gone back to Ireland for a short visit, and then went for a time to Jerusalem on a pilgrimage. In the end, though, she always returned to Paris, where, alone and ignored, she died of stomach cancer on 25 July 1886. She was buried in the Pere Lachaise cemetery. 
The story of Madame Lynch's love affair with Francisco Solano Lopez has long remained the stuff of gossip in Paraguay, and has inspired novelistic treatments by foreigners. In 1961 the government of Alfredo Stroessner brought her remains back to Asuncion, but controversy clouded the occasion. Because her martyred lover had been placed in a national pantheon that was simultaneously consecrated as a church, the bishop refused to allow the marshal's paramour to rest by his side. Lynch was instead interred in an ornate marble tomb in another cemetery several miles away. In her native Ireland, on the other hand, no monument has ever been erected to her memory, and she has been almost completely forgotten. 


@@@@@


doc= 38274


Frink, Dame Elisabeth Jean (1930-1993), sculptor and printmaker, was born on 14 November 1930 at The Grange, Thurlow, Suffolk, the only daughter of Ralph Cuyler Frink (1899-1974), cavalry officer, and his wife, Jean Conway-Gordon ('b'. 1910), a colonel's daughter. 
Frink's early years were spent travelling with her army father, who was serving with the 4th-7th dragoon guards, to Shorncliffe, Kent, Salisbury Plain, Aldershot, and Edinburgh, but home remained at Thurlow. She had her first pony at three, and was riding at four, and then, through her father, became interested in dogs and guns. In 1940, when Frink was ten, her father was stationed at Kingston, Dorset, close to the Purbeck quarries and the magnificent ruin of Corfe Castle; both sites impressed her enough for her to make Dorset her home over thirty years later. 
In 1941 Frink's mother sent her to Chypraze, near Exmouth, Devon, to stay with her godmother to avoid the planes and bombs in Suffolk, as Thurlow was surrounded by air stations. Frink started to draw when she was thirteen and her subjects were men on skeletal horses rendered in ink and wash, which she called 'apocalyptic'. At sixteen, with her father confined in the army sanatorium at Midhurst, Surrey, she applied for and won a place at Guildford School of Art. In 1947 she started in the painting school, but moved over to sculpture, where the head of department was the sculptor Willi Soukop. At this time she was given a book on Rodin, and she later remembered that 'life began for me then'. 
At Guildford Frink learned to model in clay, and also to carve in wood and stone. Carving was too slow a method for her, and she abandoned it as a sculptural practice. She spent two years at Guildford and then applied to Chelsea School of Art in 1949, following Soukop, who had moved there in 1948. At Chelsea, where she studied from 1949 to 1953, she perfected her own method of modelling and carving in plaster of Paris, a practice used by the head of department there, Bernard Meadows, and also by Henry Moore, a visiting tutor who influenced her at that time. Her student sculptures were mainly men with birds and dogs, cast in cement or plaster. 
In 1951 Frink visited Paris for the first time and admired the recent work of Giacometti, Germaine Richier, and Picasso, all of whom made figurative sculptures in plaster. In 1952 she received her first major commission, a figure of St John Bosco (des.), for the new church of St John Bosco in Woodley, near Reading, Berkshire. Frink was brought up a Roman Catholic, and although she did not practise her religion regularly, she executed several major religious sculptural commissions throughout her career. The second work recorded in her 'catalogue raisonne' was a large plaster figure of 'Christ at the Pillar'. 'So far as the traditional iconography of religion is concerned, with its events and characters, I have accepted commissions to make crucifixions, altar crosses, a risen Christ in Solihull, a big Head of Christ for All Saints' Church, Basingstoke, an eagle lectern for Coventry Cathedral and a walking Madonna outside Salisbury Cathedral... I also did a larger than life-size figure of Judas in 1961, not through a commission but for myself... The religious impulse or acceptance or awareness must be there, but almost at an unconscious level -- and it is not only activated by commissions because the idea for Judas had absorbed me for some time as a formal, figurative embodiment of the idea of betrayal. (Shaffer, Robertson, and Kent, 33)' Her last religious commission was her last work, 'The Risen Christ', for Liverpool Cathedral, unveiled by her son on Easter Sunday, 11 April 1993, a week before her death. 
In 1952, while still a student, Frink exhibited with two other sculptors at the prestigious Beaux Arts Gallery, London, and the Tate Gallery bought a small bronze, 'Bird of Prey', from the show, making her the youngest female artist to enter the national collections. In 1953 she won the student prize in the Unknown Political Prisoner sculpture competition. She taught at Chelsea School of Art from 1953 to 1961, at St Martin's School of Art from 1954 to 1962, and was visiting instructor at the Royal College of Art from 1965 to 1967. She was given her first solo show at St George's Gallery, London, in 1955 and overseas at the Bertha Schaefer Gallery, New York, in 1959. Success came early in Frink's career and she was always newsworthy as the only prominent female sculptor in post-war London. 
Frink married the architect Michel Jammet in September 1955 at the new church of Notre Dame de France, Leicester Place, London, with the reception at the Cavalry and Guards' Club in Piccadilly, a reminder of her army connections. His family were French and his grandfather, a chef, started the famous Jammet's restaurant in Dublin. As a result Frink and Michel Jammet were regular visitors to the city. Her only child, Lin, was born on 11 May 1958 at St Stephen's Hospital, London. 
Throughout the 1950s British sculptors such as Reg Butler, Lynn Chadwick, Kenneth Armitage, and Eduardo Paolozzi gained international acclaim for their spiky, angst-ridden male figures in bronze or iron. They were a generation older than Frink and although her contemporary work was similar, her figures had a greater sense of strength and optimism than theirs. All the sculptors at this time shared a fascination with flight and flying creatures, probably as a result of wartime experiences, but Frink was the only one to continue the theme throughout her career. Her 'oeuvre', although large -- about 400 editioned bronzes -- kept to a small number of themes and variations, and she worked through her chosen subjects, such as birds or warriors, until their potential was exhausted. 
Frink gave up her two full-time teaching jobs in 1962 in order to concentrate on work for exhibitions and commissions. One major commission was to make the eagle lectern for the new Coventry Cathedral. The eagle of St John is the usual subject for ecclesiastical lecterns, but the subject of a mighty bird was also one which fitted in with Frink's obsessions. She was the youngest artist and the only female one to be commissioned to make new work for the cathedral, and her 'Eagle' elicited much admiration. About the same time Frink gained the commission to make a memorial to the aviators Alcock and Brown for Manchester airport, and she produced a large figure, 'Horizontal Birdman', which conflated bird and man. When unveiled in 1962 it received much criticism, most notably from Alcock's elderly sister, who complained that the figure of her brother was 'obscene. At least my brother had his trousers on when he landed' (Gardiner, 133). 
Frink divorced Michel Jammet in 1963 and at Wandsworth register office in the spring of 1964 married Edward Gordon Pool (1922-2013), a former paratrooper whose family had a butchery business in Smithfield. In 1967 they sold their Chelsea home and moved to a group of abandoned farm buildings, Le Village, in the foothills of the Cevennes, near Nimes, France. In June 1973 Frink was divorced from Pool and returned to live and work in Britain, where she moved into a large apartment at Buckingham Gate, London. Her sculpture in the 1960s and 1970s concentrated on the nude male figure, and used it to reveal her deep concern with man's inhumanity to man. Numerous nude male figures stand or sit in postures that are both monumental and vulnerable. She also made a series of huge male heads. Living in southern France, she was very aware of the war in Algeria, and she records how a newspaper photograph of General Oufkir, a Moroccan murderer, wearing dark glasses caught her attention. The huge heads then turned into menacing heads wearing large goggles, which shaded their eyes, and thus their emotions. About this time she joined the human rights organization Amnesty International, of which she remained a committed member all her life. She was a generous supporter of charities, and gave drawings and etchings to Amnesty International and an edition of fifty casts of a sculpture of a seated dog to Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital. 
Frink made a large number of sculptures of animals, especially horses and dogs, ever favourite companions. Her horses and dogs were made with sensitivity and tenderness, and share none of the aggressiveness of the 'Birds' series or the 'Goggle Head' series. Although portraiture was not her favourite category of work, she did accept seven commissions between 1975 and 1984, including eminent male sitters such as Sir John Pope-Hennessy (for the British Museum), Sir Alec Guinness (for the National Portrait Gallery), and Michael Jaffe (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge). Critics have remarked that in many of her sculptured male heads there is an element of self-portraiture, and her own head, with its strong features, did have a masculine aspect in her later years. The sculptor F. E. McWilliam modelled a full-length portrait of her in 1956 (priv. coll.). 
Frink married Alexander Csaky, a Hungarian count and an insurance broker, in London in December 1974 and in 1976, when the lease on her Buckingham Gate studio expired, they bought Woolland House, Woolland, near Blandford Forum, Dorset, a large converted stable building with extensive gardens. In 1979 she had a studio built near the house and there made a life-size horse commissioned by the earl of March for Goodwood racecourse. This was one of her largest sculptures of a racehorse and it joined other bronze sculptures of horses, including one with a rider set on the pavement in Dover Street, London, in 1974, and one commissioned by Milton Keynes in 1978 (on Silbery Boulevard, outside Lloyds Bank). 
Frink became a member of the establishment in the late 1970s and early 1980s; appointed CBE in 1969, she was made DBE in 1982. She also became a trustee of the British Museum in 1975, a member of the Royal Fine Arts Commission in 1976, and a Royal Academician in 1977. She became a Companion of Honour in 1992. 
Frink's career included a lifelong commitment to drawing, sometimes for its own sake and sometimes in preparation for book illustrations: 'Aesop's Fables' in 1968, Chaucer's 'Canterbury Tales' in 1972, the 'Iliad' and the 'Odyssey' in 1978, and 'Children of the Gods', a book on Greek myths, in 1983. 'My illustrations have nothing to do with sculpture; neither activity helps the other, because the illustrations are subjective and my sculpture is not. The human form is not subjective' (Shaffer, Robertson, and Kent, 36). 
Frink had a solo show every year from 1967, and her work was included in group shows around the world annually. She was given a retrospective exhibition at the Royal Academy in 1985, and a major show at the National Museum of Women in the Arts, Washington, DC, in 1990. Her work can be found in public collections throughout Britain, with a large collection of pieces at the Tate Gallery, and in major galleries in the USA, Australia, and South Africa. She died of cancer at Woolland House on 18 April 1993, two months after Alex Csaky had died of the same condition. In 1967 Frink stated that she moved to France in order 'to cut myself off from the British art scene' (Gardiner, 118). This small but significant statement reveals that she felt estranged from recent developments in British sculpture, which at that time included land art, performance art, and pieces constructed from industrial metal offcuts. Her primary theme, the human body, fell from favour as a subject for innovative sculpture in the 1960s, and Frink may have felt that her work would not have been appreciated by her native audience, or that her inspiration would be weakened by these new developments. In either case, she need not have worried. Her output remained as forceful and concentrated as ever, and as Bryan Robertson reminded the congregation in his address at her memorial service at St James's Church, Piccadilly, 'she achieved the extraordinary distinction of becoming, without compromising, a genuinely popular sculptor whose work is admired by a broad public in Britain and abroad.' Her popularity stems from that fact that she did not embrace new techniques and technologies in order to make her sculpture, and that she remained utterly committed to conveying the nature and power of the human body, an inexhaustible subject for sculptural exploration. 


@@@@@


doc= 38275


Eliot, Vivienne Haigh (1888-1947), writer, was born on 28 May 1888 at Knowsley Street, Bury, Lancashire, the daughter of Charles Haigh-Wood (1854-1927), a successful artist from a carving and gilding background, and his wife, Rose Esther Robinson (died 1941). Vivienne's brother Maurice was born in 1896. He was to fight throughout the First World War -- a dark, strapping, well-conducted man who was fond of his frail, intense sister. 
In childhood Vivienne, known often as Vivien, suffered poor health including tuberculosis of the bone in her left arm, and some form of nervous illness alleviated by opiates. As a young woman she painted and took up ballet, and was a governess with a family in Cambridge for a short period. In 1914 she had a stormy attachment to a schoolmaster, Charles Buckle. 
In spring 1915, when Vivienne was turning twenty-seven, she met the 26-year-old poet T. S. Eliot (1888-1965), then a visiting student from America having a deadly time in an Oxford emptied by war. Repressed and shy, with a family history of puritan divines and memories of unfulfilled love for a proper Bostonian called Emily Hale, Eliot was jolted to life by the flamboyant Vivienne, her 'amusing' name ('Letters', 97), and her daring to smoke in public. She proved a pliant dancer, keen to follow when Eliot began to 'dip' in his one-step in a style unknown in England. It appealed to him that Vivienne would never say she liked Bach or Cezanne if she didn't. She looked like an actress in her bold colours: she owned a scarf-dress in the post-war years and, in the thirties, got herself up in a cape and waistcoat, and flourished a cigarette-holder. This was not the kind of woman a gentleman could introduce to his mother. Though her parents lived comfortably in Hampstead, London, Eliot's old New England background was very much grander. 
They married impulsively without waiting to tell their parents. The ceremony took place on 26 June 1915 in the presence of Vivienne's friend Lucy Ely Thayer and aunt Lillia C. Symes at the Hampstead register office near Vivienne's home at 3 Compayne Gardens. Vivienne was going to save Eliot for poetry, which meant keeping him from academe. He had been due to return to America, but rebelled against a future as a Harvard philosopher. An English marriage made it possible for him to deal that prospect an all-out blow, and Vivienne stood up for him against the disapproval of the Eliot family. 'Tom knows perfectly well that I share his feeling over the poetry.... I look upon Tom's poetry as real genius', she told his brother. 'I provide the motive power', she added, 'I 'do' shove' ('Letters', 157). Later she was incredulous that her creative (as opposed to destructive) bond with Eliot should have been obliterated during his lifetime. During their early years together her hatred of the 'fug and slop' of sentiment (Gordon, 'Eliot', 129), her alienation from most people, and her susceptibility to horror matched and promoted the state of mind which, in Eliot's own words, 'led to 'The Waste Land'' ('Letters', introduction). Vivienne, advising on a draft of the poem, wrote 'WONDERFUL' next to the voice of the distraught wife in the second part. Later, in her copy of his 'Poems, 1909-1925', Eliot noted that only she would understand them. 
On 9 July 1915, two weeks after the marriage, Vivienne told Eliot's former teacher Bertrand Russell that she had married her husband to stimulate him, but found she could not do it. She fell into a pattern of illness, convalescence, and relapse: migraines, fainting, stomach upsets, and disordered hormones which led to heavy, unpredictable menstruation. Eliot sought help from Russell, who obliged by making up to Vivienne over a long period, which culminated in a night they spent together in October 1917. 
Vivienne did not care for literary society, especially the Bloomsbury group, but she befriended two of its adherents: the well-read, sophisticated Mary Hutchinson and Lady Ottoline Morrell. Vivienne also shone as an actress in private theatricals which the Eliots enjoyed with Violet and Sydney Schiff (the author Stephen Hudson) in 1919-20. Whenever she demonstrated flair as actress, dancer, or writer, Eliot liked to show her off. Katherine Mansfield observed the way he kept a wing over Vivienne when they came to dinner in summer 1920, 'admiring, listening, making the most of her' (letter to Violet Schiff, 1 May 1920, BL, quoted in C. Tomalin, 'Katherine Mansfield: a Secret Life', 197). This contrasts with the other Vivienne who could not gain her husband's love (in his poetic phantasmagoria he remained in love with an idealized memory of Emily Hale), and who increasingly took the part of an invalid. This came to a head in 1923 when Eliot wished to leave his post at Lloyds Bank in order to devote more time to writing. His wife developed colitis, and nearly died. 
Vivienne did, however, show an unexpected capacity to rally. From February 1924 to July 1925 she often contributed to her husband's international journal 'The Criterion', whose name had been her choice (after a hotel where she and Buckle used to dine). Eliot thought her original, and did not hesitate to publish her stories and reviews, completing some if she were too ill to do so, or touching them up. She took on an array of pseudonyms: Fanny Marlow, Feiron Morris, Felise Morrison, FM, and Irene Fassett. Vivienne saw Fanny Marlow as the money-maker, spinning on forever like a spider. 'There is no 'end' to Fanny! But Feiron will never make money. And he does not spin. He is a nasty fellow' (letter to S. Schiff [n. d.], BL, quoted in Gordon, 'Eliot', 193). 
Feiron is the author of Vivienne's most ambitious story, 'The Paralysed Woman', in which the external paralysis of an immaculate wife in a perfect home holds up a mirror to the internal paralysis of a writer, Sybilla, who lives with a hypochondriacal husband in a ramshackle, carping milieu. Other sketches, of a dingy Parisian hotel and its inhabitants, a 'the dansant' in London, or a boring bohemian party where ballet dancers are shepherded by a 'macaw', are all emotionally alive and observant, with plangent minutiae, reminiscent of Katherine Mansfield. Vivienne planned an interlinked series which could appear separately but could make up a book. 
Vivienne enjoyed her success, but confided to Schiff in 1924 her fear that it 'is a sort of flash in the pan -- that won't 'go on''. She spoke of writing as 'this temporary aberration of mine' (letter, 2 April 1924, BL). Her diaries protest against Eliot's attempt to regulate her writing habits, which he believed might exacerbate her illness. She argued that her material came irregularly from some 'very overgrown and hidden inner spirit', which would suddenly begin to spurt: 'I think at first, until one has got the spout of this long disused fountain clear, it is better to let the water burst out when it will & so 'force' away the accumulation of decayed vegetation, moss, slime & dead fish which are thick upon & around it. (Vivienne Eliot's papers, Bodl. Oxf.)' This effort collapsed when Eliot's associates at the New York 'Dial' rejected 'The Paralysed Woman' -- it remained unpublished. 
In a poem 'Necesse est perstare?' Vivienne (as FM) recounts a moment after a literary lunch. The wife is thankful for an end to gossip about Clive Bell, Elizabeth Bibesco, and Aldous Huxley. She longs to win her husband from his resolve to master the literary scene. But he stretches his arms above his head with the weary air of a very old monkey, impervious to her silent plea. Vivienne channelled her frustration into a diatribe against America in her 'Diary of the Rive Gauche' (under the name Fanny Marlow). The narrator repeats (mimicking the repetitive manner of Vivienne's own talk): 'that I never did understand Americans... When I see an American coming I ought to say immediately, 'Please do not speak to me, because if you do I shall not understand you. I shall never understand you.'... They cannot cope with European women. Ha! They can't cope with us! ('The Criterion', 3, Jan 1925, 292)' Vivienne was insensitive to Eliot's need for time and privacy. Eloquent, febrile, now and then on the verge of collapse, she had needs of her own, and these Eliot met with conscientious patience for seventeen years. Though Vivienne shared the snobbery, antisemitism, and virulence her husband called 'hatred of life', she did not share his moral struggle for transformation. Few could bear Vivienne for long: she was quick to fault others, and later joined Sir Oswald Mosley's British Union of Fascists. She was the sort of fascist who enjoyed wearing uniform and the excitement of a rally where public denunciations provided an outlet for fury. After Eliot left her in 1932-3 she made many attempts to intercept him. These were invariably foiled, for, aided by friends and protectors, he had put himself beyond her reach. Increasingly desperate, Vivienne had attacks of panic -- as though she saw 'a goblin ghost' (Mirrlees, 50). 
Vivienne rallied yet again to begin a new career in 1935-6 at the Royal College of Music, first as a pianist, then elated to discover a 'huge' voice in singing lessons. Her manner, though, grew wilder as she began to fear she was the victim of some plot. As it happens, the plots of two of Eliot's plays suggest a continued, almost eerie affinity in their turn for horror: 'I knew a man once did a girl in', reports Sweeney in Eliot's first verse play, 'Sweeney Agonistes' (1926); and again, in 'The Family Reunion' (1939), a hero is shaken by temptation to murder. His dream-victim is his wife, a shivering painted shadow -- exactly as Vivienne appeared in the thirties. 
In July 1938, at the time Eliot was completing this play, Vivienne was certified insane, and was committed to a private London asylum, Northumberland House. Once, she tried to escape, but was apprehended. After some years abroad, when Maurice Haigh-Wood saw his sister in 1946 he acknowledged that she was sane. Vivienne Eliot remained in Northumberland House until she died of a heart attack on 22 January 1947. 
A few years later Bertrand Russell wrote 'Mrs Ellerker', a story based on Mrs Eliot, about a woman who is too sane to lend herself to the artifice of repression. It was not, though, until the mid-seventies that Vivienne was brought out of the shadow and her talents recognized, reinforced by Valerie Eliot's inclusion of Vivienne's correspondence in her volume of Eliot's early letters (1988). The combined letters confirmed the need for a delicate biographic balance, but this was skewed by a simplistic 'biopic', 'Tom and Viv' (1994), trailed by a partisan biography (2001) which sought to vindicate Vivienne by nailing Eliot. The truth is more ambiguous, and it is unlikely that the whole truth can ever be known. 


@@@@@


doc= 38276


Hopkinson, Eirene Adeline (1899-1980), novelist, was born on 31 March 1899 at 22 Perham Road, West Kensington, London, the only child of Cecil George Botting (1870-1929), classics master at St Paul's School, London, and his wife, Christine Julia Barbour White (1871-1939), governess, daughter of Henry and Clementina White. She disliked her name and was known for most of her professional life as Antonia White. Her father, a gifted but rigid man, dominated her childhood, and she would blame him for her terrifying emotional problems. In 1906 the family was converted to Roman Catholicism, and Antonia boarded at the Sacred Heart Convent, Roehampton, London (1908-14), the experience on which she based her famous novel 'Frost in May'. She wrote: 'I sometimes wish I'd never been brought into and up in the Catholic religion... but I can no more escape from it all than I can restore the lenses to my eyes or straighten my broken finger' ('Diaries, 1958-1979', 11 June 1971). She was removed from school after the nuns found a 'scandalous' novel she had been writing, and this event came to symbolize the struggle between her wish to please her father and the church, and her yearning for a life of art and freedom. 
Distancing herself from Cecil Botting's values, Antonia worked from the age of sixteen as a governess, clerk, and actress, and earned a good income from writing advertisements and newspaper fiction. But though this writing came easily, she found serious creative work a lifelong problem. On 28 April 1921 she married Reginald Henry (Reggie) Green-Wilkinson ('b'. 1899), a part-time actor and a secretary for Anglo Continental film studios, but the marriage was annulled owing to non-consummation. This led to a breakdown, and in November 1922 she was committed for nine months to Bethlem Hospital, London, where she suffered hallucinations and was forcibly fed. Although she was not certified again, the possibility of mental illness haunted her for the rest of her life. 
On 15 April 1925 Antonia married Eric Earnshaw Smith (1893-1972), a civil servant, with whom she had a deep platonic friendship. The marriage was permitted by the church, but within a year she had lapsed as a Catholic. As she later wrote, 'The general climate of the 1920s, the scepticism, the almost idolatrous devotion to art got under my skin' ('The Hound and the Falcon', 155). She worked in Crawford's advertising agency, mixed with painters and writers, and soon began to look for a more normal relationship. She was now an attractive and sophisticated woman, nothing like the girlish heroine of her novels, and had several lovers. Eventually she sought a second annulment to marry Rudolph (Silas) Glossop (1902-1993), a mining engineer who was the father of her daughter, the writer Susan Chitty ('b'. 1929). But instead she married, on 28 November 1930, (Henry) Thomas (Tom) Hopkinson (1905-1990), the future editor of 'Picture Post'. They had a daughter, Lyndall, born in 1931. 
Antonia continued to work in women's journalism and on the fringes of the London literary world. She was quite undomestic; her children were looked after by a nurse. Her husband encouraged her to write and in 1933 she produced her best-known novel, 'Frost in May'. This has been acclaimed ever since as the classic account of a Catholic education: a female, more accessible equivalent to James Joyce's 'Portrait of the Artist'. But, as she complained long afterwards, 'it hangs round my neck like a withered wreath' ('Diaries, 1926-1957', 16 Aug 1954). She could not follow up her success because her marriage was crumbling, owing to Tom's infidelity and her fears that she was again becoming mad. In 1935 she left home, became involved with various younger men, and submitted to a long course of Freudian analysis which, she felt, enabled her to stay out of asylums. She and Tom Hopkinson were divorced in 1938. She had a difficult relationship with her daughters, who lived with her only part-time. Both later wrote memoirs of her. 
Antonia remained in London throughout the war, working for the BBC and later the Special Operations Executive. Her letters (1940-41) to the Catholic intellectual Peter Thorp were eventually published as 'The Hound and the Falcon' (1965). Although troubled by 'the Church's rigorously repressive attitude towards so much in contemporary thought and opinion' ('Foreword' to 'The Hound and the Falcon'), she started to practise her religion again. Although she had no more affairs, it remained a love-hate relationship. 
In 1950 Antonia published 'The Lost Traveller', which continues the story of the Antonia-figure, now called Clara, into adulthood. But it was nothing like as good as 'Frost in May', and the reviewers said so. It was followed by two better novels, 'The Sugar House' (1952) and 'Beyond the Glass' (1954), dealing with her first marriage and breakdown. She tried for many years to complete Clara's story, but was never able to get much beyond her release from Bethlem in 1923. A collection of short stories, 'Strangers' (1954), also contains some striking work. 
The last twenty-five years of Antonia's life were the calmest, though she was still distressed by religious doubts, money problems, and her writer's block. She lived in Kensington, alone except for her cats, who inspired two charming children's books, and supported herself by translating over thirty novels from French. The beginnings of another 'Clara' novel and an autobiography were published in 'As Once in May' (1983), edited by Susan Chitty. In 1978, after years of neglect, 'Frost in May' was reprinted as the first 'Virago Modern Classic'. The three sequels followed and she was applauded as one of the very few writers who could transmute personal experience into literature. She died of cancer on 10 April 1980 at St Raphael's Nursing Home, Danehill, Sussex, and therefore did not live to see her novels dramatized on BBC television in 1981. She was buried in the Catholic cemetery at West Grinstead, Sussex, close to where her father's family had lived for generations. 


@@@@@


doc= 38277


Windsor, (Bessie) Wallis, duchess of Windsor (1896-1986), wife of Edward, duke of Windsor, was born on 19 June 1896 in Blue Ridge Summit, Pennsylvania, the only child of Teackle Wallis Warfield, an unsuccessful businessman, and his wife, Alice Montague. The Warfields and Montagues were of distinguished southern stock, but Wallis's parents were poor relations and her father died when she was only five months old. She spent her childhood in cheese-paring poverty, resentfully aware that her friends could afford nicer clothes and more lavish holidays. It seems reasonable to trace to this early deprivation the acquisitive streak which so strongly marked her character. 
Though Wallis's jaw was too heavy for her to be counted beautiful, her fine violet-blue eyes and petite figure, quick wits, vitality, and capacity for total concentration on her interlocutor ensured that she had many admirers. When only nineteen she fell in love with a naval aviator, Lieutenant Earl Winfield Spencer (died 1950), son of Earl Winfield Spencer, a member of the Chicago stock exchange, and married him on 8 November 1916. It proved a disastrous match. Spencer's promising career disintegrated as he took to drink and Wallis, whose tolerance of weakness was never conspicuous, became increasingly alienated. While they were in Washington in 1922 they decided to separate, and when Spencer was given command of a gunboat in the Far East she remained behind, enjoying a flamboyant liaison with an Argentine diplomat. 
In 1924 Wallis joined her husband in China, but the reunion was not a success and they divorced in December 1927. By then she had already won the affections of Ernest Aldrich Simpson, whose own marriage was breaking up; he was the businessman son of an English father (Ernest Simpson, shipbroker and head of the firm of Simpson, Spence, and Young) and an American mother. She joined him in London, where he was managing the office of his family shipping company, and they married on 2 July 1928. Most of their friends were in the American colony in London; among them Benjamin Thaw of the US embassy, his wife, Consuelo, and her younger sister Thelma, Viscountess Furness. Lady Furness was at that time mistress of the prince of Wales, and it was in her house at Melton Mowbray that Mrs Simpson, on 10 January 1931, met the man who was to become her third husband ['see 'Edward VIII]. 
The precise nature of Mrs Simpson's appeal to the prince of Wales could only be understood by him; probably he hardly understood it himself. It is sufficient to say that by early 1934 the prince had become slavishly dependent on her and was to remain so until he died. The courtiers at first thought that this was just another of his recurrent infatuations, but throughout 1935 they became increasingly alarmed as her role became more prominent and impinged on the performance of his duties. It seems unlikely that Mrs Simpson seriously entertained the possibility that she might become queen; indeed, all the indications are that she enjoyed her role of 'maitresse en titre' and would have been satisfied to retain it. The prince, however, convinced himself that his happiness depended on securing Mrs Simpson as his wife. From his accession to the throne on 20 January 1936 his main preoccupation was to bring this about. 
Edward VIII's reign was marked by swelling scandal as his relationship with Mrs Simpson became more widely known. The cruise which the couple undertook in the yacht 'Nahlin' around the eastern Mediterranean in September 1936 attracted keen interest everywhere except in the British Isles, where the press maintained a discreet silence. It was, however, the Simpsons' imminent divorce which convinced the prime minister, Stanley Baldwin, that he was faced by a serious constitutional crisis. On 20 October he confronted Edward at the king's country house, Fort Belvedere, but it was only a month later that Edward VIII stated categorically that he intended to marry Mrs Simpson. Baldwin was convinced that this must lead to abdication; the king played with the idea of a morganatic marriage, a solution that would certainly have appealed to Mrs Simpson, but was determined to renounce the throne if that was the price he had to pay. 
Once Mrs Simpson realized that marriage to her would cost the king his throne, she tried to change his resolve. Anticipating much hostile publicity when the story broke in the United Kingdom, she retreated first to Fort Belvedere, and then to the south of France. From there, in a series of distraught telephone calls, she tried to persuade Edward not to abdicate, even if this meant giving her up. She accomplished nothing; this was the only subject on which she was unable to dominate her future husband. 
On 10 December 1936 Edward VIII abdicated, became his royal highness the duke of Windsor, and went into exile. There followed six months of separation while Mrs Simpson was waiting for her decree absolute (3 May 1937) before, on 3 June 1937, the couple were married at the Chateau de Cande in Touraine. No member of the royal family was present and the new duchess, on doubtful legal grounds, was denied the title of her royal highness. The refusal of her husband's relatives to accept her as part of the family caused embittered and undying resentment in the duchess. 
Until the outbreak of the Second World War the Windsors lived mainly in Austria and France. The duchess accompanied her husband on his visit to Germany in 1937; it was popularly believed that she had fascist sympathies and it has even been claimed that she worked for German intelligence, but there is no evidence that she held any considered political views, still less indulged in such activities. When war broke out in 1939 she returned with the duke to Britain and then to France. When the Germans overran France in June 1940 the Windsors escaped into Spain and thence to Portugal. From there they left for the Bahamas, where the duke took up the post of governor in August 1940. 
The duchess hated their five years in Nassau and made no secret of her views to those close to her, but on the whole she performed the duties of governor's lady conscientiously and well. She entertained stylishly and went through the rituals of opening bazaars and inspecting hospitals with unexpected grace. Her happiest weeks, however, were spent on shopping expeditions in the United States, and she was much criticized for irresponsible extravagance at a time when Britain was under assault. 
After the war the Windsors settled in France and their life became a dreary -- though to the duchess, presumably, satisfying -- merry-go-round that featured principally Antibes, Paris, New York, and Palm Beach. The duchess entertained lavishly and was counted among the best dressed and most fashionable figures in international society. Some of her friends were raffish, a few even vicious, but it was the sterility of her life that was most remarkable. Though her husband resumed a somewhat cool relationship with his mother and siblings, the duchess was never received by the royal family and remained fiercely hostile to them. In 1956 she published her memoirs, 'The Heart has its Reasons', an on the whole good-tempered and balanced book, which was largely ghosted but still reflected fairly her wit and considerable common sense. When the duke died on 28 May 1972 she was invited to Buckingham Palace, but it was too late for the reconciliation to mean much to her. The last fourteen years of her life were spent in increasing decrepitude; during the final five she lived in total seclusion. She died at her home, 4 rue du Champ d'Entrainement, near Paris, on 24 April 1986 and was buried beside her husband in the royal burial-ground at Frogmore. 
Philip Ziegler', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38279


Smart, Elizabeth (1913-1986), writer, was born on 27 December 1913 in Ottawa, Canada, the third child and third daughter in the family of four daughters (one of whom died in infancy) and one son of Russel Sutherland Smart, a prominent Ottawa lawyer specializing in patents, and his wife, Emma Louise (Louie), daughter of James Alexander Parr, executive in the Montreal Telegraph Company. She grew up in affluent circumstances in Ottawa and Kingsmere, where the family had a second house on a lake. She was educated at Ottawa normal school, Elmwood School, and Hatfield Hall in Cobourg, with the exception of one year during which she was obliged to lie in bed with a heart condition, and there began to write. She vacillated between becoming a musician or a writer, and did not go to university. She travelled around the world under the eye of a family friend. In London she studied to become a professional pianist with Katharine Goodson, but with the confidence born of what she called the 'huge luckiness' of her childhood she reacted against the hollowness of her social life and broke away to travel around the world, always gravitating towards artistic rebels. Although she had studied music for thirteen years and played the piano very well she never played again. She lived on an allowance from her father. 
Smart expressed her adventurous, romantic nature to the full when, after reading the poems of George Granville Barker in a Charing Cross bookshop, she promptly fell in love with the poet, who was then working unhappily in Japan. He was the son of George Barker, formerly of the Coldstream Guards, a butler at Gray's Inn. In 1940 she invited Barker and his wife to Canada, raising the cash herself for both their fares, and they then moved to Monterey, California, where she was living. This was the pivotal act of her life: it resulted in a passion-wracked affair, which began in July 1940 and produced four children and her extraordinary novel 'By Grand Central Station I Sat Down and Wept', which she completed in 1941. First published in August 1945 by Tambimuttu just before the end of the Second World War her novel (or narrative prose poem) remained largely unnoticed in the fray, although Cyril Connolly gave it a certain grudging admiration in 'Horizon'. 
After the birth of her first love child, a girl, in 1941, Smart went to England in 1943 on a convoy which was torpedoed. Shortly afterwards she produced a son with Barker, whose wife had twins five weeks later. The rigours of bringing up a family with very little money (she was still reliant on an allowance from her father), and without a permanent father figure, gagged her muse, but she became more settled when she moved to a mill house in Essex. She wrote intermittently about the aftermath of her grand passion, but, understandably under the circumstances, her productivity was low. She had another of Barker's sons in 1945 and a daughter in 1947. 
From 1949 to 1951 Smart was a sub-editor on 'House and Garden'. Separated from Barker, who eventually had fifteen children with different women, she had occasional affairs. By the mid-1950s she supported her family by writing advertising copy. Her large flat at 9 Westbourne Terrace was a centre for London bohemians, many of them distinguished remnants from the old Soho 'Fitzrovia' days (the painters Robert Colquhoun, Robert MacBryde, Patrick Swift, and Craigie Aitchison; the poets Patrick Kavanagh and W. S. Graham; and the inspired drifter Jeffrey Bernard). In 1957, with Agnes Ryan, she published 'Cooking the French Way'. Her life began to pick up considerably in 1964 as the children grew up and she began writing for the sparkling new magazine 'Queen', a job she held until 1966. 
In 1966 Smart's novel was republished by Panther Books in a silver paperback, with an introduction by Brigid Brophy, who described it as one of the half-dozen masterpieces in the world: 'The entire book is a wound. Even when its rhythm expresses the throb of pleasure, the pleasure is so ardent it lays waste the personality which experiences it... it is one of the most shelled, skinned, nerve-exposed books ever written.' But some critics continued to be affronted by such a metaphor-laden, raw, female emotion, the eternal wail of a woman for her demon lover, and took their refuge in accusations of purple prose, discounting the passages of searing humour.After her younger daughter became involved with drugs Smart often had full responsibility for the daughter's two children, and she soon moved to a cottage near Bungay, Suffolk, where she became absorbed in creating a garden and writing poetry. She aimed for Blakean simplicity, which did not appeal to the poetry mafia of the period. However, her first collection, 'A Bonus', was published in 1977 and she began to give poetry readings. The publication of 'The Assumption of the Rogues and Rascals' in 1978, her long-brewing aftermath novel, and the Canadian publication of her dazzling memoirs, 'In the Meantime' (1984), reinforced her growing reputation. Meanwhile the now famous early book was translated into many languages and became something of a cult novel. In 1982 she spent a year as writer in residence at the University of Alberta. 
Elizabeth Smart had occasional affairs with both men and women. She was a great beauty, not only in the classical blonde, blue-eyed, well-featured sense, but because of a radiance which, even later, ravaged by age and empathy, could draw so many people to her. She was a bohemian in the best sense of the word, and died on 4 March 1986, of a heart attack, in her son Christopher's flat in the Soho where she had spent so many hours in conviviality, good talk, and freedom from hypocritical moral restraints. Her younger daughter had died from drug taking in 1982. Her journals were posthumously published as 'Necessary Secrets' in 1986. 
Jill Neville', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38280


Stark, Dame Freya Madeline (1893?-1993), writer and traveller, was thought to have been born in a studio on rue Denfert Rochereau, Paris, on 31 January 1893, the eldest daughter of Robert Stark (1853-1931), an artist, and his wife, Flora Madeline (1861-1942). Some evidence (Geniesse, 369, n. 6) suggests she may in fact have been born as much as one year earlier. Her parents were first cousins. She had one sister, Vera Josephine (1895-1926), though an elder child had been born and died in 1891. During her childhood she moved frequently when her father renovated houses in Devon and when they rented summer lodging at Asolo, Italy. From 1903, while her mother settled with the daughters at Dronero, Italy, her father remained in Devon; he emigrated to Canada as a settler in 1911. At Dronero her mother invested in and managed a silk factory owned by Mario di Roascio (died 1947), who married Vera in 1913. When Freya's hair and eyelids were caught in the machinery in 1905 she was partly scalped, and her injuries required skin grafts and left her disfigured. In the 1930s she had plastic surgery to remove scars, but her childhood left a deeper impression. In later years she often sought the maternal solicitude she had experienced after her accident in periods of bedridden hypochondria, and she befriended many older men as surrogates for her absent father. 
Stark was educated at home and, after a correspondence course, studied history at Bedford College, University of London (1911-14). Family friends introduced her to William Paton Ker, a professor of English, who took her mountaineering in the Alps in 1913, triggering her lifelong interest in mountains. During the war she trained at Bologna to become a nurse, and was briefly engaged to Guido Ruata, an Italian doctor, who broke off the engagement to marry an old flame in 1916. On Ker's recommendation she joined George Trevelyan's ambulance unit in Italy as a nurse in 1917. Although she was frequently bedridden after the war, Stark was well enough to be climbing with Ker when he died of a heart attack in 1923. That year she also trekked through Europe with Venetia Buddicom (died 1969), a railway heiress. The climax of her climbing life came in 1924, when she became the second woman to climb the east face of Monte Rosa. While convalescing from an ulcer she took Arabic lessons to become a governess in the Middle East, and was baptized Presbyterian to facilitate contacts with missionaries. She also studied Arabic briefly at the School of Oriental Studies in London. In 1926 Herbert Young (died 1941), a friend of her parents, offered to leave his Asolo home to her if she would live there. She dropped a lawsuit against di Roascio that attempted to recover her mother's investment in his business, and with her mother moved to Young's home, which became known as Casa Freia. 
In 1927 Stark lived in Lebanon for several months and travelled through Syria with Buddicom. Her father had provided her with some capital, and she visited him twice in Canada before she became his sole heir in 1931. She planned a journey to northern Persia after reading about the region at the British Museum. In 1929 she moved to Baghdad, where she went slumming in Arab clothing and was an outsider among priggish British expatriates. She gained acceptance after adventurous journeys to Lurestan and the Alamut district of Mazandaran, and the War Office made maps from her observations. She worked as a journalist in Baghdad and fell in love with Captain Vyvyan Holt (1896-1960), a diplomat, who rebuffed her affections but advanced her career. He gave her intelligence briefings about the Kurdistan uprising that she published in 'The Times' (for example, on 20 June 1932). 
In 1933 Stark returned to London to receive accolades as a female traveller. She was awarded the Back grant from the Royal Geographical Society (RGS) and was the first woman to receive the Burton medal of the Royal Asiatic Society. Her account of her journeys, 'The Valleys of the Assassins' (1934), was an immediate success, and known for its elegant prose, lively wit, and observations of people. She made many friends, especially Sir Sydney Cockerell, director of the Fitzwilliam Museum, who became a confidant. In 1935 she went to Hadhramaut, southern Arabia, in search of an ancient trade route. After she became ill the RAF airlifted her to a hospital in Aden, and she had a brief romance with Antonin Besse (died 1951), a trading magnate. She returned a celebrity, and 'The Southern Gates of Arabia' (1936), awarded the Mungo Park medal by the Royal Scottish Geographical Society, is often considered a classic of travel writing. Although short and plain in appearance, Stark now had the resources to indulge a taste for 'haute couture' and flamboyant hats. In 1937-8 she returned to Arabia with Gertrude Caton-Thompson, a distinguished archaeologist, for a dig sponsored by the RGS and Lord Wakefield. While others worked diligently Stark mostly stayed in bed, and the partnership ended acrimoniously. Stark returned on her own, riding a camel through the desert. 
During the Second World War Stark joined the Ministry of Information as an expert on south Arabia, and worked as a propagandist in Aden, Yemen, and Egypt, where she became friends with General Archibald Wavell. Her main effort at propaganda, which she styled persuasion, was founding the Brotherhood of Freedom, an organization that attempted to build support for democracy and cadres of pro-British sympathizers through clandestine tea parties. In 1941 she returned to Baghdad to try, with little success, to establish the Brotherhood in Iraq. After Wavell invited her to India in 1943 she returned from Delhi to Tehran in a government car that she subsequently sold for her own profit. Despite her waywardness, the Ministry of Information thought well enough of her to arrange for her to lecture on Palestine in the United States in 1943-4 in a fruitless attempt to counter the spreading of anti-British opinion by the Zionist movement. She spoke to women's groups in India in 1945, and returned to Italy at the end of the war to establish English reading rooms in the north of the country. Her politics were high tory; she always believed fervently in empire and remained hostile to nationalist movements, despite her empathy with many of the people she met on her travels. 
After the war Stark turned from official propaganda to promoting herself. She published a collection of uplifting essays, 'Perseus in the Wind' (1948), and the first volume of her autobiography, 'Traveller's Prelude' (1950), a popular and elegiac account of her early life. She married Stewart Henry Perowne (1901-1989), a diplomatic colleague at Aden, Cairo, and Baghdad, on 7 October 1947 at St Margaret's, Westminster. After accompanying him to a posting in Barbados she returned to Asolo in April 1948. They reunited in 1950, when he was appointed to Benghazi, Cyrenaica (Libya), but he retired in 1951 and they separated in 1952. Perowne was a homosexual, and in many ways it was a marriage of convenience for them both. Stark longed to be married but found it difficult to sustain intimate relationships. She continued her autobiography in 'Beyond the Euphrates' (1951), 'The Coast of Incense' (1953), and 'Dust in the Lion's Paw' (1961). Between 1974 and 1982 she published eight volumes of her letters at her own expense. Her public image was always carefully crafted and modulated and was seriously challenged in a biography by Molly Izzard (1993). This was followed in 1999 by Jane Fletcher Geniesse's well-rounded and sympathetic biography of Stark, 'Passionate Nomad'. 
In later life Stark turned away from contemporary concerns to meditate on history and landscape in a series of books based on journeys to sites of classical antiquity. In 'Ionia: a Quest' (1954) she visited places described by Herodotus in Asia Minor, and later works followed in the footsteps of Alexander the Great and Lucullus. She also published books of her photographs and a history of the Roman imperial wars along the Euphrates. She continued to make demanding journeys, visiting Afghanistan in 1968 and Nepal in 1970. She joined BBC film crews on a raft on the Euphrates in 1977 and on horseback around Annapurna in 1980. She received the founder's medal from the RGS, the Percy Sykes memorial medal from the Royal Central Asiatic Society, and honorary doctorates from Glasgow and Durham universities. She was named CBE in 1953 and dame of the British empire in 1972, was made sister in the order of St John of Jerusalem in 1949 and sister commander in 1981, and was presented with the keys to Asolo on 26 May 1984. 
Stark's early works often appear in anthologies of travel writing. Her personality and motivation to travel had been shaped by a complex relationship with her mother, and Stark's wider success as a writer and traveller owed much to an easy sociability learned from her. However, her strong personality polarized acquaintances into those who admired her as a charming eccentric, observant traveller, and prose stylist and others who considered her a vain, imperious mountebank. Late in life she was plagued by ill health, and she was 'non compos mentis' for the last five of her 100 years. She died at Asolo on 9 May 1993. A memorial service was held at St James's, Piccadilly, on 28 September 1993. Despite her significant achievements as a traveller and her less well-known feats as a mountaineer, it is for her evocative and reflective prose that she is remembered. 


@@@@@


doc= 38281


Baring, Edward Charles, first Baron Revelstoke (1828-1897), merchant banker, was born on 13 April 1828, the fifth son of Henry Baring (1776-1848), a merchant banker, and the second son of his second marriage, to Cecilia Anne (died 1874), the daughter of Admiral Windham of Felbrigg in Norfolk. His grandfather was the merchant and founder of the house of Barings, Sir Francis Baring (1740-1810), his father was a junior partner of Baring Brothers, and his brother was Evelyn Baring, first earl of Cromer (1841-1917). He was educated at Rugby School. On 30 April 1861 he married Louisa Emily Charlotte (died 1892), the daughter of John Crocker Bulteel, of Flete and Lyneham, Devon, from a Devon banking family. Of their seven sons and three daughters, the eldest surviving son, John Baring (1863-1929), became Barings' senior partner while another son was the writer Maurice Baring (1874-1945); two others died in infancy. 
About 1850 Edward entered Barings as a clerk, and a year later he was sent 'with procuration' (Bates, diary, vol. 4, 16 Dec 1850) to their Liverpool house. On his return to London in 1854 he received power of signature with annual remuneration of $1000. Admission as a full partner followed two years later. 'He is sharp at a bargain', reckoned Joshua Bates, a senior partner who had little good to say of any of his juniors, 'but slovenly in keeping his accounts, inexact in his calculations and I doubt his judgements, expensive in habits but he likes business' (ibid., vol. 6, 1 Jan 1856). The other senior partner, Thomas Baring (1799-1873), eventually agreed, but failed to curb Baring's influence, along with that of another junior, Russell Sturgis. 
After Thomas Baring's death in 1873, Baring and Sturgis led Barings, and from 1883 Baring was undisputed leader. His share of the profits (and, if need be, the losses) rose steadily from 18/144ths in 1870 to 26/120ths in 1887, yet his capital contribution was modest. It stood at $50,000 in 1885, when total capital exceeded $2 million, but recovered to $220,000 by 1889. Barings, in most years, was highly profitable, but Baring did not plough back his profits; instead he withdrew them to fund an extravagant life -- not least his acquisition of a 4000 acre estate and house at Membland, Noss Mayo, south Devon, and an opulent London house at 37 Charles Street, Mayfair. Everything was done with generosity and style; niggardliness was not in his character. 
At Barings, Baring managed rapid growth in bond issuing, at a time when London's role as a supplier of international capital grew dramatically. Between 1873 and 1890 about eighty issues were handled, mostly for governments and railway companies in the United States, Canada, Argentina, and Russia, but also in many other countries besides. His management of trade finance, an important source of regular income, was at arm's length, while under his leadership Barings' work as merchants withered. He initiated issues for home businesses such as Whitbreads, the Manchester Ship Canal, and, not least, Guinness, which he floated with great profit but corresponding controversy. His other achievements included funding the completion of the Canadian Pacific Railway in 1885, after which the town of Revelstoke was named in his honour. In the same year his elevation as Baron Revelstoke recognized his importance as an international banker. The Bank of England appointed him a director from 1879 to 1891 and he was Lloyds' chairman from 1887 to 1892. 
In the 1880s many of Barings' transactions were high risk and unprofitable. Bad debts written off in 1883 exceeded $150,000, and those the following year were more than $260,000. A huge bond issue for the Italian government almost brought ruin in 1882. Then in 1888 a $10 million issue for the Buenos Aires Water Supply and Drainage Company was inadequately underwritten and poorly taken up, causing a liquidity crisis at Barings in November 1890. In what was known as the Baring crisis, Barings' collapse and a major financial panic were avoided only by a Bank of England loan. 
Revelstoke's judgement was held responsible. 'There is really no excuse for Ned', wrote his brother, 'he has been reckless... loosing his head from success, departing from all the old rules and traditions of the firm and doing things inconceivably foolish' (ING Barings, DEP 84). The price Revelstoke now paid was enormous. He retired disgraced, his wife died prematurely, and his assets were sold to meet his firm's debts. But his integrity and honour were never doubted. He died at 37 Charles Street on 17 July 1897, a broken man in straitened circumstances, but gratified that, under his son's leadership, Barings had paid its debts and was regaining much of its prestige. 


@@@@@


doc= 38283


Masson, Sir David Orme (1858-1937), chemist, was born on 13 January 1858, probably in Avenue Road, Hampstead, London, the second child of four and only son of David Masson (1822-1907), the historiographer royal for Scotland, who was then professor of English literature at University College, London, and his wife, Emily Rosaline (1835-1915), eldest daughter of Charles Orme, of Hampstead. In London and then in Edinburgh, Masson's childhood and youth were strongly coloured by the literary influences of his father's and mother's circles, which included the Tennyson brothers, the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, Coventry Patmore, Giuseppe Mazzini, Thomas Carlyle, Robert Browning, and T. H. Huxley. 
In 1865 the family moved to Edinburgh, where Masson attended first Oliphant's School and then Edinburgh Academy. In 1873 he entered Edinburgh University, later graduating in both arts and science. After a period at Gottingen, he joined the staff of University College, Bristol, in 1880, engaging in work with William Ramsay on atomic volumes. He returned in 1881 to Edinburgh and was awarded a research fellowship in chemistry; he published several papers on glyceryl trinitrite and trinitrate, and on salts of organic bases such as sulphines. On 5 August 1886 he married Mary (1862-1945), second daughter of Sir John Struthers (1823-1899), professor of anatomy in Aberdeen University. They had three children: their son, Sir (James) Irvine Orme Masson ['see below'], a chemist, became vice-chancellor of the University of Sheffield, and their two daughters were noted writers, particularly the elder, Marnie Bassett. The younger, Elsie Rosaline (died 1935), was married to the anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski (1884-1942). After his marriage Masson emigrated to Australia, having been appointed to the chair of chemistry in the University of Melbourne. During the next fifty years he was to be one of the most prominent figures in Australian science, doing much to advance its cause in both Melbourne and the nation, both of which were growing rapidly. His wife became much involved in voluntary community work, for which she was created CBE in 1918. 
Despite the handicaps of isolation and heavy teaching responsibilities, Masson's original scientific work was extensive and of a high quality. Apart from studies associated with the periodic classification of the elements, his chief interests lay in the development of the theory of solution as originally put forward by Svante A. Arrhenius, Jacobus Hendricus van't Hoff, Wilhelm Ostwald, and their school, and in interpreting the chemical dynamics of such reactions as that of hydrogen peroxide on potassium cyanide, the decomposition of cyanates, and the decomposition of persulphuric acid and its salts in aqueous solution. His paper on the velocity of the migration of ions was a particularly valuable contribution in its time ('PTRS', 192, 1899). He was attracted by problems of theoretical interpretation rather than by those of design or manipulation of apparatus, and in his later years he contributed much to the development of ideas on the constitution of atoms, and to the theory of dissociation of electrolytes in water. 
From 1910 Masson became absorbed more and more in university administration and in outside public work. In 1911-13, as president of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science, he took the leading part in organizing the visit of the British Association to Australia in 1914. He actively assisted the first expedition under Douglas Mawson to the Antarctic in 1911-14, and in 1929-31 he was chairman of the committee responsible for the British, Australian, and New Zealand Antarctic research expedition. During the First World War he served on many special committees dealing with munitions and naval matters and did notable work from 1915 onwards in drafting the scheme leading to the establishment in 1920 of a Commonwealth Institute of Science and Industry, which in 1926 was reorganized as the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, on which he served until his death. Retirement from active teaching in 1923, when he was made emeritus professor, gave him increased opportunity for outside interests which included service on several business directorates. 
The Melbourne University Chemical Society, the Society of Chemical Industry of Victoria, and the Australian Chemical Institute were all founded by Masson, as was (with Sir T. W. Edgeworth David) the Australian National Research Council. He presided over the second Pan-Pacific Scientific Congress held in Melbourne and Sydney in 1923. 
Masson was elected FRS in 1903, and appointed CBE in 1918, and KBE in 1923; he received the honorary degree of LLD from Edinburgh University in 1924. A Masson lectureship was established in his honour by the National Research Council, and a Masson memorial scholarship by the Australian Chemical Institute. 
His personal charm, originality, and independence of mind, and his perfect integrity made Masson a powerful influence in his adopted university and country. Together with his colleagues Sir Walter Baldwin Spencer, biologist, and Sir Thomas Lyle, physicist, he shaped the science schools of Melbourne University, particularly with respect to the teaching of advanced laboratory subjects; many of his students became successful in academia and industry. He died of cancer at his home at South Yarra, Melbourne, on 10 August 1937, and was cremated after a private funeral. 

Sir (James) Irvine Orme Masson (1887-1962), chemist, was born in Melbourne on 3 September 1887. He was educated at Melbourne grammar school and at Ormond College (University of Melbourne). He was awarded an 1851 Exhibition scholarship, which he held at University College, London, under William Ramsay. In 1912 he was appointed to the staff of University College's chemistry department and in the following year he married Flora Lovell, daughter of G. Lovell Gulland, later professor of medicine at Edinburgh University. 
Masson's tenure at University College was interrupted by the First World War, during which he worked at the research department of the Royal Arsenal in Woolwich. In 1924 he was appointed professor of chemistry and head of the department of pure science at the University of Durham. In 1938 he went to the University of Sheffield as vice-chancellor, remaining there until his retirement in 1952. During these years he moulded the university into an expanded and modern institution. 
Masson's interests spanned physical chemistry, the history of chemistry, and science education. He was author of 'Three Centuries of Chemistry' (1925) and 'Problems in the National Teaching of Science' (1931). During the Second World War, in addition to his duties as vice-chancellor, he supervised a large group involved in explosives research. Outside the sciences he had a keen interest in typography and contributed several articles to 'Transactions of the Bibliographical Society'. He was elected FRS in 1939 and was awarded honorary LLDs from Edinburgh and Sheffield. He was knighted in 1950. 
Masson retired to Edinburgh, where he spent many hours in bibliographical pursuits. His years there were saddened by the long illness of his wife, who died in 1960. Masson himself died in Edinburgh on 22 October 1962. He left one son. 


@@@@@


doc= 38290


Bayes, Gilbert (1872-1953), sculptor, was born on 4 April 1872 at 6 Oval Road, Gloucester Road, St John's Wood, London, the third of four children of Alfred Walter Bayes (1832-1909), a painter and etcher, and his wife, Emily Ann 
('nee' Fielden; 'fl'. 'c'.1840- 'c'.1910)
. He was the brother of the painters Walter Bayes (1869-1956) and Jessie Bayes (1878-1970). He studied at Finsbury Technical College (1891-6) and at the Royal Academy Schools (1896-9). In 1899 he won the Royal Academy gold medal and travelling scholarship. Most of his overseas study was spent in Paris, where his bronze relief 'Jason Ploughing the Acre of Mars' (1900; Robert McDougall Art Gallery, Christchurch, New Zealand) won an honourable mention at the Universal Exposition (1900). In 1906 he married the artist Gertrude Smith ('c'.1875-1952); they had two children. 
Bayes's early works are mainly reliefs and statuettes, often equestrian, inspired by classical, medieval, and Nordic mythology (for example, the bronze 'Sigurd', 1910; Tate collection). From the outset, he showed remarkable versatility, designing such objects as chessmen, caskets, cabinets, mirrors, medals, statuettes, trophies, and portrait busts. Before 1914 his work formed part of the New Sculpture movement, and reflected the influence of George Frampton and Alfred Gilbert. Like Frampton, Bayes experimented with the decorative and expressive potential of colour, and frequently applied mosaics, enamels, and glazes to his sculpture. In the earliest major article on Bayes (1902), Walter Shaw Sparrow admired his 'artistic gaiety and lightness of touch', adding that his work 'is certainly never dull, it never bores you' (Sparrow, 11-12). 
In both his versatility and his careful craftsmanship, Bayes upheld the ideals of the arts and crafts movement and he also had a strong social conscience, without adopting socialism like many of its proponents. In 1945 he declared, 'It is up to the artist to serve the community and deserve well of it, not to make feeble things that won't function' (Irvine and Atterbury, 18). At the same time, he deplored the increasing divergence between the crafts and fine arts. He was elected a member of the Art-Workers' Guild in 1896 and master in 1925. His performances at the guild's theatrical masques and revels won widespread praise. 
Bayes began to enjoy national prominence as a sculptor with his First World War memorials. These revealed a tendency towards elegantly stylized, geometrical art deco forms (for example, Hythe war memorial, Kent, 1921), which developed further in the reliefs for the Pavilion of Concrete Utilities Bureau at the 1924 British Empire Exhibition, Wembley (Portmeirion, Wales). His success in the art deco style was reflected in the gold medal he received at the 1925 Exposition International des Arts Decoratifs et Industriels Modernes, Paris. The simplified, archaic qualities of his distinctive, double-sided reliefs (for example, 'The Lure of the Pipes of Pan', 1932; artificial stone, Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery) have affinities with works by his younger contemporaries, such as Ivan Mestrovic and Paul Manship. Like them, Bayes never rejected his academic training and his work continued to make historical references, evident in the early Renaissance flavour of the Royal Doulton stoneware panel 'Madonna and Child' (1924). His two large outdoor equestrian bronzes, 'Offerings of War' and 'Offerings of Peace' (1918-26; Art Gallery of New South Wales, Sydney), owe much to the French nineteenth-century sculptor Emmanuel Fremiet. 
During the inter-war years Bayes eagerly experimented with modern materials. These included Doulton's polychrome stoneware, which was used for many garden sculptures. The most important and ambitious work in this medium was 'History of Pottery through the Ages' (1939), the frieze for Doulton House, Lambeth Embankment, London, subsequently acquired by the Victoria and Albert Museum when the building was demolished. Bayes also used 'artificial stone' or pre-cast concrete, in the large-scale relief 'History of Drama through the Ages' for the Saville Theatre (now MGM cinema), Shaftesbury Avenue, London (1930). His architectural collaboration with T. P. Bennett in this work and, elsewhere, with John James Burnet and Thomas Tait, maintained an important aspect of the New Sculpture movement, adapting it to updated stylistic demands. 
Probably Bayes's best-known landmark is the 'Queen of Time' clock at Selfridges, London (1930), one of many works commissioned for the department store by Gordon Selfridge, his admiring patron. Bayes's work catered for 'high life' in the 'Unicorns in Battle' decorative panel, executed with Alfred Oakley for the RMS 'Queen Mary' (1936), but he also believed in bringing colour to council estates administered by the St Pancras housing association. The 'Four Seasons' clock and fairytale lunette panels (1937; Sidney Street estate) still survive 'in situ'. A further area of his practice was as a medallist (for example, 'Country Life Marksmanship Medal', 1912; 'Queen Mary Medal', 1935). These mirror in miniature his stylistic progress from the New Sculpture to art deco, although their design and modelling are sometimes compromised by poor lettering. A commission in a related genre, the great seal and counterseal of George V (1912), is elegant and intricate but literally failed to make a successful impression. 
Bayes's awards and offices culminated with a gold medal at the Salon de la Societe des Artistes Francais (1939) and election as president of the Royal Society of British Sculptors (1939-44). Although he regularly exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1889 and 1952, he was not elected to it, perhaps because he was a victim of his sheer versatility as a 'sculptor-craftsman' at a time when the role of fine art became increasingly important. 
Bayes died in the Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth, Marylebone, London, on 10 July 1953. He was liked by his fellow artists, from his mentor, Frampton, to contemporaries such as William Reid Dick and Kathleen Scott. His chief interests were his enormous output of work and the garden at his residence from 1930 in Greville Place, Maida Vale, London, which contained examples of his sculpture. Bayes's last years were saddened by his wife's ill health and, at another level, by what he perceived as the aesthetic narrowness of modern art, which overlooked his craftsmanship and humanism. As a result of the exhibitions 'The Doulton story' held at the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1979 and 'Gilbert Bayes' at the Fine Art Society, London, and Henry Moore Centre, Leeds, in 1998, his place in twentieth-century British sculpture and ceramics has been favourably reappraised. Examples of Bayes's work may be seen in the Tate collection, the British Museum and Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 38291


Pomeroy, Frederick William (1856-1924), sculptor, came from a family of artists and craftsmen. He was apprenticed to a London firm of architectural carvers -- possibly Farmer and Brindley -- and from 'c'.1877 to 1880 studied at the South London Technical Art School, Lambeth. He was taught there by the French emigre sculptor Jules Dalou, whose lively naturalism and modelling skills were a formative influence. Another of Pomeroy's teachers, W. S. Frith, later collaborated with him on the terracotta Victoria fountain (1888; Glasgow Green), commissioned by Doulton & Co. In late 1880 Pomeroy entered the Royal Academy Schools, where he won several prizes, culminating with a gold medal travelling scholarship in 1885. 
Pomeroy visited Paris, where he studied with Antonin Mercie, and then Italy. This experience inspired him to combine the technical proficiency of contemporary French practice with what he called 'ideas of character, of mind, of individuality' found in the early Italian Renaissance (Beattie, 62). On his return to London in 1887, Pomeroy exhibited a bronze statuette of the youthful Giotto at the Royal Academy. The theme and execution appealed to Frederic Leighton, who delegated the carving in marble of his 'Athlete Wrestling with a Python' (1888-90; Ny Carlsberg Glyptothek, Copenhagen) to Pomeroy. Another important professional association, also formed in 1887, was with the architect J. D. Sedding. In line with Sedding's arts and crafts ideals, Pomeroy was employed in several ambitious architectural carving and decoration schemes. The best-known example is Holy Trinity Church, Sloane Street, Chelsea, where he designed the chancel stalls and screen (1890). Pomeroy was one of several leading artists (others included Henry Armstead, Harry Bates, Edward Onslow Ford, and William Reynolds-Stephens) who made Sedding's church 'a museum of 1890s design' (Pevsner, 'London: North-West', 559). He also worked for the architects Arthur Blomfield, Alfred Waterhouse, John Belcher, Henry Wilson, and E. W. Mountford. 
Pomeroy's collaboration with Mountford was particularly successful. His architectural sculptures include friezes and interior lunettes at Sheffield town hall ('c'.1892-5); reliefs at Booth's distillery, City of London ('c'.1902), which explore the gin-making process; and charmingly stylized bronze lamp standards for Liverpool Museum and Technical College ('c'.1902). At the Old Bailey, City of London (1900-07), Pomeroy's gilt-bronze 'Justice' statue makes a fitting climax to Mountford's neo-baroque architecture. His other sculptures for the building include pediment figures at the entrance and carved reliefs of Virtues beneath the dome of the great hall. The latter are described by Benedict Read as 'excellent groups... ably designed to fit well into their allotted spans' (Read, 333). 
Pomeroy's architectural sculpture, exhibited at the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society, was complemented by more academic works, shown at the Royal Academy. 'Dionysius' (1890; Tate collection), an ebullient variation on Leighton's 'The Sluggard' (1886; Tate collection), was described by Edmund Gosse, champion of the New Sculpture, as 'exquisite' (Gosse, 308). The over-life-sized bronze 'Perseus' (1898; National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff) is his best-known work in this genre. The lithe body and sharp silhouette are a spirited answer to Benvenuto Cellini's classic mannerist sculpture of the same theme (1545-54; Loggia dei Lanzi, Florence). Pomeroy's historical portrait statues include monuments to Robert Burns (1896; Fountain Gardens, Paisley; versions in Sydney and Auckland); Oliver Cromwell (1901; Market Place, St Ives, Cambridgeshire); and Francis Bacon (1912; Gray's Inn, London). With the decline of the arts and crafts movement, Pomeroy relied increasingly on commissions for conventional portrait busts and monuments to politicians and churchmen, for example, the Curzon memorial, Calcutta (1912-15). While he never compromised his technical qualities, his later work lost something of its spark. 
Pomeroy was described by C. R. Ashbee as showing 'easy-going and indolent grace of movement' and was nicknamed 'the beautiful Pom' by the girls at the 1899 Art-Workers' Guild masked ball (Beattie, 122). He married Patricia Morrison Coughlan in 1913; they had two sons. He was elected master of the Art-Workers' Guild in 1908 and to associate and full membership of the Royal Academy (1906; 1917). Pomeroy died in Cliftonville, Kent, on 26 May 1924, survived by his wife and sons. He was buried in Boscombe cemetery, Hampshire. 
Unlike several other leading figures of the New Sculpture, Pomeroy has received little art-historical attention, with no recent exhibitions or even monograph articles on him. This is surprising, particularly in view of his intelligent espousal of arts and crafts precepts. He stressed the significance of a craftsman's training, examined the relationship between nature and design, and called for the sculptor's work to be 'bound up with that of the architect' (Beattie, 61). While Pomeroy was not a socialist, he endorsed the populist message of William Morris and celebrated 'the remarkable way in which art in its many branches has... become the fashion with people of all types' (Baldry, 77). In his work, he did much to encourage this trend. 


@@@@@


doc= 38292


Stephens, Sir William Ernest Reynolds- (1862-1943), artist, was born in Detroit, Michigan, United States of America, on 8 August 1862, the son of William Comben Stephens. Both his parents were English and the family moved to London when William was a child. He was educated at Blackheath School and trained as an engineer before studying at the Royal Academy Schools, London (1884-7), where he won prizes for painting and sculpture in 1887. In 1890 he changed his name by deed poll, hyphenating his last two names. 
Reynolds-Stephens's first major work was a mural, 'Summer' (1890), painted for the Royal Academy refreshment room. A highly self-confident work even at this early stage of his career, it depicted a bevy of beautiful, somnolent women and was reminiscent of the Victorian neo-classicist Albert Moore. Unfortunately the installation of a heating system beside 'Summer' caused serious damage and the work was painted over in the 1920s. Despite this early success, sculpture and design dominated Reynolds-Stephens's output from the mid-1890s until his death. 
Reynolds-Stephens had a lifelong belief in the ideals of the arts and crafts movement and was elected to the Art-Workers' Guild in 1888. His cousin Graham Seton Hutchison claimed that: 'even up to the last days of his life, his eager, active mind was planning how best the arts and crafts could be brought into the homes of the people, instead of being... a kind of opiate for the few. (Hutchison)' Even judged by the standards of his day, Reynolds-Stephens's versatility was astonishing. He designed furniture, wall decorations, textiles, picture rails, letterboxes, photograph frames, sweet dishes, light-fittings, fireplaces, and medals, as well as statuettes, portrait busts, funerary monuments, and war memorials. 
In his sculpture Reynolds-Stephens inherited Alfred Gilbert's and George Frampton's interests in experimentation with metal and precious stones. Although his status is currently lower than theirs, he was highly acclaimed in his lifetime. Between 1897 and 1911 seven articles were published on him -- more than on any other living British sculptor -- in the 'Magazine of Art', 'The Studio', and the 'Art Journal'. A. L. Baldry's praise was typical: 'he is a very skilful painter, a sculptor with a... delicate grace of line, a designer with endless resource and unfailing imagination and a craftsman who... aims habitually at a high standard of workmanship' (Baldry, 'Some recent decorations', 278). In 1904 he was one of the signatories to the foundation of the (later Royal) Society of British Sculptors. 
Reynolds-Stephens's work combines dazzling technique with sculptural sagacity. The relief 'Happy in Beauty, Life and Love and Everything' (1896; National Gallery of South Australia, Adelaide) owes its unusual title to John Keats's poem 'Lamia'. The sculpture, which depicts a young woman beside a mirror, is made from copper and bronze and is inset with mother of pearl and precious stones. For all its decorative richness, its contrast between intricacy and plainer passages is highly effective. It was followed by a series of Arthurian statuettes, 'Sir Lancelot and the Nestling' (1899; priv. coll.), 'Guinevere and the Nestling' (1900; priv. coll.), and 'Guinevere's Redeeming' (1905; Warrington Museum and Art Gallery), which use such materials as bronze, silver, coloured marble, ivory, and enamel. Linear elegance, seen in the drapery of 'Guinevere's Redeeming', is as significant as the colour harmonies. 
Reynolds-Stephens's ambitious life-sized sculpture 'A Royal Game' (1906-11; Tate collection) portrays Elizabeth I of England and Philip II of Spain playing an imaginary chess game with ships. It represents the contest between the two powers for maritime supremacy. Although highly praised at the time, the work was later scorned by Susan Beattie for its 'manic precision and profusion of detail' and 'trivial historical anecdote' (Beattie, 233). She saw it as part of the decline of the New Sculpture. Yet 'A Royal Game' could equally be considered a technical and decorative masterpiece, the climax of Reynolds-Stephens's experiments in copper-deposit electrotyping. 
Architectural decoration was another important area of Reynolds-Stephens's activities. His decorative scheme for 185 Queen's Gate, South Kensington (1903), included wall panels, ceiling coves, fireplaces, and electric light fittings. A harmony in cool green, grey-green, copper-gold, and mahogany, it was destroyed in the Second World War. Fortunately his interior of St Mary the Virgin, Great Warley, Essex (1902-4), survives. The church was a collaboration with the architect Charles Harrison Townshend. Reynolds-Stephens designed the interior decoration and major fittings, including the chancel and chapel screens, organ case, pulpit, stained glass, font, and electroliers. The focal point of the church is his 'Gateway to Life' reredos relief which portrays the dead Christ surrounded by angels, the wings and drapery of the figures forming a heart shape. Although Great Warley has been called 'a jewel of the Art Nouveau' (Orbach, 123), Reynolds-Stephens would have disputed this. Baldry stated in 1911 that Reynolds-Stephens's 'sense of responsibility has prevented him from subscribing to any 'art nouveau' fallacies' (Baldry, 'Recent decorative work', 262). Like most of his arts and crafts contemporaries, he regarded the style as one of decorative excess. 
Reynolds-Stephens's most significant works all predate the First World War, although he continued to exhibit at the Royal Academy until 1942. His later sculpture, predominantly portraiture (such as 'This Girl with her Dreams', 1923, Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool; and 'Charles Lamb', 1936, Giltspur Street, City of London), is relatively conventional and conservative but shows no decline in quality. Reynolds-Stephens's chief achievement in his later career was his lengthy and dedicated presidency of the Royal Society of British Sculptors (1921-33). He carefully avoided the society's involvement in the controversy surrounding Jacob Epstein's 'Rima' (1923-5; Hyde Park, London), while not endorsing the sculpture. In 1926 he organized a banquet honouring Alfred Gilbert's return from self-imposed exile in Belgium. In 1928, together with Gilbert Bayes, Reynolds-Stephens organized an exhibition of works by thirty-five British sculptors at the Royal Horticultural Society, London, a more attractive environment than the cramped conditions of the Royal Academy. His services to sculpture were recognized with the award of the Royal Society of British Sculptors' gold medal (1928) and a knighthood in 1931. 
William Reynolds-Stephens died at Vale Royal Hotel, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 23 February 1943 and was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex. He was survived by his wife, Annie 
('nee' Ridpath; 'b'. 1866/7)
, a skilled embroiderer who executed many of her husband's designs, and to whom he was married on 1 June 1891. His 'Times' obituarist called him 'a belated Pre-Raphaelite' ('The Times', 7). This seemed true in 1943 but was less than fair. Forty years earlier he had stood at the forefront of British sculpture, decorative arts, and design. His achievements in these fields are finally receiving recognition. Examples of his sculpted works are in the Tate collection, the National Portrait Gallery, London, and the Castle Museum, Nottingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 38293


Toft, Albert Arthur (1862-1949), sculptor, was born on 3 June 1862 in Hunters Lane, Handsworth, Birmingham, the son of Charles Toft (1832-1909) and his wife, Rosanna Reeves. He came from a family of Staffordshire pottery artists; his father was Wedgwood's principal modeller from 1876 to 1888, and Albert himself served an apprenticeship there. Toft studied at the government schools of art at Hanley and Newcastle under Lyme, and in 1881 won a scholarship to the National Art Training School (later Royal College of Art), South Kensington. He was one of the earliest of Edward Lanteri's long line of outstanding sculpture students, winning silver medals in his second and third years. 
Despite receiving offers to return to modelling for pottery, Toft gave priority to sculpture and, in doing so, 'passed through lean and trying years... much might be written concerning his struggles' (Reddie, 23). His earliest Royal Academy exhibits were reliefs, medallions, and portrait busts, the most important being that of W. E. Gladstone (1888; National Liberal Club, London). Modelled from the life, it was 'regarded by the family as his best portrait-bust' (Hamer, 396). Several ideal sculptures followed, including 'Fate Led' (1892; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), 'Spring' (1897; original model purchased for City of Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery), and 'The Spirit of Contemplation' (1901; bronze, 1903, Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne). All three portray young nude women and possess characteristic New Sculpture qualities of naturalism in modelling and spiritual reverie in mood. 
Commissions followed for commemorative portrait statuary, including monuments to Queen Victoria at Leamington Spa, Nottingham, and South Shields, and to Edward VII at Birmingham and Warwick. Toft's allegorical reliefs are often more impressive than his actual statues. An example is the 'Queen Victoria' statue (1905; Victoria Embankment, Nottingham), which is described by Susan Beattie as appearing 'almost superfluous to the complex fantasy explored below' (Beattie, 206). The 'Charity' relief on the pedestal, framed by climbing roses, reflects the influence of Toft's friend Alfred Gilbert. Further major works include the Welsh memorial to the South African War (1910; Cathays Park, Cardiff) and four allegories representing the armed services (1923-4; Centenary Square, Birmingham). They comprise monumental seated bronze figures, which harmoniously complement the nearby Hall of Memory and attest to the vigour of the New Sculpture long after its supposed decline. In his Royal Fusiliers memorial, Holborn (1922; another version, Flers, France), Toft featured an alert soldier, bayonet fixed and ready for action. 
Toft's early training in ceramics is indicated in his frequent use of terracotta, whose increasing unfashionableness he regretted. About 1913 he was commissioned to design the Royal Doulton slip-cast figure of W. S. Penley as 'Charley's Aunt', a work that reveals his witty versatility. A notable work in yet another medium is Toft's coronation medal of George V and Queen Mary (1911); on the reverse, the dramatic use of lines to denote the ship of state again attests to Gilbert's influence. Although Toft regularly exhibited at the Royal Academy over many years (1885-1947), he was not elected to its membership. This was probably due to the abundance of talented sculptors slightly senior to Toft when his career was at its height. He was, however, elected to the Art-Workers' Guild (1891) and to a fellowship of the Royal Society of British Sculptors (1938). Toft died in a nursing home, at 22 Downview Road, Worthing, Sussex, on 18 December 1949. He was married, and had at least one child, a daughter. His work is represented in the Tate collection; the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool; Birmingham City Art Gallery; and the Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne. His public statuary is in many cities and towns in England and Wales. 
Toft's temperament was described as 'warm and genial' (Reddie, 23), qualities which he displayed towards Gilbert following the latter's resignation from the Royal Academy and bankruptcy. Perhaps Toft's greatest claim to enduring significance is his book 'Modelling and Sculpture' (1911; reprinted 1949). Less detailed and more accessible to the layman than Lanteri's 'Modelling', the text is clear and commonsensical, if conservative. In it, Toft celebrates 'the renaissance of the sculptor's art in Great Britain' (Toft, 19) and stresses the significance of Italian Renaissance sculpture and the legacy of Alfred Stevens in bringing this about. 


@@@@@


doc= 38294


Bigge, John Thomas (1780-1843), judicial commissioner, was born on 8 March 1780 at Benton House, Northumberland, the fourth of ten children of Thomas Charles Bigge (1739-1794), landowner, banker, and sheriff of Northumberland, and his wife, Jemima (1748-1806), daughter of William Ord and his wife, Anne. The Bigges supposed their ancestry, in Kent and Essex, to predate the Norman conquest. John Thomas was educated at Newcastle Free School and Westminster School (1795). In 1797 he entered Christ Church, Oxford (BA 1801, MA 1804). Although financially independent through a legacy, he chose a bar career, being called at the Inner Temple (1806), and practised on the northern circuit and in London. 
In 1810, while accompanying his unwell sister, Eliza, to Madeira, Bigge met and befriended Sir Ralph Woodward, also escorting an ailing sister. Woodford, by 1812, became governor of Trinidad and recommended Bigge to the vacant chief justiceship there. Commissioned on 5 July 1813, Bigge made a concentrated study of Spanish laws and language as used in Trinidad courts, and reformed court business which he found in confused arrears. He recommended the displacement of Spanish by English institutions, particularly jury trial. 
Bigge undertook many extra-judicial duties, auditing the colony's accounts, and inquiring into financial mismanagement and corruption. His recommendations concerning slave emancipation were commended by the Colonial Office, which, on his seeking leave in 1818, invited him to become commissioner of inquiry into the New South Wales convict settlement. He accepted and resigned from the bench. New South Wales, appointed a place to which convicts might be transported, had changed much since 1788. The rebellion that dislodged Governor William Bligh in 1808 might have stimulated a wider revolution, but order was restored under Governor Lachlan Macquarie. Autocratic, like his predecessors, Macquarie had new policies. He saw New South Wales as a future free colony, not as a perpetual gaol, and he believed in readmitting to society convicts who had served their sentences (emancipists). Because members of the armed forces and emancipists alike stayed on to take land grants, and capitalists invested in the pastoral promise of the country, the settlement's future had to change. 
Bigge's inquiries, politically motivated to delay change, looked to making transportation more cost-efficient while restoring its terror to discourage crime in England. An inquiry into New South Wales in 1812, along with copious recommendations from officials and individuals, made a further inquiry superfluous. But it was expedient. Macquarie, who had sought leave to retire, but had not received a reply dissuading him, was shocked at Bigge's arrival in Sydney in September 1819, bearing a dormant commission as governor should Macquarie resign. At first reassured by Bigge's credentials and demeanour, Macquarie believed that the inquiry would vindicate him. But there was soon friction, particularly over Bigge's insistence on economies, especially the deployment of convict labour from town developments to rural work. 
Bigge, while recording minute evidence of continuing historical interest -- a 'book of petty details', remarked the Sydney 'Monitor' (3 February 1827) -- used inquisitorial methods owing more to Trinidad than to Westminster. Natural justice and procedural fairness were denied, to Macquarie's prejudice. Three reports followed: 'State of the colony' (1822); 'Judicial establishments' (1823); and 'State of agriculture and trade' (1823). Conceived in controversy, they retain that character, still stimulating disagreement as to their worth. They collectively strengthened the future of New South Wales as a free colony, while denying such concessions to democracy as a franchise and jury trial. The ensuing 'New South Wales Act' (4 Geo. IV c.96) conceded only a nominated legislature and embryonic court structure. 
Rejecting a judicial post at Gibraltar, Bigge agreed in 1823 to be a joint commissioner inquiring into the Cape and other colonies. The inquiries were prolix. Reports, not completed until 1830, stimulated some government and court reforms. Declining, because of illness, to inquire into clerical establishments in 1832, Bigge, still unmarried, led a secluded life until his accidental death at the Grosvenor Hotel in London on 20 December 1843. He was interred in All Saints' cemetery, Fulham, his considerable estate being distributed among nephews and nieces. 


@@@@@


doc= 38295


Sclater, Philip Lutley (1829-1913), zoologist, was born on 4 November 1829 at Tangier Park, Hampshire, the second son of William Lutley Sclater (1789-1885) and Anna Maria, 'nee' Bowyer (died 1879). He was educated at Winchester College (1842-5), whence he obtained a scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Oxford (1846-9). He received a first in mathematics in 1849 and remained at Oxford for a further two years, studying natural history and modern languages. In 1851 he entered Lincoln's Inn and practised on the western circuit for a number of years after his call to the bar. 
Sclater was an accomplished ornithologist, and he published a number of articles in the journals of the Linnean and Zoological societies. His most important paper was 'On the general geographic distribution of the members of the class aves'. This paper identified six zoogeographic regions of the world according to their bird life. This concept was developed by subsequent writers and Sclater's terminology remains in use to this day. He was a frequent traveller to Europe and often stayed with the ornithologist Charles Lucien Bonaparte in Paris. His first visit to America was in 1856 when he travelled on foot and by birch-bark canoe as far as the Mississippi and met leading American naturalists. Subsequent journeys took him back to North America, to north and south Africa, and to Europe. He contributed four volumes to the 'Catalogue of Birds at the British Museum'. 
In 1850 Sclater became a fellow of the Zoological Society of London and in 1857 a member of its council. In 1859 he was elected secretary of the society. The financial and scientific affairs of the society were not in good order at that time. Sclater ensured that the 'Transactions' and 'Proceedings' were published at the due time, and that the library was greatly improved. In 1886 responsibility for the 'Zoological Record' (founded in 1864) was assumed by the Zoological Society on his initiative. Other activities included the founding in 1858 of 'Ibis', the journal of the British Ornithologists' Union, which he edited (apart from the years 1865-77) until 1913. 
In 1861 Sclater was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and in 1862 he married Jane Anne Eliza Hunter-Blair (died 1915), daughter of Sir David Hunter-Blair, third baronet. They had one daughter and three sons, the eldest of whom, William Lutley (1863-1944), was also an ornithologist and succeeded his father as editor of 'Ibis' (1913-30). 
Sclater's elder brother, George Sclater-Booth (later Lord Basing), was appointed president of the Local Government Board by Disraeli in 1874 and for two years Sclater acted as his private secretary. However he declined a permanent position as this would take him from his study of natural history. In 1892 he was elected chairman of the British Ornithologists' Club. 
During Sclater's period as secretary, many new buildings were erected in the zoological gardens, but he was more anxious to secure that a rare species should be added to the official list than that it should be sedulously cared for. Before his retirement in 1902, his administration of the zoological gardens was subjected to mounting and justified criticism. He made a poor impression when giving evidence to the society's reorganization committee and although he persuaded the council to nominate his son William as secretary, he was not elected by the fellows. 
Sclater was always very helpful to other zoologists, but this was marred by an arrogant and dictatorial manner. His retirement was spent in Hampshire where he was an active and by far the oldest member of the Hampshire hunt. He died at his home, Odiham Priory, as a result of a carriage accident on 27 June 1913. 


@@@@@


doc= 38296


Baker, John Gilbert (1834-1920), botanist, was born on 13 January 1834 at Guisborough, Yorkshire, the son of John Baker, draper and grocer, and his wife, Mary Gilbert. In August 1834 his parents moved to Thirsk, Yorkshire, and opened a shop. In 1843 he became a pupil at the Quaker school in Ackworth, Yorkshire, and then in 1846 at the Quaker school at Bootham in York, whose pupils were encouraged to study natural history. His schooling ended late in 1847, after which he helped his father in the family business until 1864. He married Hannah Unthank (died 1902) in August 1860. Their son Edmund Gilbert (1864-1949) was also a botanist and eventually became assistant keeper at the Natural History Museum, London. 
Baker began collecting plants when he was only twelve and he briefly had charge of the school herbarium at Bootham. When he was fifteen the 'Phytologist' published his note on the occurrence in a rather boggy wood in north-east Yorkshire of a sedge he identified as being 'Carex persoonii' (now 'Carex curta'). His intimate knowledge of the local flora encouraged him to collaborate with John Nowell in issuing a supplement to H. Baines's 'Flora of Yorkshire' (1840) in 1854. The following year he read a paper at the annual meeting at Glasgow of the British Association, on British flowering plants and ferns, which he declared was an attempt to classify them according to their 'geognostic relations'. 
When the scheme for the national exchange of plant specimens was suspended by the Botanical Society of London, Baker suggested that the Thirsk Natural History Society might take over the service. His proposal was approved and in 1859 he became curator and secretary of the Thirsk Botanical Exchange Club under the aegis of the Thirsk Natural History Society. It was largely through his efficient management of this exchange of plant specimens that Thirsk became an important centre for field botany in Britain. His first major work, 'North Yorkshire: Studies of its Botany, Geology, Climate and Physical Geography' (1863) was a pioneering ecological survey of over 1100 species of flowering plants and ferns. Unfortunately most of the copies were lost in a fire which devastated the family business in 1864. The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union began reprinting the work in its 'Transactions' in 1888, and an enlarged edition was published in 1906. It is a measure of the esteem in which Baker was held that donations from fellow botanists enabled him to replace the library he had lost in the fire. 
On 20 November 1865 Joseph Hooker, recently appointed director at the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew, wrote to Baker that he anticipated 'soon to be in need of a person of 'careful, neat, accurate' and 'industrious' habits, who has made some progress in Systematic Botany and is really fond of the pursuit' (Hooker to Baker, 20 Nov 1865, RBG Kew, Baker MSS). Shortly afterwards Baker took up an appointment as an assistant in the Kew herbarium in January 1866. The work of the Thirsk Botanical Exchange Club was then taken over by the newly formed London Botanical Exchange Club with Baker as joint curator. His first task at Kew was the completion of the late Sir William Hooker's 'Synopsis filicum', which was published in 1868. In addition to taxonomic work, he lectured on botany at the London Hospital medical school, 1869-81, at Kew to student gardeners, 1874-1904, and at the Chelsea Physic Garden, 1882-96. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1878. He became principal assistant to the keeper of the Kew herbarium in 1884 and its keeper in 1890. 
Baker contributed substantially to the colonial floras prepared at Kew during his quarter of a century in the herbarium. 'Flora of Mauritius and Seychelles' (1877) was entirely his own work; so, too, was volume 6 of the 'Flora Capensis' (1896-7); he described species in the 'Flora of British India' and 'Flora of Tropical Africa'. The 'Journal of the Linnean Society' published his enumeration of the plants of Madagascar. It has been calculated that he wrote about 400 papers which appeared mainly in the 'Journal of Botany', 'Journal of the Linnean Society', and 'Kew Bulletin'. 
Baker was a regular contributor to the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' between 1869 and 1899 on monocotyledons of interest to gardeners. These articles formed the basis of his handbooks on Amaryllidaceae (1887), Bromeliaceae (1889), and Iridaceae (1892). His research on roses which began with a paper on British species in the 'Naturalist' (1864) culminated with the text to Alfred Parson's plates in the 'Genus Rosa' (1910-14). Ferns remained an abiding interest. He revised Sir William Hooker's 'Synopsis filicum' in 1874; contributed the volume on ferns to C. F. P. von Martius's 'Flora Brasiliensis'; described 100 new or rare ferns in volume 17 of 'Icones plantarum' (1886-7); and wrote a 'Handbook of the Fern-Allies' (1887). He never abandoned his interest in British plants, as 'A Flora of the English Lake District' (1885) testified. 
It has been said that Baker's output was so impressive because he chose to study plant families that did not require microscopic examination. It is more likely, however, that his wholehearted dedication to the task in hand is the explanation. Joseph Forster's portrait of him depicts him completely absorbed in his work, plants and herbarium sheets around him on his desk. A kind and considerate man, he had a number of interests, in particular poetry, but botany was always his chief concern. The Linnean Society honoured him with its gold medal in 1899, and the Royal Horticultural Society with the Victoria medal of honour in 1897 and the Veitch memorial medal in 1907. The plant genera 'Bakerella' (a genus in Loranthaceae, native to Madagascar, 'Bakeria' (now 'Bakerantha', a South American Bromeliad), and 'Neobakeria' (a South African genus belonging to Liciaceae) were named in his honour. 
Baker retired in 1899. His wife died in 1902 and he died at his home, 3 Cumberland Road, Kew, on 16 August 1920. He was buried at the Quaker burial-ground, Isleworth, on 19 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 38297


Britten, James (1846-1924), botanist and Roman Catholic propagandist, was born on 3 May 1846 at 18 Shawfield Street, Chelsea, London, the son of James Alexander Britten, bookseller, and his wife, Mary Ann ('nee' Shepard). His father was a prominent active member of the local community, and Britten Street was named after him. Educated privately, by the age of ten Britten had become interested in plants, aided by Anne Pratt's 'Flowering Plants of Great Britain' (1855). Intending a medical career he spent four years from 1846 onwards with a doctor at High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, but in 1869 abandoned medicine for botany and was appointed a junior assistant in the herbarium at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, where he was befriended and encouraged by Daniel Oliver. He had already (1863) contributed a note on plants found near Kew Bridge and while at Kew prepared an account of the 'Crassulaceae' for Oliver's 'Flora of Tropical Africa' (1871). 
In 1871 Britten moved to the department of botany at the British Museum, where he worked until he retired in 1909. His interest in field botany led to publications on the plants of Buckinghamshire (especially those of High Wycombe) and other counties. Undoubtedly his major task, appreciated by amateur and professional botanists alike, was editing the 'Journal of Botany, British and Foreign' from 1879 until his death in 1924. This became the esteemed and convenient medium for the publication of records of British plants, descriptions of new species, obituaries, and articles on botanical bibliography (which particularly interested Britten -- a bookman in the broadest sense). Britten's editorial notes and reviews were entertaining, critical, and sometimes caustic. The management of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, with its ambition to absorb the department of botany, British Museum (Natural History), was a frequent target for witty attacks. Thiselton-Dyer considered one so libellous that he threatened a lawsuit, and to avoid this Britten agreed to make a large donation to a charity. He gave it to Richmond Hospital whose grateful governors, ignorant of the reason for his donation, made him a privileged life governor, to his lasting amusement. 
Editing the 'Journal of Botany' for forty-five years was only a part of Britten's activities. Between 1879 and 1891 he published in parts a well-illustrated pteridological work, 'European Ferns'. 'A Dictionary of English Plant Names' (in collaboration with Robert Holland, 1878-81), and, in collaboration with George Simmonds Boulger, 'A Biographical Index of British and Irish Botanists' (1891). He was also responsible for the publication of a reprint (1892) of Turner's 'The Names of Herbes' (1549) and of 'Illustrations of Australian plants collected in 1790 during Captain Cook's voyage... by Sir Joseph Banks and Dr Daniel Solander' (1900-05). His paper, 'Some early Cape botanists and collectors' in the 'Journal of Linnean Society-Botany', (45, 1920, 29-51) reveals his detailed knowledge of botanical history. 
About 1867 Britten entered the Roman Catholic church and served it thereafter with ardour and industry; he was for some years honorary secretary of the Catholic Truth Society, wrote some of its polemical publications, and bequeathed most of his estate to Roman Catholic charities. Described as 'the most active Catholic layman' (Rendle, 340), he received the knighthood of St Gregory in 1897 and was promoted to knight commander in 1917. He died suddenly on 8 October 1924 in Bedford Street, London, and was buried at Isleworth cemetery, near his home in Brentford. He never married. 
Britten had a ready wit and keen sense of humour, possessed a strong visual memory, held very firm views sometimes virulently expressed, and was appreciated for his scholarship and willingness to share his knowledge. The botanical names 'Brittenia' Cogniaux (1890) and 'Jamesbrittenia' O. Kuntze (1841) commemorate him. 


@@@@@


doc= 38298


Bunbury, Sir Charles James Fox, eighth baronet (1809-1886), naturalist and diarist, the oldest surviving son of Sir Henry Edward Bunbury, seventh baronet (1778-1860), and his wife, Louisa Emilia Fox (1788?-1828), was born in Messina, Sicily, on 4 February 1809, while his father was stationed there as head of the quartermaster-general's department of the British army. His mother was a niece of Charles James Fox (1749-1806), hence his baptismal name. He was a sickly child. The family moved back to England to a house owned by the family in Mildenhall, Suffolk, in 1813 when Sir Henry was promoted to under-secretary of state for the war department; in 1824, three years after his father succeeded to the baronetcy, the family moved to the ancestral estate at Great Barton, Suffolk. During these years, young Bunbury visited many spas and seaside resorts for medical treatment and early on became very attached to botany. His mother taught him a great deal about this, in particular fostering an interest in scenery, his father meanwhile encouraging him in minerals and geology. From both parents he acquired markedly cultivated and varied tastes, and while still very young was introduced to some of the best-known experts in these fields as well as leading whig politicians and statesmen of the day. In 1829 he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, at the same time as his younger brother Edward. He became a scholar in 1831 but did not graduate. 
By then Bunbury was showing much better health, and his father let him travel to Brazil, via Madeira, to work with his uncle Fox, who was minister in Rio de Janeiro. Bunbury lived there from 1833 to 1835, collecting plants and making notes on natural history. On his return he joined the Holland House circle and attended London's scientific societies, primarily the Linnean and Geological, where his accomplishments and remarkable memory stood him in good stead. With no need to work for a living, he pursued a gentleman's scientific and artistic occupations. In 1837 he stood unsuccessfully as a whig candidate for Bury St Edmunds. The following year he accompanied another uncle, Sir George Napier, to the Cape, where he collected plants assiduously, afterwards publishing a well-received 'Journal of a Residence at the Cape of Good Hope' (1848); he also made a brief continental tour through France and Italy in 1842. 
A turning point came, however, with Bunbury's connection (in quick succession) with the geologist Charles Lyell (1797-1875), followed by Lyell's friend and father-in-law, Leonard Horner (1785-1864), and then Horner's unmarried daughter, Frances ['see below'], a keen botanist and linguist. Bunbury worked with increasing purpose in geology, becoming close friends with Lyell and others in the Geological Society, and specializing in fossil botany. He identified several of Lyell's coal deposit specimens and catalogued the Carboniferous fossils in the Geological Society museum. His relationship with Lyell and Horner was cemented in 1844 when he married Frances, on 30 or 31 May. Since Frances's older sister Mary was married to Charles Lyell, and her younger sister Katherine was married to Lyell's brother Henry, the two naturalists were now affectionately united as scientific brothers-in-law and shared many natural history excursions and personal experiences thereafter. This close family network gave a focus to Bunbury's endeavours. His letters to Horner and Lyell, and to others such as Charles Darwin, and the copious journal he began to keep at about this time, are full of detail about scientific societies, natural history excursions in Europe, the people he and Frances met, and the life they led in London and Suffolk. He enjoyed art exhibitions, visited historical sites and antiquities with enthusiasm, travelled, collected, and read widely. As well as this, he possessed an eager, enquiring mind that allowed him to accept Darwin's theory of evolution with equanimity, although he was a staunch, church-attending Anglican. Few other journals provide such an intimate view of mid-Victorian natural history. Extracts from the journal and letters were posthumously published in nine volumes, edited by his wife. In 1851 Bunbury was elected FRS. 
Bunbury became eighth baronet when Sir Henry died in 1860 and he and Frances moved from Mildenhall to Barton Hall. Like Mary and Charles Lyell, they were childless. His botanical publications included papers on the influence of the chemical nature of the subsoil, the plants of South America and the Cape, and the characteristic features of leaves, using what he knew of fossil leaves to supplement traditional systems of classification. His geological papers were all on fossil plants. He also edited a 'Memoir and Literary Remains' of his father in 1868. From 1868 he was high sheriff of Suffolk. Towards the end of his life Bunbury became depressed by the deaths of members of his close family circle. He died on 17 June 1886 at Barton Hall, and was buried on 24 June at Great Barton church. He was succeeded by his brother Edward Bunbury, himself a keen geologist, and MP for Bury. 




@@@@@


doc= 38300


Stebbing, Thomas Roscoe Rede (1835-1926), zoologist and Church of England clergyman, was born on 6 February 1835 in Euston Square, London, the fourth son of Henry Stebbing (1799-1883), clergyman and long-time editor of 'The Athenaeum', and his wife, Mary Griffin (1805-1882). He was educated at King's College School and at King's College, London (BA, 1855), and matriculated at Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1853. Soon afterwards he entered Worcester College, graduating BA in 1857 and MA in 1859. For a time, about 1859, he held masterships at Radley College and at Wellington College. Until he resigned his fellowship at Worcester in 1868 he was fellow (1860-68), tutor (1865-7), vice-provost (1865), and dean (1866) of the college. He was ordained by Samuel Wilberforce, bishop of Oxford, in 1859. 
Stebbing aptly called himself 'a serf to natural history, principally employed about Crustacea' ('WWW', 1916-28, 991). However, his studies of natural history began relatively late, in 1863, when he was employed as a tutor in Reigate. There he met the entomologist William Wilson Saunders (1809-1879), whose daughter Mary Anne (1845-1927) he married in 1867. After their marriage Thomas and Mary Anne Stebbing (who was herself a capable botanist and illustrator) moved to Torquay. There Stebbing continued his career as tutor and schoolmaster and, influenced by the naturalist William Pengelly, also began to write on Darwinism, natural history, and theology. His first paper on Crustacea dates from 1873; a year later he began to study the amphipod Crustacea, a group on which he specialized for the rest of his life, becoming the ranking authority on the group. His work was recognized by fellowships in the Linnean Society (1895) and the Royal Society (1896) and by the gold medal of the Linnean Society (1908). Moving to Tunbridge Wells in 1877, Stebbing gave up full-time teaching in favour of natural history and writing. 
The majority of Stebbing's scientific writings deals with the taxonomy of amphipod Crustacea, on which he published more than 110 papers. On the recommendation of the naturalist Canon A. M. Norman, Stebbing monographed the Amphipoda collected on the voyage of HMS 'Challenger', using the resulting publication (1888) to provide an extensive annotated bibliography of the group and a definitive history of its classification, including the original definition of each genus. In a brief discussion he showed how small variations could account for the evolutionary radiation of the group. In a later monograph (1906), he provided a brief synopsis of the gammaridean Amphipoda that was not superseded until the 1950s. Also among his major works are a biography of the Scottish naturalist David Robertson (1891), a general natural history of the Crustacea (1893), and a monograph on the crustacean order Cumacea (1913). 
Stebbing was an early and enthusiastic convert to Darwinism. Originally an evangelical Anglican, he was convinced by the arguments in the 'Origin' and issued a series of polemical writings, beginning with the book 'Essays on Darwinism' (1871), supporting Darwinian evolution by natural selection, and becoming increasingly unorthodox in his religious beliefs through the years. His later books 'Faith in Fetters' (1919) and 'Plain Speaking' (1926) used the rationality of Darwinism to account for the origin of human behaviour and morality and to criticize tenets of the established church, including the literal truth of 'Genesis', the doctrine of the Trinity, the divinity of Jesus, many of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', miracles, and the accuracy of prophecy. Religion, in Stebbing's view, had to be consistent with the logic of science, but its roots were transcendental, emanating from a god of love and unselfishness. Forbidden a parish because of his outspoken views, Stebbing none the less left an important legacy of scientific work and early Darwinian essays, expressing his passion for natural history and the creator of the natural world in formidably rational and lucent prose for nearly sixty years. He died at his home, Ephraim Lodge, The Common, Tunbridge Wells, on 8 July 1926, and was buried in the borough cemetery there on the 13th. 


@@@@@


doc= 38303


Collins, Thomas (1775-1806), actor, was born in Chichester, Sussex, the son of Thomas Court (professionally known as Thomas Collins), originally of Edinburgh, and his wife, the former Mrs King, an actress. Thomas Collins senior was co-manager with James Davies of the Salisbury Comedians, whose circuit of theatres was based in Salisbury, Winchester, Chichester, Southampton, Newport, and later Portsmouth. The young Collins was sent to Bath to study music under Brooks, the violinist and leader of the orchestra at the Theatre Royal, but when he returned to Chichester in 1793 he forsook instrumental music for a place as a light comedian in his father's company. 
Over the next nine years Collins established himself on the performance-circuit as a romantic tenor, able to play dialect roles and to move nimbly about the stage, a trait he inherited from his father. He performed such characters as Gunnel, a young sailor, in 'Netley Abbey' by William Pearce and Motley, the jester in M. G. Lewis's 'The Castle Spectre'. James Davies's daughter Henrietta, who had appeared on the stage since her childhood, often performed with Collins, and in 1795 the two were married. Their child died at Southampton in 1797. 
Collins was invited by Richard Brinsley Sheridan to join the company at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. Presumably Sheridan saw the young man at the theatre in Jewry Street during one of his visits to Winchester, where Sheridan was courting Esther Jane Ogle, the daughter of the dean. An actor named Sheridan, possibly a cousin of the London manager, was a member of the Collins-Davies company. In 1802 Collins transferred to London together with Andrew Cherry, the dialect comedian and playwright. Sheridan had employed both men to replace Thomas King, the retiring comic lead who had established the role of Sir Peter Teazle in 'The School for Scandal'. For his opening role Collins took the part of Jabal, servant to Sheva in Richard Cumberland's sentimental play 'The Jew', gaining commendations. This was followed by 'Fortune's Frolic' by John Till Allingham, in which the new member played Robin Roughhead. 'We have no doubt that Mr Collins will become a favourite with the public', wrote a London correspondent to the 'Hampshire Chronicle'. 
That same year Sheridan revived 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', in which Collins played Slender, a part, 'The Times' noted (27 October 1802), he 'fooled... to the top of his bent; his simplicity was irresistibly laughable'. Samuel De Wilde painted the actor in this role, clad in brown and blue, looking out towards his audience from a background representing Windsor Forest. 
In 1804 Collins established the role of Timothy Quaint in Cherry's popular comedy 'The Soldier's Daughter', surrounded by long-serving members of the company. Nevertheless, according to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', it was to Collins that Cherry presented a portrait of Quaint inscribed: '
Honest Tim, when this you view, 

Remember who created you, 

Not man, nor mortal, sage or saint, 

Hath made you Tim, but Nature, Quaint. 
('GM', 484)' The painting is unidentified. Later De Wilde painted a full length of Collins in this role in 1805. 
The young actor was summed up as a 'promising genius in his line of acting'. The 'Thespian Dictionary' said his humour lay in a 'peculiarity in his voice and manner'. Collins realized his limitations and began to experiment with character parts, disguising himself in a brown wig to play Old Dubbs in 'The Dash'. Little time was left to him, though. Frenetic performances and a predominating nasal twang were caused by vocal strain, tiredness, and illness. Collins's condition worsened when, in March 1806, Henrietta died. She had been childhood sweetheart, wife, and colleague to the actor. Two months later, on 4 May, Thomas Collins also died, at a lodging in Brompton Row, Chelsea. 


@@@@@


doc= 38304


Butts, Mary Franeis (1890-1937), writer, was born on 13 December 1890 at The Salterns, Parkstone, south Dorset, the elder of the two children of Frederick John Butts (1833-1905), captain and gentleman, and his second wife, Mary Jane (1863-1944), daughter of the Revd James Briggs of Parkstone, Dorset, and his wife, Sarah. 
Mary Butts spent her first fifteen years at Salterns. She described her childhood in her autobiography, 'The Crystal Cabinet' (1937), as a 'perfectness'. Her great-grandfather Thomas Butts had been William Blake's patron, and she grew up among the treasures of Salterns which included a number of Blake's paintings and possessions. The paintings were later sold and are now in the Tate collection but Mary Butts wrote that she inherited 'the kind of seeing that there was in William Blake' ('The Crystal Cabinet', 34). The countryside around Salterns together with the classical stories and myths her beloved father recounted and acted out with her haunted her imagination and informed her writing, which has a visionary quality akin to Blake's. 'I can write, I want to, should never want to 'do' anything else', she wrote in a later diary entry in 1927, but she had discovered her vocation as a child. 
Mary Butts was educated locally at The Haven and Sandecotes schools until her father's death. Her mother married Frederick Colville-Hyde and Mary Butts chose to become a boarder at St Leonard's School for Girls in St Andrews. She took the entrance exams for Cambridge but was unsuccessful and registered as a 'general student' at Westfield College, London (1909-12), but left before completing her degree. The following autumn she entered the London School of Economics and graduated in 1914 with a social science certificate, the equivalent of the present-day diploma in social work. She then worked on the Children's Care Committee in the East End of London, before becoming actively involved in the pacifist movement during the First World War, working on the first National Council for Civil Liberties. By this time she had become an atheist and socialist. In her late teens to mid-twenties Mary Butts seems to have had mainly lesbian relationships. This changed, however, when she met the poet and publisher John Rodker (1894-1955). They were married at the Hampstead register office on 10 May 1918 and worked together on Rodker's first publishing house, the Ovid Press (1920). Their only child, Camilla Elizabeth, was born in November 1920, by which time the marriage had broken down, and in early 1921 Mary Butts left for the continent with her lover, the author Cecil Maitland. She divorced Rodker in 1926. 
During the first half of the 1920s Mary Butts was based in London at 43 Belsize Park Gardens and her work began to be published in many of the little magazines of the period. 'Speed the Plough and other Stories' (1923) was followed by her first novel, 'Ashe of Rings' (1925), set in and written during the war. By 1925 her relationship with Maitland had ended and she left for Paris and the French riviera where she stayed until the end of the decade. During the 1920s she knew many of her now more famous modernist contemporaries and is remembered in numerous memoirs for her exuberant personality, her passion for her work (in which she developed an original prose style), and her striking red hair. Jean Cocteau illustrated her epistolary prose sequence, 'Imaginary Letters' (1928), which was published a few months after her second novel, 'Armed with Madness', a modernist treatment of the grail myth. 
In 1930 Mary Butts collapsed from poverty, alcoholism, and drug addiction and returned permanently to England. On 29 October 1930 in London she married the artist Gabriel William Aitken, otherwise Atkin (1897-1937). In 1932 they moved to Sennen Cove, west Cornwall, to a small cliffside bungalow, which she renamed Tebel Vos (House of Magic). The marriage lasted four years. Aitken moved away in late 1934 in which year Mary Butts converted to Anglo-Catholicism. 
The 1930s saw a prodigious output. In addition to becoming a regular reviewer, Mary Butts published her third novel, 'Death of Felicity Taverner' (1932); two historical narratives ('The Macedonian', 1933, and 'Scenes from the Life of Cleopatra', 1935) for which she was highly respected among historians; two further volumes of short stories ('Several Occasions', 1932, and 'Last Stories', 1938); her autobiography; and numerous poems and articles. The last category includes an appreciation of Aldous Huxley (1931), one of the first critical essays on the supernatural writer M. R. James (1934), a history of supernatural fiction (1933), and two pamphlets which address the psychological and ecological consequences of industrialization, urbanization, and loss of religious faith ('Warning to Hikers', 1932, and 'Traps for Unbelievers', 1932). 
Mary Butts remained in Sennen Cove until her sudden death from general peritonitis at Penzance General Hospital on 5 March 1937. She was buried in Sennen church cemetery. Out of print for several decades, Butts's work has slowly been republished since the late 1980s. Always highly regarded by writers, it is only since the latter part of the twentieth century that her contribution to modern literature has begun to be properly recognized. 


@@@@@


doc= 38305


Mayne, Ethelind Frances Colburn (1865-1941), author and translator, was born at Johnstown, co. Kilkenny, on 7 January 1865, the eldest surviving child (she had a younger brother and sister) of Charles Edward Bolton Mayne (died 1927) of the Royal Irish Constabulary, and his wife, (Charlotte) Emily Henrietta (died 1902), daughter of Captain William Sweetman of the 16th lancers. The family moved to Kinsale, co. Cork, and finally settled in the city of Cork where her father became a resident magistrate. She was educated at private schools in Ireland, and at some stage became sufficiently accomplished in French and German to work professionally as a translator. Little of her early life is known until the age of thirty. If her novels are a reflection of her life as a young woman, she experienced with some irritation the confines of rural Irish life. She spent her time translating verse, writing short stories, and following literary activity in London through the press. 
When the 'Yellow Book' was launched in April 1894 Mayne submitted a story, 'A Pen-and-Ink Effect', under the pseudonym Frances E. Huntley. The 'Yellow Book''s editor, Henry Harland, sent Mayne a letter, 'not only accepting the story but praising it in words which even now it thrills me to recall' (Mayne, 'Some reminscences'). She could not know that effusiveness, particularly to female authors, was Harland's usual mode of address. In December 1895 she accepted Harland's offer of employment as sub-editor of the 'Yellow Book', and left Cork on new year's day 1896 to take up the position in replacement of Ella D'Arcy who had gone to France. Mayne came under the spell of Harland for his charm, his editorial elan, and his literary commitment to 'the clearer vision' of the writer, a phrase she used in 1898 as the title for her first volume of short stories. Their industrious partnership was ended abruptly by D'Arcy's return in spring 1896. With no authority but her own, D'Arcy banished Mayne from the office, removed a story of hers that was scheduled for the next edition, and deleted phrases in praise of Mayne written by Harland under his Yellow Dwarf soubriquet. Mayne hoped that Harland would resolve the situation, but he was a cowardly man who avoided confrontation, and he went to Paris in order to escape from the conflict. Despairing of receiving just treatment, she returned to Ireland. Although her prose was always to show the influence of Harland in its allusiveness and searching out of the 'bon mot', their friendship was not resumed. 
Despite this setback Mayne had now embarked on her most important literary endeavour, as a short-story writer, and reverted to publishing under her own name (she always regretted the early subterfuge of a pseudonym). 'The Clearer Vision' was the first of six volumes of her stories including 'Things That No One Tells' (1910) -- an apt description of the content of her stories -- and 'Inner Circle' (1925). Her fiction shows a dark and brooding vision of Victorian domestic life, particularly the lives of women. The children in her stories are often ugly, the women plain and lonely, the mothers unsympathetic. Her writing shows an intensity of emotion about the perverse and petty tyrannies of everyday life: a woman's desire to have her own room; the wish of schoolgirls that their most popular friend is not in love with her intended husband. The stories tell of impossible yearning and unspoken sentiments with the course of whole lives changed by a few words misunderstood or unsaid. She was compared as a short-story writer to Henry James and Katherine Mansfield but critical acclaim was not followed by popular success and prosperity. A first novel, which was based on her 'Yellow Book' experiences in London, was not published and the manuscript has been lost. 
Mayne's first published novel, 'Jessie Vandeleur', whose plot centres on literary theft, came out in 1902. In that year her mother died, and the burden of looking after her father fell on her as the maiden daughter. In her second novel, 'The Fourth Ship' (1908), she wrote: 'There are three ships that we all watch for -- the golden-sailed 'Love'; the ship with white sails called 'The Little Child'; the 'Success' with rosy sails. For some of us all come home; for some one or the other, for some, again, none of these comes home.' She had accurately predicted her own fate. In her forties she began publishing translations from French and German, and embarked on factual studies of regency themes. Her two-volume life of Byron (1912), described as 'one of the most brilliant biographies of our age' ('The Times', 28 June 1929), was followed by 'The Life of Lady Byron' (1929), which interpreted Byron's relationship with Augusta Leigh, his half-sister, as being sexual and therefore incestuous, and the reason why Byron's separation from his wife was irrevocable. 
When Mayne's father retired in 1905 the family moved to London. His death on 8 January 1927 was a double blow as it also meant the loss of his pension. She moved from fashionable Holland Road, Kensington, to various Richmond and Twickenham addresses, accompanied by her invalid sister Violet and her brother-in-law. Over sixty, and not strong, she was solely dependent on literary earnings which were reckoned to average about $27 a year. She was given a civil list pension of $85 a year on 16 March 1927 for 'services to literature', and in May 1939, when her output had dwindled and she had no means but the pension, the Royal Literary Fund granted her $150 in two annual instalments. In the 1920s and 1930s she served on the English committee of the Femina Vie Heureuse prize, from 1924-5 as president. Her opinions on the literary works she was invited to judge could be acerbic. 
A friend to Hugh Walpole, Violet Hunt, and Mary Butts, Mayne was clearly tolerant of their unconventional lifestyles. Her letters show evidence of close emotional relationships, including with Mary Butts. She died, unmarried, on 30 April 1941 at the Trinity Nursing Home, Torquay, Devon. Although she was an influential modernist writer, she did not ally herself to movements or espouse theories, and this has limited critical appreciation of her work. 


@@@@@


doc= 38306


Hanley, James (1901-1985), novelist and playwright, was born in Jervis Street, Dublin, on 3 September 1901, the son of Edward Hanley (died 1937), a ship's stoker. The Hanleys had ten children, three of whom died in infancy; another of their sons was Gerald Hanley (1916-1992), also a novelist. The father took to the sea after moving his family to Liverpool in 1908 and they lived in Othello Street (now gone) in Kirkdale, near Bootle. The only school Hanley attended was St Alexandra's Roman Catholic primary school, near his home. At the age of twelve he left school and joined the merchant navy, serving in a submarine during the First World War; the reason for his enlisting while under age has never been made clear, except that the family was poor and needed him to start bringing in a wage. Three years later he jumped ship at New Brunswick to enlist in the Canadian Black Watch and eventually saw action in France. Invalided out of the army suffering from the effects of gas, he returned to the sea, working as a stoker on troop carriers, which he featured in some of his novels. He continued to educate himself, mainly by reading Russian literature, and having come ashore in the late 1920s earned a precarious living in a variety of jobs in docks, on the railway, and for a while at Aintree racecourse. Many of his early stories were published in the 'Liverpool Echo', the editor of which, E. Hope Prince, became his mentor. 
Hanley's first novel, 'Drift' (1930), and his first volume of stories, 'The German Prisoner' (1930), were published shortly before his move to Wales, where he settled first at Glan Ceirw, Ty-nant, near Corwen in Merioneth, and then, in the autumn of 1941, at Bodynfoel Lodge and Tan-y-ffridd in the village of Llanfechain, Montgomeryshire. He lived from about this time with Dorothy Enid Thomas, 'nee' Heathcote (1902/3-1980), the woman whom he later married at Hampstead register office in London on 6 October 1947; their son, Liam Powys Hanley, had been born at Corwen in 1933. His second novel, 'Boy' (1932), an appalling story of sexual violence on board ship, was originally published in an edition of 145 copies for subscribers only. An expurgated trade edition followed, but when in 1934 it was issued in a cheap edition, copies were seized by the police and the book was successfully prosecuted for obscenity. The publisher was fined $400 and copies of the book were burnt. At the International Congress of Writers held in Paris in 1935, which was devoted to 'the defence of culture', E. M. Forster (accompanied by Hanley) delivered a speech entitled 'Liberty in England' which criticized the workings of the obscene publications laws with reference to the trial; the speech is included in Forster's collection of essays, 'Abinger Harvest' (1936). Hanley forbade republication of the novel during his lifetime and it was not reissued until 1990. 
The first of Hanley's novels about the Furys, a Liverpool Irish family, appeared in 1935 and a volume of autobiography, 'Broken Water', in 1937. On the outbreak of the Second World War he found work with the BBC and later with the Ministry of Information, but his home remained in Llanfechain until 1963, when he and his wife moved to London. During the war he wrote three novels of the sea which are among his best work: 'Hollow Sea' (1938), 'The Ocean' (1941), and 'Sailor's Song' (1943); it was to these that the novelist Henry Green referred in describing Hanley as 'far and away the best writer of the sea and seafaring men since Conrad'. He also wrote the autobiographical 'No Directions' (1943), an evocation of London during the blitz. Many of his stories and radio plays were broadcast on the BBC Third Programme during the 1940s. During his long residence in Wales, Hanley wrote four books with Welsh settings: a collection of essays, 'Don Quixote Drowned' (1953), and the novels 'The Welsh Sonata' (1954), 'Another World' (1971), and 'A Kingdom' (1978). His 'Selected Stories' appeared in 1947 and 'Collected Stories' in 1953. His most memorable achievement is the series of novels about the Furys, which continued with 'The Secret Journey' (1936), 'Our Time is Gone' (1940), 'Winter Journey' (1950), and 'An End and a Beginning' (1958), all of which are imbued with a sense of the dignity of suffering. 
Hanley was a prolific and accomplished writer but, despite the admiration of C. P. Snow, Herbert Read, Edwin Muir, and others, his work has been oddly neglected by literary critics. His output, though uneven, was prodigious: some thirty novels, sixteen volumes of short stories, six plays, numerous scripts for radio and television, and seven volumes of miscellaneous writings, including 'Grey Children' (1937), a study of conditions in the distressed mining valleys of south Wales during the depression, and books about John Cowper Powys (a neighbour of his at Corwen) and Herman Melville. The reasons for his neglect may have to do with his subject matter: the brutality of life at sea, the wretchedness of his proletarian characters, and the unglamourized portrait of men at war. There is, too, a recurrent theme of violence which some readers have found repugnant. But Hanley, 'the well-known proletarian novelist', as he was described by the poet and editor John Lehmann when his work appeared in the periodical 'New Writing' during the 1930s, had no interest in idealizing working-class life. Although once a member of the Bootle branch of the Independent Labour Party, he had no time for communism, and in later life was hostile to all political parties. His vision of man as essentially solitary, unable to communicate, and inhabiting a bleak and nightmarish world -- though unrelenting to the point of obsession -- is sometimes relieved by the quality of his writing, which can border on the poetic, and in his best fiction it is redeemed by the author's charity, humility, and courage. It is a mistake to consider Hanley as only a realist writer: there are touches of surrealism in some of his shorter novels and his main interest is always what is going on in the minds of his characters, especially in their dreams, fantasies, and fears. Some of his characters, such as the indomitable Fanny Fury, are among the most vividly drawn in modern English fiction of the first half of the twentieth century. 
James Hanley died of bronchial pneumonia at his home, 11 Clevedon Mansions, Lissenden Gardens, Highgate Road, London, on 11 November 1985 and was buried in the churchyard at Llanfechain, the village which he considered his home. 


@@@@@


doc= 38307


Bellerby, (Mary Eirene) Frances (1899-1975), poet and novelist, was born on 29 August 1899 at St Aidan's House, Summerhill Road, St George, Bristol, the younger of the two children of Frederick Talbot Parker (died 1954), Anglo-Catholic clergyman, and his wife, Marion Eirene, 'nee' Thomas (1868/9-1932), nurse, daughter of a Bristol solicitor and his wife. Her father was English and her mother Welsh. She was brought up in Bristol where she attended Mortimer House School, Clifton, from 1908 to 1919. She was a popular pupil, outstanding academically, and a superb athlete. In August 1915 her brother Jack was killed in action and his loss affected her all her life. 
On leaving school Frances had a series of voluntary and paid jobs: veterinary assistant (she was always passionate about animals), teacher, journalist, research assistant, and parish duties. She also joined the Neighbours, a fellowship for social services founded by the economist John Rotherford Bellerby (1896-1977) and described by her in a tract and a novel, 'The Neighbours' (1931) and 'Shadowy Bricks' (1932). As the sole remaining child she found her parents oppressive and was stifled by her father's religious discipline although she shared his capacity for zealous idealism in whatever she undertook. 
Frances began keeping a commonplace book of readings and observations in 1925. Her first published works were a volume of essays, 'Perhaps?' (1927), and a novella, 'The Unspoiled' (1928). By this time she was living in London where she worked as drama critic for the 'Bristol Times and Mirror'. She married John Bellerby on 9 December 1929. A person who delighted in physical activities, she found it particularly hard to deal with the disabilities with which she was afflicted in adult life. In 1930 she fell and began to suffer recurrently from a spinal injury. When her mother committed suicide in 1932 Bellerby became estranged from her father, haunted by the breakup of her family. Her marriage faltered from the mid-1930s, ending in divorce about 1948, and she moved to a cottage in Cornwall in 1940. 
Primarily remembered for her poetry (she wrote poems from the age of three), Bellerby published five collections in her lifetime: 'Plash Mill' (1946) (named after her home in Cornwall), 'The Brightening Cloud and other Poems' (1949), 'The Stone Angel and the Stone Man' (1958), 'The Stuttering Water and other Poems' (1970), and 'The First-Known and other Poems' (1975). Two volumes of her selected poems were introduced in 1970 and 1986 by Charles Causley and Robert Gittings respectively. Bellerby's poetry has an intense, visionary quality and deals with nature, memory, and loss. This is also true of her prose. Her best-known novel, 'Hath the Rain a Father?' (1946), addresses the social and psychological consequences of bereavement after the First World War, and this is the focus of a number of stories in her three collections: 'Come to an End and other Stories' (1939), 'The Acorn and the Cup with other Stories' (1948), and 'A Breathless Child and other Stories' (1952). Her 'Selected Stories' (1986) was introduced by Jeremy Hooker. 
In 1950 Bellerby was diagnosed as having breast cancer and treated with operations and excruciating X-ray therapy. While her work was published in many magazines and anthologies, and she received a pension from the civil list for her services to literature in 1973, Bellerby, who was an intensely private person, became increasingly reclusive. In 1951 she moved to Devon and finally settled in Goveton, near Kingsbridge, living at Upsteps Cottage. After her father's death in 1954 she began her autobiography but abandoned it because of the pain it caused her. In 1957 she contracted arterial claudication, a circulatory disorder which made it difficult for her to walk. The cancer recurred in 1973 and she died of breast cancer and ankylosing spondylitis on 30 July 1975. 
A Quaker since 1934, Bellerby instructed in her will that her body be donated to research and that her ashes be scattered near her place of death without flowers or any kind of ceremony. In her obituary Charles Causley wrote: 'The death... of Frances Bellerby... has robbed contemporary poetry of a unique and distinguished voice. To read her, is to be in the presence of a true original' (Causley). 


@@@@@


doc= 38308


Hamilton, (Anthony Walter) Patrick (1904-1962), novelist and playwright, was born on 17 March 1904 at Dale House, Hassocks, Sussex, the third of the three children of Walter Bernard Hamilton (1863-1930), writer and non-practising barrister, and his second wife, Ellen Adele Day, 'nee' Hockley (1861-1934), writer. Patrick Hamilton's earliest years were spent at 12 First Avenue, Hove, Sussex (now commemorated by a plaque), where his family lived from 1908 until the First World War. His parents' unhappy marriage together with the rigidly regulated social codes of Edwardian middle-class life left the young boy overwrought and introverted. The material privileges of his early years were gradually eroded from a position with servants and nannies to one where his mother had to run the household herself in the early 1920s. His father's alcoholism and mismanagement of an inherited fortune meant that the family spent the war years in boarding-houses in Chiswick and Hove, and Patrick Hamilton's education was patchy and interrupted: Holland House School, Hove (1912-18), Colet Court, Hammersmith (1915), and Westminster School, London (1918-19). About his fifteenth birthday Hamilton was removed from school by his mother when he contracted Spanish influenza. Apart from a brief, unsuccessful attempt to prepare for his matriculation at a London crammer in 1919, this was the end of Hamilton's formal education. An indefatigable autodidact from then on, he remained conservative in his literary tastes, detesting fictional experimentation in general and modernism in particular, attacking its exponents in his dystopian novel, 'Impromptu in Moribundia' (1939). 
Both his parents were minor novelists and Hamilton resisted his father's desire that he train for some profession, wishing to pursue his early vocation as a writer. After a series of poorly paid jobs, including those of assistant stage manager, small-part actor (under the stage name Patrick Henderson), and clerk, Hamilton became a full-time writer in 1923, financed by his mother, sister (Lalla), and brother (Bruce). His first novel, 'Monday Morning', was completed when he was only nineteen and published in 1925 by Constable, whose editor, the writer Michael Sadleir, became a long-term friend and mentor. Constable published the twelve novels and seven stage and radio plays which Hamilton wrote over the following three decades. The early books 'Craven House' (1926) and 'Twopence Coloured' (1928) were well received, and Hamilton was for a short time lionized in 1929 when his 'shocker', the stage play 'Rope', was a West End hit. 'The Midnight Bell' also came out in that year, and was the first of three books -- including 'The Siege of Pleasure' (1932) and 'The Plains of Cement' (1934) -- which were subsequently published as a trilogy under the title 'Twenty Thousand Streets under the Sky' (1935). 
The settings and focus of these and most of Hamilton's works were the boarding-houses, pubs, and brothels of inter-war London and Brighton, populated by 'the lost, failed and forgotten' (French, 1). Hamilton later wrote: 'what I was trying to present was a 'black' social history of my times. There were so many 'white' portraits of the twenties and thirties that I wanted to show the other side of the picture. After all, those were the decades in which Hitler rose to power. No one that I read was writing anything about him and the evil he represented. (French, 275)' With his 'bat's wing ear' for dialogue (Cockburn, x) and coruscating wit, Hamilton was the observer and habitue of the kind of society he described in his fiction and his work has been compared to that of Dickens, Gissing, and Orwell. By the late 1920s he was smoking and drinking heavily and regularly and had conceived an infatuation for a prostitute which he depicted in 'The Midnight Bell'. 
A slight man, bespectacled and expensively dressed, Hamilton cut an elegant figure until in 1932, at the height of his literary success, he was hit by a drunk driver and suffered multiple injuries which resulted in a withered left arm, a limp, and scars on his nose and forehead; his radio play 'To the Public Danger' (1939) was commissioned by the road safety campaign. The accident heightened his long-standing shyness. Despite the critical acclaim of his fiction and the financial success of 'Rope' and his second play, 'Gaslight' (1938), Hamilton was never part of any literary group, preferring the company of family and friends. Early on he compartmentalized his life into his friendships with Sadleir and other writers, his Soho acquaintances, his close relationship with his mother and sister until their respective deaths in 1934 and 1951, and his lifelong intimacy with his brother (also a novelist). Intensely fond of cricket and golf, Hamilton had a great many interests, but his main passion was his work. On 6 August 1930 he married Lois Marie Martin (1900/01-1975), yet Hamilton's attitude to women was based on an unhappy mixture of infatuation and misogyny. Intimate relationships were reserved for men. One way in which his writing differed from Dickens's was that Hamilton never wrote love stories. Nor do his characters belong to families; rather they are lonely men and women who are sympathetically portrayed in their unhappy and somehow inevitable solitariness. Nowhere is this more true than in his highly successful novel 'Hangover Square' (1941), whose bleak subject is described in its full title: 'Hangover Square, or, The Man with Two Minds: a Story of Darkest Earl's Court in the Year 1939'. 
By the time he was writing 'Hangover Square', Hamilton had become intellectually committed to Marxist communism, which he championed with an almost religious fervour. Unfit for active service in the Second World War, he did work for the Entertainments National Service Association, as well as being a firewatcher during air raids. He continued to write plays, including 'This is Impossible' (1941) and 'The Duke in Darkness' (1943), but neither achieved the success of 'Gaslight', which was filmed in America as 'Angel Street' (1942) and, more famously, 'Rope', the basis of Alfred Hitchcock's 1948 screen version. Unfortunately this was one of Hitchcock's weaker productions and Hamilton was disappointed at the loss of the taut atmosphere of his stage original. 
More successful was Hamilton's novel 'The Slaves of Solitude' (1947), which led John Betjeman to describe him as one of 'the best English novelists' (Jones, 283). In 1948 Hamilton began an affair with the novelist Lady Ursula (La) Winifred Stewart, 'nee' Chetwynd-Talbot (1907/8-1966), daughter of Viscount Ingestre. She had changed her surname by deed poll to Hamilton before their marriage on 10 April 1954, a year after Patrick Hamilton's divorce from Lois Martin in 1953. Yet Hamilton's life was no less turbulent and he was looked after by La and Lois in turn as his health continued to deteriorate because of alcoholism. His final three novels were 'The West Pier' (1951) -- 'the best novel written about Brighton' (Graham Greene, in Jones, 310); 'Mr Stimpson and Mr Gorse' (1953), which was adapted for the television series 'The Charmer'; and 'Unknown Assailant' (1955). Together they form 'The Gorse Trilogy' and explore the criminal mind, a subject which had long fascinated Hamilton. 
Hamilton's final seven years were dominated by his alcoholism and what one doctor diagnosed as menopausal melancholia. In despair he underwent electro-convulsive therapy in 1956. It brought relief but seems to have eradicated his desire and ability to write except for an autobiographical piece, 'Memoirs of a Heavy Drinking Man' (never published), in which he considered how far his alcoholism might be a genetic condition (his sister had also been an alcoholic). Increasingly impaired by regular drinking although suffering from cirrhosis of the liver, Patrick Hamilton died on 23 September 1962 at his home, 3 Martincross, North Street, Sheringham, Norfolk. His body was cremated on 26 September and his ashes scattered on the Blakeney Flats. 
Only since his death has Patrick Hamilton's work received its due critical recognition, with republications introduced by J. B. Priestley and Michael Holroyd. He has been the subject of several biographies. 


@@@@@


doc= 38309


Brooke, (Bernard) Jocelyn (1908-1966), writer and naturalist, was born on 30 November 1908 at 9 Radnor Cliff, Sandgate, Folkestone, Kent, the third child of Henry Brooke (1870-1936), wine merchant, and his wife, May, 'nee' Turner (1867-1963). Both his parents were English, and were converts to Christian Science. Jocelyn Brooke was brought up in Kent primarily by his nanny, a strict Baptist whom he called Ninnie. A painfully sensitive, precocious child, considered by his family to have weak health, Brooke from a very early age observed his world, the countryside around Folkestone and their summer residence, Forge Cottage, Bishopsbourne, in the Elham valley. Much younger than his sister, Evelyn, and his brother, Cecil, Brooke seems to have admired and been rather overwhelmed by the gregarious if strictly class-conscious world of his family. He found school a painful experience: life at his preparatory day school was daunting but tolerable. Not so, however, King's School, Canterbury, and he ran away twice in the first two weeks before being sent to the co-educational progressive Bedales School, which seems to have been as good as it could be given that Brooke hated sport and the intrusive environment of boarding-school life. From 1927 he attended Worcester College, Oxford, where he paid to have his first book, 'Six Poems', published in 1928. 
After only a year Brooke was sent down from Oxford. Between 1928 and 1930 he worked in three London bookshops, and for a London publisher in 1931. He then joined his brother in the family's wine business, but found that he had no acumen for this or any of the other jobs he worked at and suffered a breakdown of some sort. When the Second World War began he enlisted in the Royal Army Medical Corps (RAMC) and became one of the pox wallahs, those working to treat venereal disease. He was decorated for bravery. 
Brooke was restless as a demobbed veteran and soon rejoined the venereal disease branch of the RAMC as a regular: 'Soldiering had become a habit with me' (Brooke, 'The Dog at Clambercrown', 220), he wrote by way of explanation for this rather surprising decision, given his childhood unhappiness at boarding-school. His homosexuality and the orderly anonymity of military life perhaps combined to make the army attractive to Brooke, who was a self-deprecating, extremely private individual; his unsuitability to take over the family business (his brother was killed in a car accident) may well have propelled him away from civilian life. 
While Brooke wrote poetry and prose from his schooldays onwards, his next book, 'December Spring: Poems', published by John Lane's Bodley Head (which became his main publisher), did not appear until 1946. It was followed by 'The Military Orchid' (1948), which in addition to receiving critical acclaim (Desmond MacCarthy praised it highly) was a sufficient financial success to enable Brooke to buy himself out of the army. He moved to London and became a talks producer for the BBC, but was unhappy in the metropolis. After four months he resigned and moved to the country, eventually settling in an environment familiar from his childhood -- Ivy Cottage in Bishopsbourne, which he shared with Ninnie. 
From this point Brooke wrote full-time and published books of a variety of genres in an astonishingly quick succession (eighteen appeared between 1949 and 1958). They reflect his knowledgeable passions for botany, pyrotechnics, and literature. He was a botanophile from early childhood: 'not content with the English names [of flowers], I memorised many of the Latin and Greek ones as well. Some of these (at the age of 8) I conceitedly incorporated in a school essay.... The Headmaster read the essay aloud to the school (no wonder I was unpopular). (Brooke, 'The Orchid Trilogy', 23)' He was a founder member of the Kent Trust for Nature Conservation and published two botanical works: 'The Wild Orchids of Britain' (1950) and 'The Flower in Season' (1952), 'a book about wild flowers for those who like wild flowers' (Brooke, 'The Flower in Season', 11). His only children's novel, 'The Wonderful Summer' (1949), includes a detailed description (with diagrams) of how to make fireworks, and the plot revolves around the search for a rare orchid, the Epipogon, by three teenagers in Oxfordshire: a brother and sister and their cousin, Vincent, a mocking self-portrait. This novel is just one aspect of what Anthony Powell aptly described as the 'Brooke myth' (Powell, 3): Brooke's ability to write what has elsewhere been called 'managed autobiography'. Brooke repeatedly drew on his life in the three loosely connected volumes of his trilogy: 'The Military Orchid', 'A Mine of Serpents' (1949, named after a type of firework), and 'The Goose Cathedral' (1950). In these witty, subtle, deceptively simple works, the narrator records details of the childhood and later life of a young man resembling but not identical to Brooke himself, who is presented as a prototype of his generation and class. The books capture the unfolding of a melancholy, often painfully sensitive male consciousness, an observer who portrays sardonically and with delicate wit a quintessentially English life. His gift lay in evoking life in the inter-war years and in the army with all its idiosyncratic and distinctive elements without creating dated period pieces. 
Also on the cusp between autobiography and fiction are the following narratives: 'The Scapegoat' (1948) -- an excellent portrayal of doomed adolescent angst; 'The Passing of a Hero' (1953), in which Brooke wrote in a note that 'all the characters... including that of the narrator, are ninety per cent fictitious'; 'Private View' (1954); 'The Dog at Clambercrown' (1955); and 'Conventional Weapons' (1961). Brooke's only true novel, 'The Image of a Drawn Sword' (1950), is a haunting account of a post-war veteran whose sense of futility is dissolved when he is drawn into a world where fantasy, paranoia, and reality merge with fatal consequences. Brooke's most unusual work is 'The Crisis in Bulgaria, or, Ibsen to the Rescue!' (1956), a surrealist pastiche. In addition to his own writing Brooke was a percipient reviewer and wrote critiques of Aldous Huxley, Elizabeth Bowen, Ronald Firbank, and John Betjeman as well as introducing and editing the journals and published works of Denton Welch. His interest in music is shown in his final publication, 'The Birth of a Legend: a Reminiscence of Arthur Machen and John Ireland' (1964). 
Brooke continued to live at Ivy Cottage after Ninnie's death and was a well-respected albeit solitary figure in Bishopsbourne and the surrounding countryside. Despite his enormous output, he never received due recognition. On 29 October 1966 he was found dead in his cottage of a coronary artery insufficiency due to atherosclerosis. His ashes were scattered at Barham crematorium. A plaque decorated with an orchid on Ivy Cottage commemorates his unassuming yet distinctive achievements: '
Jocelyn Brooke 

1908-1966 

lived here 

Author & Naturalist. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 38311


Olivier, Edith Maud (1872-1948), writer, was born on 31 December 1872 at the rectory, Wilton, Wiltshire, the eighth of the ten children of Canon Dacres Olivier (1831-1919), rector of Wilton, and his second wife, Emma Selina (1836-1908), daughter of Bishop Robert Eden, of Moray, Ross, and Caithness. The Olivier family was of Huguenot descent, settling in England in the early eighteenth century. Edith's grandfather Henry Stephen Olivier lived at Potterne, Wiltshire, from about 1830, and was high sheriff of the county in 1843. His eldest son, Henry Arnold, was the grandfather of Laurence Olivier, the actor. Educated at home, Edith attended St Hugh's College, Oxford, for four terms only (1895-6) owing to bronchial asthma. Her early years were dominated by her father, with whom she and her younger sister Mildred lived until his death in 1919. From 1922 Edith lived in the Daye House, on the Wilton estate. In 1916 she was asked by Wiltshire county agricultural committee to form the Women's Land Army, for which she was appointed MBE in 1920. She was a member of the Conservative Party, was involved in parliamentary elections, and held local and county offices in the Women's Institute. A devout Christian all her life, she attended the Anglican church regularly and was secretary to the Bishop's Women's Diocesan Council. In 1934 she became the first woman councillor on Wilton town council and was mayor of the borough from 1938 to 1941. During the Second World War her many extra duties as mayor included being president of the local St John Ambulance Brigade. 
After the death of Mildred in 1924 Edith's friendship widened to the younger generation and included much of the artistic circle of the day. She was close to the artist Rex Whistler and frequent hostess to Cecil Beaton, Siegfried Sassoon, William Walton, and many others, but she remained fully involved in the local community. Her books include 'The Love Child' (1927) and 'Four Victorian Ladies of Wiltshire' (1945) (the only ones to be republished), 'Dwarf's Blood' (1931), 'The Triumphant Footman' (1930), 'The Seraphim Room' (1932), 'Night Thoughts of a Country Landlady' (1943), a biography of Alexander Cruden (1934), a book on Wiltshire, and an autobiography, 'Without Knowing Mr Walkley' (1938). She died on 10 May 1948 following three strokes, and was buried on 14 May in Wilton churchyard, a few yards from where she was born. Cecil Beaton described Edith's funeral thus: 'The dignity of Church and Government was there to pay her honour, as was fitting. But that was only part of what was in our hearts. There was honour, indeed, for what she had done; but there was love for what she was and is' ('Salisbury Journal'). 


@@@@@


doc= 38312


Mayor, Flora Macdonald (1872-1932), novelist, was born on 20 October 1872 at Queensgate House, Kingston Hill, Surrey, the youngest of the four children of the Revd Joseph Bickersteth Mayor (1828-1916), professor of classics and later of moral philosophy at King's College, London, and his wife, Alexandrina Jessie (1831-1927), daughter of Andrew Grote of the Indian Civil Service and his wife, Isabella. Flora's mother was a remarkable linguist, and Flora is said to have spoken thirteen languages. The family was comfortably off: like her character Henrietta Symons, Flora 'was always cursed with her tidy little income'. Flora was educated with her identical twin Alice at Surbiton high school and in Switzerland, then read history at Newnham College, Cambridge (1892-6). A lively girl, she threw herself so fervently into Cambridge pleasures that despite earlier academic achievement at school, she got only a third. For the next seven years she thrashed about in search of an occupation. Despite having asthma, and to the horror of her family who wanted her to be a 'daughter at home', she attempted to become an actress. Her experiences in the theatre were unpleasant and degrading, and she got only tiny parts. She also published a novel, 'Mrs Hammond's Children' (1901), under her stage name of Mary Strafford. 
In March 1903 Flora became engaged to an old friend, Ernest Shepherd (1871/2-1903), but they had only a few weeks together. Ernest had accepted a job with the architectural survey of India so that he could afford to marry, and Flora allowed him to go there ahead of her. He died of fever at Simla on 22 October 1903, aged thirty-one. The shock made her a semi-invalid for years. Flora wrote that up to then, 'I instinctively put happiness as what I was aiming for and expecting as my right in life. Since then I have also quite instinctively given up expecting it' (Oldfield, 136). Outwardly the second half of her life appeared a long sad postscript to the adventurous years. She never again attempted to leave her family, living at various times with her brothers in London, or Bristol, or with her elderly parents at Kingston Hill. Inwardly she was preparing to write two great novels about the buried, intense emotions of spinsters like herself. 
About one in four women never married, and there was much discussion before 1914 about what society should do with them. Flora's contribution to this debate was 'The Third Miss Symons' (1913), a novel about an unloved and useless woman. It carried a preface by John Masefield, and narrowly missed winning the Polignac prize. The war years were spent unhappily keeping house for her brother Henry, a master at Clifton College. She then began work on her masterpiece, 'The Rector's Daughter' (1924). This is a longer and more complex novel, concentrating on the inner life of a middle-aged spinster, Mary Jocelyn, her unconsummated love for a married clergyman, and her lonely death. With such unfashionable subject matter she had difficulty finding a publisher, until Leonard Woolf and Virginia Woolf offered to take it on a commission basis for the Hogarth Press. It was modestly successful and won praise from Masefield, E. M. Forster, and Rebecca West, but Flora Mayor was never recognized as an important novelist. 
Afterwards Flora's health and powers declined. Her mother died in 1927 and she moved with Alice to Hampstead. She wrote some supernatural and other stories and an inferior novel, 'The Squire's Daughter' (1929), which laments the decay of post-war England. She died at her home at 7 East Heath Road, Hampstead, on 28 January 1932 of pneumonia complicated by influenza, and is buried in Hampstead cemetery. A collection of stories, 'The Room Opposite', appeared posthumously in 1935. 
Flora Mayor was undervalued during her life and for many years after her death because she appeared to have been born out of her time. She belonged in the tradition of Jane Austen, Charlotte Bronte, and Mrs Gaskell -- her work was described by Sylvia Lynd as 'a bitter 'Cranford'' (Oldfield, 241) -- but unlike them, she did not allow her spinsters to achieve happiness, and was a woman of the early twentieth century, very much aware of feminism, agnosticism, and the lifestyle of Bloomsbury. Her novels are valuable as the only serious, full-length studies of a vast group of despised and rejected women, English spinsters. Celibacy, damaged family relationships, and the tension between modernism and tradition are the materials from which she built two extraordinary books. 'The Rector's Daughter' was reprinted in 1973, 'The Third Miss Symons' in 1980. 


@@@@@


doc= 38315


Jones, Daniel (1881-1967), phonetician, was born on 12 September 1881 at 12 Norfolk Crescent, near Marble Arch in central London, the son of a leading London barrister, also named Daniel Jones (1834-1915), and his second wife, Viola Carte (1848-1925). Jones was the third of four sons (his two elder brothers being from his father's previous marriage). His mother came from a notable musical family and was the sister of Richard D'Oyly Carte, the theatre impresario who sponsored Sir W. S. Gilbert and Sir Arthur Sullivan. Apart from his legal talents, Daniel Jones senior is also known as one of the enthusiasts who helped develop the modern game of tennis. In 1890 the Jones family moved to Wimbledon, where the Lawn Tennis Association had its headquarters, and it was there that young Daniel spent his formative years. 
Jones began his education at Ludgrove preparatory school and spent two years at Radley College; he left in 1897 to complete his schooling as a day boy at University College School, London. He went on to read mathematics at King's College, Cambridge; he obtained his BA degree in 1903 and proceeded MA in 1907. While still an undergraduate he became fascinated with language and developed his practical talents in this area by attending short language courses, first in England and later in Germany. There he spent a month at Marburg, where he was introduced to phonetics by a man whom Jones held ever afterwards in the highest respect -- William Tilly, an Australian-born pioneer of what would later be known as immersion language-teaching techniques. 
Intending to follow in his father's profession, on leaving university Jones began to read for the bar. But ill health forced him to interrupt his studies and he took the chance to spend a year (1905-6) in France, promising his father to continue his legal training on his return. He attended classes in phonetics and linguistics at the University of Paris, coming under the influence of Paul Passy, the leading French phonetician of his time. Passy, who remained the most significant influence on Jones's linguistic ideas throughout his life, encouraged him to join the International Phonetic Association (IPA), and to sit the IPA examination in the phonetics of French. Jones passed with outstanding marks and was persuaded by Passy to consider making phonetics his career. It is notable that he obtained no further linguistic qualifications of any sort, even though he was later awarded honorary doctorates from Zurich (1936) and Edinburgh (1958). 
Jones returned to London and fulfilled his filial duty by completing his legal studies, being called to the bar in 1907; but, realizing that he had no interest whatsoever in the law, he had meanwhile obtained a part-time appointment as a temporary lecturer in phonetics at University College, London. It was at this point that he also took private tuition from the Oxford phonetician and linguist Henry Sweet, already a legendary figure in his own lifetime. Sweet was to prove the third formative influence on Jones's linguistic outlook. 
On 29 August 1911 Jones married Cyrille Motte (1890-1969), Paul Passy's niece; they had a son and daughter. Until 1934 Jones and his family lived in London, but he then bought a house at 3 Marsham Way, Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire, where he remained until his death. 
For several years Jones, teaching single-handed, not only drew increasing numbers of students to his classes but also undertook research in many areas of articulatory phonetics. This included work on what were, to the Western world at that time, virtually unknown non-European languages. He was eventually allowed to take on some part-time staff at University College, and later (in 1913) set up a laboratory for experimental phonetic research. 
In 1912 University College recognized the significance of the work of Jones and his colleagues when a university department (the first such in Britain) was set up with Jones at its head. This also happened to be the year in which Bernard Shaw wrote 'Pygmalion', and it is known that Jones helped Shaw by advising him on technical matters. Despite what would appear to be deliberately misleading remarks in Shaw's preface, attempting to link the play to the recently deceased Henry Sweet, it is now thought likely that it was Daniel Jones who largely inspired Shaw's fictional phonetician Henry Higgins. 
In 1913-14 Jones taught one day a week at Oxford University for two terms, acting effectively as Sweet's replacement, but refused the offer of a full-time post. Instead, in 1915, he accepted a readership from London. Despite the war his department was growing in size and significance, and it continued to expand after the war. Several more staff, including full-timers, were now recruited to cope with increasing student numbers, and many distinguished linguists began their careers under Jones's aegis, including Lilias Armstrong, Arthur Lloyd James, Harold Palmer, Ida Ward, and, later, J. R. Firth. In 1921 Jones was appointed to a chair in phonetics, the first in a modern linguistic discipline ever to be set up in a British university; he held this post until his retirement in 1949, when he was granted the title of professor emeritus. 
Jones -- like his mentors Tilly, Passy, and Sweet -- was renowned for remarkable powers of auditory discrimination and imitation, and for insisting on the primacy of such practical aspects in phonetic teaching and research. This is reflected in the excellent standards of observation of phonetic phenomena to be found both in his own publications and in those of his followers. Jones's outstanding early works include 'Intonation Curves', an early quasi-instrumental study of pitch that appeared in 1909, and in the same year he published the elementary, but highly successful, 'Pronunciation of English'. The first editions of the latter were characterized by a largely prescriptive elocutionary approach, together with occasional proscription of non-standard pronunciations. Despite its commercial success, Jones soon became positively ashamed of the book. He thoroughly revised the material in 1950, replacing the prescriptivism by his later liberal views on accent variation, and in this improved form it remains in print to the present day. 
In 1913 Jones co-edited (with Hermann Michaelis) the 'Phonetic Dictionary of the English Language'. Surprisingly, no serious attempt at a dedicated English pronunciation dictionary had been produced in Britain since the eighteenth century. But, though worthy of recognition as a pioneering effort, it was completely overshadowed in 1917 by the success of Jones's own masterly and comprehensive 'English Pronouncing Dictionary' -- or 'EPD', as it is often known. From his original prescriptive position, in which he advocated elocutionary training for dialect speakers in order for them to acquire standard pronunciation, Jones had quite rapidly moved to the view that all had the right to use whatever type of pronunciation they themselves preferred. He considered that it was no part of the phonetician's task to decide on speech standards, but rather to be totally objective in describing current usage, declaring pithily that a phonetician should ideally be 'a living phonograph'. Such an open-minded standpoint was decades ahead of its time, and Jones encountered much opposition to his liberal attitudes. None the less, the 'EPD' set the global standard for all subsequent pronunciation dictionaries, rapidly becoming the recognized authority on British usages -- a position it held unchallenged until the 1990s. In revised form, it still has large sales in many countries. 
Together with the 'EPD', Jones's other most influential work proved to be the 'Outline of English Pronunciation' (1918). Aimed originally at the foreign learner, this was the first reliable comprehensive description of the pronunciation of English, or indeed of any language. The non-regional variety of educated British English used as a descriptive model was later (in 1926, in the third edition of the 'EPD') designated 'Received Pronunciation'; Jones by reviving a little-used Victorian expression was the innovator, in a modern context, both of the technical term and its more common abbreviation, RP. The general phonetic descriptive framework of the 'Outline' penetrated linguistics worldwide, having a profound influence on Leonard Bloomfield and the whole American structuralist school. Jones's 'Outline', completely revised and rewritten in 1932, reigned for more than forty years as the unique authority on British English pronunciation; it is still in print today. 
Jones also produced seminal research on African and Asian languages -- notably the 'Cantonese Phonetic Reader' (1912), the 'Sechuana Reader' (1916), and the 'Colloquial Sinhalese Reader' (1919) -- invariably written in co-operation with reliable native-speaker informants, who were given full credit as co-authors. The results were classic works that are milestones in the history of the phonetic descriptions of the languages concerned. In particular, Jones produced ground-breaking work on the analysis of tone languages for which he has yet to receive adequate recognition. His 'Cantonese Phonetic Reader' was one of the earliest studies in the field. This was followed by the innovative 'Sechuana Reader', which contained a perceptive analysis of register tone in the southern African language Tswana, including the feature eventually to become known as 'downstep'. Jones's research on African languages was subsequently continued, not only at University College but also by several of his former students at the School of Oriental and African Studies. 
Jones was the first writer in English to use the word 'phoneme' in its current sense of a minimal unit of sound capable of distinguishing meaning, borrowing the concept from the Polish linguist Jan Baudouin de Courtenay. It was in a lecture given to the London Philological Society in 1917 that Jones appears to have used the term publicly for the first time, though he later claimed that the theory had occupied a 'regular place in the teaching' of his department from 1915 onwards. Jones was ultimately responsible for the promulgation of the phoneme principle in the pre-1920 Western world. It was certainly owing to him and his London colleagues that phonemic concepts became firmly established in British linguistics by the early 1920s -- well before the advent of either the European Prague school or the American linguistic structuralists. 
The 'Pronunciation of Russian', which for long was the only reliable phonetic description of the language, appeared in 1923. In 1927 Jones was a co-author of 'Colloquial French', issued with accompanying disc recordings -- a now largely forgotten 'tour de force' which was a watershed in applied linguistics, being the most successful early example of the audio-lingual method in language teaching. He then turned from writing books to concentrate on producing numerous influential articles, including several on the phoneme concept. These can now be seen as leading up to 'The Phoneme: its Nature and Use', the book Jones regarded as his life's work. When the book eventually came out in 1950, many linguists considered it outdated; he was bitterly disappointed with the critical reception it received. In the immediately following years, after his official retirement, Jones produced important revisions of several of his major books and, in 1957, the historiographical 'History and Meaning of the Term 'Phoneme''. 
Another significant aspect of Jones's work is his system of cardinal vowels, the underlying research for which was first made known in 1917 through an article in 'Nature'. It provided an elegantly simple dual-parameter model of vowel description based on tongue-arch height and lip shape. Jones subsequently elaborated on the theory, and arrived eventually at a system of eight rounded and eight unrounded front and back vowels at articulatorily equidistant intervals, plus two close central vowels. Jones produced three recorded versions of the vowels, of which the last (1956) is the best known. Although its theoretical basis is now largely rejected, the cardinal vowel system has nevertheless been widely adopted ever since its inception; most non-instrumental methods of vowel description derive ultimately from Jones's model. 
From 1906 on, Jones was, together with Paul Passy, the main force behind the IPA, and editor of its influential organ, 'Le Maitre Phonetique', thus playing a leading role in spreading the International Phonetic Alphabet, and laying the foundation for the universal recognition it enjoys today. He was elected assistant secretary of the IPA in 1909 and made secretary in 1928; from 1950 onwards he was the association's president. 
Jones was also a supporter of spelling reform: in 1911 he joined the committee of the British Simplified Spelling Society and in 1946 was appointed president, a position he retained until he died. He also co-operated enthusiastically on schemes for alphabets later adopted for various African languages, and subsequently devised romanized alphabets for Indian languages and Japanese. 
In 1926 Jones became a founder member of the BBC advisory committee on spoken English. Perhaps because of his disagreement with the eccentrically prescriptive views of certain members of the committee -- which included such eminent figures as Bernard Shaw and the poet laureate Robert Bridges -- he left dealings with it largely to his former pupil and colleague Arthur Lloyd James. When, on the outbreak of war, the committee ceased to function, and later, as the result of tragic personal circumstances, Lloyd James's contacts with the BBC ceased, Jones took over. From 1942 to 1967 Daniel Jones was chief pronunciation adviser to the BBC, and in that role, paradoxically considering his libertarian linguistic views, was to a degree responsible for reinforcing the notion of 'BBC English' as a pronunciation standard. The early editions of his books now provide us with interesting information on the state of English pronunciation at the time. The first mentions of the spread of the glottal stop in English are to be found in Jones's works, as are predictions of future language change, including hints of the increasing influence of vernacular London speech on RP, thus presaging what is nowadays termed 'estuary English'. 
Apart from linguistic matters, Jones's only other major preoccupation was the study of oriental religion and philosophy, in particular as interpreted by theosophists and similar groups. In his youth, religion of any kind had concerned him little, but by the time he reached middle age, theosophical ideas began to play an increasingly important part in his daily thought. Such concepts even infiltrate into his linguistic writings, and it is difficult to interpret some of his later statements on the phoneme without taking due account of them. Theosophical influences also seem to be why Jones from the 1930s onwards emphasized the benefits of applied practical phonetics, and increasingly regarded scientific approaches with suspicion. 
Jones continued working -- writing and revising his academic publications, playing a full part in the IPA and the Simplified Spelling Society, and advising on pronunciation for the BBC -- long after his official retirement, in fact well into his eighties. His very last jointly written book, the 'Phonetics of Russian' (1969), did not in fact appear until after his death. In old age he came to be considered almost as a kind of elder statesman of phonetics, and scholars from all over the world came to consult him on linguistic matters. After a long period of illness, exacerbated by painful arthritis, he died on 4 December 1967 at his home in Gerrards Cross. 
It is indicative that so many of Jones's books remained in print into the twenty-first century, and that he is still so frequently cited as a phonetic authority. His writings, now regarded as classic works, have proved outstanding, not only for reliability but also for lucid explication. They established him as by far the best-known phonetician of his generation. His ideas and methods, later to be propagated by his colleagues and former pupils, even now continue to influence most areas of phonetics and pronunciation teaching. Jones takes his place among the world's leading figures in twentieth-century linguistics; his claim to be the greatest of all British phoneticians is challenged only by Sweet. 


@@@@@


doc= 38316


Catherwood, Frederick (1799-1854), architect and traveller, was born in Charles Square, Hoxton, London, on 27 February 1799, the son of John James Catherwood (1752-1829), receiver of corn returns ('c'.1779-1813) and partner with Henry Caslon from 1814 to 1821 in the Caslon type founding firm in Chiswell Street. His mother was Ann, 'nee' Rowe. He received an education in the classics at Haberdashers' School in Hoxton, and during this period developed an interest in architecture. In 1815 he began a five-year apprenticeship with the architect Michael Meredith. In 1820, encouraged by Joseph Severn, a friend of Keats, he took free classes at the Royal Academy, where he came under the influence of Sir John Soane and discovered Piranesi's sketches of Roman monuments. These two figures, along with J. M. W. Turner, who taught at the Royal Academy during this period, profoundly shaped Catherwood's aesthetic vision over the next few decades as he mastered both the faithful recording of monuments and the evocation of the affective experience of viewing them. 
In September 1821 Catherwood travelled to Rome, where he joined Severn and a large group of English artists known as the Society of Englishmen, including Joseph Bonomi, Thomas Leverton Donaldson, and Henry Parke. He threw himself into the study of Roman art and architecture, 'lay[ing] a foundation that may direct nobly all through life' ('Severn: Letters and Memoirs', 168). If Catherwood's head, as Severn wrote, was 'full of Rome' (ibid., 169), his heart, for a time at least, lay with Lady Westmorland, Jane Fane, 'nee' Huck Saunders (1779/80-1857), who lived apart from her husband, John Fane, the tenth earl of Westmorland, and was known for her generosity to artists. Severn's principal patron during his early years in Rome, she had invited him to accompany her to Egypt, but Severn instead suggested his friend Catherwood. Within four months of arriving in Rome, Catherwood had taken up residence at Lady Westmorland's Villa Negroni. 
The brief affair having ended, Catherwood continued his artistic apprenticeship, sketching ruins in Sicily, where he painted 'Mt. Etna from the Ruins of Tauramina', and then Athens, where he travelled in 1822 and remained, amid the Greek revolt against the Turks, until 1823. Accompanied by his friends Parke and Joseph Scoles, and dressed in Arab garb, Catherwood ventured to Egypt, exploring yet another distant civilization and its monuments. 
Catherwood returned to London with the intention of beginning a career as a commercial architect. Over the next few years he designed buildings and exhibited drawings of Egyptian ruins at the Royal Academy. In 1828 the antiquarian Robert Hay, whom he had met in Egypt, invited him to join a team of artists and architects -- including Edward William Lane, Sir Gardner Wilkinson, and Bonomi -- to survey and map ancient sites in the Nile valley, a grand project modelled in scope and ambition on Napoleon's 'Description de l'Egypte'. Catherwood employed his talents as an architectural draughtsman to map and survey such sites as Giza, al-Amarna, Saqqara, Abydos, and Thebes; he erected scaffolding to produce scale drawings of the towering statues of Amenhotep III, each some eighteen metres high. He also wrote the only known account of the monument at Dugga, which was destroyed not long after his visit. Catherwood's article was published years later (1845) in the 'Annals' of the American Ethnological Society, of which he was a founding member. 
In 1833 Catherwood left the Hay expedition and continued his exploration of the Middle East, travelling with Bonomi and Francis Arundale, who published an account of the journey. He employed a camera lucida, a device invented in 1807 that enabled artists to represent the outlines of distant objects, generating by this means highly detailed renderings of Baalbek and sites around Jerusalem, both of which Robert Burford later employed as the basis for his large-scale panoramas, a wildly popular form of mass entertainment. Both he and Bonomi donned Middle Eastern disguises to enter and survey the Dome of the Rock (Von Hagen, 34-5), one of the holiest sites in Islam, and both claimed credit for the detailed drawings that appeared in James Fergusson's 'Essay on the Ancient Topography of Jerusalem' (1847). 
In 1834 Catherwood married Gertrude (1813/14-1870), the daughter of Peter Abbott, British consul at Beirut, in a ceremony conducted at the consul's residence in Beirut and officiated over by an American missionary clergyman. They were to have three children, Frederick Abbott, Elizabeth, and Ann. After a brief honeymoon he returned with his new bride to London and attempted, unsuccessfully, to sell his Jerusalem sketches. In 1836 he met the American traveller John Lloyd Stephens, who was attending Burford's panorama of Jerusalem. Stephens had already explored Greece, Turkey, and eastern Europe and had travelled in Catherwood's footsteps in the Middle East. At Stephens' prompting Catherwood moved to New York, arriving in June with his first-born son and his pregnant wife and establishing an architectural practice, first as sole proprietor and later in partnership with Frederick Diaper, another English architect. Among other projects he built the Rotunda, a round theatre for displaying panoramas modelled after the one in Leicester Square. Here he displayed his panoramas of Jerusalem, Thebes, and Baalbek, as well as one of Niagara Falls, which increased the popularity of the panorama form in the United States. 
Stephens and Catherwood developed plans to bring their travel and architectural expertise to bear on American antiquities. Rumours of cities lost in the Central American jungles had circulated since the 1820s, when the Spanish colonies won their independence and non-Hispanic European travellers visited the region in increasing numbers. A few tantalizing but incomplete accounts had been published. In September 1839 Catherwood signed a contract with Stephens to illustrate the ruins, with Stephens supplying the written narrative; that same month he sent his two children and his wife, pregnant with their third child, back to London to live in Charles Square while he carried out his explorations. 
The next few years brought Catherwood fame but also personal difficulties. Having arrived in British Honduras in October 1839, he and Stephens at once set out for the ancient Mayan city of Copan, which lay in a remote valley near independent Honduras's northern boundary with Guatemala. They arrived in November and commenced the first large-scale survey of Mayan ruins, visiting such other Mayan sites as Quirigua in Guatemala and Palenque in southern Mexico. Catherwood cleared away the entangled vegetation covering the ruins to enable the use of his camera lucida. At Palenque, despite suffering from malaria contracted within a month of his arrival in Central America, he made maps and over fifty drawings. Catherwood's health, however, declined precipitously, and Stephens decided to suspend the expedition. 
Catherwood and Stephens arrived in New York in July 1840. The next month, prompted by a letter from his brother James, Catherwood returned unannounced to London and confronted his wife, accusing her of having an affair. He sailed back to New York in late October and on 11 December filed a writ in the court of exchequer charging Henry Caslon (1793-1873), Catherwood's second cousin and the son of his father's former business partner, with 'criminal conversation' with Gertrude Catherwood. The case went to trial one year later; by this time Caslon and Catherwood's wife were openly living together. The defendant argued, however, that Catherwood's marriage was invalid because it had not been conducted by an Anglican priest, but the court ruled it was valid 'de facto' if not 'de jure'. A later ruling (1844) overturned this decision, but in the first trial the jury took only twenty minutes to decide in Catherwood's favour, awarding him damages of $200. 
In June 1841 Stephens published 'Incidents of Travel in Central America, Chiapas, and Yucatan', which instantly earned the authors great accolades on both sides of the Atlantic. According to the historian William H. Prescott, Catherwood's copious and compelling illustrations clinched the book's success. Shortly after the work was published these images engendered a transatlantic response, prompting officials at the British Museum (principally Henry Ellis and Philip Henry Stanhope) to secure the government's aid in carting off Mayan ruins for exhibition in the national repository. The scheme came to naught, but it occupied British officials in London and Central America for years. 
Stephens and Catherwood soon recommenced their explorations, turning their attention now to the Yucatan peninsula. They arrived in October 1841 accompanied by Samuel Cabot, a physician from Boston, and bearing with them a daguerreotype machine, one of the first brought to Mexico. They began by taking daguerreotypes of the local people, whom they invited to sit for portraits. These pictures, shot by Catherwood, constitute the first use of the daguerreotype for anthropological research. He later tried to use the machine for limning the ruins, but found it unsuited to bringing out their carved reliefs, which he presciently understood were not simply decorative, but connected to a linguistic system, as were the hieroglyphs he had depicted in Egypt. In June 1842 Catherwood and Stephens returned to New York, taking the daguerreotypes with them, among the first archaeological photographs produced in Spanish America. Tragically all were lost in a fire on 31 July that consumed Catherwood's Rotunda; several priceless Mayan monuments removed by Stephens and Catherwood were also destroyed. The sketches made from the daguerreotypes, however, appeared in Stephens's 'Incidents of Travel in Yucatan' (1843). 
In July 1843 Catherwood was back in England working on his next project, a large folio volume of twenty-five lithographs complete with maps, introductions, and descriptions, printed by Owen Jones and limited to an edition of three hundred sets. The images from 'Views of Ancient Monuments' (1844), along with those produced for the two Stephens volumes, immediately became among the most widely circulated representations of pre-Hispanic American monuments ever published, a status they continue to hold. 
Catherwood's last decade saw him turn, with a few exceptions, from art to a variety of projects connected with railway building. After finishing his work on 'Views' he returned to New York, where he exhibited fourteen drawings at the National Academy of Design. The next year he travelled back to England to train as a civil engineer, working for a time on the Sheffield-Manchester Railway. In 1845 he was offered a contract by the directors of the Demerara Railway Company, and sailed for British Guiana, where he worked on surveying the line, the first in South America. The scheme, however, encountered many difficulties and by 1849 Catherwood's contract was terminated. He immediately accepted work on another railway project, the Panama Railroad, one of whose directors was Stephens. The railway, begun shortly after the California gold rush, was eventually completed in 1855, and became one of the most profitable ventures of the mid-century railway boom, but Catherwood became ill again with malaria, and left the railroad company for California in August 1850 to recover his health. Over the next two years, during the heyday of gold fever, he worked as a civil engineer on railways in California and undertook expeditions to the mines in the foothills of the Sierra Nevada. In 1852 he sailed to England, issuing a new edition of 'Incidents of Travel', which included a brief biography of Stephens, who had recently died. 
In December 1853 Gertrude Catherwood married Henry Caslon, and the following year Catherwood's brother James died. In consequence, Catherwood altered his will on 16 September 1854, naming his son Frederick as an executor. On 20 September 1854, having settled his affairs, Catherwood sailed again for America on the SS 'Arctic', intending to return to California. Seven days out at sea, on 27 September 1854, he died when the 'Arctic' collided with another ship off the coast of Newfoundland and went down in the icy waters of the north Atlantic. After the New York papers omitted him from the published lists of the dead, a now famous correction appeared: 'Mr Catherwood, also, is missing.' On 22 March 1855 Gertrude Caslon renounced the probate and execution of Catherwood's will on behalf of Frederick Abbott Catherwood, who at the age of twenty was still a legal minor. Catherwood's drawings, books, and other possessions were sold at auction in 1856. 
A man of prodigious energy and unusually varied talents who published only a tiny fraction of his overall output, Catherwood was in the vanguard of many fields: Middle Eastern archaeological travel and surveying; panoramic exhibition; New World archaeology and photography; and South American railway building. Though he was reticent about himself -- unusually so even by his era's standards -- his work speaks eloquently of his achievements and imagination. His depictions of Mayan ruins have introduced generations of readers to the culture, first through printed sources and now through the internet, where they circulate more widely than ever. By capturing in these images the magnificence of a bygone world, and by arguing that the monuments were indigenous, contrary to the received opinion of the day, he revitalized Central American archaeology and can be credited, along with Stephens, with having launched it as a field of inquiry. 


@@@@@


doc= 38319


Meryon, Edward (bap. 1807, d. 1880), physician, was baptized in Rye, Sussex, on 10 December 1807, the son of John Meryon ('bap'. 1776, died 1857), harbour commissioner, merchant, and innkeeper, who was descended from a Huguenot family who emigrated to England from France about 1682, and Jane Gatland or Gateland ('bap'. 1787, died 1858), of Rye, spinster and dressmaker. He was the nephew of Charles Lewis Meryon (1783-1877). Edward's parents never married and little is known of his early life. However, in 1829 he entered the newly established London University to study medicine, where he was an outstanding student, gaining many distinctions and prizes. Between 1830 and 1831 he was apprenticed to Frederick Bellingham, an apothecary. In 1831 Meryon became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons and a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries, London. Meryon married Catherine Baily ('bap'. 1811, died 1897) of Falkingham, Lincolnshire, on 5 February 1833 and the couple had four daughters -- Lucy Elizabeth ('b'. 1834), Anne ('b'. 1835), Julia ('b'. 1841), Evelyn Jane ('b'. 1846) -- followed by a son, John Edward (1851-1896). 
In 1836 Meryon published 'The Physical and Intellectual Constitution of Man Considered' and in 1838 he went into partnership with Thomas Wood, surgeon, at 4 Bolton Street. In 1840 Meryon became one of the founder members of the Microscopical Society of London. Two years later he was appointed lecturer in comparative anatomy at St Thomas's Hospital, London, and in 1844 was awarded an MD degree from the University of London. Meryon gradually established himself as a respected physician with a special interest in nervous and muscle diseases. In 1846 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society of London (later to become the Royal Society of Medicine). In 1850 he became a member of the Athenaeum and had his portrait painted by John Linnell. It was exhibited that year at the Royal Academy. 
In December 1851 Meryon presented a paper, 'On granular and fatty degeneration of the voluntary muscles', at a meeting of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society. This was published in the 'Transactions' of the society the following year ('Medico-Chirurgical Transactions', 35, 1852, 73-84). Some years later he expanded his observations in a chapter of his book, 'Practical and Pathological Researches on the Various Forms of Paralysis' (1864). In these two publications he reported his studies on several extensive families with a disease subsequently to be referred to as Duchenne muscular dystrophy after Duchenne de Boulogne (1806-1875), who described the disease some years later. In fact Edward Meryon was the first to make a systematic and detailed study of the disease. He showed that the disorder affected only males, was familial, essentially a disease of muscle and 'not' the nervous system because he demonstrated that the spinal cord was normal, and finally, based on his microscopic observations, he concluded that the basic defect was a breakdown of the muscle fibre membrane (sarcolemma). These observations were made many years before Duchenne and others. In fact it was some 135 years later that the basic defect was proved to be the absence of the muscle fibre membrane protein dystrophin. 
Several factors might account for the fact that Meryon's contributions went unrecognized at the time of their publication. His paper presented to the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, and later published in the 'Transactions' of the society in 1852, was a relatively brief article running to just twelve pages. This was enlarged into a short chapter (fifteen pages) in his 'Practical and Pathological Researches'. By comparison, Duchenne's main contributions on muscular dystrophy were published in several very extensive papers (totalling 124 pages) in a single year, 1868. In addition, Duchenne incorrectly dismissed Meryon's publication of 1852 as describing cases of 'progressive muscular atrophy', a neurogenic disorder, rather than muscular dystrophy, a disease of muscle. This misinterpretation by Duchenne was perpetuated by later researchers, and though corrected in a publication in 1879 by Sir William Gowers, Meryon's contribution never gained the recognition given to Duchenne for having first described childhood muscular dystrophy. Duchenne was perhaps also a better publicist of his findings than Meryon. 
Meryon was elected a fellow of the Geological Society in 1857, and a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1859. In 1861 he published a first volume of 'The History of Medicine', but planned further volumes were never completed. He was a council member of the Geological Society (1862-4) and vice-president 1865 and the following year published some further observations, in his 'On granular degeneration of the voluntary muscles' ('The Lancet', 1, 1866, 258-60). 
In 1869 Meryon was elected vice-president of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society. From this time his main hospital appointment was as physician to the newly established London Infirmary for Epilepsy and Paralysis, which eventually moved to Portland Terrace, Regent's Park, as the Hospital for Diseases of the Nervous System. 
Meryon's 'On the functions of the sympathetic system of nerves, as a physiological basis for a rational system of therapeutics' (1872) drew heavily in the first part on the work of the celebrated French physiologist Claude Bernard (1813-1878). In the second part, however, Meryon emphasized the possible future role of the system in therapy, prescient by some fifty years of subsequent work on neurotransmission. In 1875 he was elected to the council of the Royal College of Physicians. About this time he also wrote a play, partly in verse, entitled 'The Huguenot' (1876), a historical romance between a young Catholic girl and her childhood love who was a Huguenot, set in France in 1572 at the time of the St Bartholomew's day massacre. 
Meryon resigned his hospital appointment owing to ill health in 1879 and died on 8 November 1880 at his home, 14 Clarges Street, Piccadilly, London, from heart disease and gout. He was buried at Brompton cemetery, London, on 12 November. His obituaries demonstrate that he was a much-liked and respected physician. Meryon bequeathed everything to his wife, Catherine, the estate being valued at less than $4000. 


@@@@@


doc= 38320


Manning, Frederic (1882-1935), writer, was born on 22 July 1882 at 29 Upper William Street South, Sydney, Australia, the sixth of the eight children of Sir William Patrick Manning (1845-1915), accountant and local politician, and his wife, Honora ('nee' Torpy). Sir William, whose parents and wife were Irish Roman Catholic immigrants, was a respected and powerful figure in Sydney, knighted in 1894. Frederic was a lifelong asthmatic, and so was educated almost entirely at home. In his early teens he formed a close intellectual friendship with Arthur Galton (1852-1921), a scholarly Englishman who had moved to Sydney as secretary to the governor. Manning accompanied Galton to England in 1898, and returned to Australia in 1900, but settled in England for good in 1903, taking lodgings with Galton, who was by then vicar of Edenham, Lincolnshire. 
Sensitive and unassertive, Manning seems to have been dominated by the increasingly ill-tempered, reactionary vicar, who hoped he would write a masterpiece. Manning laboured in vain on a historical novel, and read widely in the classics and philosophy, enjoying the great sceptics and sharing Galton's scorn for Roman Catholicism (although he never quite deserted the faith). He was of slight build, his drawn face and large dark eyes showing the constant strain of asthma, made worse by heavy smoking. Lonely and often unwell, he developed a weakness for alcohol. He probably never had a sexual relationship; Galton and several motherly women were perhaps parent-substitutes. He made several London friends: Max Beerbohm, William Rothenstein, and others, and two young modernists, Ezra Pound and Richard Aldington. Pound said later that 'Fred', whom he always highly esteemed, had been his first literary companion in England. 
Manning's first two books, 'The Vigil of Brunhild' (1907), a verse monologue, and 'Scenes and Portraits' (1909), were well received by a small, discriminating readership. 'Scenes and Portraits' is a collection of debates -- ironic, elegant, inconclusive -- about religion in different periods of society. Manning began to be talked of as an outstanding new talent, although his 'Poems' (1910) showed little originality. 
It may seem extraordinary that such a man was keen to join the army when war came. Perhaps Manning was driven by Galton's loathing of Germany, or perhaps by the chance of freedom from the vicarage. After various attempts, he was accepted as Private 19022 in the King's Shropshire light infantry in October 1915. He coped well with life in the ranks, observing his fellow soldiers with an Australian's lack of class-consciousness and warmly admiring their spirit. After failing an officer training course, he was sent to France for the second half of 1916, took part in the Somme fighting, and was promoted lance-corporal. He came home in December for further training, and in May 1917 was posted to Ireland as second lieutenant, Royal Irish regiment. Loathing the ethos of an officers' mess, he was soon in trouble, receiving a severe reprimand in August for excessive drinking; neurasthenia was diagnosed, perhaps generously. His resignation was accepted in February 1918. 
Manning had published a collection of verse, 'Eidola', in 1917. The style was still predominantly old-fashioned, but the war poems showed traces of Pound's imagism. Their central theme is the complete self-possession that can be found in battle, where each individual finds secret freedom, fighting for his own dreams. 
Needing to supplement the small income he received from his family, Manning accepted a commission to write 'The Life of Sir William White' (1923), a meticulous, uninspired biography of the ship designer. He ceased to have a settled home after Galton's death in 1921, except for a brief period when he owned a Surrey farmhouse. He wrote for periodicals, including T. S. Eliot's 'Criterion', but without a mentor he seemed likely to drift, until in 1929 the publisher Peter Davies persuaded him to write a short novel about the western front. The market for war books was suddenly opening up; urged on by Davies, who allowed no opportunity for revisions, Manning worked fast. Unlike most other authors of the time, he wrote about the troops, using their normal language. 

'The Middle Parts of Fortune' appeared anonymously in a small, private edition in 1929 (the standard text since republication in 1977). The expurgated version, 'Her Privates We', by Private 19022, was published by Davies in 1930. Though unobtrusively literary -- Manning's friend, T. E. Lawrence, claimed to have seen that it had to be by the same author as 'Scenes and Portraits' -- the book is a vivid story of archetypal soldiers, their innate strengths brought out by suffering and comradeship. 'The Middle Parts of Fortune' is one of the finest accounts of war ever written, as many of its early readers recognized. Manning used his own experiences, and the central character Bourne, a mysterious, detached figure, is his self-portrait. Bourne, however, dies at the end of 1916, and the survivors are left immersed in their own thoughts, 'each man keeping his own secret'. 
Manning kept his own secret. Comparatively little is recorded about him. The authorship of his one great book was not widely known, and he was never famous. He died of pneumonia and asthma at a Hampstead nursing home at 12 Merton Road on 22 February 1935, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 26 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 38323


Achurch, Janet (1863-1916), actress, was born at 47 Richmond Grove, Chorlton upon Medlock, Lancashire, on 17 January 1863, the third and youngest daughter (there was also a son) of William Prior Sharp, insurance agent, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Thomson, who died in giving birth to her. Brought up by her widower father, she was educated privately. She was descended, she herself claimed, from a long line of actors, from whom her stage name, Achurch, was derived. Her great-grandparents Thomas Achurch Ward (1749-1835) and Sarah Hoare (1756-1838) had been managers of the Theatre Royal, Manchester, and friends of the Kemble family in the late eighteenth century and it was apparently assumed from the start that this striking-looking young woman would follow the family tradition. In 1881 she was sent to Sarah Thorne's actor-training school in Margate (where, a few years later, Harley Granville Barker received his first training for the stage). She made her first appearance on the stage in a farce called 'Betsy Baker' at the Olympic Theatre, London, in January 1883. During the latter part of 1883 and in 1884 she toured the English provinces in a variety of plays, including C. H. Hazelwood's 'Lady Audley's Secret' (dramatized from Mary Elizabeth Braddon's melodramatic novel) and 'The New Magdalen' (Wilkie Collins). Of her performance in the latter, Bernard Shaw wrote in the 'Saturday Review' that it showed her to be 'the only tragic actress of genius we now possess' (Shaw, 'Dramatic Opinions', 221). 
On 25 May 1884 Achurch married (Fitzwilliam) St Aubyn Miller (1865-1929), an actor, the son of James Miller, army officer, but the marriage proved a disaster and they separated after only a few months. In 1885 she joined the Frank Benson company, contracted to play leading parts, on tour, in Bulwer Lytton's 'The Lady of Lyons', Dion Boucicault's 'The Corsican Brothers', and three Shakespeare parts -- Gertrude, Desdemona, and Lady Macbeth. She stayed with the company for only one season. Early in 1886 she began to live with Charles Martin (1854-1926), known as Charles Charrington, an actor in the Benson company at that time. In December 1888 her husband petitioned for a divorce, which was granted on 18 June 1889. She married Charrington at Chelsea register office on 28 June 1889. During 1887 and 1888 she alternated between playing in London and touring nationally with various companies. Her London appearances included Lady Teazle with the Farren-Conway company at the Strand Theatre in July 1887 and a season with Herbert Beerbohm Tree at the Haymarket Theatre in January 1888. In 1889, when she was still only twenty-three, she undertook the management of the Novelty Theatre, London, where on 7 June she appeared as Nora in the first English production of Ibsen's 'A Doll's House'. This was a turning point both in her career and in English critical appreciation of Ibsen. Granville Barker thought it the most dramatic theatrical event of the decade. Charles Charrington, her husband, appeared with her in this production, playing the part of Dr Rank and, immediately after its limited run was over, on 5 July 1889 they left London for a two-year theatre tour of Australia, where their daughter Nora (1890-1914) was born. The tour was successful and they extended it to include New Zealand, Tasmania, India, and Egypt. However, while in Cairo Janet Achurch almost lost her life in childbirth. The child was stillborn and, though she continued with her stage performances, she was able to do so only with increasingly large doses of morphia, which the doctor had prescribed. She already had a tendency towards alcoholism; to this was now added morphine addiction. 
In spite of physical debility and depression, immediately on her return to London in 1892 Achurch plunged into a heavy and continuous programme of work. At the Avenue Theatre she repeated her success as Nora in a new production of 'A Doll's House' and subsequently, during 1893 and 1894, was continuously engaged, although playing in several undistinguished pieces. In November 1896, in spite of being pregnant again, she undertook the challenging and exacting role of Rita in Ibsen's 'Little Eyolf'. The cast of this production also included Mrs Patrick Campbell and Elizabeth Robins. Shaw praised her performance: 'She played with all her old originality and success, and with more than her old authority over her audience... For the first time one clearly saw the superfluity of power and the vehemence of intelligence which make her often so reckless as to the beauty of her methods of expression. (Shaw, 'Dramatic Criticism', 197)' For just such qualities of the actor's craft Shaw, on another occasion, compared Janet Achurch -- and favourably -- with Eleonora Duse, whose work he much admired. 
The following year Achurch played the lead in the first production of Shaw's 'Candida', the play that he had written in 1894 with her very much in mind and which he had in 1895 offered to the American actor Richard Mansfield, on condition that he cast Janet Achurch as the eponymous heroine. When Mansfield refused to do as he wished Shaw withdrew his offer of the play, which remained unperformed. Achurch finally played the part at Her Majesty's Theatre, Aberdeen, on 30 July 1897 at the start of a provincial tour and, later, at the Strand Theatre, London, on 1 July 1900 under the auspices of the Stage Society. At the same theatre, and again for the Stage Society, on 16 December 1900 she played the leading role of Lady Cicely Waynflete in the first production of Shaw's 'Captain Brassbound's Conversion'. About her performance in this Shaw, in a splendid letter to her, said: 'Lady Cicely is the first sign you have given of reaching the wise age of comedy and being able to play the fiddle as well as the trombones and drums' (Shaw, 'Letters', 2.208). 
Achurch appeared in Ibsen twice more before her career closed, though in both cases the play had been seen in England before: in 1902 in 'The Lady from the Sea' and in 1911 in 'A Doll's House' (in which she no longer played Nora but the lesser part of Mrs Linde). On 15 May 1903 she played the part of Leila Daintree in the first (and only) production of 'Mrs Daintree's Daughter', a piece which is interesting for its history and its associations rather than for any intrinsic merit. It was written by Janet Achurch herself in 1897-8, based on Guy de Maupassant's novel 'Yvette', at the encouragement of Shaw. In 1912 she played Ann Redvers in Eden Phillpotts's 'Secret Woman'. 
Janet Achurch's last appearance on the London stage was in October 1913, as Merete Beyer in John Masefield's version of 'The Witch', a Norwegian play by Wiers-Jenssen; she had played the part two years before in an earlier production of the play. Exhausted and ill, she announced her official retirement immediately after the play closed. She died, aged fifty-two, at 4 Devonshire Terrace, Ventnor, Isle of Wight, on 11 September 1916. The cause of death was morphine poisoning. She was survived by her husband, Charles Charrington, who died in 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 38324


Harte, (Francis) Bret (1836-1902), author, was born on 25 August 1836 in Albany, New York, the third child of Henry Philip Hart (1800-1845), who conducted a private school in his home, and Elizabeth Ostrander Hart. His paternal grandfather was Bernard Hart, an English Jew who had emigrated to New York via Canada and married, in 1799, Catherine Brett, of English and Dutch ancestry. They separated after their only son was born. 
Henry Hart added an 'e' to his surname and moved to wherever he could find paying pupils. Young Frank claimed to have attended eight different schools in eight cities before dropping out in New York city at thirteen to work, as his father had died and his mother could no longer afford the luxury of tuition. When she remarried in 1854 (her new husband was a Californian, Andrew Williams), Bret -- as he now called himself -- followed the family across the United States to Oakland. 
Seeking employment at eighteen, Harte drifted in and out of jobs -- some of which he later may have invented -- as tutor, typesetter, goldminer, and 'shot-gun' on a stage coach, penning poetry all the while. He confided to his diary that he intended to make a livelihood by writing. His opportunity came while he was a 'printer's devil' -- compositor -- for the weekly 'Northern Californian' in Uniontown, where he filled empty spaces with his own verse and prose, often using Western dialect. Composing sketches while typesetting, he recalled, compressed his style. His six years along the Humboldt River, source of a lifetime of material, would turn that segment of the West, in the popular mind, into 'Bret Harte country'. 
When, as the 'Californian''s sub-editor, Harte denounced a massacre of peaceable Indians by local 'diggers' in early 1860, the ire of the white establishment cost him his job, but his frontier experience shaped his writing. His stories and verse would scorn the greed, corruption, lawlessness, brutality, and hypocrisy of miners and ministers, bankers and sheriffs, merchants and politicians. Gamblers, prostitutes, and other social outcasts, open in their ways, were by contrast more worthy. 
In San Francisco he contributed to the weekly 'Golden Era', often under the pseudonym the Bohemian, and also worked as compositor for this journal. In 1868 he moved to the 'Overland Monthly' as its first editor. One paper for which he wrote, the San Francisco 'Call', employed a writer, Samuel Clemens (Mark Twain), who claimed, before the two had a falling out, that he learned his craft from Harte. 
Irony with a realistic texture, yet softened by sentimentality, was the hallmark of Harte's style. Typical of his best fiction was his nativity parable 'The Luck of Roaring Camp' (August 1868), published in the second issue of the 'Overland Monthly'. In a mining camp a prostitute, Cherokee Sal, dies in childbirth, leaving an infant christened by the miners Thomas Luck. For the boy, who is being bottle-fed with ass's milk, they import a rosewood cradle. A metamorphosis begins. They wash, plant flowers, eschew profanity. The 'Ingin' baby survives into spring, when melting snow and rain inundate the foothills. A flash flood sweeps away the cabin in which Kentuck, a miner, is sleeping with 'The Luck' in his arms. Vanished also may be the brief moment of civilization. 
Harte's verse is remembered for 'Plain Language from Truthful James' ('Overland Monthly', September 1870), popularly known as 'The heathen Chinee'. In a satiric condemnation of racism -- Chinese immigrant labour was abused in the West -- the inscrutable Ah Sin confounds the prejudices of narrator and reader by outwitting at euchre two 'Anglo' card-sharks. Although Harte would dismiss it as 'possibly the worst poem anyone ever wrote' (Stewart, 181), it was widely reprinted. 
Early success had brought Harte into contact with local worthies eager to sponsor him. He received two regional sinecures -- with the surveyor-general and then with the United States mint. His rising status led to his marriage, on 11 August 1862, to Anna Griswold, who was four years his elder. With local fame came mannerisms at odds with his uncouth subject matter. So transformed, Harte would not have been out of place in a London club in Pall Mall; he wore elegant clothes and affected a nasal voice. 
Publication in the eastern USA led to an invitation from Fields, Osgood & Co. of Boston for Harte to furnish a minimum of twelve contributions annually to its magazines, which included the 'Atlantic Monthly'. The $10,000 contract was the most lucrative up to that time in American publishing. When he left California with his family he was at the top of his form, but like Antaeus of Greek mythology he would be enervated by separation from the vital soil. He overspent, resorting then to fictional formulas which seemed parodies of past writings. His agreement was not renewed, compelling him to concoct sketches often refused by once-eager editors. He took up lecturing from 1872 to 1875 to augment his dwindling earnings, delivering 'The argonauts of '49' -- on gold rush California -- 150 times, but receiving little over expenses. Simultaneously, he struggled to create stage vehicles from his stories, but the plays were stillborn. One, 'Ah Sin', based upon his 'heathen Chinee' character and with Mark Twain as collaborator, also failed. Mutual recriminations ended their association. 
With his career reduced to desperate hack work, Harte appealed to influential acquaintances for a diplomatic post in the tradition of Washington Irving, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and James Russell Lowell, even ridiculing his own efforts in the pages of the New York 'Sun' as the Office-Seeker. He floated, the Boston 'Traveller' quipped, 'on the raft made of the shipwreck of his former reputation'. Rescue came via an appointment as consul in the Rhenish town of Crefeld on the Rhine. On 28 June 1878 he left his wife, two sons, and two daughters in New Jersey, never to return to the USA. 
Crefeld regenerated Harte's pen. While he sent his salary 'home' to his wife, whom he had all but divorced, he wrote cliched frontier stories as well as fiction about an American innocent abroad in 'Sammstadt'. The Germans were enthusiastic. In translation he would become one of the most popular American-born writers there. Yet he did not learn German and appealed for a post where English was spoken. Despite his unconcealed absenteeism he was transferred in August 1880 to Glasgow, where he would encounter even gloomier weather than that of which he had complained in Crefeld, and impenetrable English. (Harte would call Glasgow 'a damp cellar'.) He would also abandon business to aides, spending so much time in London that 562 letters and telegrams from him to his Glasgow office are recorded during the five years of his assignment. 
Harte's plunge in reputation in the United States had not affected his esteem in Europe. He had already appeared, on 1 May 1880, at the Royal Academy's annual meeting to reply to the toast to literature. In his writings in Britain, where he would live out his remaining years, Glasgow became 'St Kentigern'. London editors, however, preferred his more exotic frontier tales, and commissioned them. Eager for further income once his consular salary ceased in 1885 -- for he had to send maintenance payments to Anna -- he turned again to the theatre. Plays promised continuing receipts; stories earned only a fee. Assisted by Marguerite Van de Velde, the wife, then widow, of a Belgian diplomat in whose home at 74 Lancaster Gate in London he usually lived, he collaborated, between 1882 and 1885, upon three plays based upon his fiction -- 'Thankful Blossom', 'The Luck of Roaring Camp', and 'A Frontier Penelope'. Up until 1897 he wrote eight other plays, mostly with T. E. Pemberton, a knowledgeable stage technician. One, 'Sue', an adaptation of Harte's 'The Judgment of Bolinas Plain', actually had twenty-eight performances at the Garrick Theatre beginning on 29 June 1898, following earlier brief runs in Boston and New York. 
Harte continued to collect in book form his increasingly benign short stories, many featuring his favourite character, Colonel Culpepper Starbottle. His fiction written in London, like his plays, increasingly betrayed his distance in time and place from 'Bret Harte country'. Yet whatever his inaccuracies, his vision of the gold rush days in the West had mapped it for countless English readers. 
Parody remained Harte's metier. In 1867 he had published 'Condensed Novels and Other Papers', influenced by Thackeray's parodies in 'Punch'. Perhaps his cleverest was 'Lothaw' (1870), mocking Disraeli's 'Lothair'. 'Condensed Novels, New Burlesques' (1902), in which his later parodies were collected, satirized, among others, Conan Doyle, Kipling, Caine, Marie Corelli, and, in 'Rupert the Resembler', Anthony Hope's 'The Prisoner of Zenda'. Stoical in his last illness (throat cancer after decades of smoking strong cigars), he warned his wife, who had finally sailed to England in 1898 but whom he declined to see, that his income was 'precarious' and that she could expect little. He wrote anxiously for the McClure syndicate in the United States, which supplied Sunday supplements -- and dollars -- though in London his work was still welcome in such prestigious monthlies as the 'Cornhill Magazine' and 'The Strand'. 
An exploratory operation in March 1902 confirmed that Harte's cancer was inoperable, and he returned to the care of Marguerite Van de Velde. On 17 April he rallied enough to begin 'A Friend of Colonel Starbottle'. It remained a fragment. Following his death on 5 May 1902 at the Red House, Camberley, Surrey, he was interred in the churchyard at Frimley, Surrey, where Marguerite Van de Velde arranged the obsequies and ordered the tombstone. Also at the funeral, however, and uncontested now, was Anna Harte. To her, Harte left all his assets -- his copyrights and $360. 
His English writings were less deft than his brilliant early fiction, but Harte never abandoned his rude West, merely rearranging his familiar characters within their recognizable settings. Beginning as a frontier Dickens, he faded with failed ambition into inadvertent self-parody. Still, the vision of the frontier he defined remained potent enough to leave its impact upon fiction, drama, and film thereafter. Five years after his death the melodrama 'Salomy Jane', drawn from his 'Salomy Jane's Kiss', was a long-running West End hit. Film after film in the silent era emerged from his fiction, and his characters have since stereotyped the mythical West. 


@@@@@


doc= 38328


Mitchell, (James) Leslie (1901-1935), writer, was born on 13 February 1901 at Hillhead of Seggat, Auchterless, Aberdeenshire, the third son and last child of James McIntosh Mitchell (1862-1936), farmer, and his wife, Lilias Grant Gibbon (1873-1953), daughter of George Gibbon, a farm servant, and his wife, Lilias Grassick. Those who knew James McIntosh Mitchell remember him as a hard-working but rather strict and severe man who was already nearly forty when Leslie was born; Lilias Mitchell appears to have been more lively and spontaneous. Both sides of Mitchell's family could be traced back to Scots peasant stock for several generations. 
The lease of their farm having not been renewed, after a brief spell in Aberdeen the Mitchell family moved in 1909 to Bloomfield, in the Kincardineshire parish of Arbuthnott, in the district known as the Howe of the Mearns, close to where Robert Burns's father had been born and brought up. It was there that Leslie spent his formative years. Bloomfield was a smaller and poorer holding than Seggat and the struggle to scrape a living from it even harder, so that quite naturally James Mitchell expected that as his son grew up he would lend a hand with the endless work. Leslie had different ideas. He was an intelligent boy with very much a mind of his own, which did not accept that he should waste time on the mindless routine of farm work. Resentments built up on both sides. As often as not, to escape the unhappiness and drudgery of home he would simply go off on his own and wander in the nearby hills and moorland. There he came across relics of ancient history, the standing stones and flints, which stimulated an interest in prehistoric times that remained with him all his life. 
But books were Mitchell's abiding interest during these difficult adolescent years, for through them he could enter into magic worlds far from the grey routine of Bloomfield. He loved the romantic fiction of Rider Haggard and Conan Doyle, and this inspired not only his determination to be a writer but also the belief, which took him some time to get beyond, that fiction was about the remote and the exotic, not about the immediate world in which he was living, and that it was written in English, not the vulgar Scots that his community spoke. 
Books also introduced Mitchell to ideas that seemed alien in Arbuthnott. At an early age he was reading Darwin, Huxley, and Haeckel. H. G. Wells, however, was his particular favourite, for he brought not only the delight of science fiction but also an exciting radicalism. Later Mitchell was to turn from Wells 'the inspirer and bamboozler of youth' (Gibbon) but at this stage Wells had a huge formative influence on him. He taught Mitchell, among other things, to despise traditional religion and to place his faith instead in science, to have contempt for conventional education and schoolmasters, to call himself a socialist, and to question the stereotype of women's role in society. All these concerns, in more or less modified form, can be seen in Mitchell's later writing. 
These controversial notions, and the outspoken way in which he made them public, did not help to reconcile Mitchell to his parents and the rather traditional community in which he lived. He was looked upon as an eccentric -- some would say without all his wits -- and it was fortunate that he had at Arbuthnott village school a teacher, Alexander Gray, who recognized that in this oddity lay real talent. They remained friends for the rest of Mitchell's life. When he moved to secondary school, however -- Mackie Academy, in Stonehaven -- he did not receive such understanding. There he was looked upon as a difficult and opinionated young man who refused to conform. His time there was not happy, and at the age of sixteen he left school as an academic failure. 
The expectation now was that Mitchell would get a job as a farm labourer, like most other boys, but he was determined not to be caught up in that narrow and restrictive existence. In 1917, through his own efforts, he got himself a post in Aberdeen, as a junior reporter on the 'Aberdeen Journal'. And so at the age of sixteen he left the Mearns, never to return except on holidays and, of course, in his imagination. The move to Aberdeen brought him into a whole new world, the life of a modern city, and his first acquaintanceship with the urban proletariat. Observation of their conditions, particularly when he was assigned to 'the harbour run', hardened his political beliefs, and by this time he was calling himself a communist. This was the year of the Russian revolution, and in a way that he was later to realize was naive and idealistic he saw this as the beginning of a whole new era. When in 1919 he was appointed to a better-paid post in Glasgow, with the 'Scottish Farmer', his impressions of the horror of capitalist industrialism were strengthened. His essay on Glasgow in 'Scottish Scene' (1934) is a virulent attack on the whole system, and describes the 'life that festers in the courts and wynds and alleys of... the Gorbals' (L. G. Gibbon and H. MacDiarmid, 'Scottish Scene', 1934, 137) in a way that shows how deep an impression had been made on him. This was the time of the 'red Clydeside' movement, and he became politically active to such a degree that he lost his job as a journalist, apparently for fiddling his expenses to fund his politics. 
Mitchell's response to the horror of Glasgow and to his dismissal left him deeply despondent, and there was even an attempted suicide at this time. The future looked bleak. His prospects in journalism were now gone and yet he was determined not to end up in farming. Like many before him in a similar situation, joining the army seemed the only way to survive, and on 26 August 1919 he joined the Royal Army Service Corps, to spend the next ten years in the services. 
As a rather opinionated and sensitive young man Mitchell was clearly not one to take easily to army life, and he hated it with an intensity that comes out in nearly everything that he wrote. The mindless discipline that was demanded and the squalid conditions of the barrack-room appeared to him to have a brutalizing effect upon the men, and in his fiction there are a number of examples of characters who have their souls, as well as their bodies, destroyed by the experience. The army did, however, have some compensations. It allowed him to travel in a way that he would not otherwise have been able to do. In the next four years he was stationed in various countries in the Middle East and central Asia, such as Persia, Palestine, and Egypt, and this provided him with some local colour, which he was later to exploit, sometimes over-zealously, in stories; even at the time, in letters home, he was cultivating the romance of it, describing himself riding across the desert on a camel to Hebron and exploring the bazaars of Alexandria and Cairo. Another advantage was that he was able to visit at first hand many of the great sites of antiquity, and this encouraged him to build on that interest in ancient history which he had had since childhood. 
Mitchell's travels in the Middle East and his interest in Egyptology led him to a particular approach to prehistory called the diffusionist theory -- associated with Professor Elliot Smith, of London University -- that became central to his world view and a preoccupation in his writing. The diffusionists believed that primitive man had lived in a kind of golden age. He was a hunter and food gatherer rather than food producer, a nomad roaming the world in innocent contentment. He had no laws to curb and confine him, and there was no need for them; in his pristine state man was kind and generous and sociable. There was no governmental authority, for no such thing as a state existed prior to the emergence of civilization. There was no religion and no externally imposed moral code, no taboo, no sense of sin. And there was peace in the world. The theory goes on to assert that man lived in this natural state for many thousands of years until, quite by accident, there occurred on the banks of the Nile an event that changed the whole course of the world. This was the emergence of what we now call civilization. It began with the chance discovery of agriculture, due to the peculiar circumstances of the annual flooding of the river. From that developed a settled community and with it a governmental system, a class structure, religious beliefs, and, as this civilization was diffused around the world, the inevitability of war. 
Mitchell adopted and propagated this theory enthusiastically, and it shaped his thinking -- not so much by changing his convictions as by giving him a theoretical underpinning to what was already there. Thus the religious scepticism that had been his since his youth now became a firm conviction that religion was a disease by which man had been stricken rather than a natural part of a healthy human life, 'no more fundamental to the human character than cancer is fundamental to the human brain' (Gibbon and MacDiarmid, 'Scottish Scene', 313). This disease called religion had had a particularly virulent form in Scotland, where Calvinism was a withering and distorting influence on the human spirit, particularly in matters sexual. 
Similarly Mitchell's theory of history was used to underpin his existing political radicalism. It is not possible to say whether he ever belonged to a particular political party. Different friends have made differing claims as to his position, usually to imply that he shared their own stance. Orthodox Marxists in particular have regretted that his views on primitive society got in the way of the true faith. From his youth until his death Mitchell would always have called himself a socialist. At other times he used the term communist, and also anarchist, and this latter term probably best describes his position. There was never any doubt in his mind about the kind of free and egalitarian society to which he aspired; what was less certain was the process by which to get there. 
Mitchell left the army on 22 March 1923, and again the question arose of how he was going to make a living. He later told a newspaper feature-writer that for six months he nearly starved in London. Once again the services beckoned, and on 31 August 1923 he enlisted as a clerk in the Royal Air Force, spending the next six years at various bases in the south of England. His duties do not appear to have been too onerous, for it was at this time that he began seriously with his own writing. Nevertheless he seems to have been an efficient clerk, for in April 1924 he was promoted leading aircraftsman, and in September 1927 corporal. 
One advantage of being back in Britain was that Mitchell was able to develop his relationship with a young woman called Rebecca Middleton ('b'. 1901/2), usually called Ray. They had known each other since childhood in Arbuthnott. Her father, Robert Middleton, was tenant of the farm of Hareden, just across the road from Bloomfield. While Mitchell was abroad he had written regular letters to Ray, and even a few poems; now she was working as a civil servant in London. She and Mitchell formed a strong attachment, and were married at Fulham register office on 15 August 1925. 
On marrying Ray was obliged to leave the civil service, and on Mitchell's RAF allowance alone they were desperately poor. They rented rooms in various of the cheaper parts of London, which Mitchell of course was only able to visit when he had leave. The precariousness of their lives became even greater when incredibly he decided to give up the only income that they had. On 31 August 1929 he left the RAF. The foolhardiness of this was even more apparent when a daughter, Rhea, was born, and later a son, Daryll. But Mitchell was now determined that he was going to try to make it as a full-time writer. The omens were not good. To date he had published one slim volume of non-fiction, 'Hanno, or, The Future of Exploration' (1928), and a short story or two, but the combined income from this would not have kept them going for long. Gradually he did establish himself as a writer, and although income was never great he was able to move at Christmas 1931 to a more comfortable home in the new town of Welwyn Garden City, in Hertfordshire. Now with his own study, he was able to see himself as the real writer that Arbuthnott sceptics had always doubted. 
Mitchell's breakthrough as a writer came with a series of short stories in 'Cornhill Magazine', starting in January 1929 and drawing heavily on his Middle Eastern experiences. Getting his first novel published proved more difficult, and 'Stained Radiance' had been revised again and again, and rejected by twenty publishers, before it appeared in September 1930. A deeply ironic and sardonic anatomy of life in the modern city, it has as its hero an airman who aspires to be a writer. Mitchell's second novel, 'The Thirteenth Disciple' (1931), was even more autobiographical. The story takes the hero through his childhood in the north-east of Scotland, journalism in Glasgow, and service in the army before he sets off on an expedition to Yucatan, in search of a lost city. 
From his boyhood reading in Haggard and Wells, Mitchell was steeped in romance, and this is evident in much of his fiction. 'The Lost Trumpet' (1932) follows an archaeological expedition by a group of characters, all of whom display sterility of some kind in their lives, so that it becomes a quest for fertility in the desert, while in 'Image and Superscription' (1933) the hero, who has been damaged by a religious upbringing, follows a quest for meaning and enlightenment that takes him to a commune of naturists in Minnesota. 'Three Go Back' (1932) and 'Gay Hunter' (1934) adopt Wellsian time travel to compare modern civilization with the values of the primitive past. 
There is a consensus that 'Spartacus' (1933) is the best of the Mitchell novels, and in it he takes the story of the slave revolt in ancient Rome and makes of it a political paradigm of the revolutionary process itself. Making this link was not original to him. Spartacus was a recurring figure in socialist iconography, and Mitchell was familiar with the Spartacist movement in Germany led by the Marxists Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg. In 'Spartacus' is to be found Mitchell's most acute analysis of the nature and the demands of revolution, of the tension between idealism and ruthless practicality. It is presented as a problem of means and ends, the paradox of the cruel inhumanity required to bring about a humane society, which he confronts later in 'Grey Granite', but less convincingly. Mitchell's absorption in primitive history had led him to a vision of the true society that emphasized freedom and anarchy, but on the other hand the harsh experience of the general strike of 1926 had taught him that political effectiveness depended on the antithesis of these, on the kind of discipline that he had hated in the army: strict mass organization, the suppression of self. 
In the novel this issue is explored through the juxtaposed characters of Elpinice and Kleon, with Spartacus trying to find his way between them. The whole venture begins in his love for Elpinice and their vision of the free life that they will live together; it is she who releases him from the chains that the masters have placed upon him. But he soon learns the necessity of Kleon's political authoritarianism, and one of the most admirable features of 'Spartacus' is the way in which the character of the hero develops as he gradually apprehends the significance of what he is engaged in. He abandons the open, democratic organization of the army in favour of a kind of dictatorship, and reaches his own sacrificial crisis point when he is prepared to abandon Elpinice in childbirth. But Kleon himself can only be a temporary guide. He has been distorted by his experience of oppression; he is a eunuch, essentially sterile. Even to the end Spartacus retains his vision of the future, when there will be neither master nor slave, which is quite alien to Kleon's idea of the totalitarian state. 
On 2 September 1932 Mitchell published a novel, 'Sunset Song', that was so different from what he had written so far that he felt the need to adopt a pseudonym, Lewis Grassic Gibbon, derived from his mother's family names. It had been written at great speed -- it is said in a mere six weeks -- but then he was working through matter that had been simmering in his mind for years. 
The difference lies not so much in theme or location as in language and style. Mitchell had always been aware of his uncertainty in standard English. He claimed that for someone brought up speaking Scots that voice always remained a real and haunting thing, no matter how hard he tried to Anglicize himself. But to write in broad dialect was not a commercial possibility. His solution is highly personal and ingenious, and confirms him as one of the great experimental writers of modernist literature. What he does in effect is to invent his own language, in which he tries to capture the rhythm and intonation -- the voice, as it were -- of north-east Scots without a lot of dialect words. The result is essentially a spoken novel. The voice changes, the point of view fluctuates, but there is always a distinctive spoken voice behind the prose. And with this return to his linguistic roots comes naturally a sharper focus in what he is writing about, a return to the world of his mother tongue that makes 'Sunset Song' the greatest evocation of that particular community and culture. 
It is the emergence of this authentically Scots voice of Lewis Grassic Gibbon that creates the great writer, for with that voice comes the ability to present Scottish rural life from the inside in a way that had never been done before and not from the point of view of some alien external narrator. For the first time ordinary Scots folk are given their own voice to present themselves, warts and all. 
The central character, Chris Guthrie, is in many ways clearly based on the author himself. She grows up in the same kind of place, in the same social situation, and goes through many of the conflicts with parents and the community at large that Mitchell himself experienced. But equally obviously Chris is not Mitchell himself. She is female through and through, so much so that when the book first came out one female critic insisted that the author must be a woman, for no man could have made such an imaginative leap into essential femininity. The author both identifies with the character and is detached from her, and it is this combination of subjective introspection and objective distancing that helps to make the characterization so effective. And she is not a fixed or flat character but one who changes and matures, so that in the story of Chris's development from childhood, through the confusions and uncertainties to the full flower of womanhood, Gibbon is able to explore and open up areas of human experience in which we can all share. 
Chris is more intelligent than her parents and others in the community around her, more alive to things of the imagination, more reflective, and with a spirit that can look beyond the narrowness of farm life. When she goes to school this spirit is released and she discovers that books can carry her into another world, where life is more refined and exciting. And yet she is a peasant girl with generations of peasant blood in her veins, with a strong emotional attachment to the land itself and the folk who live on it. That is the inheritance from her mother, who could 'never forget the singing of the winds in those fields when she was young... or the feel of the earth below her toes' (L. G. Gibbon, 'Sunset Song', 1959, 33). While her father encourages her education as a means of getting on, her mother insists that 'there are better things than your books or studies... there's the countryside your own, you its, in the days when you're neither bairn nor woman' (ibid.). For a time these conflicts are laid to rest when, with the death of her mother, Chris's chance of education and a career disappears, and she has to fulfil a more traditional female role, staying at home to look after the house. But with the death of her father comes the opportunity once more to move into an educated, professional, middle-class way of life. And it is then, when she is all set to leave behind this life of the land and go off to college, that she realizes that to do so would be a fundamental betrayal of her real self. In a profound moment of self-awareness it becomes clear to her that her attachment to the land is basic to her being, for the land is the one thing that is permanent in a world of change. She marries Ewan Tavendale, a young farmer who 'had fair the land in his bones' (ibid., 29). Their relationship is evoked with such lyricism that when the First World War comes along and destroys it the novel takes on a tragic force. 
This personal story of the conflicts and self-discovery of a girl growing up in rural Scotland at the beginning of the twentieth century is at the heart of 'Sunset Song'. But equally important is the fact that this drama all takes place at a time of enormous change in farming life. At the start of the book Kinraddie is a community of small farms, each sustaining its own family. By the end it is very different; mechanization and economic change have turned farming into a large-scale capitalist industry. And with the changes in farming come changes in the whole way of life. The old language, the old songs, the old neighbourly ways have all disappeared. This is the sunset of which we are singing, and again the First World War provides the climax, the final setting of the sun. The new young minister of Kinraddie, Robert Colquohoun, makes this point at the unveiling of the war memorial when he says of the dead of the parish 'With them we may say there died a thing older than themselves, these were the Last of the Peasants, the last of the Old Scots folk' (p. 193). 
When published in 1932 'Sunset Song' was received rapturously both in Britain and in America. Compton Mackenzie, for instance, declared, 'I have no hesitation in saying that 'Sunset Song', by Lewis Grassic Gibbon, is the richest novel about Scottish life written for many years' ('Daily Mail', 13 Sept 1932). Only back home in the Mearns was the response more grudging, where some felt that he had presented the folk and their way of life less than flatteringly. Buoyed up by his success, Gibbon went on quickly to produce the second novel, 'Cloud Howe' (1933), in what was always intended as a trilogy, to be called 'A Scots Quair'. In this book Chris has married the Revd Robert Colquohoun, and soon after their marriage they move from Kinraddie to Segget, where Robert becomes the minister. Segget is a creation of the author's imagination, a small manufacturing town in the Mearns depending upon its jute mills -- very different from Kinraddie, which is based directly on what Gibbon had known at first hand since childhood. 

'Cloud Howe' is set in the 1920s -- a period of severe economic depression -- and Gibbon gives a vivid picture of the hardship and injustice that he sees as an inevitable part of the capitalist structure. Much of the novel is concerned with differing political views about how this terrible situation can be remedied. Fascism, Scottish nationalism, labour socialism are all examined and dismissed. The main interest lies with Robert Colquohoun and his struggle to find his own solution to the ills of the time. When he first comes to Segget he naively thinks that he can turn to the so-called Christian community of the kirk and that merely by exhorting them to put their principles into practice he can change the face of the town. He soon realizes that the respectable kirk folk have no interest in reform and social justice. Robert then aligns himself with the mill workers and their kind of socialism, only to be disillusioned by the collapse of the general strike, and eventually to fall into a vague kind of mysticism that relies on the second coming of Christ. Chris has very little sympathy for this 'madman's dream' of Robert's (L. G. Gibbon, 'Cloud Howe', 1959, 127), and this gives a sense of estrangement and failure to their marriage. Chris indeed is sceptical about all the schemes for putting the world to rights. To her they are all clouds that will pass, all illusions. Her role in the novel is to stand back from the main action and provide critical commentary. The most positive character is her son young Ewan Tavendale, whom we see growing up to be a very clear-headed and forceful figure who 'refused all clouds and all dreams' (ibid., 122). When Robert, aware that he is close to dying and at last realizing the seriousness of the situation, preaches one final sermon, in which he turns away from the soft old creeds, Christianity and socialism, and advocates 'a stark, sure creed that will cut like a knife, a surgeon's knife through the doubt and disease' (ibid., 156) it is Ewan who picks up on this, and it is his role in the last novel of the trilogy to discover this creed in communism. 

'Grey Granite' (1934) is set in the imagined industrial city of Duncairn and focuses on the differing responses of Chris and her son to its severe social problems. Now a widow again, she helps to run a boarding-house, while Ewan too is forced to earn a living and goes to work in the local ironworks. At first he feels alien from the working classes around him, dismissing them as mindless 'keelies'; he is more interested in books and in history. But gradually we see him develop into the kind of revolutionary leader that was foreshadowed in 'Spartacus' -- wholly committed and willing to sacrifice personal fulfilment to the necessary movement of history. Chris again stands back sceptically. Towards the end Ewan goes off on a hunger march, but the novel concludes not with him but with Chris, who returns to the land from which she came, 'concerning none and concerned with none' (p. 144). It was essential to the plan of the trilogy that it should move from a traditional farming community to a town, and then to an industrial city. Thus not only is the central theme of change maintained but 'A Scots Quair' as a whole reflects the main pattern of development of the western world in our time. 
The completion of 'A Scots Quair' established Lewis Grassic Gibbon as perhaps the most important Scottish novelist of the twentieth century. Growing success as a writer, however, also had its downside. There is no doubt that overwork played a part in Mitchell's tragically early death, at not quite thirty-four. Partly this was due to the need to prove himself to those doubters back home, partly it stemmed from the very precarious nature of his early finances. In the last year of his life he published no fewer than six books. At the time of his death he left a huge number of projects at various stages of preparation, and it has been estimated that by the summer of 1934 he was committed to an output of over a million words. 
Mitchell suffered from gastric problems for most of his later life. He put this down to the damage wrought by years of services food, though the fact that he was a heavy cigarette smoker perhaps did not help. He was admitted to Queen Victoria Hospital, Welwyn Garden City, at the beginning of February 1935, and there he underwent an operation for a perforated gastric ulcer. He died, of peritonitis, on 7 February. There was a non-religious service for him at Golders Green crematorium on 11 February, and his ashes were interred on 23 February in Arbuthnott churchyard, where a handsome granite memorial now stands. 

'A Scots Quair' was first issued as a single volume in 1946 and has remained in print ever since. The reissue in recent years of most of Mitchell's other work is a mark of his growing stature. 'Sunset Song' has become perhaps the most widely taught novel in Scottish schools. The televising of 'A Scots Quair' in the 1970s brought his work to an even wider audience, reflected in the founding in 1991 of the Grassic Gibbon Centre at Arbuthnott, with an archive of manuscripts and memorabilia. Academic interest in Mitchell, both in Scotland and throughout the world, has grown apace, and in 2001, to mark the centenary of his birth, the Association for Scottish Literary Studies devoted its annual conference to his life and work. 


@@@@@


doc= 38330


Milward, John (1599-1670), parliamentary diarist, was born on 28 October 1599 and baptized at Thorpe, Derbyshire, the second son of John Milward (1551-1633) of Bradley Ash and Mary (died 1651), daughter of William Blount of Osbaldeston, Lancashire. Milward served as a captain in the Derbyshire militia in the late 1630s and as sheriff of Derbyshire in 1635-7. During the civil war he commanded a foot regiment in the marquess of Newcastle's royalist army and in early 1644 he, with other Derbyshire gentlemen, was left in the county to confront troops under the command of Sir John Gell (another Derbyshire gentleman, and Milward's predecessor as sheriff) when Newcastle was called north to fight the Scots. Subsequently his regiment was called away by Goring, and may have fought at Marston Moor. Milward submitted to parliament after July 1644. His application to compound came with the recommendation of the county committee because he had restrained his soldiers from plundering, but he was, nevertheless, fined $1000 in December 1645. After the war he was engaged in some business interests with his former adversary, Gell: Gell demised land to him in 1649, and Gell's son and Milward appear to have been sold a lease of lead mines at Wirksworth in 1648. Milward's wife, Anne, daughter of James Whitehalgh of Whitehalgh, Ipstones, Staffordshire, with whom he had three sons and eight daughters, died on 20 June 1658. 
After the Restoration Milward was regarded locally as one of the most deserving of cavaliers. He was praised for his initial refusal to join with Derbyshire presbyterians (including Gell) in the commission of the peace; indeed their continuance in office appears to have been a particular grievance of his, as he raised it in the Commons in 1668. He was appointed a deputy lieutenant for Derbyshire in August 1660: his letter-book on militia business survives and suggests that he was among the most active of the Derbyshire deputies, and closely consulted by the lord lieutenant, the third earl of Devonshire. 
After the conferral of a peerage on John Frescheville in 1665 Milward replaced him as one of the knights of the shire for Derbyshire. From the time he took his seat at the beginning of the 1666-7 session of parliament to the adjournment of the 1667-9 session in August 1668, he kept a detailed diary of its proceedings, providing a daily account of business in the House of Commons. His diary, which exists in a scribal copy in the British Library, gives reasonably full coverage of the major debates, including those on supply and Irish cattle in the 1667 session and the impeachment of Clarendon in late 1667. It also includes fairly detailed accounts of sermons delivered to the Commons and elsewhere. It is the only complete informal record of the first of the sessions, and for the second of them it complements the diary taken by his countryman Anchitell Grey, who was elected as burgess for Derby a few months before Milward's own return. The fact that two Derbyshire men should be engaged in compiling the only extant Commons diaries of this period, combined with Milward's connections with the earl of Devonshire as revealed in the militia business letter-book, has led to the suggestion that both diaries may have been produced for Devonshire's benefit ('Diary', xv). 
The diary shows that Milward was a loyalist and suspicious of the intentions of the government's principal parliamentary critics. He regarded Sir Richard Temple's 'Triennial Bill' of 1668 as abhorrent, and noted how it was seconded and supported by Sir Thomas Littleton, Sir Robert Howard, and Sir Robert Carr 'and all that gang' ('Diary', 190). He was no courtier, however. He was keen on the banning of the Irish cattle trade, against the court's wishes, and on popular solutions to the government's financial crises such as the replacement of the hearth tax and the excise. He may have been identified by 'country' politicians and by the duke of Buckingham as a possible ally: he records himself as accepting dinner from Sir Robert Carr on one occasion and Sir Thomas Osborne in 1670 assumed that he would be susceptible to an approach from the duke on behalf of the court. What most concerned Milward, though, was the state of the church and the defence of its supporters. The diary gives particularly detailed coverage of ecclesiastical business, especially of the debates on toleration and the 'Conventicle Act' in March and April 1668, and indicates his own strong objections to the proposals. He was close to Gilbert Sheldon, the archbishop of Canterbury and a fellow countryman from Derbyshire. The diary records twelve occasions on which he met Sheldon or was invited by him to dine at Lambeth, and Sheldon, who referred to Milward as his 'ancient acquaintance countryman and my good friend' helped to get his son into Trinity College, Oxford (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. C. 308, fol. 378). 
Milward died at Snitterton, Darley Dale, Derbyshire, on 14 September 1670 and was buried a week later at Darley Dale church, as his wife had been. Despite a reputation as one of the strongest of cavaliers, Milward was apparently a popular figure, noted as even-handed and public-spirited; a local poet marked his death with lines which celebrate him as an old-fashioned type of the good landlord, neighbour, and father. 


@@@@@


doc= 38334


Addis, Sir Charles Stewart (1861-1945), banker and government adviser, was born on 23 November 1861 in Edinburgh, the youngest of twelve children of the Revd Thomas Addis (1813-1899), a Free Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Robina, daughter of a tea merchant in South Leith. He had five brothers and six sisters. Addis entered the Edinburgh Academy at the age of eleven, where he worked hard and did well. Yet, made deeply unhappy by his stern father's demands to excel, he left school at fifteen to become an apprentice at Peter Dowie & Co., general importers. In 1880 he obtained a clerkship with the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation (HSBC) in London, a move which shaped the rest of his career, for after only three years he was appointed to the bank's eastern staff. 
Between 1880 and 1905 Addis held many assignments, including Hong Kong, Peking (Beijing), Shanghai, Calcutta, and Korea, positions that provided the young banker with the knowledge of international finance, as well as the social and diplomatic training, which ultimately led to his advancement to the top ranks of international banking and government counsel. The years in Peking (1886-8) were particularly important, since here, as an attractive young bachelor, Addis became part of the small and intimate diplomatic community, establishing lifelong friendships and gaining confidence and prestige. He continued to study Chinese, and began writing articles for the local English-language newspaper, the 'Chinese Times'. Addis was ambitious and level-headed, determined to advance in the world. 
In January 1894, while home on leave, Addis met and fell in love with Eba (Elizabeth) McIsaac, the daughter of the provost of Saltcoats, and within six months they were married. They then returned to Shanghai, where Addis had been appointed sub-manager of the HSBC branch. A son, Thomas, was born in 1895, the first of their thirteen children. Another son, John, was destined half a century later to become the first British ambassador to the People's Republic of China. 
While in Shanghai in the late 1890s, Addis observed China's decline as an empire and participated in the establishment of the system of financial controls which transformed the Middle Kingdom into a semi-colonial outpost of Britain and its imperial rivals. Following his return to London in 1905 as junior manager of the London office of the HSBC, and his subsequent appointment in 1911 as senior manager, Addis worked closely with the world's leading bankers and businessmen, as well as Foreign Office and Treasury officials. He was knighted in 1913 for his role in creating the Six Power China Consortium. In 1921 he was created KCMG for helping to create the second China consortium. 
With the outbreak of the First World War, Addis's financial expertise attracted the attention of government leaders who were seeking ways to finance the huge, growing debt to America. At the same time, Addis gained national attention through his advocacy of free trade in such leading academic journals as 'The Economist' and the 'Economic Journal'. He was appointed to the Cunliffe currency committee in 1917, and in May 1918 he was elected to the court of the Bank of England where he subsequently became a close friend and adviser of its governor, Montagu Norman. Throughout the 1920s Addis and Norman defended the bank's independence from government control and succeeded in achieving Britain's return to the gold standard in 1925. 
In addition to his role as central banker and as a government adviser on China policy, Addis also participated in the post-war settlements in Europe, helping to shape the Dawes plan (1924), and the Young plan (1929), which created the Bank for International Settlements. All of these efforts, which aimed at satisfying the American demand for payment of the war debts and the Europeans' insistence that German reparations provide sufficient funds for such payment, ultimately failed. 
Although Addis preached Anglo-American co-operation as the key to world peace, he also defended the HSBC's dominant role in China, and successfully obstructed American post-war ambitions to supplant British influence. In the 1930s, after failing to convince the American Hoover administration to support free trade, Addis gave his support to the British imperial policy of protection and abandonment of the gold standard. His hopes to achieve permanent peace had proved unattainable as Europe moved inexorably towards war. 
During the last decade of his life Addis was finally able to devote time to his family and his country estate, Woodside, at Frant, in Sussex. The decision he had made in China to pursue success in business had displaced his interest in music, literature, and nature, but had never eclipsed his dedication to his wife and family: in his daily diary he always noted small items of family news alongside major international issues. His family life was not without tragedy: his youngest son, Dick, serving as a naval officer, was killed in 1944 when his ship was torpedoed, leaving behind a wife and an unborn son. 
Throughout his life Addis found refuge in the religious teachings of his early training, maintaining his belief in the ultimate triumph of righteousness, despite wars and personal tragedies. His distinguished career was built on a reputation for personal integrity. Perhaps his most significant insight was that international financial stability is a prerequisite for world peace. Addis died of a stroke at his home on 14 December 1945 and was buried at the village church at Frant, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 38335


Hillier, Edward Guy (1857-1924), banker, was born on 11 March 1857 in Cambridge, the posthumous son of Charles Batten Hillier (died 1856), British consul in Bangkok and sometime chief magistrate of Hong Kong, and his wife, Eliza Mary, the daughter of the Revd Dr W. H. Medhurst (1796-1857) of the London Missionary Society. He was the youngest son in a family of three sons and one daughter. He was educated at Blundell's School, Tiverton, Devon, and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he gained a BA in Chinese studies. Fluent in the language, he was first employed as tutor to Robert W. Buchanan-Jardine and went to the East as private secretary to the governor of British North Borneo. He briefly joined Jardine Matheson in Hong Kong, but in 1883 was recruited by Ewen Cameron, then Shanghai manager, for the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation. In 1885, after training in Shanghai, he was sent north to the Tientsin (Tianjin) office and from there to Peking (Beijing), where Cameron foresaw China's future sovereign-risk loans would be negotiated. 
When Hillier first entered Peking it was as a resident representative with no right, as defined by the treaties, to undertake business. Local bankers objected, and the Hongkong Bank for a period lay low. Hillier went on leave in 1886, but the banking activities of the 'sub-agency' were tentatively re-established by Charles Addis. After a period in Tientsin, where he was a successful amateur jockey, Hillier returned to Peking in 1891, at which time the existence of the agency was announced formally. In 1894, in Peking, he married his first wife, Ada (died 1917), the daughter of Frederick William Everett, a stockbroker; they had two daughters and two sons, including the painter Tristram Paul Hillier. 
Hillier undertook routine banking while establishing an intelligence network through the compradores. He supervised young bank staff assigned to Peking for language study. He was the intimate of the legations in part helped by his brother Walter Caine Hillier, who was for a time Chinese secretary of the British legation. Hillier was also friendly with Sir Robert Hart, the inspector-general of the Chinese maritime customs. All sought his advice, but Hillier's main negotiations were connected with China's major borrowing -- first for the finance of the Sino-Japanese War, then for the 1896 and 1898 indemnity loans, for railway construction, and, finally, for the 1913 reorganization loan. 
By 1896 Hillier had lost the sight of one eye; the other was threatened with glaucoma. He left China temporarily for what proved to be an unsuccessful operation in Vienna, and was on leave when the Boxers laid siege to the Peking legations in 1900. The uprising was, however, virtually confined to the north of China; Hillier accordingly negotiated and signed on behalf of the bank, then acting for the British government, a loan with the co-operative Hukuang (Huguang) viceroy, Zhang Zhidang, enabling him to pay his troops. In 1901 Hillier became the British representative on the Shanghai-based International Commission of Bankers dealing with the technical aspects of the Boxer indemnity. For this he was created CMG in 1904. 
In Peking loan negotiations had become increasingly politicized. Indeed, of all the foreign bank managers in the capital Hillier was the only qualified banker, the others having been seconded from their respective diplomatic services. By 1907, however, he was virtually blind and offered to resign; instead, the bank provided him with a private secretary, Eleanor Isabella, the daughter of the China missionary Dr Timothy Richard. They were married in 1919. 
Hillier continued to represent the Hongkong Bank in Peking until his death. The bank had become the British member of a multinational consortium, popularly known as the 'China consortium'. In the early post-Boxer years Hillier had expected to work closely with the British and Chinese Corporation, of which the Hongkong Bank was joint manager in China (with Jardine Matheson), and with the Chinese Central Railways, a combination of British, French, and Belgian interests. The early railway loan negotiations assumed the lender would retain control of each project through the associated companies, but this ran counter to 'Young China' sentiment typified by the Rights Recovery Movement. Hillier began reluctantly to negotiate purely financial loans. This brought him into conflict with the outspoken publicist J. O. P. Bland, the British and Chinese Corporation's representative in China; Bland was dismissed. As a principal negotiator for the consortium, in 1911 Hillier successfully concluded the $6 million Hukuang Railways loan, but, fearing that any official recognition would aggravate international rivalries, Sir Charles Addis, then the bank's London manager, advised the Foreign Office against a proposed knighthood for Hillier. 
In the intrigues that accompanied the eventually successful negotiations for the $25 million reorganization loan (1913), Hillier underestimated China's ability to find alternative sources of finance. In consequence, China for a time circumvented consortium controls by accepting the Birch Crisp loan (1912), masterminded by Charles Birch Crisp. 
During the First World War, European finance for Chinese development was impractical. Hillier, moreover, suffered personal losses; his eldest son was killed and his first wife died, although he was able to return briefly to England in 1917 to be at her deathbed. Political critics of his policies attempted unsuccessfully to brand him 'pro-German', a charge lent credibility because of his official and personal relations with Heinrich Cordes, the manager of the Deutsch-Asiatische Bank and an alleged German agent. 
After the war the New China consortium was established by a formal government-to-government agreement, which the experienced Hillier deplored as impractical. He nevertheless remained as representative of a more broadly based British group, his work frustrated by petty arguments and, more importantly, by China's lack of creditworthiness. In his final years in Peking, Hillier, the great banker-diplomat, had become a mere intermediary, with policy decided in London by Sir Charles Addis. Yet he remained a symbol to contemporaries of that unique era -- the last days of imperial China. His long experience with the language enabled him to develop a system of Braille for Chinese; in 1917 he founded Peking's first public school for the blind. A Roman Catholic, he played the organ at the French Catholic Cathedral to the last. 
In late 1923 Hillier's health deteriorated further, and he died in the German Hospital in Peking on 12 April 1924. His pallbearers included the doyen of the diplomatic corps, the British and French ministers, and representatives of the foreign-managed customs, salt, and postal administrations. Other heads of diplomatic missions followed the cortege on foot through the legation quarter. Hillier was buried on 13 April in the cathedral cemetery. Had he lived but a few more months, he would have received a knighthood: his name was intended for inclusion in the king's birthday honours list. 
As the representative of the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation in Peking 1885-6 and from 1891 to his death in 1924, Hillier tested the very limits of the 'treaty system', establishing close relations both with modernizing compradores and with imperial officials. It was Hillier's genius to understand the politics of the foreign diplomatic community, to learn what was possible in the London market, to determine what was acceptable politically in China, and to match all three -- on terms to the benefit of the Hongkong Bank, its associate companies, and, indeed, the general British position in China. 


@@@@@


doc= 38336


Potter, Marian Anderson (1900-1981), painter, was born on 9 April 1900 at Rockford, Barnmead Road, Beckenham, Kent, the second of the four children of (John) Arthur Attenborough (1873-1940), solicitor, and his wife, Kathleen Mary, 'nee' Doble (1872-1957). She was educated at St Christopher's, Beckenham, and at Beckenham School of Art. She won a scholarship to the Royal College of Art but out of preference went to the Slade School of Fine Art instead. When she arrived there in October 1918, she was taught by Professor Henry Tonks, who believed that students should learn to paint exactly what they saw; Mary would argue furiously with him but thought him a wonderful teacher and in turn became a star pupil. She won a near record number of prizes. At the Slade she was extremely popular and was remembered as a great party-goer. Her 'turn' was to sing songs and accompany herself on the ukulele. She became known as Att (short for Attenborough), a name which remained with her until her fifties. After leaving the Slade she shared a studio in nearby Fitzroy Street and became an early member of the Seven & Five Society. She exhibited with it on at least three occasions but resigned early on, never liking to align herself with any kind of movement. She also exhibited at the New English Art Club. Very few of these early paintings can be traced, but according to the critic P. G. Konody her work was 'competent and accomplished'. 
At a boat race party given by A. P. Herbert, Mary Attenborough met the critic and radio producer Stephen Meredith Potter (1900-1969), whom she married on 7 July 1927. They rented from the Herberts a tiny house overlooking the Thames in Chiswick Mall. Mary painted the world around her -- a vase of flowers on a window sill with the river in the background, or an ornament on a bookcase. She and her husband later moved into a bigger house -- Thames Bank, a few doors along Chiswick Mall. Two sons were born: Andrew in 1928 and Julian in 1931. Bringing up a family made inroads into her painting. None the less on a normal day she would paint at least throughout the morning. Records of over 100 Chiswick oils exist: undoubtedly she painted many more. Her first solo exhibition was at the Bloomsbury Gallery, London, in 1932, followed by a second in 1939 at Arthur Tooth & Sons. With the onset of war Mary and her husband, who was working for the BBC, moved to Manchester. Opportunities to paint were limited but she sold 'The Golden Kipper' to the Tate Gallery at this time, and two pictures to the Manchester City Art Gallery. In 1941 the Potters moved to a farmhouse deep in the Essex countryside, where Mary had more freedom to work. She received commissions for a number of portraits, mostly of local friends. Her talent for portrait painting had been recognized by Henry Tonks, who had set up commissions for her when she left the Slade. She liked to paint her closest friends, of whom the actress Joyce Grenfell was one whose portrait she painted extremely successfully, capturing her humour as well as her depth of character. While she undertook portrait commissions for financial reasons, she continued with her other work. At the end of the war the Potters moved to a flat in Harley Street, London. The Essex paintings, together with the first of many views of Regent's Park and of Harley Street, were shown at Arthur Tooth & Sons in 1946. Over half were sold, including a series of paintings of the windswept seafront at Brighton in winter. She was slow to build up enough paintings for a further show because of family distractions. Her next exhibition was at the Leicester Galleries, in Leicester Square, London. 
In 1951 Mary Potter and her husband moved to the Red House in Aldeburgh, Suffolk. Stephen Potter already knew Benjamin Britten through his work at the BBC, and it was not long before the Potters took part fully in Aldeburgh life, serving on the council of the music festival. Sessions of the Aldeburgh Music Club were held either at the Red House or at Crag House, Britten's home on the seafront. Every summer Britten, Peter Pears, and the Potters formed the nucleus of countless tennis parties on the grass court at the Red House. From this time until his last illness Britten became Mary's very close friend. Other friends made at this time included Sir Laurens van der Post, who was living at Aldeburgh, a tennis opponent as well as a collector of her work. Many years later he attended all her exhibitions at the New Art Centre in Sloane Street, London. With more time to paint, Mary Potter began a regime of long hours of work every day which was to become ever more unrelenting over the next thirty years. In 1954 her husband asked for a divorce, which became effective in 1955. As the Red House was too large and too expensive for one person, it was decided that she and Britten should swap houses, and in 1957 she moved to Crag House. Her work was shown regularly at the Leicester Galleries, and her pictures were sold to many leading collectors and museums. 
In 1963 Bryan Robertson, director of the Whitechapel Art Gallery, London, proposed that Mary Potter should have an exhibition there and persuaded her that she was capable of developing in new directions, on a larger scale. A retrospective exhibition of her work opened at the gallery in October 1964 and was a brilliant success. The accompanying catalogue had a foreword by Sir Kenneth Clark and the exhibition toured to Sheffield, King's Lynn, and Chichester. At this time Mary Potter moved into a studio house commissioned by Benjamin Britten and designed by Peter Colleymore in the garden of the Red House, her old home. As her reputation grew steadily she continued to be involved in the Aldeburgh festival. She held exhibitions, and painted many portraits of musicians such as Janet Baker and Britten. Seeking to change her exhibiting arrangements, and on the recommendation of Sir Kenneth Clark, another great friend, she approached the New Art Centre in Sloane Street, London, where both the directors of the gallery responded enthusiastically to her work. From 1967 until 1980 an exhibition of her work was mounted every two years at the gallery, and for each exhibition she produced about fifteen new paintings. 
Using beeswax mixed with paint Mary Potter achieved a chalky luminous quality in her paintings, and from the 1950s her range of colours was pale and subtle. She always put strict instructions on the back of each painting not to varnish or glaze the work, abhorring the use of shiny varnish or gloss, both widely used by many artists to give their work a false depth. Her later paintings became more diffuse and abstracted; their misty colours were never bright and very seldom pure. She painted in an evocative shorthand, the lines and half-shapes suggesting the whole. Certain images continued to appear in her work, such as a leaf-shape, a fraction of tree trunk, or the misted disc of a sun. Her paintings at this time expressed joy, beauty, and freedom, and some of her best and most original work was produced in these last years. 
Honours and wider recognition came during this period: in 1979 Mary Potter was made an OBE, and in 1980 the Tate Gallery held an exhibition of her work, in two of its rooms, which included many of the paintings it owned, together with loans from other museums. In May the following year the Arts Council of Great Britain organized a full-scale retrospective of her work at the Serpentine Gallery in London. With its magical light filtered through the leaves of the trees of Kensington Gardens, the space was a perfect setting for her paintings. The show received outstanding critical acclaim and was attended by 25,000 people before it went on tour. Critically ill with the lung cancer which caused her death four months later, she went to London for the hanging and the private view. Mary Potter died on 14 September 1981 at her home, the Red Studio, Golf Lane, Aldeburgh, and was cremated on the 16th at Ipswich crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 38337


Noonan, Robert Philippe (1870-1911), author, was born Robert Philippe Croker on 18 April 1870 at 37 Wexford Street, Dublin. But the vastly influential novel for which he is known -- 'The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists' -- was published posthumously and his true identity remained hidden until forty years after his death. He was the illegitimate son of Samuel Croker, a substantial man of property, resident magistrate, and retired inspector in the Royal Irish Constabulary, and Mary Noonan. Two other children were born from this union. Robert's father died when he was a boy, and his education, though good, was incomplete. By all accounts he was an exceptional linguist and skilful artist, but he served no apprenticeship despite working as a signwriter and housepainter from leaving school at sixteen until his death. In 1890 he emigrated to South Africa, where he lived comfortably and bought a plot of land. On 17 October 1891 in Cape Town he married Elizabeth Hartel ('b'. 1872/3); they had a daughter, Kathleen, the following year, but Elizabeth died shortly thereafter. 
Noonan, as he now called himself, raised Kathleen alone, supplementing his artisan's income through journalism. In 1896 he moved to Johannesburg in the Transvaal, where with John (Sean) MacBride (executed in 1916 for his part in the Dublin Easter rising) and Arthur Griffiths, later president of the Irish republic, he helped form the Irish brigade, which fought against the British in the South African War. Before hostilities began in 1899, Noonan had returned to Cape Town and thence to Britain, where he settled in Hastings in 1901. Working in the building trade at subsistence wages, he contracted tuberculosis, was influenced by socialist writers such as Robert Blatchford, and became an active member of the unusually large Hastings branch of the Social Democratic Federation, whose banner he painted. He spent his spare time during the last ten years of his life writing by hand the 1800-page manuscript of 'The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists', which brought posthumous fame. In 1910, when his daughter was eighteen, Noonan determined to make a new start in Canada, but 'en route' he was taken seriously ill in Liverpool, where, after living for a while in a workhouse, he died in the Royal Infirmary on 3 February 1911; he was buried in a pauper's grave in the city's Walton Park cemetery. In 1913 his daughter, Kathleen, sold his manuscript outright for $25 to the publisher Grant Richards, whose editor Jessie Pope cut the text to about 100,000 words; and this 'damnably subversive, but... extraordinarily real' novel (as Richards described it) was published in April 1914. 
Although the title page of the manuscript is clearly signed Tressell (which was how Noonan wrote the word for a painter's trestle in his manuscript), for some unknown reason the author's name was printed as Tressall in the first edition and in the Grant Richards abridged cheap edition of 1918. Sardonic and satirical in tone, the novel's great strength is its minute and convincing observation of the hero's workmates, whose 'philanthropy' consists of letting employers reap the surplus value their labour produces. Its political argument, though crude, is powerful, and the use of names -- Crass, Didlum, Graball, Slyme, and Sweater all live in Mugsborough -- redolent of John Bunyan and Charles Dickens. The story covers a year in the life of Frank Owen, who tries to arouse his workmates to the evils of the system which exploits them, helped by the mysterious Barrington, an educated, middle-class man, who is another 'alter ego' for the author. A clear, convincing, and often poignant narrative emerges; but Tressell was not a great creative writer and his development of plot and character is much weaker. Moreover, the inability (implied in the title) of the working class ever to see beyond their immediate circumstances makes their acceptance of socialism seem unlikely and gives the novel a pessimistic context. Nevertheless, it presents a unique view of early twentieth-century working-class life through the eyes of an articulate proletarian. 
Reissued many times between the wars, 'Philanthropists' was published in Canada, Germany, and the United States, with pirated translations appearing in Romania and the Soviet Union. Penguin Books published the abridged version in April 1940. By then it had sold, at a conservative estimate, more than 100,000 copies. Penguin reprinted it in May 1940, January 1941, and May 1942, with an Australian edition in October 1942, all widely read and lent on by soldiers during the Second World War, while the Richards Press printed eight abridged editions between 1944 and 1951, with a final Richards original version in 1954. By then F. C. Ball, who had spent his life researching Tressell, had fixed beyond reasonable doubt his Croker-Noonan identity and, equally important, located his manuscript. This was finally published in full (with his pseudonym spelt properly at last) in 1955 by Lawrence and Wishart, who subsequently reprinted it many times. This full text has been published in the Soviet Union and translated into Bulgarian, Czech, French, German, Japanese, and Swahili. Stage adaptations have been frequent since the 1920s. BBC television broadcast one in 1967, the year in which Tressell's daughter, Kathleen, who was believed to have died in 1918, returned from years spent in Canada and was interviewed by a reporter from 'The Times'; she later confirmed most of the facts of Tressell's life which F. C. Ball had established by years of tireless work. 


@@@@@


doc= 38338


Grayson, (Albert) Victor (b. 1881), politician, generally known as Victor Grayson, was registered as having been born at 8 Taliesin Street, Liverpool on 5 September 1881. His father was given as William Grayson, a carpenter, and his mother as Elizabeth, 'nee' Craig (died 1929). The circumstances of his birth remain disputed. Some sources (for example Clark, 'Labour's Lost Leader', 156-7) refer to rumours that these were not his natural parents, and that his father was an aristocrat. 
Grayson's formal education was at St Mathew's Church of England School on Liverpool's Scotland Road; he then served an apprenticeship as a turner at the Bank Hall engine works. His mother was deeply religious; at the age of eighteen he began to attend the undenominational Bethel mission, and he later moved to the Hamilton Road mission. A talent for oratory became evident during his activities first as a Sunday school teacher, and then as an outdoor speaker. In the autumn of 1904 he entered the Home Missionary College in Manchester to train for the Unitarian ministry, and also attended classes at the University of Manchester. Increasingly involved in socialist activities, he joined the Manchester central branch of the Independent Labour Party (ILP). Unemployment was high in Manchester during 1905 and Grayson emerged as a popular and effective speaker at demonstrations. His passion for socialism replaced his religious commitment, and in July 1906 he withdrew from his course. 
Grayson's subsequent political rise was meteoric. In significant respects his experience of the labour movement was narrow. He preferred the emotions of the platform to the humdrum tasks of political organization. He had no experience of trade unionism and could be critical of what he considered its narrowness of vision. But in the circumstances of 1906-7, his revivalist socialism struck a telling chord among many activists of the ILP. 
The general election of 1906 had produced a Parliamentary Labour Party of thirty members, several of whom identified themselves as socialists. ILP membership was increasing, and many new recruits were unhappy about the constraints intrinsic to the ILP's alliance with the trade unions. These enthusiasts wished to attack Liberal seats in by-elections. In the context of these sentiments the Mancunian roots of Grayson's politics were perhaps significant. The conurbation's socialists included many who were critical of the Labour Party's caution and wished for an alternative socialist alliance of the ILP and the Social Democratic Federation (Social Democratic Party from 1908). 
During 1906 Grayson became a frequent and enthusiastically received speaker in the Colne Valley, a safe Liberal seat to the south-west of Huddersfield. A West Riding constituency of mill villages, nonconformist chapels, and moorland, it included the well-established Colne Valley Labour League. This was essentially a network of ILP branches and clubs; local trade unionism was sparse. When a by-election was called in June 1907 Grayson was adopted as the league's candidate. He was not endorsed by the national Labour Party. Formally this resulted from the lack of a local Labour Representation Committee, itself symptomatic of trade union weakness, but there appear also to have been doubts about Grayson's suitability not least on grounds of his inexperience. 
Grayson's campaign combined orthodox Labour politics with revivalist oratory. His victory by 153 votes in a three-cornered contest held on 18 July 1907 led him to a contrasting verdict -- 'this epoch making victory has been won for pure revolutionary socialism' (Thompson, 22). Many activists felt that Grayson's victory demonstrated the feasibility of a radical alternative to established Labour politics, and he became symbolic of this discontent. His oratory expressed at socialist meetings could seem threatening to other Labour politicians. Attempts to negotiate his inclusion within the Parliamentary Labour Party failed. The gulf was revealed dramatically on successive days in October 1908 when he twice flouted parliamentary procedure to demand a debate on unemployment. Prior to his first removal from the chamber, he castigated Labour members -- 'you are traitors to your class' ('Hansard 4', vol. 194, col. 497, 15 Oct 1908). His use of the parliamentary 'scene' brought approval from George Bernard Shaw, but provoked predictable hostility from Labour members. Some responded by spreading rumours about Grayson's liking for alcohol and his enjoyment of luxuries. The ILP conference in 1909 revealed the limits of his influence. Many critics of the Labour Party leadership nevertheless remained committed to the basic strategy of an ILP-trade union alliance. Grayson clearly was not; his journalism firstly for A. P. Orage's 'New Age' and subsequently for Robert Blatchford's 'Clarion' demonstrated a commitment to a socialist alternative. A book, 'The Problem of Parliament' (1909), written with G. R. S. Taylor, presented parliament not as an instrument for reform but as a socialist platform. 
Grayson's brief parliamentary career ended with the general election of January 1910. Even in Colne Valley his politics divided socialists, and in an election dominated by the Liberal issues of House of Lords reform and the people's budget, his socialist rhetoric could seem less compelling. His vote fell by 499 and he finished third. In the second 1910 election he stood for Kennington, south London, as a socialist, but polled only 408 votes. Throughout 1911 he campaigned for a new socialist party through his column in 'The Clarion'. The Salford Unity Conference at the end of September elected him to the steering committee charged with the task of devising a party constitution. Yet his hopes for the consequential British Socialist Party (BSP) proved brief. The Social Democratic Party under H. M. Hyndman moved into the BSP en bloc and soon marginalized the ILP dissidents and 'Clarion' readers that represented Grayson's support. By the spring of 1912 he had retired from the organization. His combination of passionate platform oratory and high living was lubricated increasingly by alcohol; his status within the socialist movement declined further. 
On 7 November 1912 at Chelsea register office, describing his occupation as 'journalist', he married Ruth Nightingale (1886/7-1918), an actress with the stage name of Ruth Norrey; she was the daughter of John Webster Nightingale, banker. The fragility of Grayson's health and the unpredictability of his wife's earnings meant poverty. During 1913 donations from political sympathizers allowed them to travel abroad in the hope of Grayson's recovery. After visiting Italy and, for a longer period, New York, they returned to Britain at the end of the year. A daughter was born in April 1914. 
Grayson strongly supported Britain's entry into the war in August 1914. The influence of Robert Blatchford might have been significant; the result was to separate Grayson further from many of his sympathizers. In the spring of 1915 the Graysons left for Australia. Ruth had obtained a theatrical engagement and Victor spoke at meetings and wrote for political journals. Initially his pro-war views harmonized with those of the Australian labour party leadership, but the growth of anti-conscription feeling produced criticism. Similar problems confronted him when he arrived in New Zealand in 1916. Not only did his pro-conscription views prove unpopular, but his speeches could be marred by alcohol, and there were allegations of financial deception. In November 1916 he enlisted in the New Zealand expeditionary force, and he arrived in France in the following September. On 12 October 1917 he was wounded, and subsequently discharged, probably suffering from shell-shock. Early in 1918 he featured as a pro-war orator in alliance with the seamen's leader Havelock Wilson; the campaign was interrupted by his wife's death during childbirth in February. 
This reappearance on public platforms was brief. Grayson subsequently lived in apparent affluence -- a contrast with his recent poverty -- in a West End flat. His associates included Maundy Gregory, the man at the heart of the post-war honours scandal. The significance of this relationship and the source of Grayson's income remain unknown; and then, probably in September 1920, began a greater mystery. Grayson disappeared. Subsequent sightings proved inconclusive; no death certificate was ever issued. Speculations have included murder at the hands of Gregory or his associates, a breakdown, or the construction of a new identity. 
Beyond the unresolved mysteries stands the power of Grayson's spellbinding oratory. Often charming, and attractive to both men and women, his politics lacked depth. For his sympathizers he represented the hope of a better world that owed more to moral conversion than to legislation; for his detractors he represented the irrational, the destabilizing, and the potentially violent both as pre-war socialist and as wartime patriot. From one standpoint he is the flawed socialist hero; but his distinctive trajectory also illuminates specific and important themes within the Edwardian left. A character in a morality play, he was nevertheless very much a man of his time and place. 


@@@@@


doc= 38339


Crew, Francis Albert Eley (1886-1973), animal geneticist, was born on 2 March 1886 at 227 Dudley Port, Tipton, Staffordshire, on the outskirts of Birmingham. His father, Thomas Crew, was a small grocer who later prospered in business. Both his father and his mother, Annie ('nee' Eley), were devout nonconformists. Crew was the third of their five children but the only one to survive beyond infancy. He was educated at the King Edward VI School in Birmingham from 1896 to 1906. From an early age Crew was passionately interested in pets, and he bred bantams very successfully, winning prizes at local shows. Believing a medical qualification to be the gateway to biological research, from 1907 he studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh, graduating MB ChB in 1912. In the following year Crew married Helen Campbell Dykes ('c'.1886-1971), a fellow medical student in Edinburgh. They had one son and one daughter. 
During the First World War Crew served in the Royal Army Medical Corps, reaching the rank of major in 1917. After the war he returned to Edinburgh and obtained the post of assistant in the department of natural history, where he taught genetics. His flair for teaching was described by his colleague and close friend Lancelot Hogben: 'In the lecture theatre he was a spell binder. Handsome, well built, equipped with a mellifluous voice and a ready but rarely uncharitable wit, he had histrionic talent worthy of a Shakespearean actor and -- how rare a combination -- an irreproachably lucid gift of exposition. (Hogben, 136)' In 1920 Crew was appointed as the first director of the Institute of Animal Breeding, then being set up in Edinburgh. Although it was linked to the department of animal breeding, the department existed only in name (and had neither staff, nor accommodation). By persuasive begging he obtained funds for a new building and for the endowment of a new chair, staff, and funds for research. In 1928 he was appointed to the new Buchanan chair of animal genetics. 
Under Crew's leadership the institute did pioneering work on sex determination, reproductive physiology, and many aspects of the husbandry and breeding of sheep, cattle, pigs, horses, and poultry, and on the genetics of mice and budgerigars' colours. Crew's own most notable work centred on sex determination and sexual abnormalities such as sex reversal and intersexes in birds and mammals. This work, which was described in his book 'Sex Determination' (1933), led to an understanding of how secondary sexual characters (such as the feathering of fowls) are determined during development. 
The Seventh International Congress of Genetics was held in Edinburgh from 23 to 30 August 1939, when the Second World War was imminent. In the absence of the president-elect, the Russian N. Vavilov, Crew was chosen to be president in his place. This congress was the culmination of Crew's career in genetics. 
Crew's influence on genetics was not so much through his own research, but through his infectious enthusiasm which attracted many able biologists to the subject, and through his success in obtaining funds. Crew's successor in the Buchanan chair, C. H. Waddington, described his influence on genetics as 'an achievement on a heroic scale' ('The Times'). During the Second World War, Crew served in the War Office as director of biological research, with the rank of brigadier. He was charged with producing the official 'Army Medical History of the War', much of which he wrote himself. It was published between 1953 and 1966 in five volumes. Crew resigned from the Buchanan chair in 1944 and was appointed in 1945 to the chair of public health and social medicine in Edinburgh. During his tenure of this chair he laid the foundations of medical genetics. His book 'The Measurement of Public Health' (1948) outlines his teaching in the department. After retiring in 1955 he went on missions to Egypt, Burma, and twice to India, teaching and advising on medical genetics. After the last of these journeys, in 1967, he settled at Upton Mill, Framfield, Sussex. 
Crew was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1939, and he received many other marks of distinction and honours. In 1972, following the death of his first wife, he married Margaret Whithof-Keus, a medical graduate and friend who had given him much help and support in his later work. Crew died on 26 May 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 38343


Bischoffsheim, Henri Louis (1829-1908), financier, was born in Amsterdam, the younger of the two sons of Louis Raphael Bischoffsheim (1800-1873), banker, and his wife, Amelie, 'nee' Goldschmidt. His grandfather, Raphael Nathan, had migrated to Mainz in the eighteenth century from Bischofsheim on the River Tauber in Baden, and thereafter he took the name of Bischoffsheim. He became president of the Jewish community in Mainz. His elder son Louis Raphael Bischoffsheim established a bank in Amsterdam with branches in Paris, London, and Antwerp. Paris later became his headquarters. Raphael Nathan's younger son, Raphael Jonathan, settled in Belgium, where he opened banking houses which rendered financial services to the Belgian government of such magnitude that after his death the street on which he lived in Brussels was renamed boulevard Bischoffsheim. He became a senator and was father-in-law of Baron Maurice de Hirsch. 
Louis Raphael's elder son Raphael Louis settled in Paris, where he became a prominent and successful banker. He was also deeply interested in astronomy and founded one of the foremost observatories in France, close to Nice. Henri Louis, the younger son, went to London in 1849 to serve in the London branch of his father's business, which had been founded in 1836. The branch was under the management of his uncle, S. H. Goldschmidt, who subsequently retired to Paris and became in 1882 president of the Alliance Israelite. During his life in England Bischoffsheim was known as Henry. In 1856 he married Clarissa (1837-1922), one of 'seven beautiful daughters' of J. Biedermann of Vienna, four of whom married prominent figures in the City of London ('The Times', 12 March 1908). Her portrait was painted by Millais (1873). The Bischoffsheims had two daughters, one of whom, Ellen ['see 'Cuffe, Ellen Odette (1857-1933)], became countess of Desart and the first female senator of the Irish Free State. Like her parents, she was very active in Jewish philanthropy. The second daughter married Sir Maurice Fitzgerald, knight of Kerry and equerry to the duke of Connaught. 
On his father's death in 1873 Henry separated from the Paris firm and settled into business, still in association with Goldschmidt, as a successful merchant banker. Until the mid-1870s when Bischoffsheim's business activities slackened, he carried on wide-ranging international financial operations from offices at 31 Throgmorton Street under the title of Bischoffsheim and Goldschmidt. The firm's success in the mid-nineteenth century, according to his 'Times' obituary, owed much to 'Mr Bischoffsheim's sanguine and energetic temperament' ('The Times', 12 March 1908). Such an account, however, fails to bring out the controversial nature of the foreign loans with which Bischoffsheim and Goldschmidt became associated early in their partnership. The firm's involvement in the Honduras loan of 1867 was especially notorious. 'Bischoffsheims saw its chance for a killing and had few if any compunctions about taking it' (Kynaston, 270). This was one of the episodes investigated in March 1875 by the select committee on loans to foreign states, and it was undoubtedly the case that between 1866 and 1875, when the market in foreign loans reached its peak, 'their transactions were on an extraordinary scale' (Emden, 537). From 'c'.1874 Bischoffsheim took little part in the affairs of the firm; although he still attended his office for a few hours on most days of the week and gave advice, he initiated no transactions. By this time Sir Ernest Cassel was a successful manager in the firm. 
Bischoffsheim occupied his semi-retirement with a glittering social life and with philanthropy, in both of which his wife was his close partner. She was an active and distinguished hostess and was said to have won the favourable regard of Queen Victoria ('The Times', 12 March 1908). The couple gained the society nickname of the 'Bischs', and were known for the splendour of their entertainment at their London home, Bute House, South Audley Street, and their country estate, Manor House, at Stanmore, Middlesex. On these occasions 'Mrs Bischoffsheim played her part as hostess with a distinction and brilliancy which was natural to her; her husband was as unassuming as he was generous' (ibid.). Bischoffsheim also owned a stud farm, The Severals, at Newmarket. 
The couple were generous donors to charity, especially to Jewish charity. 'That he accumulated a considerable fortune is a fact well-known, and even more notable is the generous use to which he put his wealth, of which he devoted large sums to general and communal purposes', noted the 'Jewish Chronicle' after his death. 'No movement of importance has gone forward in the community to which Mr Bischoffsheim did not contribute munificently and readily' ('Jewish Chronicle', 13 March 1908). He was also actively involved on the committee of the Jews' Free School, the council of the Anglo-Jewish Association, the Roumanian Committee, and as a trustee of the Jewish Convalescent Home, Hampstead. He was one of the founders of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, and was the founder and sole owner of the Metropolitan Hospital Ambulances, which were established in various parts of London to provide first aid. The cost of constructing the children's wing of the Jewish Convalescent Home, which was established by his cousin Baroness de Hirsch, was also borne by Bischoffsheim. Together with his wife he founded the Daneswood Sanatorium at Woburn Sands, Bedfordshire, for Jewish consumptives. 
The Bischoffsheims celebrated their golden wedding anniversary in 1906 by giving a total of $100,000 to charity. The largest sum -- $40,000 -- was given to the Imperial Cancer Research Association, $10,000 each to the Daneswood Sanatorium and to King Edward VII's Sanatorium; a further $10,000 went to various Jewish charities. Although the public credit for these philanthropic activities often went to Bischoffsheim alone, the initiative often lay equally with his wife. She was active as vice-president of the Union of Jewish Women, served as a committee member of the Jews' Infant Schools and the Ladies West End Charity and of various hospitals, dispensaries and help societies. Bischoffsheim was also in his later years treasurer of the Twentieth Century League, founder of the Twentieth Century Club, and chairman of the committee formed to raise funds for the enlargement of the Stepney Jewish Free School. 
Bischoffsheim died at Bute House, 75 South Audley Street, Mayfair, London on 11 March 1908 and was buried at the Golders Green cemetery of the West London Synagogue. Survived by his wife, he was described by the 'Jewish Chronicle' as 'an ideal type of the rich Jew. He gathered his vast wealth by means at which the sternest moralist could set no cavil, he took a pride and a pleasure in distributing huge amounts of it with an unsparing hand, an example to Jews of what a rich Jew should be, an example to the world of what a rich Jew can be.' His obituarist added: 'Both in public and private life Mr Bischoffsheim was a man of exceedingly simple manners, and the natural amiability of his disposition was never spoilt by success' ('Jewish Chronicle', 13 March 1908). 


@@@@@


doc= 38344


Ogston, Sir Alexander (1844-1929), surgeon and bacteriologist, was born at Ogston's Court, 84 Broad Street, Aberdeen, on 19 April 1844, the elder son of Francis Ogston (bap. 1803, d. 1887), physician, and his wife, Amelia Cadenhead (died 1852). After attending Archibald Storrie's school and the public school, Aberdeen, Ogston attended Marischal College, Aberdeen (1859-65), where he graduated MB CM in 1865 and MD in 1866. During the winter of 1863-4 he took the winter course at the University of Vienna; he then attended the summer session in Berlin, which was followed finally by two months in Paris. He became fluent in French and German and made friends with a number of continental physicians. After qualifying Ogston made another European visit before returning to Aberdeen, where he entered general practice. Between 1865 and 1873 Ogston was assistant to his father, who by this time was professor of medical jurisprudence at Aberdeen University. On 25 September 1867 Ogston married Mary Jane, daughter of James Hargrave of Stoke Newington, London; they had two sons and two daughters; following her death, he married on 1 August 1877 Isabella Margaret ('b'. 1847/8), daughter of James Matthews, architect; they had four sons and four daughters. 
From 1868 to 1872 Ogston was joint medical officer of health for Aberdeen, and in 1872 he was given charge of the city's smallpox isolation hospital. After being appointed ophthalmic surgeon to Aberdeen Royal Infirmary in 1868 he became junior surgeon (1870) and acting surgeon (1874); he was senior surgeon from 1880 until his resignation in 1898, when he became consulting surgeon. At Aberdeen University he was lecturer in practical ophthalmology (1869) and examiner in medicine (1873-6). Following the retirement of Professor William Pirrie in 1882 Ogston became regius professor of surgery, a post he was to hold for twenty-seven years. 
An early convert to Lister's methods, in 1880-81 Ogston, using a technique devised by H. H. R. Koch, examined for bacteria in more than 100 abscesses. After obtaining samples of pus from some ninety of his patients and examining them microscopically and by staining he concluded that of two main types of cell frequently present in cultures, one always accompanies suppuration and is normally absent in 'cold' cultures. A comprehensive study over two years confirmed that the properties of the 'Staphylococcus' isolated from or tested in cultures of a variety of small mammals were independent of species, justifying the conclusion that 'Staphylococcus' is a specific organism. After Ogston's death William Bulloch acknowledged 'his pioneer bacteriological work on inflammation and suppuration', and noted that 'It is not generally recognized that many of the current doctrines of infection and metastatic generalisation of bacteria really emanated from him' ('The Lancet', 309). 
A tall, commanding figure, Ogston was a slow, deliberate lecturer who never used an unnecessary word or repeated himself. He particularly enjoyed making sly digs at those he considered as being 'armchair theorists'. As a surgeon Ogston was a meticulous planner who clung to the use of the antiseptic spray 'so that before the operation was far advanced the well of the theatre was shrouded in a mist' ('BMJ', 326). Early in his career Ogston had been interested in bone surgery and the operation he devised for genu valgum was practised widely until it was replaced by William Macewen's method. Ogston published widely in medical journals between 1868 and 1902. 
Ogston also took a keen interest in military surgery. In 1885 he set out for Egypt to take part in the war of 1884-5. After service on the hospital ship 'Ganges' he joined the first bearer company and worked with the wounded at Hasheen and Suakin. He was awarded the Egyptian campaign medal and the khedive's bronze star. After his return home Ogston in 1887 took advantage of being vice-president of the surgical section of the British Medical Association to deliver a thorough criticism of the conditions faced in Egypt by the British forces, especially the deficiencies in medical care. His criticisms so offended some sections of the medical establishment that he was not allowed access to the theatre of war in South Africa in 1899-1900, forcing him to appeal directly to Queen Victoria to intercede on his behalf. During his seven months in South Africa, Ogston was cold-shouldered by some of the medical authorities but was well treated by the military. However, his recommendations made after the Egyptian campaign were yet to have any significant effects. 
On his return Ogston was appointed a member of the committee to consider the future organization of the army medical corps. During the First World War he acted as operating surgeon to the Southall Auxiliary Military Hospital, during the winter of 1914-15, before being given charge of a hospital detachment at Belgrade. In 1916 he became operating surgeon to the first British ambulance unit in Italy and worked with the second Italian army. He was awarded the Cavalier order of the Crown of Italy in 1920. His 'Reminiscences of Three Campaigns' was published in 1919. 
Ogston was appointed surgeon-in-ordinary in Scotland to Queen Victoria, Edward VII, and George V. He was created LLD by Glasgow University (1901) and Aberdeen University (1910), and became KCVO in 1912. Ogston died at his home, 252 Union Street, Aberdeen, in the early hours of 1 February 1929. He was survived by two sons and five daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 38346


Farquharson, Joseph (1846-1935), landscape painter, was born in Edinburgh on 4 May 1846, the fourth of at least five sons of Francis Farquharson (1802/3-1876) and his first wife, Alison Mary, 'nee' Ainslie (died 1863). His father, laird of Finzean, Aberdeenshire, and by profession a doctor, in 1864 married his second wife, Mary Anne Girdwood. Francis Farquharson was a keen amateur artist whose own ambitions had been curtailed, on the grounds that painting was neither a dependable nor a lucrative profession. He encouraged his son's artistic talents, allowing Joseph to use his studio at weekends, when he was not attending to his more conventional schooling. 
Joseph Farquharson's professional training began at the Board of Manufacturers School in Edinburgh and the life class run by the Royal Scottish Academy, where, at the age of thirteen, his first painting was exhibited, 'A Study from Nature', inspired by the woods at Finzean in the Dee valley. At the outset of his career he was influenced in his choice of subject and style by the established Scottish landscape painter and friend of the family Peter Graham (1836-1921). From 1880 he spent three or four winters in the Paris atelier of the successful society portraitist Charles Emile Auguste Duran, where he befriended the American painter John Singer Sargent. In the atelier Farquharson worked in oils directly from the life model, concentrating on colour and form. Landscape was not taught but many students visited the forest of Fontainebleau, made famous by the Barbizon school, to practise 'plein air' painting, which required working directly from nature. 
A trip to the Netherlands in 1874 with his fellow Scottish artist George Paul Chalmers was crucial to Farquharson's artistic development. He met the distinguished Hague school painter Jozef Israels, who was much admired in Scotland, and who introduced him to human pathos as an artistic subject. Farquharson was similarly struck by the daily tragedy of life, developing as his signature idiom not the suffering of men but the hardships endured by animals in the highlands. Farquharson's sheep in snowy landscapes, bathed in the glow of a setting sun or more rarely moonlight, secured his lasting fame; large editions of coloured prints published by Frost and Reed indicate that he captured the public's imagination. His trademark subject earned him the sobriquet Frozen Mutton Farquharson. 'The Joyless Winter Day' (1883; Tate collection), bought by the Chantrey Bequest fund for $250, exemplifies the genre: 'on a bleak and barren snow-covered Scotch moor a shepherd is driving home his flock. Muffled in his plaid the man seeks to save himself from the swirl of the eddying snow flakes, while the sheep half blinded by the darkened atmosphere yield ready obedience to his guidance. (Jackson, 154)' To achieve a realistic result Farquharson used 'imitation' sheep, made for him by William Wilson of Monymusk, which could be placed in a setting of his choice. A windowed hut, equipped with wheels and a stove, enabled him to paint in all weathers. By the 1920s he had several of these huts dotted about the Finzean woodlands, allowing him to work on a number of canvases simultaneously and thereby capturing changing light and atmospheric conditions. His desire to render modulated light may stem from his interest in photography; he was preoccupied by shadows, silhouettes, and the Scottish crepuscular 'gloaming'. He often chose the glow of a setting sun to create his desired lighting and atmospheric effects, as suggested by such titles as 'Day's Dying Glow' (1873; Aberdeen Art Gallery), 'The Yellow Sun Declines, and with Long Rays and Shades the Landscape Shines' (1899; Leeds Art Gallery), 'The Shortening Winter's Day is Near a Close' (1903; Lady Lever Art Gallery), 'The Sun had Closed the Winter Day' (1904; Towneley Hall, Burnley), 'When the West with Evening Glows' (1910; Bristol City Museum and Art Gallery), and 'Afterglow' (1912; Aberdeen Art Gallery). 
Farquharson's first work was accepted at the Royal Academy in 1873. Thenceforth he was a constant and prolific exhibitor, sending six works to the annual summer show in 1933. It was a heavy blow when, in 1914, his agent failed to deliver by the due date the five paintings he was entitled to exhibit. It was the only year from 1873 to 1935 that he was not represented. That his works were not considered 'great art' may account for his late admission to the Royal Academy: he was elected an associate in 1900, academician as late as 1915, and senior Royal Academician in 1922. 'When Snow the Pasture Sheets', his diploma work accepted in 1915, illustrates his genuine feeling for nature, which found its fullest expression in the representation of the bleakness of winter. 
Farquharson was aware of his limits, readily referring to himself as a 'commercial' artist; a gillie opined, 'Mr Farquharson's pictures are just grand, they are almost as good as photographs' ('The Times', 16 April 1935). This resemblance did not deter sales; the Fine Art Society of New Bond Street held a show of seventy highland and lowland Scottish scenes in 1893. His snowy sheep were also admired by Walter Sickert, who considered their on-the-spot vividness superior to Gustave Courbet's realist landscapes, though Farquharson was a 'guilty pleasure' (Sitwell, 205-6). From 1885 he made several trips to Egypt in the company of his stepmother, and captured scenes of human activity, in markets and mosques, though even there he could not resist a depiction of sheep: in 'He Drove them Wandering o'er the Sandy Way' (1891) the red heat of the sun, rather than snow, is distressing the flock. 
Aged sixty-nine Farquharson married, at Banchory on 14 September 1914, Violet Evelyn (1888-1971), daughter of James Toner Hay of Blackhall Castle, Banchory, Kincardineshire. In 1918 Farquharson succeeded his elder brother, Robert Farquharson (1836-1918), a physician and Gladstonian Liberal MP for West Aberdeenshire (1880-1906), as laird of Finzean. He managed the estates with the businesslike spirit with which he had conducted his artistic career, and held various offices including those of deputy-lieutenant of Aberdeenshire and chief of the Farquharson clan. In later years his subjects were increasingly restricted to his gardens at Finzean. He died at Finzean on 15 April 1935, and was buried at Birse. His work is held in numerous public collections. Aberdeen Art Gallery honoured Farquharson with an exhibition in 1985, also shown at the Fine Arts Society, to mark the fiftieth anniversary of his death; during his life Farquharson presented several works to the gallery. 'The Silence of the Snows', a film on the life and work of the artist, was commissioned at the same time. 


@@@@@


doc= 38347


Atkinson, Robert (1883-1952), architect, was born on 1 August 1883, at 23 West Street, Wigton, in Cumberland, the son of Robert Atkinson, a joiner and cabinet-maker, and his wife, Elizabeth Johnston. By 1896 his family had moved to Nottingham, and he trained as an architect there, at Nottingham School of Art and at University College, and was articled to the Nottingham architect James Harris before moving to London in 1905 and working in the office of John Belcher. He later became a draughtsman for C. E. Mallows, the country-house architect, and collaborated with R. Frank Atkinson (no relation) and the leading landscape architect T. H. Mawson. Much of his work for them was as a perspectivist, a skill then greatly revered, at which he excelled. In 1907 he set up in practice with George Nott, Charles Gascoyne, and Alick Horsnell. Three years later he was elected ARIBA and in 1912 entered partnership with George Alexander. The following year he was appointed head of the Architectural Association school, London, and in 1915 he was elected FRIBA. 
In his buildings Atkinson showed himself a highly versatile eclectic, using in a distinctively personal manner almost every style at one time or another from American 'Beaux-Arts' to oriental; he believed that by developing traditional styles a modern idiom, suitable for the times, would emerge. It was as a pioneer in cinema architecture that he made his name. His talents for colour, decoration, and interior design, developed in cinemas in Edinburgh, Liverpool, and numerous midland towns, culminated with the Regent Cinema, Brighton (1919-21; 1923; dem. 1974), called by Howard Robertson 'his No. 1 Symphony'. This, the first luxury cinema on the American model in Britain, was one of the most remarkable British buildings of the 1920s: it seated nearly 3000 people and boasted a restaurant, tea-room, roof-garden, promenade, and ballroom. Atkinson's flair for decoration reached its acme in the entrance hall of the Daily Express Building (1931-2), probably the best surviving art deco interior in Britain. 
But Atkinson also rose to the challenge of new building techniques and types: St Catherine's Church, Hammersmith (1922-3; dest. 1940), was the first steel-framed church in England and the Barber Institute of Fine Arts at the University of Birmingham (1935-9) was the first British purpose-built institution for the study of art history. The institute is undoubtedly Atkinson's finest surviving building. It contains an art gallery of international standing, a music auditorium, and the departments of history of art and music of the University of Birmingham. In design and style it triumphantly combines practicality with aesthetic merit, and the essential austerity of its brick and stone exterior is embellished with some excellent period detail. It was deemed by Sir John Summerson to represent 'better than almost any other building (except, perhaps the RIBA in Portland Place) the spirit of English architecture in the 1930s' (J. Chapel and C. Gere, eds., 'The Fine and Decorative Art Collections of Britain and Ireland', 1985, 18). Other inter-war works by Atkinson included: the Gresham Hotel, Dublin (1925-7); the Dome Hall of Music and Corn Exchange, Brighton (1934-5); Wallington Town Hall and Municipal Library (1933-5); and Oslo Court, Regent's Park (1936-7). After the war Atkinson worked on electric power stations at Croydon (1945-51) and Wigan (1947-51). 
Atkinson was well travelled and greatly influenced by the leading Scandinavian and Dutch architects of his day, such as E. G. Asplund and W. M. Dudok. Yet he could accept neither the 'tabula rasa' required by modernism, nor its utopianism, and held rather that the architect should remain an artist. However, in the post-war years, with economic stringency and the predominance of the modern movement, this position became increasingly untenable and he found himself obliged to produce less creative and convincing work, such as the ill-fated government offices, Marsham Street, Westminster (begun in 1949 but radically revised after his death), and the government rehousing scheme, Gibraltar (1946-50). Even in the post-modern architectural climate of the late twentieth century his instinctive and undogmatic attitude to style was not fully appreciated and much of his work remains relatively unknown. 
Atkinson was a distinguished teacher and theoretician. In 1919 he visited the United States to study architectural education and cinema design. Three years later his 'Report on the Education of the Architect in the United States of America' was published by the RIBA. From 1920 to 1929 he was director of education at the Architectural Association and his academic and pedagogical achievements are best represented by the influential 'Theory and Elements of Architecture', published jointly with Hope Bagenal in 1926 (further volumes were intended but never materialized). An inspiring lecturer, he revolutionized the teaching at the Architectural Association, bringing out the best in his colleagues, so that the school began to take a leading place in British architectural education. 
'A reddish-haired, shrewd looking man with sharp features' ('The Times', 29 Dec 1952), Atkinson was forthright and often unconventional in manner. His directness is most memorably enshrined in the reception accorded to Frank Yerbury, secretary of the Architectural Association, who went formally to invite him to join the staff, dressed in a top hat, only to be greeted with the words, 'Why are you wearing that damned thing?' (Yerbury, 120). Yet Howard Robertson, Atkinson's successor as principal of the Architectural Association, recorded that 'when his wisdom hurt, his unfailing humour set all right again and especially when one could go to his room and pass from the subject of architecture to those of the books and antiques that he loved so well' (H. Robertson, 'The Builder', 21). A noted connoisseur of architectural books and a collector of furniture and pictures, Atkinson lent part of his collection of candlesticks to the Victoria and Albert Museum for many years. 
In 1927 Atkinson was awarded an honorary MArch by the University of Liverpool, and the same year was appointed an assessor of the competition for the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, Stratford upon Avon. In 1931 he became an assessor for the RIBA Building, Portland Place, London, and for the city hall, Norwich -- the latter perhaps the foremost public building of the inter-war years. In 1932 he was made a director of the Building Centre. Five years later he and his partner, Alexander Anderson, were awarded the RIBA London architecture bronze medal for Stockleigh Hall flats, Regent's Park, and in 1946 he gained the RIBA architecture bronze medal for the Barber Institute. In 1951 he was appointed OBE. His death occurred unexpectedly, after a short illness, on 26 December 1952 at Beaumont House, Beaumont Street, Marylebone, London. He left a son, John R. Atkinson, but no details are known of his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 38348


Bradley, Katharine Harris (1846-1914), poet, collaborated with her niece 
Katharine Bradley's much older sister Emma Harris Bradley (1835-1889) had married James Robert Cooper (1818-1897), merchant, about 1860, and in 1861 or 1862 their household was joined by Katharine and her widowed mother (who, like the father, died of cancer). Edith Emma Cooper was born to Emma and James Cooper in High Street, Kenilworth, on 12 January 1862. After the birth of a second daughter, Amy, Emma Cooper became an invalid, and Katharine took over from her sister the upbringing and education of her young niece Edith, tending her as a mother. Katharine had similarly been educated at home, by private tutors, but in 1868 attended the College de France in Paris and later (1874) attended Newnham College, Cambridge, for a vacation course studying the classics. The whole family moved to Stoke Bishop, near Bristol, in 1879, and Katharine and her niece Edith attended courses there at University College. They joined the debating society, arguing eloquently for causes like women's suffrage and anti-vivisection (Sturgeon, 20). Katharine was briefly a disciple of Ruskin, being swayed in the 1870s by his moral and aesthetic teachings. She joined his Guild of St George in January 1875, but was ejected in 1877 for her confessed atheism (T. S. Moore and D. C. S. Moore, chapter 7). 
In 1875 Katharine had published her first volume of lyrics, 'The New Minnesinger', under the name Arran Leigh; in 1881 the collaboration with Edith took shape in their joint publication of 'Bellerophon' under the names Arran and Isla Leigh. Their aim was to write great verse tragedies based on historical subjects, calling up the male Elizabethan tradition and eschewing modern realism (they admired Rossetti and Pater): they likened themselves to Beaumont and Fletcher. Dorothy Wordsworth was the only other English woman they ranked as a poet at this time. 
In 1884, with the publication of the verse dramas 'Callirrhoe' and 'Fair Rosamund', their joint pseudonym Michael Field was born. 'He' was hailed by critics (including Robert Browning) as a major new voice: 'a poet of distinguished powers', 'something almost of Shakespearean penetration', 'a fresh gift of song' (Sturgeon, 27-8). The disguise was not penetrated until after the publication of 'Long Ago' (1889), based on fragments of Sappho. Just as Katharine had predicted, 'the report of lady authorship will dwarf and enfeeble our work at every turn' (T. S. Moore and D. C. S. Moore, 6). Calling them his 'two dear Greek women', Browning remained an admirer of their work, as did Swinburne, Wilde, Meredith, and Yeats. But after it was known that Michael Field was two spinsters his works were shunned, until at length they resorted to anonymity and found success in 1905 with 'Borgia'. Lionel Johnson was the only critic ever to praise as they felt they deserved. Nevertheless, they published twenty-seven tragedies, eight volumes of lyrics, and a masque, and had one (prose) play, 'A Question of Memory', briefly staged in London; it was produced by J. T. Grein for the Independent Theatre Society in 1893. 
Their collaboration was close-knit and closely guarded: 'we are closer married [than the Brownings]', they maintained in 'Works and Days' (T. S. Moore and D. C. S. Moore, 16). Katharine (nicknamed Michael) was the short, energetic, vivacious, outgoing partner who loved to study Greek, and who managed their business correspondence; Edith (Henry) was tall, shy, pallid, reflective, of a keener and steadier intellect, more given to Latin than Greek; she kept the accounts. Their economic independence allowed them to remain lifelong worshippers of beauty -- 'life was one of their arts', as one contemporary remarked (Sturgeon, 36). Both women enjoyed continental travel with frequent trips to the art galleries of Europe; 'Sight and Song' (1892), a series of lyrics centred on various paintings by old masters, was one of the fruits. They issued much of their work through private presses in small, beautifully decorated editions, many designed and published by the artists Charles Shannon and Charles Ricketts, editors of 'The Dial', who became their close friends. From about 1885 their partnership had blossomed into a romantic love and they formed a sexual union, at first joyous but later clouded by various guilts. Edith's much-loved father died while walking in the Alps in 1897; his body was not recovered for many months. Edith took the news as a punishment, but he left money that enabled the pair to set up house together for the first time, at Richmond in 1899. Her mother (Katharine's sister) had died in 1889. 
In 1907 Edith turned to the Catholic church, remaining a devotee until her death. Katharine at first feared losing her, but then joined her, choosing for her own confessor their friend Father John Gray, poet and probable homosexual. The two women remained devoted companions until their deaths within nine months of each other, both of cancer. Katharine concealed her own illness while nursing Edith, who died on 13 December 1913 at 1 The Paragon, Petersham Road, Richmond. Katharine published 'Poems of Adoration', Edith's last work, in 1912, and her own, 'Mystic Trees', in 1913. Each was signed Michael Field. After Edith's death, Katharine published early poems by Edith in 'Dedicated' (1914), also slipping in one of her own, 'reverting to the pagan' (Sturgeon, 57): '
In the old accents I will sing, my Glory, my Delight, 

In the old accents, tipped with flame, before we knew the right. 

' Katharine died at The Cottage, Hawkesyard, Armitage, near Rugeley, Staffordshire, on 26 September 1914; she had been dressing to go to mass. Katharine and Edith were buried together in the St Mary Magdalen cemetery, Mortlake, and a marble tomb was made for them by Charles Ricketts in 1926; it has since disappeared, however, possibly because of deterioration or damage. Twenty-nine volumes of the diaries of Katharine Bradley and Edith Cooper ranging over the period from 1888 to 1914 are housed in the British Library: selected excerpts were published in 1933 as 'Works and Days'. Their verse writing is uneven, their plays are marred by an indulgence in archaisms, but many of their lyrics are fine, especially the more passionate love poems. 


@@@@@


doc= 38349


Edith Emma Cooper (1862-1913) to publish verse under the pseudonym Michael Field. The aunt was born in Birmingham on 27 October 1846, the daughter of Charles Bradley (1810-1848), tobacco manufacturer of a Derbyshire family (who died of cancer when she was only two), and his wife, Emma Harris (1812-1868). Katharine became her own spelling of what at her birth had been Catherine (and on her death certificate was Katherine), although her preference for a series of male nicknames and pseudonyms meant that her own name was rarely used. 


@@@@@


doc= 38350


Collcutt, Thomas Edward (1840-1924), architect, was born on 16 March 1840 in Jericho, Oxford, the son of James Collcutt, servant at St John's College, Oxford, and his wife, Emma, 'nee' Blake. He was educated at the Oxford diocesan school, Cowley, Oxford. Articled to R. W. Armstrong of London in 1856, he later worked in the office of Mills and Murgatroyd of Manchester, in G. E. Street's office, and in the Brighton town surveyor's office (1867-9), before establishing his own practice in the City of London, initially with H. Woodzell. In 1871 the partnership was placed first in the Blackburn Free Library and Museum competition, a 'mildly Gothic' building with 'touches in the direction of the Arts and Crafts' (Pevsner, 'North Lancashire', 1969, 64), indicative of Collcutt's way ahead. Exhibiting at the Royal Academy in 1873 from 12 Finsbury Place South, by 1875 Collcutt had moved his office to 17 Essex Street, Strand, and was engaged on houses at Mill Hill. He built a house for himself and another for a doctor at Ravenscourt Park, Hammersmith: 'inexpensive domestic work marked by intuitive taste and a cultured individuality' (Adams, 24). Other houses followed, at Sheen and elsewhere. About 1878 he moved to a large, red brick house, again of his own design, at 36 Bloomsbury Square (dem.). The sanitary engineer George Jennings introduced him to terracotta, which he first used in houses for Jennings in Nightingale Lane, Clapham. Collcutt's reputation as a house architect caused him to be invited to design one for the 1878 Paris Exhibition's street of houses. Picturesque and half-timbered, his houses were found comfortable to live in and easy to work. In the 1890s and 1900s he designed additional buildings for Mill Hill School and boarding-houses for Eton College. 
It was, however, the success of his powerfully original design in local stone in the Wakefield town hall competition (1877) that put Collcutt in the first rank of English architects. An assiduous competitor, so keen was Collcutt to win at Wakefield that he put in two designs, one in Gothic, the other in the Queen Anne style. Street, the assessor, recognizing that they were by the same hand, placed the Queen Anne design first, and told the promoters 'that if they liked to have the other that was first also' ('RIBA Journal', 3rd ser., 15, 1907-8, 10). In 1887 Collcutt was successful in a competition of six architects invited to design the Imperial Institute in South Kensington, commemorating Queen Victoria's jubilee. Important commissions multiplied, and in 1890 he was engaged on the English Opera House exterior (1889-93; later the Palace Theatre) at Cambridge Circus for D'Oyly Carte, the Bechstein (later Wigmore) Hall, and the City Bank, Ludgate Hill. Characteristic in all these buildings was his employment of a pale buff terracotta of larger size and more complex modelling than that which Waterhouse made fashionable: Phillips's China and Glass Emporium (later Waring's), 175-181 Oxford Street, was the precursor. Walter Smith was Collcutt's modeller, Doulton his manufacturer. The 1890s were the outstanding period of his work, comprising 'the delicacy and minuteness of detail and ornament combined with the largeness and simplicity of form which are the outstanding features of his designs' ('RIBA Journal', 3rd ser., 31, 1923-4, 667). In the lavish Lloyd's Registry of Shipping, Fenchurch Street (1900), his use of Portland stone produced broader, bolder features in a baroque version of arts and crafts. 
Soon after the erection of the Savoy Hotel, D'Oyly Carte had employed Collcutt on some interiors, followed in 1905 by an extension to the Strand, faced in Doulton's Carrara blocks of creamy matt-glazed terracotta designed to cope with London's sooty climate, an example of Collcutt's care for the practical; he employed him again for the extension on the river front (1910). Collcutt designed furniture as a hobby, and interior design and furniture became an important side of his practice. A notable interior in 1894 was the opulent King's Hall in the Holborn Restaurant (dem.). He also worked for the Peninsular and Oriental Line, designing music saloons for several liners in 1896-7, suites in liners subsequently, pavilions at international exhibitions, and hotels at Algeciras and Colombo (1912). In 1904 Gloucester House, a gabled block of flats in green and white striped faience, broke the skyline on Piccadilly and Park Lane; the John Lewis store, Oxford Street, however, was reckoned a failure. 
Collcutt, like his sometime master Street, was ferociously energetic in his daily office work. 'Always the most practical of constructors' ('RIBA Journal', 3rd ser., 31, 1923-4, 667), he employed an instructor two or three times a week to expound construction to his staff, which included L. Stokes and J. S. Gibson. From 1908 he was in partnership with Stanley Hinge Hamp. 'Singularly simple and direct in the statement of his views', Collcutt 'gave a lead and developed a rendering of the movement of the day, characteristic of his own genius... it was a thoroughly English rendering of the Renaissance' (ibid., 668). He had, said Beresford Pite, the capacity to design charming buildings 'which displayed extraordinary vigour and grip, and that peculiar power to design Gothic works as they really were supposed to be' ('RIBA Journal', 3rd ser., 15, 1907-8, 11), work that evoked enthusiasm among the younger generation of architects. Marked by successful composition and grouping, his elevations were ruled by contrasting lines of subdivision and by carefully considered ornamentation. Collcutt received the RIBA gold medal in 1902. He was much concerned with professional questions, such as the proper management of competitions (he organized a petition in 1876 in favour of boycotting them unless there were a professional assessor), and he was intensely interested in architectural education. A man of innate modesty, though of strong opinions, he was reluctant to become president of the RIBA in 1906, but he was seen as 'a model of integrity' (ibid., 14, 1906-7, 10), his 'wisdom of judgment and sympathy with earnest effort... [endearing] him to all who knew him' (ibid., 31, 1923-4, 667). He was re-elected for a second term in 1907. Among the issues he brought forward was the idea of moving the Charing Cross railway terminus to the south bank of the Thames, and constructing a street bridge with arcaded buildings. In 1906 he was one of eight architects invited by the London county council to design facades for Kingsway, but finding the conditions unacceptable he withdrew. Anxious to improve London, particularly in terms of housing for the working classes, he urged replacing slums by towers of flats eight or ten storeys high, and published a small book on this theme in 1923. 
Collcutt was an impressive figure, bearded, with high forehead and aquiline nose, genial in personality, with many friends. He formed a notable collection of clocks. On 30 April 1868 he married a Londoner, Emily Green or Tagg (1844-1906), and they had two sons and four daughters. At the time of the 1881 census they were supported in Bloomsbury Square by a governess, a cook, and three other young women servants. Later they also lived at West Lodge, Totteridge, Hertfordshire (with stables and coachman's lodge), where Collcutt had built several houses. He died a widower at Grosvenor House Nursing Home, Southampton, on 7 October 1924. After a funeral service four days later he was buried at Totteridge parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 38351


Farquhar, Horace Brand, Earl Farquhar (1844-1923), financier and politician, was born at Goldings, near Hertford, on 19 May 1844, the fifth of six sons of Sir Minto Townsend-Farquhar, second baronet (1809-1865), MP for Hertford, and his wife, Erica Mackay, daughter of the seventh Lord Reay. Farquhar came of a distinguished but impoverished Scottish family, members of which had, like other families from north-east Scotland, travelled to England in search of fame and fortune under the Hanoverians. His great-grandfather Walter Farquhar had been physician to the prince regent and was created a baronet in 1796; Walter's younger son, Sir Robert Townsend-Farquhar, grandfather of Horace Farquhar, was the first 'and probably the most distinguished' British governor of Mauritius, from 1810 to 1821 ('The Times', 31 Aug 1923). 
Details of Horace Farquhar's education remain obscure; he did not, like his older brother Robert, attend the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich nor, like his younger brother, Gilbert, Eton College. Formal obituaries say that at an early age he joined Forbes, Forbes & Co., a business dealing with the East Indian trade, belonging to the Forbes family, old friends and compatriots of the Farquhars; a contemporary noted, however, that he started his career in the 1860s as 'an impecunious clerk in one of the Government offices' before joining the house of Forbes (Huntly, 168-70). 
Handsome, self-confident, and ambitious, Farquhar rose to become manager of Forbes, Forbes & Co. According to one source his rapid rise in business and society -- he was introduced to the prince of Wales's circle by the Forbeses -- was due as much to his physical charms, skilfully exploited with both sexes, as to his undoubted shrewdness and ability to make money (Hyde, 157). He left Forbes to join the private banking house of Sir Samuel Scott, bart & Co., in which he became a partner and a substantial shareholder. Farquhar enjoyed a long-standing friendship with his fellow countryman Lord Macduff (later the sixth earl of Fife), who sold much of his Scottish estate and invested the proceeds in Scott's bank. In 1889 Fife married Louise, the third daughter of the prince and princess of Wales, and was elevated to a dukedom; he also was invited in that year to become vice-chairman of the British South Africa Company (BSAC) the company largely created by Cecil Rhodes and chartered by the British government in 1889 to administer and develop the territories north of South Africa. At Fife's suggestion Farquhar was invited to join the board of the company. Farquhar's presence on the board of BSAC 'did not enhance its moral tone' because he was also a chairman of (and a considerable shareholder in) the Rothschild-backed Exploration Company which was seeking mining concessions in BSAC territory (Galbraith, 117). Farquhar appeared unaware of, or ignored, the potential conflicts of interest which led others to turn down positions in both companies. In 1896, in the wake of the Jameson raid, he was obliged to resign from the board of BSAC, as were others too closely identified with the interests of Cecil Rhodes. 
By 1890 Farquhar had secured for himself considerable wealth and position in the City, where his brother Granville was by that time senior partner of the stockbrokers Steer, Lawford & Co. In 1894 Horace played a leading part in the merger of the Scott bank with Parrs Banking Company and joined the board of the enlarged Parrs. On 5 January 1895 he married Emilie (died 1922), 'nee' Packe, Lady Scott, formerly married to Sir Edward H. Scott, of the Scott bank and a widow since 1883. 
Marriage may have helped what was by this time a burgeoning political career. Farquhar had been elected a member of the first London county council in 1889, representing the Municipal Reformers of Marylebone, but he was disappointed in 1892 by the reward of a baronetcy rather than the peerage for which he had hoped. In 1895 he entered the House of Commons as MP for Marylebone, which he represented until 1898, when he was raised to the peerage as Baron Farquhar of Marylebone; he was succeeded in the House of Commons by his stepson, Sir Samuel Scott. When the prince of Wales became Edward VII in 1901, Farquhar was appointed master of the household, a position he held until 1907. He was then lord-in-waiting, until 1915, and finally served as lord steward of the household until 1922. He was created a viscount in 1917 and an earl in the dissolution honours late in 1922, a few months after the death of his wife. Despite, or perhaps because of, all his wealth and honours and his generous hospitality both in London and at his Norfolk home, Castle Rising, a contemporary noted that he was far from popular. 
Early in 1923 Farquhar was dismissed by Bonar Law from the treasurership of the Conservative and Unionist Party after he refused to pay for some of the election expenses with moneys that he claimed had been given to the coalition rather than to the Conservative Party. It seemed that he had handed over a large sum of money to Lloyd George. Farquhar died on 30 August 1923 at his London home, 7 Grosvenor Square. He was buried at Bromley Hill cemetery, Kent, on 11 September. He left no heir and his titles died with him. His will provided for many legacies, including some to members of the royal family with whom he had been so intimately connected for so long. His estate was assessed for probate at $400,000, but the subsequent revelation of huge debts meant there was nothing to distribute and that he was an undisclosed bankrupt. 


@@@@@


doc= 38353


Gomme, Sir (George) Laurence (1853-1916), public servant and folklorist, was born on 18 December 1853 at 3 Cecil Street, Stepney, London, the second of ten children of William Laurence Gomme (1828-1887), a civil engineer, and his wife, Mary Annie, 'nee' Hall (1831-1921). On 31 March 1875 he married Alice Merck (1853-1938) ['see 'Gomme, Alice Bertha], the daughter of Charles Merck, a tailor; they had seven sons, two of whom were killed in the First World War. Their third son, Arthur Allan Gomme, became a librarian and historian of technology. 
Educated at the City of London School, Gomme started work at the age of sixteen with a railway company, and later moved to Fulham district board of works. In 1873 he joined the Metropolitan Board of Works, whose functions were subsumed by the newly created London county council (LCC) in 1889. Gomme then remained with the council until retiring through ill health in 1914. He soon made his mark, becoming in 1893 statistical officer, effectively the head of policy formulation and development. In addition to providing information to council committees (council statistics were soon enlarged and improved, setting standards that other authorities followed), the office dealt with such matters as private bill legislation (important when the council was seeking to extend its responsibilities) and submissions to government inquiries. Gomme provided influential evidence, for example, to support the council's contention that there was an inadequate and uneven provision of workmen's trains, which in turn led to haphazard patterns in suburban growth, a significant issue at a time when London's population was increasing rapidly. 
In October 1900, following an open competition, Gomme became clerk to the council, its chief administrative officer, at an annual salary of $2000. The council had already developed a dense committee structure with committee secretaries reporting to the clerk. During the 1890s the council had assumed new responsibilities, particularly in housing and tramways, adding to its original roles in such fields as highways and drainage; staff numbers grew from 3300 in 1890 to 6300 in 1898 and nearly 12,000 in 1904. In that year it became the education authority for London and staff numbers nearly tripled: to supervise the transition Gomme himself assumed the additional duties of secretary to the education committee until 1908. He wished to make London's administration a model for the nation, and contemporaries record the zest with which he went about his task. 
Gomme described his recreations as 'change of work'. History and folklore, 'the scientific study of the survivals of archaic beliefs, customs, and traditions in modern times' (quoted in Dorson, 'British Folklorists', 225), became a lifelong passion -- his wife was also a distinguished folklorist. This was not just antiquarianism: he firmly believed in the evidence of continuity in institutions, thus linking the present with the past, and saw clear connections between his studies and his official duties. In his view it was important to devolve governmental functions to local authorities, and he drew extensively on historical experience to provide examples. This enhanced role called for dedication among staff; and he looked forward to a unified municipal civil service as a branch of the national civil service. Later, in a development of these thoughts, he saw 'the civilisation of our future [as lying] in our cities' ('LCC Staff Gazette', March 1914). 
From his official position Gomme was able to influence the fate of old buildings, about which he was deeply knowledgeable. They were tangible evidence of the past and an enrichment of the present, and he was one of a growing number who deplored the recent destruction of so many fine examples in central London. He helped the council secure legal powers to purchase threatened buildings (1898) and he was also involved in securing the participation of the council in, and its subsequent assumption of responsibility for, the 'Survey of London'. (He wrote the historical sections of part 1, 'Lincoln's Inn Fields', of volume 3, 'The Parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields'.) Gomme was also instrumental in persuading the council to assume responsibility for the commemorative (blue) plaque scheme (1901). 
Gomme's historical writings, especially the books on London, and his works on folklore were highly regarded by his contemporaries, although to us they seem at times overlaid by outdated theorizing. But his contribution remains significant and, in folklore particularly, he is in the front rank as a collector and classifier. He was a prolific writer: his bibliography includes fifteen books, several more written jointly or edited, and some forty articles in learned journals. Laurence Gomme, as he was known, was a justice of the peace and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, the Royal Statistical Society, the Anthropological Institute, and other learned societies. He lectured at the London School of Economics, was a founder member (1878) and sometime secretary and president of the Folk-Lore Society, and joint originator of the 'Victoria History of the Counties of England'. He was knighted in 1911. He was of medium height and slender build and in disposition said to be amiable, cheerful, and receptive to ideas; a strong personality, he could sometimes become very attached to a particular point of view. He died on 23 February 1916, aged sixty-two, from pernicious anaemia, at his country home, The Mound, in Long Crendon, Buckinghamshire, and was cremated on 1 March at Golders Green crematorium, in Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 38354


Hill, Diana (d. 1844), miniature painter, of unknown parentage, was a pupil of the miniature painter Jeremiah Meyer. In 1775 she exhibited three miniatures at the Society of Artists and was presented with an award. At that time she lived in Angel Court, Great Windmill Street, London. Between 1777 and 1798 she exhibited miniatures, mostly of ladies, at the Royal Academy. On 1 February 1781, at St Mary's, St Marylebone, she married Haydock Hill, and in 1785 exhibited at the academy under her married name three works, of which two were flower pieces. On 21 September of that year the court of directors of the East India Company gave her permission to work in India as a portrait painter -- her mother-in-law, Elizabeth Hill, and T. C. Blanchenhagen, merchant, being her approved securities. 
On Diana Hill's arrival in Calcutta in 1786 the miniaturist Ozias Humphry noted that she was 'a pretty widow with two children' who possessed great merit, came with powerful recommendations, and whose brother-in-law John Hill was highly placed in the East India Company's Bengal civil service (Foster, 39). The attention and patronage that she received caused Humphry much alarm: he would 'rather have had all the male painters in England landed in Bengal than a single woman' (ibid.). An early commission came from William Larkins, accountant-general at Calcutta, whose miniature (BL OIOC, reproduced Foster, pl. 8c) is signed 'Hill, 1786'. Three of her portraits, painted in India and all signed and dated, were shown at the exhibition of miniatures held at South Kensington Museum in 1865. These included a portrait of Sarah Stackhouse (priv. coll.), wife of General Macleod, stylishly dressed in a tartan jacket and a headdress of high feathers and ribbons, of whom Mrs Hill painted another, whole-length miniature showing her seated in a landscape (priv. coll.; reproduced Foster, pl. 8d). Like the portrait of Larkins this shows, in the treatment of the hair and the large eyes, the influence of Meyer. The flattering images that her portraits -- usually oval, in watercolour on ivory -- display of their sitters indicate that Diana Hill's success was due not only to her social connections in India. On 7 November 1788 the painter Thomas Daniell wrote to Humphry, who had returned to England: 'Mrs. Hill is still making handsome faces, in the house you lived in last in Calcutta' (Foster, 40). In that month, however, Diana Hill gave up painting professionally when on 15 November she married Lieutenant Thomas George Harriott, of the 1st native infantry, then acting as brigade major, 3rd brigade. A miniature of her second husband (V&A) is signed 'D.H. 1791', her marriage perhaps indicating the reason for the change in her signature. Her miniature of an unknown, dark-complexioned, perhaps Indian girl in a large, almost theatrical mob cab (V&A; reproduced 'British Portrait Miniatures', pl. 77) is an intriguing portrait in which the effects of the artist's style, together with the sitter's Western dress, led to her being described as 'evidently half-caste' (Foskett, 528). In 1792 Sophia Dietz was given permission by the East India Company to join her sister in Bengal. After serving in Fatehgarh and Dinajpur, Harriott resigned in 1806 and returned to England, presumably with his wife and family, and resided at West Hall, Mortlake, Surrey, where he died in 1817, aged sixty-four. Diana Hill died at Twickenham, Middlesex, on 10 February 1844. Of her two sons with Thomas Harriott, William Henry Harriott (died 1839) became a clerk in the War Office, a watercolour painter, and a friend of Cotman. Examples of his work are in the British Museum and in Bridport Art Gallery. With his wife, Sibella Mary, 'nee' Hunter, he had a daughter, Sibella Christina, who also became an artist. 


@@@@@


doc= 38356


Terry, Edward O'Connor (1844-1912), actor and theatre proprietor, was born on 10 March 1844 at 42 Gibson Street, Lambeth, London, the son of John Terry, a painter and actor, and his wife, Emblen Ann, 'nee' Middleton. Terry was already an experienced amateur actor when he swiftly quit a commercial career to appear professionally, on a 'stage' made from 9 inch planks laid upon trestles, at the Mechanics' Institute, Christchurch, Hampshire, on 15 August 1863 with the dishonest manager of an impoverished 'fit-up' company. Minor roles at a series of provincial theatres followed. In 1866-7 he appeared in Charles Calvert's company at the Prince's Theatre, Manchester, where his parts included one of the three sisters in 'Macbeth', the Clown in 'Antony and Cleopatra', and the Second Citizen in 'Julius Caesar', and received some acclaim from the 'Morning Post'. 
This led to Terry's London debut, at the Surrey Theatre on 14 September 1867, as Finnikin Fusselton in 'A Cure for the Fidgets'. Thereafter he played at the Lyceum and, from 1868, the Strand, taking leading parts in burlesques and comedies, before joining John Hollingshead's company at the Gaiety Theatre in 1876. Here, one of the celebrated Gaiety Quartet, with Nellie Farren, Edward W. Royce, and Kate Vaughan, he was to 'take burlesque to its highest peak' (Pope, 164). After leaving the Gaiety in 1885, and a period touring in the provinces as Montague Joliffe in A. W. Pinero's 'In Chancery' and Chevalier Walkinshaw in the same author's 'The Rocket', Terry returned to London and leased the Olympic Theatre. He opened there on 16 December 1886 as Mr Chuffey in 'The Churchwarden', which he had adapted from a German farce. 
Terry opened his own 800-seat theatre, Terry's, in the Strand, London, on 17 October 1887. Theatre and fittings were designed by Walter Emden to reassure the public after the recent destruction by fire of the Paris Opera Comique and the theatre in Exeter. There, 'the most amusing theatre in London' ('The Times', 3 April 1912), Terry was to earn his fortune, primarily by productions of plays by Pinero. 'Sweet Lavender', which opened on 21 March 1888, with Terry as Dick Phenyl, ran originally for 670 performances and is said to have earned him more than $50,000. Among other successes, Terry's saw the first legitimate production of Frances Hodgson Burnett's own adaptation of 'Little Lord Fauntleroy', on 15 May 1888. The theatre closed on 8 October 1910, shortly after Terry had sold it. It was subsequently converted to a picture house, and was pulled down in 1923. 
Terry took productions abroad, notably to Australia, Canada, and South Africa, as well as making many provincial tours. His last runs in London were in 1909-10 at His Majesty's Theatre, as Crabtree in 'The School for Scandal' and as Uncle Gregory in W. G. Robertson's 'Pinkie and the Fairies'. He played the Club Servant in the royal command performance of Bulwer-Lytton's 'Money' on 17 May 1911 at Drury Lane, and Brown in T. W. Robertson's 'David Garrick' at the gala performance at His Majesty's Theatre on 27 June 1911. 
Terry was regarded as an 'incomparable eccentric character' (Archer, 151) and as a 'past master of the art of comic despair' ('South African News', 24 Jan 1903). His voice was particularly memorable, 'with the shrill staccato notes of a piccolo which would suddenly run down through a whole gamut of strange sounds into the deep grunt of a bassoon' ('The Times', 3 April 1912). He was kind, genial, and a keen churchman. In 1889 he lectured to the church congress at Cardiff on the tensions between stage and church. He was treasurer of the Royal General Theatrical Fund between 1896 and 1911, when he became chairman. In the 1880s and 1890s he was a member of the Richmond board of guardians and, for a period, a member of the Barnes school board. From 1897 until his death he was the ruling councillor of the Barnes Habitation of the Primrose League. He was a churchwarden at Barnes parish church and held office in various other local organizations. He was a council member or trustee of a range of national as well as local charities, and became a magistrate for Surrey in 1906. Prominent in freemasonry, he was in 1889 the grand treasurer of all England. He was one of the founders, in 1898 at Barnes, of the Edward Terry Lodge. 
Terry's first wife, Ellen Dietz ('c'.1849-1897), whom he had married in 1870 and with whom he had a son and (probably) two daughters, died in 1897. On 24 October 1904 he married Florence Edgecombe, 'nee' Rendle, the widow of Sir Augustus Harris, the one-time lessee of Drury Lane Theatre. Terry died from cancer on 2 April 1912 at his home, Priory Lodge, Church Road, Barnes, and was buried on 6 April in Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 38357


Williams, Edward (1781-1855), landscape painter, was born in Lambeth, London, and baptized on 13 October 1781 at St Mary, Lambeth, the son of Edward Williams, an engraver, and his wife, Mary Ward ('b'. 'c'.1764). 'The Coke and Perkin' (after John Hamilton Mortimer) from Chaucer's 'Canterbury Tales', published by J. R. Smith in 1787, shows his father to have been a competent engraver, but he was also an irresponsible roisterer, whose wife ran off with one of her many lovers, leaving the young Edward to the care of his maternal uncle, the engraver and painter James Ward. Williams was not strictly a pupil of Ward, but some examples of his work demonstrate the influence of mezzotints by the latter, after the paintings of George Morland, who had married Williams's aunt Ann Ward. Williams was briefly placed with a carver and gilder, but soon began work as a picture maker, executing copies in the manner of the Dutch school of Ruisdael and Hobbema, later apparent in the strong colours and stormy skies, the watermills and woodland glades of his established style. Early original work by Williams is not well documented and was rarely signed. If present, 'E. Wms.' was his most usual form of signature. Typical subjects included river and heath scenes, frequently painted under moonlight, which earned him the sobriquet of Moonlight Williams. 
Edward Williams married Ann Hildebrandt (1780-1851) (who was of German-Jewish descent) on 12 February 1806 at St Pancras Church, Pancras Road, London. They had six sons, who all became successful landscape painters, three of them adopting different names to avoid confusion: Henry John Boddington (1811-1865), who used the maiden name of his wife, and Sidney Richard Percy (1821-1886) and Arthur Gilbert (1819-1895), who worked under their last forename. The other three sons, Edward Charles (1807-1881), George Augustus (1814-1901), and Alfred Walter (1824-1905), retained their surname. The son and daughter of George Augustus were also painters: Walter Williams (1835-1906) and Caroline F. Williams (1836-1921). All worked in the family manner, showing at the Royal Academy and other London and provincial exhibitions. A reviewer of the British Institution exhibition noted that 'The Williamses (whose name is legion) have contributed a vast number of paintings of much merit' ('Observer', 6 Feb 1859). 
In 1846 Edward Williams moved from 100 Cromer Street, Brunswick Square, in the artists' quarter of London to 32 Castelnau Villas, a new house in suburban Barnes, Surrey; he was joined in this area by his six sons. Old Williams (as he was sometimes known) undoubtedly repeated popular themes, but some of his most authoritative work was produced late in his career. 'On the Thames: Looking towards Putney' (exh. National Institution 1850) led one reviewer to observe that he 'never could have painted more effectively... the vapoury atmosphere and clouded sky in this picture is perfect, and not less true is the manner in which the [moon] light is broken on the trees, water, and near objects' ('Art Journal', 12, 1850, 138). 
Edward Williams died at his home in Barnes on 24 June 1855 and was buried in the Old Barnes cemetery. An obituarist noted that 'This agreeable painter... has trained what must almost be called a school of landscape painters in his sons... whenever family groups of painters are mentioned the name of Mr. E. Williams must reappear' ('The Athenaeum', 14 July 1855). 'Landscape with Figures by Moonlight' (1826) and 'Village Forge -- Moonlight' (1847) by Williams are in the Tate collection, and 'The Mill' is owned by the Castle Museum, Norwich, one of various provincial collections that hold examples of his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 38360


Barlow, James (1767-1839), obstetric surgeon, was born at Croichley Fold Farm, Hawkshaw, Lancashire, the son of William Barlow (died 1815) and his wife, Catherine Taylor (died 1768); they also had a daughter, Catherine, and an elder son, John. He was a descendant of the Barlows and the Taylors of Turton, though he claimed to be the descendant of Sir Alexander Barlow. The 'Palatine Note-Book' for 1884 mentions that Barlow discovered and acquired a portrait of Sir Alexander painted in 1616. After training at Manchester he may have attended St Bartholomew's Hospital since he later dedicated his major publication to three well-known teachers at the hospital. About 1790 Barlow, a Roman Catholic, began to practise in Chorley, Lancashire. In 1793 he was called to see Jane Foster in Blackrod, where he performed a caesarean section on Wednesday, 27 November 1793. This was the first such operation in Britain where the mother survived. In this particular case the patient lived a long life, dying at the age of seventy-six in October 1829. During this operation Barlow's assistant, a local general practitioner, fainted and Barlow had to rely on a female attendant to assist in the procedure. Barlow went on to perform a further three such operations in his career. Barlow's triumph was referred to during a debate in 1798 between two well-known Manchester doctors, John Hull and William Simmons. Hull, although a champion of the caesarean section, attempted to minimize the importance of Barlow's achievement, claiming that Barlow only removed the foetus from the peritoneum. Hull's remarks may have been motivated by the fact that Barlow's estranged wife, Elizabeth Winstanley, was Hull's sister-in-law. 
After the breakdown of his marriage (which lasted only a matter of months), Barlow established himself in practice at Blackburn in 1795. He never married again but in 1812 adopted a son, James Barlow Stewardson Sturdy, who later became the mayor of Blackburn. Barlow inherited $12,000 cash and significant valuable property on the death of his father in 1815. He also built up a lucrative practice. 
Barlow was the first to suture the uterus after caesarean section. He strongly advocated the use of callipers for pelvimetry, and described various degrees of pelvic deformity and gave indications of the mode of delivery in each case; he designed and described the sound, a polished solid steel instrument. Barlow published 'Essays on Surgery and Midwifery: with Practical Observation and Select Cases' in 1822, and 'An Address to Medical and Surgical Pupils on the Studies and Duties of their Profession' in 1839. Barlow died at his home, Spring House, Blackburn, on 20 August 1839 and was buried in Blackburn parish church; no tombstone exists. Some manuscript material of Barlow's exists at Blackburn Library and two of his portraits and a miniature at Blackburn Art Gallery. Copies of the portraits are also held at the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 38363


Yeoman, Antonia (1907-1970), cartoonist and illustrator, was born on 24 July 1907 in Esk, Queensland, Australia (she took the name Antonia when she became a Roman Catholic in her early twenties, influenced by the author R. T. Regent, a family friend). She was the eldest child of Arthur Henry Thompson (1855-1911), an English sheep farmer and local agent for his father's trading company, shipping farming equipment from Liverpool to Australia. Her mother, Ida May Cooke (1882-1955), was an Australian head teacher from Brisbane, Queensland. The family visited England on holiday in 1911, staying with relatives in West Kirby in the Wirral, Cheshire, where her brother, 
In 1937 Harold and Antonia formed a partnership producing cartoons as Anton (Harold suggested the name, as it sounded foreign and sophisticated), selling the first cartoons under this name to 'Night & Day' (1937) and 'Punch' (26 January 1938) -- though the Antons in the 'Evening Standard' (1939) were entirely Harold's work. 'As my line drawing was better than his and his observation and sense of form better than mine, we decided to form a partnership' (Antonia in 'Illustrated'). Normally Antonia blocked out the drawing and her brother added the detail and what both of them called 'the squiggly bits', their trademark shading. However, interviewed in 1955 Antonia said: 'After all these years we have reached the point where each of us can produce an 'Anton' and defy even the closest observer to say which of us drew it' (ibid.). At first they shared a flat in Earls Court, London, trading as Botterill Artists (Antonia still signing herself Beryl Botterill Thompson at this stage) and then briefly moved together to the south of France (1938-9), still drawing for London publications. During the Second World War Harold trained at St Alfred's, Hove, Sussex, and served in the Royal Navy as a captain of minesweepers and convoy escort vessels in the Atlantic and along the British coast and was twice mentioned in dispatches. Antonia, meanwhile, worked in a canteen in Bognor Regis, Sussex, and continued to draw Anton cartoons. Here she met her husband, John Richard Harding Yeoman (1916-1988), a former teacher serving in the army, and married him three weeks later, on 29 January 1941; they had no children. Shortly after this (17 October 1942) Harold married a Wren, Mary Kateley (1918-1989), whom he had met in Plymouth; they had four children. After the war brother and sister teamed up again to produce numerous cartoons under their joint pseudonym for 'Punch', 'Lilliput', 'London Opinion', 'Men Only', and others. Harold, meanwhile, also worked in a creative capacity for Greenly's advertising agency and when this was taken over by the Lonsdale-Hands Organisation in 1954 he became creative marketing director and then senior marketing director of the company. This work left him less time for drawing -- though he continued to write short stories for the 'Daily Herald' and others; designed posters, showcards, and advertisements (for among others Orient Shipping Line and Northern Aluminium); and wrote a book on marketing, 'Product Strategy' (1962). In consequence Antonia took over the name herself, and by 1949 the Anton cartoons were entirely hers. They often included 'elegant men-about-town, superior spivs and the middle classes' ('Daily Telegraph', 1 July 1970) and were drawn, usually in black and white, with Gillot 290 nibs and Indian ink with a distinctive 'squiggle' technique to create half-tone effects. As well as in 'Punch', they appeared in 'Tatler', the 'New Yorker', the 'Daily Telegraph' ('Way of the world' feature), and 'Private Eye'. Two books of the jointly drawn cartoons were published: 'Anton's Amusement Arcade' (1947) and 'Low Life and High Life' (1952). Antonia also drew a series of popular Anton advertisements for Moss Bros. and others, including Simpson's Services Club, Morley Outfitters, and Saxone Shoes. In addition she illustrated seventeen books including works by Virginia Grahame and Denys Parsons. The only female member of 'Punch''s Toby Club, she was also -- in 1966 -- the first woman to be elected to the Chelsea Arts Club (her husband -- a local councillor, a governor of both the Chelsea School of Art and the Royal College of Art, and secretary of the Council for the Preservation of Rural England -- was already a member). In addition she served on the council of the Artists' General Benevolent Institution for many years. Anton cartoons are held in the collections of the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Cartoon Art Trust, and the University of Kent Cartoon Centre. 
Antonia was about 5 feet 2 inches tall with short dark hair and brown eyes with wide owl-like spectacles. She walked stiffly as a result of tuberculosis of the spine and later arthritis. She died at St George's Hospital, London, on 30 June 1970. Harold Underwood Thompson was about 5 feet 8 inches tall, of stocky build, and usually clean shaven. In later life he moved to Wells, Somerset. He died in Taunton Hospital, Somerset, on 21 November 1996, was cremated in Bath the following week, and interred in St Thomas's Church, Wells, Somerset, with his wife who had predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 38365


Hourani, Albert Habib (1915-1993), historian and Arabist, was born on 31 March 1915 in Didsbury, south Manchester, the fifth of the six children of Fadlo Hourani (1871-1960), a textile exporter, and his wife, Soumaiya (1881-1943), daughter of the Revd Yuakim and Khazma Racy. His parents were both born in Marj 'Ayyun in what is now south Lebanon and his father emigrated to England in 1891. 
Hourani was educated at a primary school founded by his father and at Mill Hill School. He won a scholarship to Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1933 where he obtained a first in philosophy, politics, and economics. After graduation in 1936 he used a small grant from the college to visit Lebanon where he obtained a job teaching British and Middle Eastern history at the American University of Beirut. 
Returning home in 1939, Hourani was recruited to the newly organized Foreign Office research department run by Arnold Toynbee and Hamilton Gibb. He was sent to the Middle East in 1942 on a mission which culminated in his official report, 'Great Britain and Arab nationalism' (1943). In 1943 he became assistant adviser on Arab affairs to the British minister of state resident in Cairo, writing a series of papers which later formed part of his first two books, 'Syria and Lebanon: a Political Essay' (1946) and 'Minorities in the Arab World' (1947). The ambivalence which he felt towards the Arab nationalism of that period and his firsthand experience of the key role played by influential urban families in Arab politics remained important themes throughout his scholarly life. 
In November 1945 Hourani joined the Jerusalem section of the Arab office, which had been set up to promote the Palestine Arab case. He testified with great skill before the Anglo-American committee of inquiry in February 1946. He did similar work for the Arab office in London from May 1946 to June 1947 before resigning on the grounds that he found this type of political propaganda uncongenial. 
At the encouragement of Hamilton Gibb, Hourani returned to Oxford in early 1948 as a research fellow at Magdalen College and then, in 1951, as the university's first lecturer in the modern history of the Middle East. He continued to write on contemporary Middle Eastern affairs in articles and reviews which were sometimes sharply critical of what he took to be ill-informed official prejudice about the Arab people, notably his 'The decline of the West in the Middle East' ('International Affairs', 1953). But after one last trenchant piece looking at the Suez affair from the perspective of declining imperial power, 'The Middle East and the crisis of 1956' (1958), he deliberately confined himself to historical themes and, in particular, to the impact of modern Europe on certain leading Arab thinkers, published as 'Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age' (1962). This was a pioneering work which opened up many new areas for academic research. 
In the early 1950s Hourani converted to Roman Catholicism. In February 1955 he married Christine Mary Odile Wegg-Prosser ('b'. 1914), an antiques restorer; they had one daughter, Susanna ('b'. 1956). Hourani moved to St Antony's College, Oxford, in 1958 as the second director of its newly created Middle East Centre. He was immediately drawn into an energetic period of institution building, using the government funds recommended by the Hayter committee report to place modern Middle Eastern studies on a firm basis with the establishment of eight new posts. The intelligent guidance which he exercised over this whole process, the intellectual frameworks he established for examining what was still a fledgeling field, and his patient supervision of a growing number of graduate students soon made Oxford one of the premier Middle East centres in the world. Of particular importance were his ability to open up the older, orientalist, approach to insights from the work of the important social scientists he encountered during two visits to the University of Chicago in 1962 and 1963 and to reach out to European scholars, particularly in France and Germany. First fruits of this can be seen in his influential article 'The politics of the notables' (1966), and in his leadership of the Oxford Near East History Group and its series of international symposia beginning with 'The Islamic city' (1965). 
Hourani resigned as director of the St Antony's Middle East Centre in 1971 and as university reader in Middle East history in 1980. This gave him more time to write and also to do what he enjoyed best, teaching and advising graduate students in Britain, the United States (particularly at Harvard), and Europe. He remained unusually open to the ideas of his younger colleagues and was always willing to share his own thoughts with them. At first meeting, many seemed in awe of a man who acted with a dignified old-fashioned courtesy and who was so knowledgeable and well read. But they were soon put at their ease by his warmth and interest and by the skill with which he and his wife, Odile, were able to make visitors feel welcome and at home. 
Hourani published two collections of essays, 'Europe and the Middle East' (1980) and 'The Emergence of the Middle East' (1981). These contain many of the seminal works by which he was best known, notably 'Islam and the philosophers of history' in which he sets out several themes later developed by Edward Said in 'Orientalism' (1979), 'Ideologies of the mountain and city: reflections on the Lebanese civil war', and his very personal memoir, 'H. A. R. Gibb: the vocation of an orientalist'. 
It was a source of much discomfort to Hourani that he was unable to complete a major work on the Arab provinces of the Ottoman empire which had been commissioned in the 1950s. Nevertheless, he eventually found a satisfactory way of writing general history based on an emphasis on the central importance of notable politics and the agro-city, first unveiled as a research agenda in 1976, and then used to structure his highly successful 'A History of the Arab Peoples' (1991). 
Hourani was appointed CBE in 1980. He and his wife moved to London in 1984. In 1988 he delivered the Tanner lectures at Cambridge University, later published as 'Islam in European Thought' (1991). He took obvious pleasure in the enthusiastic reception accorded to 'A History of the Arab Peoples', which appeared at a time of great public interest in the Middle East during the Gulf crisis of 1990-91. He continued to write and meet students until two days before his death in the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 17 January 1993. He was cremated at Oxford crematorium on 25 January. 


