@@@@@


doc= 38367


Pearson, Charles (1793-1862), lawyer and urban reformer, was born on 4 October 1793 at 25 Clement's Lane, London, son of Thomas Pearson, upholsterer and feather merchant, and his wife, Sarah. Educated at Eastbourne, Sussex, he was initially apprenticed to his father, but was admitted solicitor in 1816, and developed an extensive practice. He was made free of the Haberdashers' Company in 1817, and in the same year, on 20 March, married Mary Martha Dutton (died 1871) of Brixton; their only child, Mary Dutton Pearson, was born in 1820. 
Pearson began an active career in the City of London as common councilman for Bishopsgate ward, 1817-20 and 1830-36, becoming chairman of the City board of health in 1831-3, and under-sheriff in 1834-5. He was an active supporter of reform measures: the issues for which he campaigned included the freedom of Jews to hold public office, abolition of capital punishment, and reformatory treatment for juvenile offenders. He was opposed to the established church, and in favour of free trade, and similar 'progressive' causes. He protested against the practice of packing juries in political cases, and he is credited with the City's decision, taken in 1831, to erase the words in the inscription on the Monument which attributed the Great Fire of 1666 to 'the Popish faction'. He was a thorn in the flesh of the London gas companies. He 'felt passionately about whatever cause was for the moment uppermost in his mind' (Heap, 21-2). 
In 1839 Pearson was appointed City solicitor and held the office until his death. In this position, and as MP for Lambeth from 1847 to 1850, he campaigned, by speech, pamphlet, and influence, for London improvements of many kinds: the embankment of the Thames, a new meat market, a central railway terminus in the Fleet valley (which happily did not come to anything), and improved transport by an underground railway. In this last he was successful. Pearson was associated, with the City's consent, with early versions of this project, and in 1857 he joined forces with the promoters of the Metropolitan Railway from Paddington to Farringdon Street, which was in financial doldrums with no work started; the City took $200,000 in shares in 1859 (which it later sold at a profit), and Pearson's skilful advice and lobbying were largely responsible for the work coming to fruition, four months after his death. 
This was, however, only part of his vision, which also encompassed workers' housing in healthy suburban conditions away from the pent-up courts and alleys of the City, linked by railway communication with cheap workmen's fares. In this he was a visionary for his time; later generations took up the concept. Pearson died on 14 September 1862 at his home, Oxford Lodge, West Hill, Wandsworth, having suffered from dropsy, despite which he had continued to work up to a week before his death. He was buried in Norwood cemetery on 23 September. His wife survived him. 
Without Pearson's constant advocacy -- his gadfly conduct, which he managed to combine with holding high office in the City of London -- the Metropolitan Railway, the first of its kind in the world, and the nucleus of London's underground system, could not have come into existence when it did. 


@@@@@


doc= 38370


Carlile, Elizabeth Sharples (1803-1852), freethought lecturer and advocate of women's rights, was one of six children born to Ann and Richard Sharples, a counterpane manufacturer, in Bolton, Lancashire, probably late in 1803. The family was pious and prosperous, the children received a good education, and Eliza attended boarding-school until she was about twenty. She then remained at home, sewing and reading, not questioning her faith until the deaths of her eldest sister, father, and a brother shook her faith in providence and prepared her for the theological unorthodoxy of Richard Carlile (1790-1843). 
When Richard Carlile visited Bolton in 1827 Elizabeth Sharples thought him no better than the devil, but her curiosity was aroused when he and Robert Taylor came to dine with the father of a school friend whom she was visiting in Liverpool in 1829. About a year later she discovered her cousin reading Carlile's former paper, 'The Republican', and saw Carlile's publications in his library. She began visiting a local freethought bookseller called Hardie, and in December 1831 requested him to ask Carlile to write to her. After a rapid exchange of correspondence in which admiration turned to ardent love, she determined to share his work. On 11 January 1832 she arrived in London where Carlile, who had parted from his wife, Jane, in 1830, was in the Giltspur Street compter serving two years for sedition. 
Elizabeth Sharples gave her first discourse at the Rotunda lecture theatre in Blackfriars on 29 January 1832. 'The Times' (18 Feb 1832) found her pretty, with a good figure and genteel manners, and thought she dressed very well. Cast in the role of the Egyptian goddess Isis, she stood on the stage of the theatre, the floor strewn with whitethorn and laurel, and delivered lectures on mystical religion and women's rights that were then printed in 'The Isis', which she edited (11 February-15 December 1832). Once the novelty had passed, though, she was unable to hold her audiences or readers, and she had no head for business. 
Sharples consummated her relationship with Carlile while he was still in gaol, and a son, Richard Sharples, was born in April 1833 but died of smallpox in October. From Carlile's release in August 1833 the couple cohabited in a 'moral union' from which time Elizabeth Sharples adopted Carlile as an assumed name. The Carliles lived first at his London house and shop on the corner of Bouverie Street and Fleet Street, where another son, Julian Hibbert, was born in September 1834. In November 1835 they took a seven-year lease on a cottage in Enfield Highway, where shortly afterwards a daughter, Hypatia, was born. A fourth child, Theophila, followed a year later. Though Eliza accompanied her partner on lecture tours, she played little further part in his public work. He died intestate, thus leaving her destitute, on 10 February 1843. 
At first, the family was supported by Sophia Chichester, who arranged for Eliza to take charge of the sewing-room at the Ham Common Concordium. After a few months a small legacy from an aunt enabled her to set up on her own, letting apartments and maintaining her family by her needlework. In 1849, again in dire poverty, she was helped by a public subscription to set up a coffee and discussion room at 1 Warner Place, Hackney Road, in which to advocate radical freethought and women's rights. Here she gave a temporary home to the young Charles Bradlaugh. She 'looked like a queen' but was 'no good at serving coffee' ('Literary Guide', 1 April 1915); in a few months both her business and her health had failed, and she died on 11 January 1852 at her home, 12 George Street, Hackney. 


@@@@@


doc= 38373


Stephenson, Rowland (1782-1856), art collector, politician, and bankrupt, was born at sea between Florida and England on 19 May 1782 and baptized at St Andrew's Church, Holborn, London, on 2 August. He was the third surviving son and fifth of eight children of John Stephenson ('bap'. 1741, died 1822), merchant and banker, of Great Ormond Street, London, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1738-1814), the daughter of James Broadley, of Mersham, Kent. John Stephenson was the nephew of Rowland Stephenson (1728-1807), a distinguished patron of the arts and member of parliament for Carlisle (1787-90), who took him in as a partner in the Lombard Street bank of Stephenson, Remington & Co. after his business as an agent victualler and member (by 1776) of the king's council at Pensacola, Florida, had collapsed during the American War of Independence. 
On leaving Eton College, where he was educated from 1796 to 1799, the younger Rowland Stephenson also joined the bank. On 23 April 1807 he married his cousin Mary Eliza ('bap'. 1786, died 1821), the granddaughter of Rowland Stephenson senior, with whom he had eight children. Her father, the banker Edward Stephenson (1759-1833), of Farley Hill, Berkshire, was an authority on the composer Johann Sebastian Bach and a collector of Cremona violins. The Stephensons' circle included the conductor Sir George Smart and the comedian Charles Mathews. 'The dapper little banker' (Lennox, 2.48-52), Rowland junior, became renowned for his musical soirees and Sunday entertainments for London friends at Marshalls, a villa near Romford, Essex, which he purchased in 1816, adding to it the manor of Cockermouth, Essex, further properties in Romford, and the How Hatch estate near Dagenham. He invested heavily in Thomas Horton's Regent's Park Colosseum, which opened in January 1829. 
Stephenson's parliamentary ambitions were thwarted at Carlisle and possibly Hull in 1816 for want of money. He intensified his efforts following the death of his wife on 21 October 1821 and his succession to his father's banking partnership in 1822. Spending lavishly on entertainments, petitioning, and legal costs, he boldly opposed the re-election of Henry Goulburn, lately appointed Irish secretary, for West Looe in February 1822, and of Jonathan Raine for the Cornish borough of Newport in March 1823. He was returned as a tory for Leominster in 1826 after a committee of the House of Commons upheld his claim that the lottery contractor Thomas Bish, who defeated him at the poll, was disqualified, being a government contractor (19 February 1827). Stephenson's parliamentary career was distinguished solely by his manner of leaving it in December 1828, when unsecured advances authorized by his assistant John Henry Lloyd came to light and bankrupted Remington's bank and Stephenson himself. He fled with Lloyd to Savannah, Georgia; rewards were offered for his apprehension, and he was detained in a debtors' prison in New York, but extradition proceedings failed (26 March 1829). He was formally bankrupted under the twelve-month rule on 19 January 1830, and thus forfeited his parliamentary seat. The property and effects seized and sold by the London auctioneer Shuttleworth between 29 January and 3 June 1829 included the Essex estates, a mansion (7 Clarence Place, Dover), a box at the Drury Lane Theatre, and the contents of his apartments at St Bartholomew's Hospital (of which he was treasurer, 1824-9). He had acquired the Shakespearian elbow chair and portrait 'after Reynolds' of the dramatist David Garrick, together with numerous books, pictures, and effects from Garrick's villa at Hampton, when they were sold at auction by Robins, Burrell & Sons, and Saunders in 1823. 
From October 1829 until his death on 2 July 1856 Stephenson lived at Farley Hill, a 170 acre estate at Bensalem township near Bristol, Pennsylvania, where he was buried in the churchyard of St James's Episcopal Church. The sole beneficiary of his will, proved at Doylestown, Pennsylvania, on 16 July 1856, was his eldest son Rowland Macdonald Stephenson (1808-1895), who was knighted in October 1856 for his services as a civil engineer and managing director of the East India Railway Company. 


@@@@@


doc= 38374


Edwards, George (1787?-1843), modeller and spy, was born in London, the youngest of three children of a man called Edwards and a sometime lottery keeper by the name of Gordon, whom Edwards had courted in a gin shop, according to Aylmer, one of the few biographical sources available. Details of the early life of George Edwards are sketchy, but it is said that, when his father abandoned the family, the youth helped his mother to run her lottery partnership and embarked on a career as a petty thief. By the age of eight he had been caught stealing from a grocer's shop and from a local public house. Having shown early artistic abilities he was encouraged to paint, but preferred modelling, and went on to serve a full apprenticeship with the Smithfield statuary, Chicani. In March 1808 Edwards married Eleanor Hampton, whom he physically abused and abandoned for nine months. Nothing is known of his movements from the end of his apprenticeship to his arrival in Eton some six years later, but it seems likely that his involvement in a scheme with John Castles, a government spy, to free French prisoners of war and then to betray them to the authorities for a reward belongs to this period. 
About 1814 Edwards moved to Windsor and ran a modeller's shop at 50 High Street, Eton. One of his best-selling lines was a plaster likeness of Dr John Keate, the unpopular headmaster of Eton College, which was bought by the schoolboys for target practice. The writer and publisher Charles Knight, who was also a customer, remembered Edwards in his 'Passages of a Working Life' as a 'diminutive animal with downcast look and stealthy face'. Another visitor was Sir Herbert Taylor, then private secretary to George III, and it was possibly through him that Edwards was invited to model busts of members of the royal family. While at Windsor, Edwards became an active member of the radical Spencean Society and managed to get his brother William, said to have been a Bow Street officer in Windsor, elected secretary. It is known that following the death in 1814 of Thomas Spence, founder of Spenceanism, the modeller was asked to supply fifteen busts to mark the occasion. Whether or not the two brothers ever shared a genuine interest in the political aims of the Spenceans remains a matter of speculation. What is beyond doubt is that by January 1818 George was willing to sell his knowledge of the society to government officials. Although Edwards and his brother were said to have incited violence among the disaffected at Spa Fields in 1817, there is no evidence that George was a government informer before 1818. After this date, however, Spenceans were closely watched. 
By the time Edwards began passing information it would appear that he had left his shop in Eton, where he owed money and had lost patrons. He moved to London, establishing himself in William Hone's former premises at Fleet Street. Here, from January 1819, the radical journalist and publisher Richard Carlile was his next-door neighbour. Carlile commissioned him to make a full-length figure of Thomas Paine and also a likeness of himself, which Edwards completed while Carlile was incarcerated in the king's bench prison. Throughout this period the modeller was busily employed as a government spy, worming his way into the confidence of the Spencean Arthur Thistlewood and other malcontents, reporting his findings to Henry Hobhouse of the Home Office, and inciting violence towards government ministers. After the discovery of the Cato Street conspiracy on 23 February 1820 it was Edwards who led police to the hide-out of Thistlewood ['see 'Cato Street conspirators (act. 1820)]. At the subsequent trial of the leading conspirators the pivotal role of Edwards as the plot's instigator and the chief supplier of weapons and ammunition was revealed. Edwards, however, was never called as a witness. He went into hiding under the name of Wards but early in May was reported to have been spotted in Cambridge. Soon afterwards Alderman Wood MP called for a Commons inquiry to investigate the government's role in the conspiracy. His motion failed, but on 23 May Edwards was indicted for high treason, and a reward of 100 guineas offered for his capture. He is described in 'The Times'' notice as being 5 feet 3 inches in height, 'thin and pale-faced, with an aquiline nose, grey eyes and light brown hair'. 
Meanwhile the fugitive had fled to Guernsey under the name of G. E. Parker, leaving behind his wife and four young children, who eventually joined him in July. The Home Office occasionally sent him small sums of money, but there is no record of Edwards ever having received the $1000 reward for the capture of Thistlewood. Early in August 1820 he disappeared completely from Home Office records and the evidence suggests that he emigrated with his family to Cape Colony. A George Parker, modeller, is listed as living at Green Point in 1840. A 'George Parker jun., lime-burner', also of Green Point, is listed in the same issue of the 'Cape Calendar and Annual Register'. On 30 November 1843, according to a local newspaper, 'George Parker senior' died, aged fifty-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 38375


Webb, Cornelius Francis (1789-1858), poet and essayist, was born in Holborn, London on 19 September 1789 and baptized at St George's Church, Bloomsbury, the son of William Webb and his wife, Charlotte. His place in literary history is due chiefly to an unfortunate association with Keats. A quotation from a poem by Webb, now lost, referring to 'Keats, / The Muses's son of promise' and placing Keats, with Hunt, alongside 'Chaucer, Spenser, Shakspeare, Milton', headed the first of John Gibson Lockhart's savage articles entitled 'The cockney school of poetry' (October 1817) in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine'. In a letter to Benjamin Bailey (3 November 1817), Keats alludes with some bitterness to the 'Motto from one Cornelius Webb Poetaster', whose effusion provided so convenient a starting point for Lockhart's ridicule. Thenceforward, 'Corny' Webb was frequently linked with 'Johnny' Keats as belonging to a new urban breed of writers, marked by the absurdity of their pretensions, the vulgarity of their productions, and the effeminacy of their style. 
Keats's remark and the 'cockney' label notwithstanding, Webb had an established, if modest, literary reputation in his time. He was prolific as a poet between 1813 and 1821, publishing in many major contemporary periodicals, and contributing to the 'New Monthly Magazine' in its first four years (1814-17) the largest proportion of its new poetry. About 1820 he turned from poetry to prose writing, and his essays and sketches were published in periodicals such as the 'Literary Gazette', the 'New Monthly Magazine', the 'New European Magazine', and the 'London Magazine'. Of Webb's published collections of poetry, 'Sonnets, Amatory, Incidental, and Descriptive, with other Poems' (1820) and 'Lyric Leaves' (1832) found great, indeed disproportionate, critical favour. If his poetry is less than remarkable, his prose pieces are more successful, his two main essay collections 'Glances at Life in City and Suburb' (1836) and 'The Man about Town' (1838) evincing the talent for 'original description and gentle humour' that Leigh Hunt described ('Leigh Hunt's Literary Criticism', ed. L. H. Houtchens and C. W. Houtchens, 1956, 487). Webb was a proof-reader for some years in the printing office of Messrs Clowes, in charge especially of the 'Quarterly Review' proofs. He made a number of applications to the Royal Literary Fund for financial assistance. He was unmarried and his last years were passed in the Charterhouse, London, a charitable institution that offered refuge to indigent writers; he died there of cancer and exhaustion on 11 August 1858. 


@@@@@


doc= 38380


Bevington, Louisa Sarah (1845-1895), poet and anarchist, was born on 14 May 1845 in St John's Hill, Battersea, Surrey, to Louisa and Alexander Bevington. The eldest of eight children (seven of whom were girls), she was brought up a Quaker. An early enthusiasm for science was fostered by her father. Later, interested by evolutionism, she became a friend of Herbert Spencer. Both her philosophical essays and her poems, which question religion and its moral authority, betray the influence of his ideas. 
Bevington's first volume of poetry, 'Key Notes', was published in 1876 under the pseudonym Arbor Leigh (recalling Elizabeth Barrett Browning's eponymous heroine, Aurora Leigh) and was reprinted under her own name in 1879. It has the unusual distinction of having captured the interest of the apparently poetry-weary Charles Darwin, who is said to have read it in 1879 'after not having opened a volume of verse for fifteen years' (Miles, 261). 
In 1881 Spencer solicited an article from Bevington defending scientific philosophy against critics who harped on its 'moral shortcomings'. Her reply, 'The moral colour of rationalism', appeared in the 'Fortnightly Review'. A second volume of poetry, 'Poems, Lyrics and Sonnets', was published in 1882, and in 1883 she went to Germany, where she met and married the Munich artist Ignatz Felix Guggenberger. By the early 1890s she had returned to London alone. Little is known about the circumstances surrounding the breakdown of her marriage. Obituaries tentatively report that the couple soon found themselves 'out of tune with one another' ('Liberty', 188). 
On her return to London, Bevington became an active member of the anarchist movement. By this time London had become the 'headquarters of continental communist activity' (Oliver, vii), and she belonged to the circle which included the exiled Russian Prince Peter Kropotkin and the communard Louise Michel, whose work 'Commune de Paris' she translated. As well as contributing articles to anarchist journals (among them 'Liberty', 'Commonweal', and 'Freedom') she lectured regularly at the Autonomie Club and favoured the 'short hair' and 'sensible short skirts and boots' (ibid., 153) worn by its female members. The detail contained in a letter written by Bevington about the Greenwich observatory explosion of 1894, in which an anarchist, Martial Bourdin, was killed (the incident on which Joseph Conrad based his 1907 novel, 'The Secret Agent'), reveals her close involvement with the movement. 
Louisa Sarah Bevington died, aged fifty, at her home, 25 Lechmere Road, Willesden Green, London, on 28 November 1895, having suffered for some years from heart disease. 'Liberty' recorded that among the mourners at her funeral were Kropotkin and his wife. She was buried on 3 December in St Pancras cemetery, Finchley, without 'any religious ceremony whatever' ('The Torch of Anarchy', 104). Many of her poems, written in short rhyming stanzas, demonstrate the insignificance of human concerns in the face of the vast scheme of evolution. Others engage with current social issues, most notably 'One More Bruised Heart', which deals movingly with the subject of child abuse. 


@@@@@


doc= 38381


Crackanthorpe, Hubert Montague (1870-1896), writer, was born Hubert Montague Cookson on 12 May 1870 in London to Montague Hughes Cookson, later Crackanthorpe (1832-1913), and his wife, Blanche Althea Elizabeth, 'nee' Holt (died 1928). He changed his name to Crackanthorpe in 1888 in order to facilitate his father's legacy. The eldest of three sons, Crackanthorpe grew up in a financially comfortable household that cultivated his artistic and intellectual pursuits. Crackanthorpe's parents were both published writers. Montague Cookson enjoyed a celebrated legal career, and Crackanthorpe's mother pursued an ambitious social life at various gatherings at Rutland Gate and Newbiggin Hall, the ancestral home of the Crackanthorpes and the Cooksons. Crackanthorpe's education included five years at Eton College between 1883 and 1888. After spending a year in France, he returned to England in 1889 to study art with Selwyn Image, the tutor who introduced him to the works of decadent writers such as Walter Pater. 
Crackanthorpe's initial foray into the literary world began with his contributions between January and September 1892 to 'The Albemarle', a journal financed by his father. These included a review of Henry James's recent playwriting activities and an interview with Emile Zola, the doyen of naturalist fiction. Crackanthorpe also published his first works of fiction in 'The Albemarle', including 'He Wins who Loses' (March 1892). Remarkably Jamesian in their style and texture, the short stories produced by Crackanthorpe during his brief life demonstrate a Pre-Raphaelite influence. In addition to his own later attempts at writing plays, Crackanthorpe mined the depths of realism and decadence in his short stories, a tendency that has prompted critics to credit him as one of the progenitors of early modernism. His work is often grouped among the coterie of other talented writers from the 1890s who died young, a roster that includes such figures as Francis Adams, Aubrey Beardsley, Ernest Dowson, Lionel Johnson, and H. D. Lowry. On 14 February 1893, Crackanthorpe married Leila Macdonald, a writer from an immensely wealthy background. Their initially happy marriage proved to be the defining event of Crackanthorpe's life. The young couple soon relocated to France, where they lived in the Villa Baron near Sallespisse. 
Crackanthorpe's literary corpus includes three volumes of short fiction and criticism, several critical essays, an uncollected story, and 'The Light Sovereign', a play that he wrote with Henry Harland. In addition to 'The Albemarle', Crackanthorpe's stories appeared in the 'Yellow Book', and Heinemann published 'Wreckage: Seven Studies', Crackanthorpe's first volume of short fiction, in 1893. The collection enjoyed praise from such esteemed critics as William Archer and Arthur Waugh, who both contended that Crackanthorpe's stories resonated with images derived from the works of Guy de Maupassant. Crackanthorpe's second collection of short fiction, 'Sentimental Studies and a Set of Village Tales' (1895), received a decidedly mixed critical response, although a number of reviewers lauded the writer's realist tendencies and innovative techniques of characterization. Reviewers also praised Crackanthorpe's efforts at crafting the 'dialogue story', a popular literary form during the 1890s practised by Anthony Hope, among others. 'Vignettes: a Miniature Journal of Whim and Sentiment' (1896), the final volume published by Crackanthorpe during his lifetime, collected the writer's non-fictional periodical essays which had originally appeared in such journals as 'The Speaker' and the 'Saturday Review'. 
Crackanthorpe's marriage deteriorated rapidly after the publication of his last volume. In early 1896, Leila had a miscarriage because of a venereal infection, possibly contracted from Crackanthorpe, and she departed soon after for Italy. During her absence, Crackanthorpe began an affair with Sissie Welch, the sister of Richard Le Gallienne and the wife of James Welch, the English actor. In the autumn of 1896 Leila returned to Paris with a lover of her own, the Comte d'Artaux. For a brief period the two couples shared a hostile residence in Paris. On the advice of her solicitor Leila left Hubert on 4 November and returned to London. After visiting his mother that same evening, Crackanthorpe was never seen alive again. On 24 December Crackanthorpe's body was discovered in the Seine. Although the cause of his death has never been determined, his biographers believe that he either committed suicide or accidentally drowned in the river which was in a perilously high flood stage during the latter months of 1896. He was cremated at Woking on 1 January 1897. 
Crackanthorpe's untimely and mysterious passing was the subject of a number of conspicuous obituary notices following the discovery of his body. Le Gallienne's obituary of 2 January 1897, for example, was featured on the front page of 'The Star'. 'We ask no longer why and how he died', Le Gallienne wrote. 'That he has left us thus of his free will, without a word of adieu, without a wave of the hand, is hard to think... He loved life so well, and it was so good a sight to see him alive so eagerly, so passionately, and with so vast and sympathetic a humanity.' 
'Last Studies', which included three new short stories by Crackanthorpe, was published posthumously in late 1897. 


@@@@@


doc= 38385


Madge, Thomas (1786-1870), Unitarian minister, was born in 1786 at Plymouth, Devon, and was baptized there on 15 July 1787, the son of John and Betty Madge. Little is known of his parents, except that his father, a miller, died when he was about twelve, and his mother placed him in the care of a relative, Thomas Hugo, a surgeon of Crediton. Following education at the local grammar school ('c'.1798-1803), he commenced training for the medical profession in his guardian's surgery in 1803. 
Brought up in the Church of England, Madge started to attend the Unitarian church in Crediton. The preaching of John Rowe of Lewin's Mead, Bristol, influenced him to enter the Unitarian ministry. While this was not to the taste of his guardian, nothing was done to stop him. Madge entered Timothy Kenrick's theological academy at Exeter in 1804, transferring afterwards to Manchester College at York (1804-9). He married, first, in 1819, Harriet, daughter of Benjamin Travers of Clapton, who died on 22 June 1835; they had two sons and a daughter. On 20 August 1844 he married Ellen (1805-1889), daughter of James Bischoff, a merchant, and his wife, Peggy. Their one daughter died in 1872. 
Madge's ministry commenced at Bury St Edmunds early in 1810, and he 'took his place as one of the most eloquent and able of preachers, a place he maintained for more than half a century' ('The Inquirer', 10 Sept 1870, 593). In 1811 he joined Pendlebury Houghton in the ministry of the Octagon Chapel, Norwich, becoming sole pastor the next year. Being convinced of the truth of Unitarianism as the genuine gospel of Christ, he proclaimed it strongly, thereby causing some secessions, but strengthened the congregation's sense of commitment. He influenced James Martineau, then a young chapel member, who concluded in 1870 that 'in my case, early impressions have something to do with the affectionate veneration with which I regarded him' (Drummond and Upton 1.13). Martineau's sister Harriet, however, saw him as a preacher fitted only for children. 
Madge's fame spread, and in 1825 he was appointed assistant to Thomas Belsham at Essex Street Chapel, London. He became minister in 1829, at Belsham's death, of what was then considered the premier pulpit of Unitarianism. He was no administrator or reformer, was seldom seen on platforms, and took no part in politics. The pulpit was his throne: 'In the prayers so devoutly offered, and the hymns and lessons so admirably delivered, he often produced a thrilling effect and an abiding impression' ('The Inquirer', 29 Oct 1870, 699). For thirty-four years he preached at Essex Street, attracting listeners, including Charles Dickens, from all walks of life, a power which did not diminish with time. He drew so large and select a congregation that the carriages took up nearly all of one side of St Clement's churchyard. 
Madge's attraction as a preacher was not intellectual, but lay in a crystal-clear presentation, combined with earnestness and vitality. Madge saw his success arising from his simplicity of style; there had never been any difficulty, he believed, in understanding what he said. He was considered by many as the leading Unitarian preacher of his time, and it was remarked in 1859 that 'his [was a] ministry which for acceptance and popularity had never probably been surpassed in Unitarian congregational history' (James 237-8). Essex Street Chapel never regained its popularity after Madge's retirement. The congregation declined in the 1860s, and moved to Notting Hill Gate in 1887. Madge's published writings consist mostly of sermons and prayers delivered on special occasions, for which he was in much demand until his death. Twice chaplain to sheriffs of London, he also delivered the address from the Presbyterian divines to the queen during the Crimean War and on the occasion of royal marriages. 
Madge became widely known: his son Travers (1823-1866), staying at Ambleside in 1843, introduced himself to Wordsworth, and met with the response 'Oh, the son of the clergyman' (Herford, 22). His traditional, 'Bible'-based view of the Unitarian gospel led him to oppose Martineau's theological innovations in the 1860s, but he never joined in the religious rancour that was so common after 1850. Madge died at 20 Highbury Terrace, Highbury, London, on 29 August 1870, and was buried in the grave of his daughter Amelia at Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington. 


@@@@@


doc= 38386


Monsell, Harriet (1811-1883), founder of the Community of St John Baptist, Clewer, was seventh of the nine children of Sir Edward O'Brien, fourth baronet, of Dromoland in co. Clare, and his wife, Charlotte, 'nee' Smith, whose father was an attorney. She had three sisters and five brothers, one of whom was William Smith O'Brien MP (1803-1864). Like her sisters, she was educated at home by governesses. Following the death of her father in 1837, she married on 21 September 1839 Charles Monsell, third son of the Revd Thomas Bewley Monsell, archdeacon of Derry and rector of Dunboe, and subsequently accompanied her husband to Oxford, where he studied for ordination. Here they were influenced by the Tractarian movement, Dr Pusey becoming a friend. Six years after his ordination Charles Monsell developed consumption, and he and Harriet left Ireland for Italy, where he was to recuperate. While there a friendship with William and Catherine Gladstone flourished, which continued throughout Harriet's life. Charles died in Naples on 20 January 1851, aged thirty-four; Harriet was forty. 
A devout woman, Harriet Monsell dedicated her life to God's service at Charles's deathbed, and on returning to England she became companion to her invalid sister Katherine (died 1865), whose husband the Revd Charles Amyand Harris was a curate in the parish of Clewer. With the support of the rector of Clewer, Thomas Thellusson Carter, Mariquita Tennant had founded in 1849, in the nearby garrison town of Windsor, the Clewer House of Mercy for women seeking moral refuge, but early in 1851 ill health had forced her retirement. Here Harriet Monsell saw her vocation. With Carter she refounded the House of Mercy as a sisterhood dedicated to rescue work. She was clothed as a Sister of Mercy on Ascension day, 29 May 1851 -- the only member of the sisterhood. Two others soon joined and on 30 November 1852 she was installed as mother superior. The Community of St John Baptist grew rapidly, numbering 200 sisters by the time of her death in 1883. The work came to include orphanages, hospitals, schools, and parish missions in many places, including America and India. 
With Carter as warden, Harriet Monsell as mother superior, and Samuel Wilberforce, bishop of Oxford, as visitor, the community developed along soundly Anglican lines. Harriet Monsell's personality drew women to Clewer, many of whom were from titled backgrounds (as indeed was she, having been granted the courtesy title 'the Honourable' in 1862). Henry Woodyer's vast Gothic revival buildings which arose between 1855 and 1881 were a testimony to the growing importance of sisterhoods in the church. During her twenty-five years as superior Harriet Monsell grew in stature: her counsel was available to all at Clewer, both sisters and women in the penitentiary, and her opinion was sought and respected by churchmen at all levels, including Gladstone (who referred many 'rescue' cases to Clewer), Lord Addington (whose daughter joined the community), and Dr J. M. Neale. She was also widely consulted by those founding other communities. She was cousin by marriage to Archbishop Tait, whose friendship she cherished and whom she admonished more than once for his treatment of high-church clergy. In 1864 Queen Victoria made a private visit to the House of Mercy and was impressed with all she saw, confiding to her journal (6 July 1864) that 'Mrs Monsell the Mother Superior is an excellent person'. At a time when sisterhoods were still controversial, Harriet Monsell did much to allay suspicion and win respect. 
Age brought increasing ill health, and in 1875 Harriet Monsell resigned as superior and retired to Folkestone, where the sisters had work and where her interest in the community continued. She died peacefully on 25 March (Easter Sunday) 1883 and was buried at Folkestone on 30 March. St Saviour's, Folkestone, a mission church in which she had shown great interest, was eventually completed as her living memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 38392


Woodyer, Henry (1816-1896), architect, was born in Guildford, Surrey, in August 1816, the youngest of three children and the only son of Caleb Woodyer (1766-1849), a surgeon and accoucheur, and his wife, Mary Ann Eleanor, 'nee' Halsey (1788-1864). He was educated at Eton College (1829-35) and then at Merton College, Oxford (1835-8). After a brief period working in the office of William Butterfield, Woodyer set up in business on his own at 4 Adam Street in London's Adelphi. He married Frances Martha Bowles (1830-1852) on 5 August 1851; she died in childbirth on 21 June of the following year, leaving Woodyer and an infant daughter, Hester Fanny. Together father and daughter moved to Grafham Grange near Dunsfold in Surrey, and became constant companions for the next thirty-nine years. 
The majority of Woodyer's clients were, like him, devout 'high' Anglicans. Many of his early commissions were from family friends and associates. Thereafter his clients were often his own friends, whom he had met at Eton and Oxford. He developed an image of self-confidence and stand-offishness, and, at Grafham, lived the life of a rather bohemian and mildly eccentric cultured country gentleman. He smoked fragrant cigars, carried his drawings in a rolled up umbrella, and wore a loose-fitting blue serge suit, a crimson tie, a soft black hat, and a long dark Inverness cloak. Though never rich, he enjoyed the pleasures of life, and for relaxation sailed his yacht -- the 'Queen Mab' -- in the Mediterranean. His architecture is as distinctive as his image. Yet while his best designs are full of imaginative touches, his style is somehow neurotic. He was always keen to strike out, to exaggerate, to be idiosyncratic, especially in his use of narrow windows, extra-steep roofs, peculiar dormer windows, acute arches, and slightly odd proportions. Even the details of his designs have a tense, agitated quality, undue prominence being given to unimportant details, to nervy lines, and to spiky tracery. But there is also originality, especially in his spires, chancel screens, and mechanical font covers. Even his restorations are original, with distinctive touches in place of an emphasis on the copying of ancient work. 
Woodyer's most notable designs are for the churches at Highnam in Gloucestershire (Holy Innocents, 1849-51), Christ Church in Reading (1861-2 and 1874-5), and the restoration of All Saints', Wokingham (1862-4). He was also responsible for designing buildings for a number of religious communities, including the House of Mercy at Bovey Tracey in Devon (1865-8), a similar establishment at Clewer (1854-82), the Community of All Hallows at Ditchingham in Norfolk (1859-64), St Peter's Convent at Horbury in the West Riding of Yorkshire (1862-4), and All Saints' Hospital at Eastbourne (1869-70). Beyond that his output was mainly connected with churches -- new and restored -- parsonages, and local schools, though he also designed Cranleigh School (1863-5) -- the quadrangle and chapel in an asymmetrical form of Tudor -- and was responsible for certain minor extensions and restorations at Eton (1857-60 and 1876-7). He also maintained a sizeable country house practice. 
Woodyer's daughter married in 1891, and two years later he moved to Padworth Croft, near Reading. He died there of heart failure on 10 August 1896 and was buried four days later in Grafham churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 38393


Crossland, William Henry (1835-1908), architect, was born in Huddersfield and baptized at nearby Elland on 10 May 1835, the son of Henry Crossland, a stonemason, and his wife, Eleanor, 'nee' Wilkinson. He was a pupil of Sir George Gilbert Scott, and worked under him at Akroydon, near Halifax. On 1 October 1859 he married Lavinia Cardwell Pigot (1837-1879) at St Pancras Old Church in London; they had one daughter. His wife died at Boulogne on 7 January 1879 and was buried at Highgate cemetery, though by this time Crossland was involved with an actress many years his junior, Ruth Elizabeth Hatt, 'nee' Tilley (1853-1892), with whom he then lived until her death in 1892, and with whom he had several children. 
Crossland's architectural development started at Akroydon (now Boothtown), when Edward Akroyd undertook an experiment in social housing. Scott was engaged to prepare initial designs for a model village, while Crossland was employed to work up the detail. An architectural practice centred on the Yorkshire towns of Halifax, Huddersfield, and Leeds followed. For the Church of England Crossland designed at least sixteen new churches and restored ten others. For Sir John William Ramsden he designed the Kirkgate Buildings (1878-85), Byram Arcade (1878-81), and the Ramsden estate office (1868-74) in the centre of Huddersfield. He was also responsible for designing Rochdale town hall (1864-71), on the other side of the Pennines in Lancashire, a building which celebrated Rochdale's rise to fame as a textile borough. 
Crossland then shifted his allegiance to the south of England and to Thomas Holloway, a man who had made a fortune from the sale of patent medicines, but who then set about spending his fortune on others. In 1872 Crossland, with John Philpott-Jones (died 1875) and Edward Salomons (1827-1906), entered, and won, an architectural competition for a middle-class asylum which Holloway wished to erect. However, before building work started, Philpott-Jones had died and Salomons had lost interest, leaving Crossland to inherit the commission. What emerged from the Surrey heathland at Virginia Water between June 1873 and 1885 was, at least in part, a recreation of Rochdale town hall and its large central hall (it is now a private housing development and known as Virginia Park). 
Crossland's next commission was Royal Holloway College at Egham (now part of the University of London), a women's college, and one which was intended to give women the same educational opportunities as men. The inspiration came from Vassar College in the United States, and the architectural precedents from the chateaux of the Loire, and particularly from Chambord. The first brick was laid in 1879, the skyline was up by 1881, and the college was opened by Queen Victoria on 30 June 1886. 
Shortly after completing Royal Holloway College, Crossland slipped into obscurity. He stopped designing, and his name disappeared from RIBA records in the 1890s. He died of a stroke in a north London lodging-house, 57 Albert Street, Regent's Park, on 14 November 1908 and left just $29. 


@@@@@


doc= 38395


Macray, William Dunn (1826-1916), librarian, historian, and Church of England clergyman, was born on 7 July 1826 in St Pancras, London, the third son of John Macray (1796-1878) and his wife, Ann Downs. He was educated at Magdalen College School, Oxford, and matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1844, graduating in 1848. 
John Macray was employed by Treuttel and Wurz in London and then J. H. Parker in Oxford. He was first librarian of the Taylor Institution in Oxford (1848-71), and compiled and translated a number of volumes of European poetry. His son William Macray's association with the Bodleian Library began when he was only fourteen, on his appointment as a supernumerary under-assistant in July 1840. Five years later he joined the regular staff as an assistant and was in 1850 assigned to the manuscript collections, where he remained until his retirement in 1905, except for a period of eight years' work on the new general catalogue of printed books in the 1860s. 
The work for which Macray is best known, his 'Annals of the Bodleian Library', was published early in his career, in 1868. Using the library's official records, the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century correspondence in its manuscript collections, and the diaries of Thomas Hearne, Macray covered the Bodleian's history to 1845. He escaped from the strait-jacket of a year-by-year chronicle by developing themes under the year they first occurred and then using cross-references from later years. He wrote an institutional history, enlivened by firsthand knowledge, which quickly achieved and has retained the status of indispensable manual. He produced a much enlarged second edition in 1890, taking the story to 1880. Macray's account of the forty years that he was on the staff is largely concerned with the growth of the library's collections. He rarely indulges in reminiscence and wisely stops short of E. W. B. Nicholson's troubled librarianship. His own annotated copy of the 'Annals', illustrated with photographs of many of his contemporaries, gives a more personal view of the Bodleian in the nineteenth century. Even there, little evidence survives of Macray's own involvement in the contests for the sub-librarianship in 1861 and 1865 and the librarianship in 1881-2. His failure on each occasion must have been a severe disappointment. 
Macray's long career in the Bodleian was distinguished by a succession of published catalogues and editions of manuscripts. His catalogues of the Rawlinson and Digby manuscripts, index to the Ashmole manuscripts, and calendar of the 'Clarendon State Papers' remained in daily use over a century after their compilation, monuments to his industry, thoroughness, wide-ranging scholarship, and exemplary accuracy. In addition he edited over a dozen texts, ranging from monastic chronicles to Clarendon's 'History of the Rebellion'. His expertise was used by the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts, for whom he produced a series of reports between 1888 and 1911, by the Public Record Office, on whose behalf he surveyed archives in Sweden and Denmark, and by Magdalen College, where he spent fourteen years calendaring the muniments. He was elected to a research fellowship at Magdalen in 1891 and thereafter published eight volumes to complete the college register. He contributed sixteen articles to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', including that on Sir Thomas Bodley. 
Macray married Adelaide Ottilia Alberta Schmidt before 1858. They had five sons and two daughters; three of his children, like his wife, predeceased him. Macray was ordained in 1851, held various college chaplaincies, and was curate of St Mary Magdalen parish to 1867. In 1870 Magdalen College presented him to the rectory of Ducklington, 10 miles west of Oxford, where he took up residence, thereafter working half-time in the Bodleian. He served there, an exemplary parish priest, for forty-two years. The parish magazine, which he launched, included reports on church restorations, the school reading room and library, choir, bell-ringers, cricket club, penny bank, clothing club, and regular fund-raising and social events, in all of which Macray, loyally supported by his family, took an energetic, leading role. Macray died at his home, Greenlands, Bloxham, on 5 December 1916 and was buried at Ducklington. The surviving records reveal a genial and charitable man, held in affectionate regard by all who knew him. 


@@@@@


doc= 38397


Wheatley, Henry Benjamin (1838-1917), bibliographer and editor, was born on 2 May 1838 in London, posthumous son of Benjamin Wheatley, an auctioneer, and his wife, Madalina Rosa Hibernia Burdett, 'nee' Abercromby. Soon orphaned, he was educated within the family, mainly by his brother Benjamin Robert Wheatley (1819-1884), a bibliographer, who instructed him in booklore and library management. Although Wheatley contributed to his brother's compilations, his first sole work was the 'Catalogue of the Board of Trade Library' (1866). From 1861 to 1879 he was clerk to the Royal Society and 'de facto' librarian of that institution, preparing its first catalogue of manuscripts. Privately he had also been preparing an index of anonymous literature, the notes for which he passed to Samuel Halkett. From 1881 to 1884 he edited 'The Bibliographer', and after the journal folded, a series entitled the 'Book-Lover's Library', which included several works of his own on bibliographical subjects. With his brother he was involved in the foundation of the Library Association (later CILIP, the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals) in 1877; he was a council member in its early years, and wrote several works for the association on library management. He also acted as inspector of the Cambridge University Library from 1877 to about 1882. 
Wheatley had a strong interest in language and literature; with F. J. Furnivall he was one of the founders and the first secretary of the Early English Text Society. He served as treasurer from 1872 to 1916, and edited several texts for the society. He also read papers to the Philological Society in the 1860s, and published 'Anagrams' (1862) and an edition of Levins's 'Manipulus vocabularum' (1867). His lexicographical expertise led to 'Chronological Notices of the Dictionaries of the English Language' (1867). Active in the New Shakespere Society and chairman of the council of the Shakespeare Association (1914-16), Wheatley edited several sixteenth-century plays. In addition to these pursuits, he was a keen antiquary and topographer: his early topographical works included 'Round about Piccadilly and Pall Mall' (1870). Elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1875, he contributed heavily between 1880 and 1886 to 'The Antiquary' on subjects as various as the Adelphi, Dr Johnson, Cornwall, and precious stones. 
In 1879 a career change took Wheatley to the Society of Arts, where he was assistant secretary until his retirement in 1908. He edited the society's 'Journal' and carried out much administrative work with Sir Henry Trueman Wood. The society's policy of keeping fingers in many pies, such as the London blue plaque scheme, was very much suited to Wheatley's own 'modus operandi'. From the Society of Arts he co-ordinated the Pepys memorial appeal, which culminated in the monument to Samuel Pepys in St Olave, Hart Street. Pepys was the subject of his private scholarship as well as his public work: in 1880 he published 'Samuel Pepys and the World he Lived in', which was later followed in 1893-9 by the fullest edition of the diary before the Latham one. He was also founder and president of the Samuel Pepys Club from 1903 to 1916. Other literary figures to engage his interest included Johnson and Dryden: he was prior of the Johnson Club in 1906-7, and his Dryden collection is now in the Beinecke Library, USA. Wheatley's broad knowledge of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century literature is reflected in the three chapters which he wrote for the 'Cambridge History of English Literature' (1912-13). 
Wheatley continued to pursue his topographical interests, publishing (among many works on his native city) 'London Past and Present' (3 vols., 1891). Although not a member of the London and Middlesex Archaeological Society, he gave talks to it, and was president of the Hampstead Antiquarian and Historical Society (1906-16) and of London Landmarks; he also founded (in 1880) one component of the London Topographical Society, and served as vice-president from 1900 to 1916. In addition he developed an interest in artistic matters: he served as secretary of the applied arts section of the Society of Arts, edited a series of 'Handbooks of Practical Art', and probably wrote the obituary of William Morris for the 'Journal'. Several of his publications were on bookbindings, of which he assembled an excellent collection, sold at auction in 1918. Portraits, bookplates, and maps were a further source of interest: in 1879 he edited 'The Particular Description of England, 1588', by William Smith. 
Wheatley's bibliographical interests did not flag: he was a member of the bibliographical club the Sette of Odd Volumes and served as its president in 1909, and he was also the president of the Bibliographical Society from 1911 to 1916. In 1877 he founded the Index Society, which was plagued by financial problems. In 1891 it amalgamated with the British Record Society's index library, an institution with rather different aims, and it was not until 1957 that an organization embodying Wheatley's ideals came into existence. Few book indexes can be conclusively attributed to Wheatley, but he certainly wrote 'What is an Index?' (1878) and 'How to Make an Index' (1902), the latter of which has not been superseded; the essay on indexes in the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1881) was also by him. 
Handsome, with abundant dark hair and a moustache, Wheatley was an urbane clubman, cheerful and gregarious in manner. He was the friend of London literati such as Richard Garnett, of historians such as G. L. Gomme, and of bibliographers such as Henry Bradshaw and T. J. Wise. On 4 July 1872 he married Louisa Louise (1846/7-1899), daughter of Dr George Robins; they had two sons and three daughters. Having lived at 53 Berners Street in central London in his younger years, Wheatley later resided at several addresses in Hampstead. He died there, at his home, 96 King Henry's Road, on 30 April 1917, and was buried in Highgate cemetery on 4 May. His library was sold on 8-12 April 1918 by Sotheby, Wilkinson, and Hodge. 
Any assessment of Wheatley must take account of his prodigious output, much of it anonymous: it included at least twenty-eight works, ninety-seven articles, and twenty-two editions over five decades of work. Despite his great productivity, his writing was not dashed off and his research was usually thorough. His London topographical work and his connection with Pepys ensured his posthumous reputation, but other commemorations also celebrate his life and work. Wheatley was honoured in his lifetime by a DCL from Durham University in 1913, and later in the naming of the Wheatley manuscript, a Middle English religious poem held by the British Library and edited by the Early English Text Society. In 1962 the Library Association, in conjunction with the Society of Indexers, instituted its annual Wheatley medal for a high-quality index. 


@@@@@


doc= 38401


Aston, Hugh (d. 1558), composer and choirmaster, is of obscure origins. He became one of the foremost church musicians of his generation, the peer of John Taverner, and yet biographers have sometimes confused him with namesakes. He is not Hugh Aston, canon of St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster, who died in 1522; nor is he Hugh Astyn of Balliol College, Oxford, who died in 1511; but two or three careers -- those of the composer, a local politician, and a recipient of monastic pensions, all active in and around Leicester towards the middle of the century -- have yet to be conclusively disentangled. 
Nothing is known of the composer before 27 November 1510, when he supplicated successfully for the degree of BMus at the University of Oxford, submitting a mass and antiphon as his test pieces and stating that he had spent eight years in the study of music. The next known reference to him dates from 1520-21, when the collegiate church of St Mary, Warwick, paid his return expenses from Coventry when he came to give advice about the organ; if he was then working in Coventry, it could have been with the cathedral's lady chapel choir or with one of the professional choirs maintained in their respective parish churches by the city guilds and fraternities. 
By 1525 Aston was master of the choristers at the collegiate church of St Mary Newarke, Leicester, a wealthy foundation with a choir of some seventeen men and seven boys. He was well paid: his annual salary of $10 matched that of the canons, and by 1540 it had risen to $12; in addition, he paid no rent for his house in Hangman's Lane. His reputation can be judged by the fact that in 1526 he was first choice for the post of master of the choristers in Cardinal Wolsey's magnificent new foundation, Cardinal College, Oxford. Only after Aston had declined the position because of his prosperous circumstances at Leicester was it offered to John Taverner. Later references to the composer are scanty, but it seems that he remained at St Mary Newarke for the rest of his career. In September 1546 he travelled from Leicester to the important collegiate church of St Mary and All Saints at Fotheringhay, bringing music with him. When St Mary Newarke was dissolved in 1548 he received an annual pension of $12, equivalent to his former salary. 
From the early 1530s to the late 1550s a Hugh Aston was active in local politics in Leicester, becoming mayor in 1541 and representing the town in the 1555 parliament. Before the dissolutions several religious houses in Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, and Warwickshire paid annuities to a Hugh Aston of Leicester (very possibly the same man), and at least one also paid a pension to a Katherine Aston, perhaps Hugh's wife. Such payments were usually made to local worthies for services received or anticipated. While it seems unlikely that a professional musician could have aspired to such status, the possibility of one or both of these men being the composer should perhaps be entertained until the social environment of early Tudor musicians is better understood. 
Aston's surviving music, which includes two masses, five votive antiphons, a devotional song, a 'Maske' for instrumental consort, and a keyboard 'Hornepype', is fluent, inventive, and vigorous, and innovative in imbuing the traditional florid style with a conspicuous sense of discipline. The musical connections between the mass 'Te Deum' and the antiphon 'Te Deum laudamus' suggest that these may be the works submitted for his BMus. Many of Aston's compositions show a striking fondness for ostinato writing, involving persistent reiteration and reworking of concise musical motifs; this is carried furthest in the 'Maske', which is constructed on an incessantly repeated ground bass (later used by William Byrd in a keyboard piece entitled 'Hugh Aston's Ground'). An anonymous mass which has this ground as its 'cantus firmus' may well also be by Aston. 
The date of Aston's death is unknown, but he was buried at the parish church of St Margaret, Leicester, on 17 November 1558. 


@@@@@


doc= 38402


Jennings, James (1772-1833), writer, was born in Huntspill, Somerset, on 1 December 1772, the second son of John Jennings (1736-1805), who kept the village shop, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Fear (1741?-1806). He attended Mary Ramsey's village school and then North Petherton School near Bridgwater until 1785. In 1786 he was apprenticed to a Bristol apothecary, and in the course of the next few years came to know some of the radical authors who settled in that city, notably the poets Samuel Taylor Coleridge and Robert Southey. He had poems published in the 'European Magazine', and in 1794 wrote a satire, 'The Times', which was conspicuously unsuccessful. In 1795 he married Charlotte Sawier, and shortly afterwards moved to work in London. Conditions there affected their health; Charlotte's first child was born prematurely, and she herself was so ill that she never fully recovered. In 1801 they returned to Huntspill and the family business. Charlotte was particularly active in helping the poor of the parish, and when she died, in April 1807, Jennings wrote an eloquent account of her good works which was published in the 'Monthly Magazine', to which thereafter he was a fairly frequent contributor. 
In December 1807 Jennings married Sarah Rouquet (died 1830). His philanthropic concerns continued, and in 1813 he and the local rector established a village school conducted on the monitorial system popularized by Joseph Lancaster and Andrew Bell. But soon afterwards, the onset of the British economic depression at the end of the Napoleonic wars forced him to abandon his shop, and in the summer of 1817 he settled in London. He supported himself as a professional writer, with some patronage from a wealthy banker, Sir William Paxton, to whom he seems to have been introduced by the republican artist George Cumberland. In 1821 Jennings published 'The Family Cyclopaedia'. It placed a special emphasis on recent inventions and improvements, and he was always an enthusiastic champion of the 'march of intellect'. When the Surrey Institution, scene of lectures by Coleridge and Hazlitt, had to close in 1823, he set up a successor, the Metropolitan Literary Institution. It did not succeed, however, and Jennings's last years were confined to authorship. He was something of an ornithologist, and published a verse treatise on the subject in 1828. His most successful venture was 'Observations on some of the Dialects of the West of England' (1825), which included some pleasant poems illustrating the speech patterns of his own part of Somerset. He died in Greenwich on 8 October 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 38403


Alexander, Horace Gundry (1889-1989), Quaker envoy and mediator, was born on 18 April 1889 at Croydon, Surrey, the youngest of four sons of Joseph Gundry Alexander (1848-1918), a Quaker barrister and advocate of international arbitration, and of Josephine Crosfield Alexander. He was educated at Bootham School in York and at King's College, Cambridge, where he gained first-class honours in history in 1912. After the outbreak of war in 1914 he served as secretary to a succession of anti-war committees. When conscription came in 1916 he was required, as a conscientious objector, to take up schoolteaching, working in Warwick and then in Cranbrook, Kent. On 30 July 1918 he married Olive Graham (1892-1942), and the following year joined the staff of Woodbrooke, the Quaker college in Selly Oak, Birmingham, where he remained until 1944, teaching international relations, with a special emphasis on the League of Nations and associated institutions. He was apt to express impatience with what he felt to be the vague pietism of some Quaker peace witness, and based his own teaching firmly on practical activity. 
Alexander's father had long worked for the suppression of the opium trade between India and China, and in 1927-8 his son visited India and other parts of south-east Asia on behalf of the Selly Oak college to assess how controls on the trade worked. This visit convinced him of the need for Indian independence, a conviction confirmed by his first meeting with M. K. Gandhi in March 1928. In a later visit supported by the Quakers in 1930 he acted as an intermediary between Gandhi and the viceroy of India, Lord Irwin (later Lord Halifax), helping to make possible Gandhi's participation in the round-table conference in London in 1931. After the conference Alexander, along with Agatha Harrison and Carl Heath, initiated the India Conciliation Group, which aimed to create a better understanding of Indian political aspirations. 
Throughout the 1930s Alexander was preoccupied with the threatening situation in Europe. He was secretary of the Anglo-German Society, a group of politicians and journalists who, while keenly aware of Nazi barbarities, sought to change the situation by peaceful means. His efforts at conciliation continued up to and after the outbreak of war in 1939. 
For many years Alexander's wife had been disabled by a paralysis confining her to a wheelchair, though she took an active part in the work of the college. In January 1942 she died, and later that year he returned to India with a section of the Friends Ambulance Unit, which undertook air-raid protection work in areas threatened by advancing Japanese forces. This enabled him to renew and extend his acquaintance with public figures in India, the more so since, with the onset of the great Bengal famine, relief work became the most pressing concern, raising urgent questions about the effectiveness of British administration. He was back in Britain in September 1943, advocating a relaxation of the stringent measures which had been the government's response to Gandhi's Quit India campaign. 
In 1945 Alexander visited the United States, and was present in San Francisco as an accredited press representative for 'The Friend' when the United Nations was established. Following the election of a Labour government in Britain, he and Agatha Harrison operated in the background of Indian pre-independence negotiations to help unofficially at difficult moments. He was much involved in efforts to control the violence between Muslims and Hindus that marred the transfer of power, and was with Gandhi in Calcutta when independence was declared on 15 August 1947. With his Friends Ambulance Unit colleague Richard Symonds he served as an observer monitoring the situation of refugees in the partitioned province of the Punjab, and in subsequent years undertook a number of similar tasks. His personal dignity and immense patience admirably qualified him for such work. After 1951 he was based mainly in England again, and for many years in books and articles interpreted Gandhian ideas, and especially Indian policies in world affairs, to a Western audience. In 1984 his services were rather belatedly recognized with the award of India's Padma Bhushan medal. 
Alexander had a lifelong passion for bird-watching. He and his elder brothers Wilfrid and Christopher belonged to the group of pioneers who substituted observation of the living bird for the collection of museum specimens. They are among the founding fathers of bird-watching, now the hobby of thousands. They also set those high standards of field identification, by both ear and eye, which have enabled the amateur bird-watcher to make an important contribution to the science of ornithology. Alexander's own contribution was recognized by the British Ornithologists' Union, whose records committee he chaired from 1957 to 1969. In 1958 he had married his second wife, Rebecca Bradbeer, 'nee' Biddle (1901-1991), and in 1969 went to live in Pennsylvania, where he died, at a retirement home in Crosslands, on 30 September 1989. 


@@@@@


doc= 38404


Warwick, Arthur (1604-1633), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born in February 1604, the son of Arthur Warwick, master of the grammar school in the close, Salisbury. The elder Warwick held the post from 1617 until his death in 1651 and it is to be presumed that both father and son resided for some of those years at Braybroke House, the master's official residence in the close. His father's neglect of professional duties and his consequent protracted quarrels with the Salisbury chapter may have made Warwick's adolescence unquiet; otherwise nothing is known of his early upbringing or schooling. At Oxford Warwick, matriculated from Magdalen Hall on 31 January 1623 and received his BA degree on 16 December 1624 (not 15 December, as given by both Foster and Clark); he appears not to have proceeded MA. In February 1627 he was made deacon by the bishop of Salisbury; where Warwick began his ministry is not known. He was admitted to priest's orders on 21 September 1628 and licensed to serve at Durley, a village about 10 miles south of Winchester. It was there that Warwick completed the first part of 'Spare Minutes', his only book. He dedicated it to Sir William Dodington, an important landowner of Breamore, 8 miles south of Salisbury. His son, Henry, was the same age as Warwick and had been his exact contemporary at Magdalen Hall. Although Warwick protested, in the dedication, that their acquaintance was 'short, and small' he gratefully acknowledged Dodington's former favours. As Dodington was both wealthy and influential such patronage could have been substantial. 

'Spare Minutes' was entered in the registers of the Stationers' Company to Walter Hammond on 24 March 1632. Its title is given as 'Resolved Meditations and Premeditated Resolutions', and both the engraved title-pages that it eventually had carry variants of this form; neither bears the words 'Spare minutes' which are to be found only on the letterpress title-pages of all early editions. 
Warwick's ministry at Durley lasted just five years. At a visitation on 23 September 1633 it was noted that he was ill, and within a few weeks he had died, at Durley. Warwick was buried there on 31 October 1633 but his grave has not been traced. He was twenty-nine years of age. 
The earliest edition of 'Spare Minutes' of which a copy is known is dated 1634 and described as the 'second Edition corrected and enlarged'. It is arranged in two parts. The first, containing sixty-one meditations, has an emblematic engraved title-page with accompanying verse in English by the 'Inventor' (apparently Richard Haydock, who designed the engraved title-pages), and also twenty lines of Latin by William Haydock, son of Richard. The second part is described in the dedication as a posthumous addition 'collected out of loose papers' after Warwick's death. This has a further thirty-seven similar meditations, together with three short passages of verse, one of which was the last thing that Warwick composed, a few days before his death. This latter part is dedicated by the author's father to a Mistress Anne Ashton. The 'meditations' of the second part, 'wanting filing, and polishing' (dedication), are the longer and the less concisely expressed. The meditations, or prose aphorisms, vary in length from 25 to 290 words. The whole is written in a witty, highly antithetical style, deploying familiar imagery to provide sound moral instruction. Its merit is considerable, and it enjoyed remarkable success. There were at least eight editions and reissues between 1634 and 1700, and the appearance of a further ten after 1800 is impressive evidence of its enduring vitality. 
Before the next edition of 'Spare Minutes' was published in 1635 its preliminaries were revised and rearranged. The book was embellished by the addition of a new engraved emblematic title-page (the earlier engraving then being prefixed to the second part) and a passage of verse by Francis Quarles with another by George Wither to accompany the two engravings respectively. Wither's contribution replaced the lines by the inventor, which were then omitted. With the 1635 third edition 'Spare Minutes' assumed, in essentials, the form in which it has commonly been reprinted. The plates are signed by Thomas Clarke of Salisbury, as engraver, but their design is now attributed to Richard Haydocke, also of Salisbury. The theme that they symbolically express is of the pious soul overcoming the world and ascending to heaven, leaving behind his work and memory for the edification of those who remain. They are remarkable examples of their kind. Richard Haydock was an eminent physician, translator, and engraver. Since Haydock and Warwick senior, each a noted figure in Salisbury, both resided in the close, it is improbable that they were unacquainted. Possibly the contribution of the Haydocks to 'Spare Minutes' was a token of esteem. 
Warwick's life at Durley (known as 'dirty Durley' because of the bad state of its roads) was probably lonely and obscure. But he was not without influential connections. The Anne Ashton to whom his father dedicated the second part of 'Spare Minutes' was the widow of Thomas Ashton of Bishop's Waltham, 3 miles from Durley. Thomas Ashton had been noted for his good works, and he left his wife a large estate and a considerable income. The elder Warwick acknowledges her 'favours' to himself and to his son, 'who in his life time studied to be thankfull to you' (dedication). 


@@@@@


doc= 38408


Maschwitz, (Albert) Eric (1901-1969), writer and broadcaster, was born on 10 June 1901 at 13 Carpenter Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, the son of Albert Arthur Maschwitz, a general merchant, and his wife, Leontine Hilda Bockemann. He was educated at Arden House preparatory school, Henley in Arden, and Repton School, and went on to read modern languages at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. Maschwitz worked in an editorial capacity with 'Hutchinson's Magazine' (1922-3), and then undertook a number of assignments as a freelance writer and editor, including a stint in 1925 with a film studio in France. In 1926 he became a publisher's reader with A. M. Heath, the firm of literary agents. 
Maschwitz joined the BBC in 1926 in the outside broadcast department but his first important job was in the editorial office of the 'Radio Times'. In 1927 he became editor of the magazine. Maschwitz graduated from that in 1933 to the variety department of which he became a driving force and innovator. He detached the department (which in later years would be renamed light entertainment) from the stuffy atmosphere of Broadcasting House to the nearby St George's Hall where the atmosphere was more free and easy, and the best of the pre-Second World War entertainment shows were born. 
In addition to helping to create the successful magazine programme 'In Town Tonight' Maschwitz was a songwriter, penning the lyrics of 'These foolish things' and 'A nightingale sang in Berkeley Square'. He wrote, together with George Posford, the operetta 'Goodnight Vienna', which opened a new chapter of entertainment in the expanding world of radio (still called, in the 1930s, the wireless). Many other operettas followed in association with various authors and proved hugely successful with the growing radio audience, as well as on stage. These included 'Balalaika' and 'Magyar Melody'. 'Balalaika', which ran for 570 performances at the Adelphi from 1936, was a great hit. Less successful was 'Waltz without End' in 1942, in which he tried to present Chopin in a popular format. 
Eric Maschwitz promoted the dance bands of the day and was responsible for ending the monopoly of the so-called BBC Dance Band. He encouraged the BBC to employ the many dance orchestras of the time whose music was popular, and especially those of Ambrose, Billy Cotton, Geraldo, and Joe Loss. From 1933 until 1937, when he briefly joined MGM in Hollywood, his flair and energy helped to promote radio as entertainment. In so doing he helped to dilute the more sombre educational/political view of what should be broadcast beloved of the corporation's director-general, Sir John Reith. 
While running variety Maschwitz was constantly looking for new ideas and new talent; 'Only occasionally', he claimed, 'did talent 'drop as manna out of heaven'' (Briggs, 2.103). But drop it did and Maschwitz was largely responsible for the broadcasting careers of Arthur Marshall, Beryl Orde, Vic Oliver, Claud Dampier, Sandy Powell, and many others. However, the demands on talent were enormous. When the BBC proved reluctant to install its own talent-spotting department Maschwitz employed the young Canadian Carroll Levis to provide a 'discovery' show which would put new and untried talent before the microphone. Levis was an immediate success. 
On 25 January 1926 Maschwitz married the intimate revue and cabaret star Hermione Ferdinanda Gingold (1897-1987), daughter of James Gingold, a stockbroker. Appearing on the wireless as herself, or under the pseudonym Mrs Pullpleasure, an itinerant harpist, Gingold was in constant demand. They divorced in April 1945 and on 14 November 1945 Maschwitz married Phyllis Crawford Gordon, daughter of Thomas Crawford Gordon and divorced wife of John Taylor Galey, who died in September 1969. There were no children. 
When war came in 1939 Maschwitz joined the army, and from 1940 to 1945 he served in the intelligence corps. In due course he became head of a War Office broadcasting section in the department of welfare and education, where he became involved in army entertainment at home and abroad. He pressed for the creation of a forces programme run in healthy competition with the Home Service. At the end of the war Maschwitz acted as the story editor of the official D-day film, 'True Glory' (1945). He left the army in 1945 with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. After the war Maschwitz became intimately associated with the Music Publishers' Association, constantly arguing for a greater proportion of British music in the BBC output and a correspondingly smaller American input which he dismissed as merely 'the latest fads'. 
Maschwitz in 1948 had another great success with 'Carissima', its delightful lyrics set to the music of Hans May. Other effective productions were 'Belinda Fair' (1949), 'Zip Goes a Million' (1951), 'Love from Judy' (1952), and 'Happy Holiday' (1954). 
In 1956 Eric Maschwitz rejoined the BBC as head of light entertainment television and was a stimulating force in fighting back against the energetic programme-makers of ITV, newly established in 1955. Between 1961 and 1963 he was assistant and adviser to the controller of television programmes. Under his benign leadership BBC television came up with 'The Rag Trade', 'Black and White Minstrel Show', and sitcoms for Harry Worth, Charlie Drake, and Eric Sykes. He retired from the BBC in 1963 but re-emerged as a freelance producer of the television series 'Our Man at St Marks' for Associated Rediffusion. In broadcasting terms his importance to BBC light entertainment cannot be understated. He wrote a novel, 'A Taste of Honey', in 1924, and an autobiography, 'No Chip on my Shoulder', in 1957. He was appointed OBE in 1936. Eric Maschwitz died on 27 October 1969 at Ascot Nursing Home, Sunninghill, Berkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 38410


Blore, Eric (1886-1959), actor and theatrical sketch writer, was born on 23 December 1886 at Elm Park Road, Church End, Finchley, Middlesex, one of two children of Henry Blore (died 1914), a schoolmaster, and his wife, Mary Newton. After leaving school in Finchley, Blore began selling insurance, but in 1908 he went on the stage. 
Although Blore became one of the most recognizable of film 'character actors' -- usually as a (subversive) butler or valet -- his early theatrical career was more varied. After touring Australia with a concert party, in 1910 Blore won a role in an English touring version of the popular musical comedy 'The Arcadians' and became a protege of the variety comic G. P. Huntley. By 1913, the year of his West End performing debut in the Empire revue 'All the Winners', Blore's sketches and short plays, rich in absurd situations and wordplay, were being produced in London. These included 'Alice up to Date' at the Pavilion (1913) and 'A Burlington Arcadian' at the Coliseum (1914). 
After the rise of intimate revue, Blore formed a partnership with composer Philip (Pa) Braham, placing songs -- often flirtatious and faux-innocent -- in such shows as 'The Bing Boys are Here' (1916). During the First World War, Blore, a lieutenant in the South Wales Borderers, ran a concert party called 'The Welsh Wails'. He later said that his batman 'taught me the whole art' of being a gentleman's gentleman: 'He had a way of putting out my studs that made them look worth at least 2 guineas' (private information). On 29 October 1917 Blore married Violet Lydia Victoria, daughter of George Winter; she died, childless, on 19 February 1919, a victim of the influenza epidemic of late 1918. 
In 1920 Blore contributed sketches to the Andre Charlot revue 'Jumble Sale' and made his film debut in 'A Night Out and a Day In'. 1921 was the year of his collaboration with Inglis Allen and Austin Melford in creating the revue 'Ring Up' for Jack Hulbert and Cicely Courtneidge; one of his wartime sketches, 'The Disorderly Room' (all the dialogue is set to the tunes of popular songs) was taken up by the aspiring variety performer Tommy Handley, who played it for twenty years, in a royal variety performance in 1924 as well as on record, film, radio, and television. A Blore song with Braham, 'How d'you do?', opened 'Charlot's London Revue' in New York (1924). 
Blore's onstage acting career had begun with roles portraying farcical 'dudes' with names such as Alsop Bibby and the Honourable H. Buff-Orpington. The second half of his career began in New York with another one, Bertie Bird, in 'Little Miss Bluebeard' (1923). Bird was the first of a line of Blore's fops and clapped-out nobles on Broadway -- Reggies and Basils and Roddys -- stretching throughout the decade. Blore first played a butler in 'Gentleman in Waiting' (1925). In 1926 he married the American actress Clara Macklin; they had one child and remained married until Blore's death. In the same year he was Lord Digby in the first film version of 'The Great Gatsby'. After playing a waiter in Cole Porter's musical comedy 'The Gay Divorce' on Broadway (1932) and in the West End (1933), Blore was summoned to RKO-Radio Pictures in Hollywood as Butterbass, a not quite head waiter who suffered seethingly under the prissy Franklin Pangborn, in 'Flying Down to Rio' (1933), the first notable pairing of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers. 
Four more Astaire-Rogers films followed, including 'Top Hat' (1935), in which Blore created a multi-dimensional valet (introducing himself to his bumbling employer, Edward Everett Horton, as 'We are Bates, sir', he spoke one of the era's most memorable lines). After these films Blore was rarely at liberty. Never billed higher than third, he appeared in more than eighty films, earning as much as $3500 (then $750) per week. In 'It's Love I'm after' (1937) he remarked, 'If I were not a gentleman's gentleman, I could be such a cad's cad.' In Laurel and Hardy's 'Swiss Miss' (1938) he endured a contretemps with a stingy St Bernard. In the English film 'A Gentleman's Gentleman' (1939) he took up blackmailing. 
Blore's valets were rarely obsequious. Eyebrows arched, face twitching, nostrils flaring, he could switch instantly from innocence or impishness through wounded dignity to (usually comic) menace. Blore also developed a useful sideline in seedy tropical expatriates ('The Island of Lost Men', 1939, 'South of Suez', 1940). 
In his later years in California, Blore retained his English persona, peppering conversation with 'Good chap' and 'Don't y'know?' In 1940 Blore revisited his revue past, joining other expatriates in the Hollywood run of 'Andre Charlot's War Relief Revue'. In 1944 Blore made a final Broadway appearance in a nostalgic revival of 'The Ziegfeld Follies'. His was the manic voice of Toad in Disney's 'The Wind in the Willows' (1949), a somehow fitting near-finale; early on, he had played an owl in a Liverpool panto. After a stroke in 1956 Blore retired from film. He died of a heart attack in the suburban Los Angeles Motion Picture Country Home Hospital on 1 March 1959; his ashes were inurned in the Chapel of the Pines, Forest Lawn. 


@@@@@


doc= 38411


Talbot, Howard (1865-1928), composer and songwriter, was born on 9 March 1865 in New York, USA, the son of an Irishman, Alexander Munkittrick, and his wife, Lillie. In 1869 the family returned to Britain, where their son later studied first medicine at King's College, London, and then music at the Royal College of Music. He married on 21 March 1895 the actress Amy Clare Betts 
(Ada Bellamy; 1871?-1895)
, who died eight months after their wedding, and later Dorothy Maud, the daughter of Arthur H. Cross of Sandringham, Norfolk. They had four daughters. 
From early on he aimed at a career in the musical theatre, and his first stage pieces were produced by amateurs at Hunstanton, Oxford, and King's Lynn; he always used the pseudonym of Howard Talbot for his musical output. His first professionally staged piece, the comic opera 'Wapping Old Stairs' (1894), had only a brief run, and although his next work, 'Monte Carlo' (1896), did better, Talbot found his earliest niche in the theatre in the 1890s as a conductor, leading the orchestra for a number of shows in London and the provinces, where his 'cheery, goodnatured' character made him the 'most genial and easy of conductors' ('The Era', 19 April 1902). 
In 1899, however, Talbot provided the score for a little provincial musical comedy written by the popular librettist George Dance, and his fortunes turned. 'A Chinese Honeymoon' soon proved itself a long-touring success, and when it was ultimately given a London run it turned into a record-breaker, becoming the first musical play anywhere to run for more than 1000 consecutive metropolitan performances. 
Over the following decade Talbot -- while continuing to work as a theatre conductor -- turned out a steady stream of musical comedy scores, and shows such as 'The Blue Moon' (1904), 'The White Chrysanthemum' (1905), 'The Girl behind the Counter' (1906), and 'The Belle of Brittany' (1908), for which he composed all or much of the music, were played with considerable success all around the English-speaking world. Then, in 1909, he topped all but his first huge hit when he combined with Lionel Monckton to write the score for Robert Courtneidge's production of the fantastical musical comedy 'The Arcadians'. With 'The Arcadians', Talbot had his name at the billhead of the most successful musical comedy of the Edwardian era -- just as he had a decade earlier with the most successful of the Victorian age. 
In the years that followed Talbot continued to turn out light, tuneful songs and well-made but unpretentious concerted music for a whole series of musical shows. These included 'The Mousme' (1911) with its charming high soprano solos, moulded to the voice of the 'Arcadians' star Florence Smithson, Courtneidge's up-to-date 'The Pearl Girl' (1913), the interesting light opera 'My Lady Frayle' (1915), which was full of good things but was dogged by bad luck, and the clever modern musical comedy 'Mr Manhattan' (1916), written around the American musical-comedy star Raymond Hitchcock. Talbot also scored several short musical comedies for the music-hall stage. 
At this point in time, many of the most important musical-theatre composers of the previous two decades were disappearing from the scene, unable or unwilling to adapt to the newly popular styles and rhythms in theatre music which had crossed the Atlantic in the years before the war. Talbot, whose educated but attractive and catchy writing was in no way bred to ragtime and the other rhythms of the American dance repertory, held his own, however, and at the height of the craze for what would become known as jazz he put his name to a third major hit. Teamed again with the equally 'old-fashioned' Monckton, he provided the score in 1917 for the musical comedy 'The Boy', a piece based on Sir Arthur Wing Pinero's play 'The Magistrate'. With the comedian Bill Berry as star, 'The Boy' took its place alongside 'Chu Chin Chow' and 'The Maid of the Mountains' as one of the trio of great hits of the British wartime years, before going on to further success on Broadway (as 'Good Morning, Judge') and the touring and colonial circuits. Talbot -- paired this time with the young Ivor Novello -- provided Berry with a second decided Pinero-based hit in 'Who's Hooper' (1918), but a third attempt at adapting Pinero, 'My Nieces' (1921), was a failure. It was also its writer's last West End score. 
Talbot subsequently retired and, although he continued to compose, his last works were, like his first, for amateur companies. He died on 12 September 1928 at Reigate, Surrey, survived by his widow, Dorothy. 


@@@@@


doc= 38415


Barrett, Thomas Augustine (1863-1928), composer, was born on 15 March 1863 in Southport, Lancashire, the younger son of Thomas Barrett, cabinet-maker ('b'. 'c'.1830), and his wife, Mary Ann Burke, 'nee' Lester ('b'. 'c'.1832), both natives of western Ireland. He grew up in Liverpool, where he attended St Francis Xavier's School. His family then moved to Manchester, and there he first gained recognition as a keyboard player. He became church organist at St John's Roman Catholic Cathedral, Salford, under Bishop (later Cardinal) Herbert Vaughan, and later moved to the church of the Holy Name under the latter's brother Bernard Vaughan. He also made an impression with classical piano recitals, after which he formed his own choral society and, from 1889 to 1894, promoted a series of popular Saturday night concerts at St James's Hall, Manchester. Hugely successful, these introduced to Manchester many eminent performers of the time, including the pianist Paderewski and the opera singers Marie Roze and Zelie de Lussan. Two of the children of his marriage (on 9 March 1886) to Katharine Mary Fox ('b'. 1864) were named Bernard Vaughan and Marie Roze. 
Through his father's work as property master at the Amphitheatre, Liverpool, Barrett acquired an early taste for the theatre. With his elder brother, Stephen (1855-1924), who became a music-hall performer under the name Lester Barrett, he was an 'habitue' of The Ship inn, Manchester, a local bohemian haunt. Gradually the music he composed for local pantomimes, and especially his popular ballads under the name Leslie Stuart, and music-hall songs under the name Lester Thomas, began to eclipse his religious and other serious compositions. 
Barrett's first major published successes were the ballad 'The Bandolero' (1894), introduced by the Irish baritone who called himself Signor Foli, and the music-hall songs 'Louisiana Lou' (1894) and 'Sweetheart May' (1895). In 1895 he moved to London to further his career, permanently adopting the pseudonym Leslie Stuart. He was almost immediately rewarded with the huge success of 'The Soldiers of the Queen' (1895). It became the hit song of Queen Victoria's diamond jubilee and remained much favoured during the South African War. Its success was augmented in the variety theatre by that of nostalgic, exotically rhythmic songs such as 'Little Dolly Daydream' (1897) and 'The Lily of Laguna' (1898), written for the American black-face minstrel Eugene Stratton. 
The reputation of Leslie Stuart was further enhanced by the score for Owen Hall's musical play 'Florodora' (1899). This proved a huge success at London's Lyric Theatre and across the Atlantic, most particularly for the double sextet 'Tell me, pretty maiden', in which six top-hatted gentlemen on bended knee paid court to six elegantly dressed young ladies. A further music-hall song hit was 'I may be crazy' (1902), and there were some fair stage successes in the songs he wrote for 'The Silver Slipper' by Owen Hall (1901), 'The School Girl' by Henry Hamilton and Paul M. Potter (1903), 'The Belle of Mayfair' by Basil Hood and Charles H. E. Brookfield (1906), and 'Havana' by George Grossmith and Graham Hill (1908). However, his individual musical style thereafter palled. 'Captain Kidd' (which Seymour Hills adapted from an American farce; 1910) and 'Peggy' by George Grossmith (1911), both given in London, failed to add to his reputation, as did 'The Slim Princess' by Henry Blossom (1910), given in the USA. 
By then Barrett's extravagant lifestyle was causing severe financial problems. On the back of his early successes he had built a luxurious home in Hampstead, where he entertained lavishly. He also had a taste for the racecourse, where his hot-headed and stubborn nature led to a break with his most loyal interpreter, Eugene Stratton. Further misfortune came from the pirating of popular sheet music, which was rife when his music was at its most popular at the beginning of the century and which made him a vigorous campaigner for composers' rights. In January 1913 he was declared bankrupt. 
In 1915 Barrett's daughter May Leslie-Stuart appeared in a London revival of 'Florodora', and he also accompanied her in his songs on the variety stage. In 1920 he was discharged from bankruptcy. In 1926, now frail, he appeared to acclaim, performing a medley of his songs, which by then were evocative of a previous generation. He died at his daughter's home, Downe Lodge, Richmond, Surrey, on 27 March 1928 and was buried in Richmond cemetery three days later. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 38416


Chambers, Walter (1824-1893), bishop of Labuan, Sarawak, and Singapore, was born in England and ordained at Lichfield as deacon in 1849 and priest in 1850. He served briefly as curate of Bentley in Derbyshire, before joining the Borneo Church Mission in Kuching, Sarawak, in March 1851. Founded in 1846 the struggling mission was led by a Kuching-based missionary doctor, Francis Thomas McDougall (1817-1886), but other missionaries and teachers soon left. 
Recruited to convert the newly pacified sea Dyaks of the second division, Chambers spent six months under the instruction of McDougall, who admired his energy, enthusiasm, and religious zeal, but deplored his obstinacy, prejudice, and lack of ear for foreign languages. Impatient to start work Chambers opened the first rural mission at Sekrang in September 1851, barely four months after peacemaking ceremonies between the Dyaks and the Brooke regime. Finding the tribe stubbornly unreceptive, in 1853 he moved his headquarters to less hostile territory at Banting. Chambers took his first four converts for baptism in Kuching on Christmas day 1853, but progress was slow, against a background of continuing violence and unrest. 
In 1855 McDougall, newly appointed first bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, brought two women missionaries, a schoolmaster, and another clergyman from England, but none settled. Meanwhile Chambers drove himself hard, neglecting his comfort and health. McDougall feared he was 'going native' when he first saw him in Kuching, barefoot and shirtless, wearing a sarong and with a long unkempt beard, and looking 'more a pirate than a clergyman' (Saunders, 44). Mrs McDougall's formidable missionary cousin, Elizabeth Woolley (1814?-1875), a surgeon's daughter, transformed his disordered life. Having paid her own passage she arrived in December 1856; two months later, when Chinese miners burned Kuching and murdered some of the raja's men, Elizabeth, showing great spirit and courage, took charge of the mission house. Arriving from Banting, Chambers was enchanted by her personality, religious zeal, and capacity to produce order and comfort out of devastation. Married in Kuching on 27 August 1857, they had no children and made an incongruous couple, more like mother and son: Elizabeth at forty-three, ten years Chambers's senior and looking older than her years, was gaunt, angular, and beanpole thin. Unkindly dubbed Mrs Proudie by other wives, she was fiercely devoted to her husband and his missionary enterprise, accompanying Chambers on arduous journeys, sometimes gravely ill and near starvation, but keeping their house spick and span. By 1861 the Brookes had brought relative peace to the second division, and gradually Chambers and his wife built up a successful mission station. Toiling to commit sea Dyak to writing, Chambers translated prayers, hymns, and the gospels of 'Matthew' and 'Mark'. In 1863 a Dyak warrior chief sought baptism and then took Christianity back to his tribe. For the first time Elizabeth also coaxed Dyak women and girls to the mission. By 1867 the school boasted fifty pupils, boys and girls, some of them boarders, and the church had to be enlarged. 
But in Kuching relations had soured between church and state, Chambers loyally supporting his bishop. While in England in July 1868 McDougall resigned, recommending Chambers, whom he had appointed archdeacon of Sarawak in May that year, as his successor. Chambers was duly consecrated bishop of Labuan on 29 June 1869 and formally installed as bishop of Sarawak on 5 June 1870. Meanwhile in 1869 the Straits Settlements diocese had been transferred from Calcutta, and the new diocese of Labuan, Sarawak, and Singapore was formed. Chambers made St Andrew's in Singapore the cathedral church of the united diocese and he visited it every year, although he met the extra expense himself since the diocese only funded a biennial visit. However, the Dyaks remained his priority. Appointing a resident chaplain for Kuching, he continued active missionary travel. His relationship with the government was less troubled than his predecessor's but there were still tensions. Rani Margaret Brooke called him a great friend of her husband Charles, but he refused to bury their unchristened stillborn child in the family cemetery. Although Brooke had known him from their pioneering bachelor days in the turbulent second division and respected his work among the Dyaks, both were solitary people. Their friendship had cooled when Chambers married and had worsened when he supported McDougall. Chambers's first sermon as bishop, critical of European ways, provoked an angry exchange between the raja, who preferred discreet liaisons to marriage among his officers, and Elizabeth Chambers, who upheld the bishop's ecclesiastical authority. 
Relations mellowed after 1875, when Elizabeth died, aged sixty-one, while on leave in England. After returning to Kuching in July 1876 Chambers continued his tireless journeys despite increasing arthritis, but lack of funds, a dearth of suitable recruits, and the failure to train an Asian priesthood doomed his efforts. Too understaffed to attend the Lambeth conference in 1878, Chambers collapsed in August that year and was dispatched immediately to England to recuperate. In November 1879, unable to return, he told the archbishop of Canterbury that a complete failure of health compelled him to relinquish his loved work and people, and he formally resigned early in 1881, once a successor had been found. A disabled invalid, he eventually died at his home in London, 27 Bedford Gardens, Kensington, after a painful, lingering illness, on 21 December 1893. 


@@@@@


doc= 38417


Hose, George Frederick (1838-1922), bishop of Singapore, Labuan, and Sarawak, was born in Brunswick Place, Cambridge, on 3 September 1838, the son of Frederick Hose, a clerk, and his wife, Mary Ann Knight. Educated at St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated MA, he was ordained at Ely as deacon in 1861 and priest the following year. Appointed colonial chaplain at Melaka in 1868, he moved to Singapore in 1872, and two years later became Singapore's first archdeacon, responsible to Bishop Walter Chambers, who was based in Sarawak. 
Hose and his gentle wife, Emily, were an intelligent, conscientious, kindly couple, and they fitted happily into Singapore society. Hose was proficient in Malay and a keen botanist, and he helped to found the public library and museum in 1874, and was the prime mover and first president of the Straits Asiatic Society, which in May 1878 was affiliated as the Straits (later Malaysian) branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. 
Chambers recommended Hose as his successor, but the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (SPG), hesitated, favouring new blood to rejuvenate the diocese. Nevertheless, Hose was eventually appointed, in December 1880, and consecrated by the archbishop of Canterbury at Lambeth Palace in London on 26 May 1881; he was enthroned as bishop of Singapore and Labuan in Singapore on 27 November 1881 and given letters patent as bishop of Sarawak from Raja Charles Brooke in Kuching on 17 January 1882. 
The unwieldy diocese embraced some 120,000 square miles, with Kuching and Singapore 450 miles apart by sea, and it involved expanding responsibilities for the protected (later federated) Malay states, British North Borneo, and British communities in Siam and the East Indies. In his early years Hose achieved much, attracting many converts and improving schools in Singapore and Kuching. An enthusiastic traveller, he spent half the year in Singapore and the other half in Kuching, with annual tours to outlying Dyak missions and occasional visits to North Borneo, Labuan, and the Malay states. While the Anglican church's prime concern in British Malaya was with westerners, Hose as chaplain in Melaka had set up a mission among the Chinese, and as bishop he encouraged work among Asians in Singapore, Penang, and Kuala Lumpur. He translated the 'New Testament' and 'Book of Common Prayer' into Malay, ordained a few Tamil and Chinese priests, and opened new churches which conducted vernacular services. However, he favoured neither a full Asian ministry, nor the merging of European and Asian congregations. 
Always overstretched, the diocese lost ground to the Roman Catholic and Methodist missionaries, who reached out to the Asian communities both in the Peninsula and in Borneo. While in England in 1901, Hose appealed in vain to the SPG for experienced recruits and more resources. Already distressed by Sarawak press criticism of Anglican schools, Hose was then grief-stricken when Emily died of cancer in Kuching in July 1904. Never a man of fire, he lost heart and let administration drift. In Borneo he left matters to the energetic Arthur Sharp, vicar-general at Kuching from 1898. However, despite Sharp's success among Asians, promoting local staff and converting many Chinese, the raja lost patience with the Anglican mission, and, with wide public support, in 1905 the archdeacon of Singapore appealed to the SPG both to send a new young bishop and to divide the see of Singapore from Borneo. This split was unanimously endorsed at a public meeting in Singapore in December 1905. 
Initially Hose resisted retiring, and continued to enjoy the relaxing climate, and he planted Borneo's first rubber trees in the beautiful garden he had created with his wife. However, he supported dividing the diocese, which was agreed in principle in 1907, and finally left Kuching in December 1907. He received an affectionate farewell at Singapore's Memorial Hall, on 4 February 1908, and a memorial chalice and paten were afterwards used in his honour on special occasions at St Andrew's Cathedral. After the Lambeth conference in London, Hose submitted his formal resignation, in November 1908, and retired in England. He died at his home, the Manor House, Normandy, near Farnham, Surrey, on 26 March 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 38422


Mackintosh, John (1868-1920), confectionery manufacturer, was born in Dukinfield, Cheshire, on 7 July 1868, the son of Joseph Mackintosh, cotton spinner, and his wife, Mary Jane, 'nee' Burgess. Three months later, Joseph moved to Halifax to become a foreman at the cotton spinners Bowman Brothers, which was managed by his brother, John. Mary Mackintosh, having taught at her own father's school and at the Methodist New Connexion Sunday school, Queen's Road, Halifax, had to undertake the education of her son, John, who at the age of ten began work as a half-timer at Bowman Brothers. Halifax was a stronghold of the small Methodist New Connexion church, and the Mackintoshs were active and founding members of the Queen's Road congregation. By 1881, at the age of thirteen, John Mackintosh was employed full-time on doubling machines, twisting yarn into thread. 
In 1890 Mackintosh married a confectioner's assistant and fellow member of his chapel, Violet Taylor, the daughter of a carpet weaver. In the same year they used their joint savings of $100 to open a pastry shop at King Cross Lane, Halifax, Violet running their small enterprise, while John continued to work at the cotton mill. Mackintosh began to search for a speciality which would distinguish his shop and attract custom on the Saturday half-holiday, and Violet developed a recipe which blended the traditional, brittle English butterscotch with caramel, a softer confectionery mainly imported at the time from the USA. They called their new line Mackintosh's Celebrated Toffee, and it was Mackintosh's success that ultimately transformed popular understanding of the term 'toffee', previously a description of any sugar or boiled sweet. When his father died in 1891, aged only forty-eight, Mackintosh had to take responsibility for his mother, five sisters, and a brother, in addition to his wife, but by the middle of the year sales of Celebrated Toffee enabled him to resign from his job at the cotton mill. When new bus routes ceased to carry customers past his house, he responded by setting up a stall at Halifax market, while his wife continued to supervise the shop. By 1894 he had established a trade outside his home town, and he began to rent a small warehouse in Bond Street, Halifax, and, one year later, bigger premises at Hope Street, where he could make his toffee on a larger scale. 
The firm was converted into a limited liability company, John Mackintosh Ltd, in 1899. Mackintosh wanted to build a new works at Queen's Road, the site of his Methodist congregation, but could only raise $11,000 of the $15,000 needed. With much difficulty, he persuaded his sceptical bank manager to lend the shortfall, and the company failed to pay dividends for many years. Mackintosh was determined to reinvest his profits, and his expansion plans remained ambitious. In 1909 the Queen's Road factory was burnt down, and Mackintosh used the insurance money of $20,000 to buy the empty Albion Mills. The Queen's Road factory was rebuilt, undertaking the manufacture of chocolate in 1912, and by 1914 John Mackintosh Ltd employed some 1000 people. The scale of Mackintosh's ambition is especially revealed by his overseas activities. In 1904 he began production in a factory at Asbury Park, New Jersey, but the venture soon faltered, causing large financial losses and forcing Mackintosh to restore his fortune. He nevertheless opened a works at Crefeld, near Dusseldorf, in 1906, later sending his son to Germany in order to learn the language. By 1914 he had also established manufacturing operations in Australia and Canada. 
Mackintosh was deeply influenced by his religion and local chapel life. These associations moulded his moral outlook, his charitable gifts, and his belief in the work ethic. He owed his education, his earliest insights into organization, the management of people, and, possibly, advertising to the Methodist New Connexion. His sect encouraged lay leadership, and as a result Mackintosh emerged at an early age as a key figure within his local congregation. In 1884, when fifteen years old, he sat on his chapel's Band of Hope committee. The Sunday school had some 600 members and 60 officers in the 1880s, and Mackintosh served continuously as a staff member for almost thirty years. He was its librarian from 1886 to 1889, its minute secretary from 1889 to 1895, and superintendent from 1895 to 1914. In addition he acted as secretary to the chapel's trustees from 1899 to 1920. Between 1900 and 1909 he was circuit secretary for West Halifax and circuit treasurer from 1909 to 1914, the New Connexion having become part of the United Methodists in 1907. He was a regular delegate to the annual denominational conference, but from 1914 failing health forced him to relinquish his regional and national offices. 
Mackintosh was a physically large, modest, and unpretentious man, who never forgot his origins, and his life and emotional commitment revolved around his family, his business, and the Queen's Road chapel. Although he assisted individual members of his congregation financially, he ensured that the chapel remained independent of his wealth. He gained a reputation for his support of local causes. At his factories he exhibited the characteristics of Christian paternalism, and during the First World War he provided $10,000 to the families of employees on active service. He found no calling to public life until his election as a Liberal member of Halifax town council in 1913, and, belatedly, in 1918 he was appointed a borough magistrate. 
It was marketing which enabled Mackintosh to establish his toffee as a leading British consumer product. When he first produced his Celebrated Toffee in 1891 he issued handbills, in the same way he would have done to advertise a chapel meeting, and he was soon utilizing newspapers and posters. Through his religious connections he may already have acquired an ease with public speaking and a facility for dealing with people, but he also possessed an innate flair for and understanding of publicity. He emphasized the uniqueness and quality of his toffee, wrapping and selling it in attractive containers. As early as 1896 Mackintosh was calling himself the 'Toffee King'. In 1902 he introduced a consumer and coupon competition, the prize being a model cottage worth $250, and he followed this with two scholarships of $30 per annum and with the forwarding of free samples. He came to appreciate the power and advertising value of the popular media, and in 1903 his products began to appear on the front page of the 'Daily Mail'. 
During the First World War the number of employees fell from 1000 to 250, and the German factory was sequestered. In 1917 Mackintosh Ltd developed a line, Toffee-De-Luxe, that was to emerge as its lead product over the next decade, and in 1919 it introduced an employee bonus scheme of $1 for each year of service. By 1920 the company had assets of $350,512. Mackintosh himself was made a director of the Halifax Equitable Bank in 1916, later becoming its vice-chairman as well as vice-chairman of the Equitable Building Society. He was the president of several sports clubs, and had a keen interest in bowling, football, and cricket. When John Mackintosh & Sons Ltd was restructured as a public company in 1921, employee numbers had been restored to their pre-war levels, and output was sixty times the volume achieved in 1899, the year it first became a limited company. Its capital of $750,000 was fully subscribed, with 90 per cent of the ordinary shares controlled by the family. In pursuit of his business interests John Mackintosh was widely travelled, but he continued to live at his modest terraced house in Halifax, the base of his manufacturing operations, and the venue of his religious, charitable, and temperance work. Regarded as unaffected and sympathetic, and as mindful of obligations to his community, he was a man who on several occasions risked his whole fortune to establish a business and one of Britain's most recognizable product lines. He suffered from bad health and died from a heart attack at his house at Greystones, Savile Park, Halifax, on 27 January 1920, aged fifty-one. He was survived by his wife and three sons, the eldest of whom, Harold Vincent Mackintosh, became chairman of the family firm on his father's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 38423


Shaw, Percy (1890-1976), manufacturer and inventor of the catseye road stud, was born on 15 April 1890 at Heginbottom Fold, 32 Ovenden Road, Halifax, the second son of James Shaw (1843-1929), a Halifax dyer's labourer, and his second wife, Esther Hannah Morrell (1856-1922), daughter of Joseph and Grace Morrell of Shelf, near Halifax. In 1891 nine of the fourteen children of his father's two marriages were living at home, and in the following year the family moved to 1 Mill Lane, Boothtown, Halifax, which remained Percy Shaw's home for the rest of his life. 
From childhood, Shaw demonstrated a spirit of resourcefulness, contributing to the family budget by hawking home-produced fruit, herbs, and vegetables around the neighbourhood. He received his earliest education at Boothtown board school, leaving at the age of thirteen to commence work as a labourer at a blanket mill, but later attending evening classes in shorthand and bookkeeping. Low wages compelled him to abandon an apprenticeship with a Halifax wire manufacturer, and after a succession of jobs in welding, boilermaking, and machine tool construction, he went into partnership with his father in a small business specializing in the repair of mangle rollers, which supplied government contracts for cartridge cases, shell noses, and heddle wire during the First World War. After his father's death, Shaw built up a flourishing business constructing macadamized paths and drives, for which he developed a miniature motorized roller. 
An early motoring enthusiast, Shaw's experience of negotiating the hazardous descent from Queensbury to Halifax after the removal of the tramlines, which had guided the motorist at night and in fog, induced a concern to improve road safety. Whether it was the reflection of his car headlamps on a reflective roadsign, as Shaw insisted in 1968, or his brother Cecil's perhaps apocryphal story of a cat's eyes transfixed in a beam of light, he realized by 1934 the need for reflecting studs set into the road surface as markers on unlit roads. A patent for a prototype road stud, in the shape of a Maltese cross, was approved in 1935 and a company formed, with the catseye as its registered trademark, and Percy Shaw as managing director. Initially, luminous glass lenses were obtained from Czechoslovakia and rubber pads from Manchester, but subsequently all components were manufactured and assembled on a 20 acre site at Boothtown, adjacent to Shaw's home. A series of further patents modified the original design, including the incorporation of a self-wiping mechanism, but orders were slow until Ministry of Transport backing, and the Second World War blackout, provided a major boost to production. Widening markets after the war ensured continuing expansion. In 1965 Shaw was appointed OBE for services to exports, and by the time of his death in 1976 some 15 million catseyes had been manufactured. 
The broadcasters Richard Dimbleby and Alan Whicker travelled to Halifax in 1952 and 1968 respectively to interview Shaw -- by now a celebrity -- whose invention Whicker succinctly described as 'a blinking marvel' ('The world of Whicker: Whicker with the catseyes man on the road from Rose Linda's', Yorkshire Television, 1968). Photographic and film archive reveals Shaw in later life as an engagingly eccentric Yorkshireman, short-statured, with Churchillian features, a droll sense of humour, and a penchant for straw hats. 
It was widely, if inaccurately, assumed that Shaw's invention had made him a multi-millionaire. While Shaw himself often joked about his high tax liability, rumours of a $17 million personal fortune were repeatedly denied, and probate records reveal a relatively modest personal estate of $193,500. Apart from the luxury of a customized Rolls-Royce and a profusion of television sets, Shaw's lifestyle was essentially unostentatious. He owned only two suits and often appeared attired in worn, moth-eaten pullovers. Alan Whicker compared the spartan atmosphere of the living-room at his home at Boothtown to a railway station waiting-room. Shaw rejected conventional domestic adornments such as curtains or carpets, cooked all his own meals, and stacked crockery and cutlery on open shelves, thus dispensing with the need for cupboards. Indeed, he was a somewhat reclusive figure in later years, rarely visiting his factory, except when it was closed, or leaving his home, except to play a round of golf. He died on 1 September 1976, a bachelor, at the age of eighty-six, from cancer and heart disease. An agnostic, towards the end of his life Shaw developed a close personal friendship with a local Methodist minister, who conducted his funeral service at Boothtown Methodist Church and cremation at Park Wood, Elland, on 6 September 1976. 


@@@@@


doc= 38427


Pigou, Francis (1832-1916), dean of Bristol, was born at Baden-Baden, Germany, on 8 January 1832, the second son of William George Pigou, an army officer of Huguenot descent. He had two brothers and four sisters and spent his early childhood outside England. He was educated at the Moravian School at Neuwied, Germany, and at Ripon grammar school, Cheltenham College, and Edinburgh Academy. This was followed by four years at the Divinity School at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1853, and MA in 1857. 
Ordained in 1855 by Bishop Samuel Wilberforce, he served his first curacy at Stoke Talmage in Oxfordshire. The rector, who was famous for his port, was ninety-two, and immediately gave Pigou all his sermons and all his father's sermons. In 1856 he was rescued from this isolated and moribund parish by a former bishop of Madras, G. J. T. Spencer (1799-1866), who appointed him to the chaplaincy of the Marboeuf Chapel in Paris. After returning to London in 1859, he served brief curacies at St Peter's, Vere Street; St Philip's, Regent Street; St Mary Abbot's, Kensington; and St Paul's, Kensington, before becoming vicar of St Philip's, Regent Street, in 1860. He exercised a lively ministry in this parish, which included fashionable areas as well as appalling slums and rowdy theatre districts. On 3 January 1860 he married Mary, 'nee' Somers; they had two daughters. Mary died in 1868, and in January of the following year he married Harriet Maude, 'nee' Gambier. 
From 1869 to 1875 Pigou was vicar of Doncaster, and then from 1875 to 1888 vicar and rural dean of Halifax. Thirty-four livings were in his gift. His vigorous style was much appreciated in Yorkshire. He restored Halifax parish church, where there was a famous choir. He was also an honorary canon of Ripon Cathedral 1885-8 and chaplain-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria 1871-89. Trinity College, Dublin, awarded him the honorary degrees of BD and DD in 1878. 
Pigou became dean of Chichester in 1888, but found the city unbearably sleepy. Following the unhappy ministry there of Dean Burgon, Pigou brought unity and peace to the chapter and was kindly and hospitable to the diocesan clergy. Although he claimed to be a 'high-church evangelical', he adopted the eastward position at communion services, restored the lady chapel for worship, and rescued the cloisters from ruin. 
After three years at Chichester, Pigou became dean of Bristol, which offered more scope for his energy. He furnished each altar in the cathedral with a cross, candlesticks, and flowers, provided cassocks and surplices for the choir, entertained the vergers to tea, and took a great interest in the choristers and the choral services. He immersed himself in the social life of Bristol and Clifton. Although never at a loss for conversation or anecdotes, he was given little part in diocesan life, and his attempt to interest younger clergy in 'New Testament' Greek classes was unsuccessful. 

'The Times' described Pigou's sermons as being characterized 'by real unction if not by profound thought', but he was popular both for his parochial missions and for his retreat addresses. He published two volumes of reminiscences, 'Phases of my Life' (1898) and 'Odds and Ends' (1903). He died at Bristol on 25 January 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 38429


Crossley, John (1812-1879), industrialist and philanthropist, was born on 16 May 1812 in Halifax, the sixth of the eight children of John Crossley (c.1772-1837) ['see under 'Crossley, Martha], carpet manufacturer, and his wife, Martha Crossley (1775-1854), daughter of Abraham Turner (1747-1805) of Upper Scout Farm, Northowram, near Halifax. His father, a former carpet weaver, had founded the family carpet manufacturing business at Dean Clough, Halifax, in 1822, following two decades in partnership with other carpet manufacturers. After his death in 1837 the firm continued as John Crossley & Sons under the direction of his three youngest sons, John, Joseph, and Francis Crossley, and by the time of John's death in 1879 it had become the largest carpet manufacturing firm in the world. 
It is not easy to distinguish the individual contributions to the success of the firm of the three brothers, who maintained an effective and harmonious business partnership. Joseph, who unlike his brothers played no prominent role in public life, is often characterized as the partner most closely involved in the day-to-day management of the firm, while Francis has been portrayed as the most enterprising and innovative, taking the initiative in the development of steam-powered tapestry carpet production, which provided the springboard for the firm's mid-century expansion. However, John's association with the firm, extending over a half a century, was the longest, including forty years as senior partner and chairman of the board of directors. During this period the firm became a pioneering joint-stock company, with the primary aim of enabling employees to become shareholders, achieving by the early 1870s annual carpet sales of $1,100,000, including exports to the United States valued at nearly $500,000. On his retirement John Crossley expressed particular satisfaction that for nearly forty years 'no dispute or misunderstanding has occurred but such as was there and then, by mutual compromise, adjusted' ('Halifax Courier', 19 April 1879). Later, Uriah Bairstow, a former employee, contrasted the management styles of Francis, 'the shrewd businessman', and Joseph, 'a terror to evil doers', with the more sympathetic approach to personnel of John, whose 'great kindness and his great regard for the people and their great regard for him' was universally acknowledged ('Calderdale District Archives', DC 1737). 
Samuel Smiles, the apostle of Victorian self-help, commending the approach of the Crossley brothers' father to parenting, observed: 'when at home, he always had one of his sons near him; or when he went from home, he always took one of them with him', thereby equipping them with 'a great deal of practical knowledge of life' (Smiles, 238). As John Crossley later revealed, 'when he was about twelve years of age his father, finding that he was not making much progress at school, thought it would be a good thing to put him in his factory for twelve months', working a fifteen hour day ('Hansard 3', 218, 1874, 1773-6). He received no further formal education, apart from a year at the local grammar school in 1825-6. No less significant was the influence of the boys' remarkable mother, whose earnest evangelical nonconformity and celebrated vow that 'if the Lord does bless us at this place, the poor shall taste of it' (Smiles, 240) inspired both an unremitting commitment to work and a liberal philanthropy, which characterized the lives of all three brothers. 
Of the brothers, John made the most significant contribution to the life of the local community. A petitioner for Halifax's municipal charter, he served on the Halifax town council from its inception in 1848 until 1868, earning the unique distinction of serving four terms as mayor and hosting the first visit of a member of the British royal family to Halifax in 1863, when the prince of Wales opened Sir Charles Barry's magnificent new town hall. This sumptuous monument to Victorian municipal endeavour formed the centrepiece of a privately financed urban improvement scheme, commenced by John Crossley in 1851, which transformed an area of dilapidated back yards, workshops, stables, and piggeries into an elegant urban environment with wide streets and impressive stone buildings, which a visiting reporter later maintained 'would do credit to most European capitals' (Bretton, 18). Elsewhere in the town he constructed an Italianate model lodging house, with accommodation for fifty vagrants; promoted a non-profit-making model housing scheme, designed 'to encourage thrifty artisans, clerks and others to obtain freehold dwellings for themselves' (Hole, 75); and, with his brothers, founded and endowed a large orphanage, close to his ornate Gothic mansion at Manor Heath. Moreover, besides serving as a magistrate, chairman of the Halifax Commercial Banking Company, and a member of the Halifax school board, he was associated with the establishment of a building society, chamber of commerce, local newspaper, post office, and woollen market, and the construction of new reservoirs for the town. 
In February 1874 John Crossley accepted nomination as parliamentary candidate for Halifax and headed the poll, even though serious injuries sustained in a carriage accident in August 1873 had precluded his taking an active part in the contest. A Gladstonian Liberal and sabbatarian, he also supported militant dissenting campaigns for the disestablishment of the Church of England and the repeal of clause 25 of the 1870 'Education Act', which permitted payments from the rates to Anglican schools for the education of poor children. He was assiduous in his attendance at the House of Commons and served on the public departments (purchases) select committee in 1874, but rarely spoke in debates, experiencing some difficulty with 'spontaneous public utterance' ('Halifax Courier', 26 April 1879). His maiden speech in May 1874, while recognizing the value of the 'ten hour system', revealed his opposition to further extension of factory regulation, and in a subsequent speech he supported an amendment designed to enable the employment of children of nine years of age in factories. He resigned his seat in February 1877 as a result of continuing ill health and financial embarrassment arising from imprudent speculative investment, motivated in the view of his mentor, Dr Enoch Mellor, by 'an undercurrent of hope that immense public benefit would accrue' (ibid.) from the development of natural mineral resources rather than any desire for personal financial gain. 
John Crossley appears in photographs and portraits as a tall, soberly dressed figure, with a greying beard and whiskers, a gentle bearing, and kindly disposition. He had known personal tragedy when his first wife, Anne Child (1811-1846), the daughter of Kitchenman Child of Ovenden, whom he had married on 7 May 1839 and with whom he had a son and two daughters, died shortly after the birth of their third child. He remarried on 11 November 1847; his new wife was Sarah (1803-1879), daughter of Joseph Wheatley of Hopton and widow of John Hodgson of Halifax; they had no children. He was a devout Christian and chairman of the English Congregational Chapel Building Society, supporting numerous chapel and school building schemes, including the rebuilding in 1857 of Square Congregational Chapel, Halifax, where he was a devoted member, deacon, and Sunday school teacher. Enoch Mellor, the minister, described him in his funeral eulogy as essentially 'a plain man, simple as a child, artless, unambitious of name or honours, content to do good and to be hidden behind the good he did, and to die where his work was done' ('Halifax Courier', 26 April 1879). 
Unlike Francis Crossley, who acquired a country estate in Somerleyton, Suffolk, in 1861, and a baronetcy in 1863, John remained in Halifax until ill health and straitened financial circumstances obliged him to move to his daughter and son-in-law's home at Putney in 1878, before returning with them to Halifax, where he died at Broomfield, Skircoat, from heart disease on 16 April 1879. He was buried at Lister Lane cemetery; his civic funeral brought the busy town of Halifax to a halt, revealing the undiminished respect of the Halifax public for the last of the Crossley brothers, who had died an invalid, leaving less than $8000, in marked contrast to his brothers, Joseph and Francis, who had left personal estates valued at $900,000 and $800,000 respectively. He was survived by his wife, who died later in the year, by his only son, Louis John (1842-1891), a pioneer electrical scientist, and by his younger daughter, Anne (1846-1925), who had married Giulio Marchetti, formerly one of Garibaldi's redshirts and subsequently a director and chairman of John Crossley & Sons Limited. 


@@@@@


doc= 38430


Sunderland, Susan (1819-1905), singer, was born on 30 April 1819 at Spring Gardens, Slead Syke, Brighouse, Yorkshire, the daughter of James Sykes (1782-1846), a gardener, and his wife, Hannah (1785-1855). After her marriage to Henry Sunderland (1817-1893), a Brighouse butcher and farmer, on 7 June 1838, she moved to the nearby Spring Terrace (later 24 Waterloo Road), Waring Green, Brighouse, which remained her home for the rest of her life. Notwithstanding her humble social background, her early employment in a textile mill, her lack of a formal musical education, and her domestic responsibilities as a wife and mother of six children, she emerged from the distinctive West Riding tradition of choral music to become an accomplished singer of oratorio and popular songs during the period 1834-64 in both London and the provinces. However, she neither sought nor achieved the international celebrity status of her contemporaries Clara Novello, Jenny Lind, and Therese Tietjens, who judged Susan Sunderland's voice to be the finest English voice she had heard. 
Susan Sunderland received her earliest musical training from Luke Settle, a Brighouse blacksmith and later choirmaster of Brighouse parish church, who discovered her talents by accident in 1831; John Denham, choirmaster of the Bridge End Independent Chapel, Rastrick; and Daniel Sugden, who was associated with both the Halifax Choral Society and the Halifax Sunday School Jubilee Sings. She made her debut at Deighton, an industrial hamlet near Huddersfield, in 1834, became a founder member of the Huddersfield Choral Society in 1836, and sang with the Halifax Choral Society, the Yorkshire Choral Union, and church and chapel choirs in Brighouse, Huddersfield, Rastrick, Southowram. She attracted the attention of royalty, earning the compliments of the prince consort and the duke of Cambridge at her London debut at the Antient Concerts at the Hanover Square Rooms in 1842, and of Queen Victoria (who had reputedly been moved by her rendering of the national anthem at the opening of Leeds town hall in September 1858) at private performances at Buckingham Palace. Following a performance with the Sacred Harmonic Society at the Exeter Hall in December 1858, the 'Times' critic maintained that, with the exception of Clara Novello, there was no contemporary English singer able to render the soprano music of 'Messiah' 'so impressively'. 
Invariably simply attired for concert performance in black silk or satin enhanced with a small coral brooch, Sunderland was endowed with an imposing stature and prodigious stamina, frequently walking miles to attend her Yorkshire engagements. Critics admired the flexibility of her voice, her moving interpretation of Handel's 'I know that my redeemer liveth', and her repertory of popular songs, including 'Home, sweet home'. Her appeal evidently transcended social barriers. She sang at the annual soirees of the Brighouse Mechanics' Institute and participated in glee evenings in taverns and public houses in the county of her birth, where she was known affectionately as the Calderdale Nightingale and the Yorkshire Queen of Song, and where tickets for her concerts were evidently raffled in the mills. At her farewell concert in Huddersfield in 1864, crowds unable to gain admission to the Philosophical Hall listened outside open windows in the street below. Large crowds later assembled at Brighouse town hall for her golden wedding celebration in 1888, when she was presented with an illuminated address and inscribed silver casket. Additional subscriptions collected on this occasion funded the establishment of the Mrs Sunderland Music Festival, which has been held annually in Huddersfield since 1889 (except in 1940). 
After retiring at the height of her popularity at the age of forty-five, Sunderland taught privately. Widowed in 1893, she died aged eighty-six on 7 May 1905 and was buried on the 10th in Brighouse cemetery, where huge crowds, many of whom would have been too young to have heard her sing, assembled to witness the surviving members of her family (three of her children had predeceased her), local dignitaries, and the musical fraternity of Yorkshire paying their last respects to one of the county's most distinguished vocalists. 


@@@@@


doc= 38435


Albone, Daniel (1860-1906), cycle and motor tractor manufacturer, was born at the Ongley Arms inn, Shortmead Street, Biggleswade, Bedfordshire, on 12 September 1860, the fourth son and youngest of eight children of Edward Albone (died 1864), publican and market gardener, and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Gilby (died 1883). The death of his father, who was tenant of the Ongley Arms, left his mother with a large family to bring up and she continued to run the inn while ensuring that the children received schooling. Dan was also a church chorister. On his ninth birthday he was given a Boneshaker bicycle by his cousin and became a keen cyclist. About 1872 he was apprenticed to the Biggleswade millwrights and engineers Thomas Course & Son, Hitchin Street. Being mechanically minded he designed and built his first bicycle, a spider cycle with suspension wheels, in 1873. By 1880 he was advertising bicycles for sale, which he manufactured in the outhouses of the Ongley Arms, and which he named the Ivel Cycle Works after the nearby River Ivel. Also in 1880 he started the Biggleswade and District Cycling Club, for which he rode in races. 
From 1880 Albone marketed lightweight racing bicycles, to which he added tricycles in 1882 and a safety bicycle in 1885. Following his mother's death he became landlord of the Ongley Arms, which became a stopping place for cyclists on the Great North Road, combining the occupations of innkeeper and cycle manufacturer. He advertised his products by racing them. In 1885 he won open races over 2 miles at Oundle, Lincolnshire, and 1 mile at Crystal Palace, and was an original member of the North Road Cycling Club, founded in December 1885. 
In 1886 Albone developed the Ivel Automatic Steerer, a tricycle which could be ridden with minimal use of the handles. Also in 1886 he marketed a cross-framed Ivel safety bicycle, of the type designed by John Kemp Starley, Hillman, and Cooper. Ridden by George Pilkington Mills in October 1886 to break the 50 mile record on the Great North Road, the Ivel safety bicycle was advertised as 'the fastest bicycle ever made' (Irvine and Miller, 23). He followed this in 1887 by marketing a drop-frame safety bicycle for women, which was one of the first to be commercially produced. Other innovations included his design of low-friction ball-bearing axles which used to produce pony traps. 
Albone married on 23 August 1887 Elizabeth (1860-1936), daughter of Charles Moulden, tailor; they had a son and a daughter. In 1887 he became proprietor of the Ivel Hotel in Biggleswade, next to the Ongley Arms. The Ivel Cycle Company Ltd, incorporated in March 1888, had expanded to employ fifty men, and Albone travelled around Britain establishing agencies for its products. In September 1888 he won the international 5 km Tricycle Scratch Race at Sheveningen, Holland, which he regarded as his greatest racing achievement. Pneumatic tyres were fitted to Ivel cycles from 1890 and in 1892 he patented a wickerwork child carrier fitted to the front of cycles. His firm was affected by the recession in the cycle trade in 1893, brought about by overproduction, and went into voluntary liquidation, but resumed cycle making in 1894. 
Albone constructed a prototype motor car in 1898 and exhibited it in London in 1900, having in 1899 sold one to the duke of Bedford. His work on car design benefited from his experience of cycle building, which gave him an understanding of lightness and strength. The Ivel motor car had independent suspension, pneumatic tyres, and a choice of one or two cylinder Benz engines. He produced an Ivel motor bicycle in 1901, including a version designed for women. 
Albone also began experiments in using petrol-driven engines for agricultural purposes, where they had the advantage of being lightweight compared to existing steam traction engines. In the summer of 1902 he demonstrated a motor-driven three-wheeler to cut a field of hay and followed this by demonstrations of ploughing. In November 1902 he applied for a patent for a motor tractor for agricultural purposes, which was accepted in 1903, and in December 1902 registered Ivel Agricultural Motors Ltd to produce the new machines. The other directors included Selwyn Edge and Charles Jarrott. The tractors were marketed in 1903, received much publicity and orders from around the world, and won a silver medal at the Royal Agricultural Society show in 1904. The Ivel tractor has been seen as the forerunner of later, multi-purpose tractors, and were the most successful of the early British tractors, although the number in use on British farms remained very small before the First World War. Albone foresaw the military potential of his invention, demonstrating an armoured version to War Office officials in 1903. One of his last inventions was the Ivel potato planter, which ploughed and then set potatoes. 
Albone was active in Conservative politics in Bedfordshire, and was secretary of the Licensed Victuallers' Association in the county. He was prominent in the town's celebrations on the relief of Mafeking in 1900. He died on 30 October 1906 at the Ivel Hotel, Biggleswade, where he was taken after collapsing from an apoplectic fit due to cerebral haemorrhage while receiving a telephone call at the Ivel Cycle and Motor Works. He was buried in Biggleswade cemetery on 2 November. In recognition of his achievement in designing the first successful light internal-combustion engine agricultural tractor, the Albone glacier in Antarctica was named for him in 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 38436


Aveling, Thomas (1824-1882), engineer and manufacturer of steamrollers, was born at Elm, near Wisbech, on 11 September 1824, the eldest of three sons. He came from an old-established Cambridgeshire family, but he moved to Rochester in Kent as a boy, when his widowed mother remarried. About 1836 he was apprenticed to a farmer, Edward Lake, whose niece, Sarah Lake (died 1898), he was to marry. However, his interest in agricultural implements proved to be greater than in other areas of farming and in 1856, with support from his father-in-law, Robert Lake, he bought a small millwrighting business in Rochester. He and his wife had at least one son, Thomas Lake Aveling ['see below']. 
Aveling's engineering skills were directed to two main areas of work. The first was the development of a self-moving steam engine for use on the farm and the road. His patented work on driving and steering mechanisms gave him the success that resulted in his being known as the father of the traction engine. The second area in which he was a pioneer was the manufacture of steam road rollers, which he first began to build in 1865. Although he did not originate the idea, he was the first to develop the steamroller into a practical machine. 
In 1862 Aveling took as his business partner Richard Thomas Porter, who handled the commercial side of the business, working from an office in London. The expansion of Aveling and Porter brought prominence to Aveling, who served on Rochester borough council until 1871 and as mayor in 1869-70. He was a member of the council of the Royal Agricultural Society of England from 1875 to 1882, a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, and the Iron and Steel Institute. One of his recreations was sailing, and it was on a yachting excursion that he caught the chill from which he died on 7 March 1882 at his home, Boley Hill House, Rochester. 


Under Aveling's direction, Aveling and Porter concentrated most of its efforts on the production of steamrollers. There was an expanding market, both in Britain and overseas, as roads were being remade to suit modern needs, especially after the advent of motor transport. The success of this policy was that Aveling and Porter met about 70 per cent of the British market for road rollers in the early twentieth century. The firm continued to make various products such as traction engines, ploughing engines, steam wagons, and tramway locomotives, but many others were contracted out. Aveling and Porter threshing machines, for example, were made by Nalder and Nalder of Wantage. 
After the First World War, Aveling and Archibald Maconochie, a friend and neighbour in Kent, promoted the formation of Agricultural and General Engineers Ltd. This was a publicly quoted holding company which took over the businesses of Aveling and Porter Ltd, James and Frederick Howard Ltd, and twelve other firms engaged in agricultural and related engineering. The intention was to rationalize the industry through the merger, but this was not fulfilled. The holding company's central overhead costs tended to outweigh savings from the limited amount of integration between the constituent companies. Aveling and Porter's business began to suffer, and by 1928, when Aveling retired, the number of employees had declined and short-time working had been implemented for many of those that remained. Agricultural and General Engineers collapsed in 1932, and in the aftermath Aveling and Porter merged with Barford and Perkins. The new firm, Aveling Barford Ltd, closed the works at Rochester, transferring its operations to Grantham. Thomas Lake Aveling did not live to see the demise of his business. He suffered a heart attack on 5 October 1931, and died that day at his home, Pettings Court, Ash, near Wrotham, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 38437


Bastin, (Alfred) Harold (1875-1962), entomologist and photographer, was born at 48 Lower Union Street, Torquay, on 7 July 1875, the son of Richard Bastin (1849-1917), an ironmonger, and his wife, Priscilla Barter (1850-1933), originally from Reading. He had a Quaker upbringing and the family (of two sons and two daughters) moved between Alton and Reading in the decade 1878-88 before finally settling in his mother's home town (although his restless father continued to reside elsewhere for long periods). Schooled in Alton and in Reading, Bastin's interest in insects was developed through visits to the department of entomology at the British Museum (Natural History), London. By 1903 he had established an entomology business in Reading with his younger brother, Leonard (1880-1947). On 4 July 1905 Bastin married, at Altrincham in Cheshire, Ellen Mary (1873-1971), daughter of Alfred Taylor, a clergyman, and a sister of Alfred Edward Taylor (1869-1965), professor of moral philosophy at the universities of St Andrews and Edinburgh. Bastin's brother, Leonard, left Reading around this time, and by 1909 Bastin had moved to 7 Upper Redlands Road. A son and daughter were both born in Reading and for a period of over forty years Bastin made a living from model making, photography, and writing. 
Bastin's models illustrated the life history of insects and the damage caused by insect pests and plant diseases, and he developed a technique for reproducing artificial flowers and leaves from wax-filled moulds. He supplied models to various museums, schools, and other institutions, including Reading and Bristol museums, the British Museum (Natural History), Charterhouse School, the Royal Horticultural Society, and Sutton's Seeds of Reading. A notable example of his skill was the cabinet of economic insects commissioned by Professor F. J. Cole for the department of zoology at the University of Reading (later displayed in the Cole Museum of Zoology). Bastin also became a professional photographer and assembled an extensive commercial negative library covering all aspects of natural history, among which entomology continued to occupy a prime place. His range of subjects also extended to scenes of farming, rural industries, and town and country life in the southern counties of England. His photographs of woodland industries taken before the 1920s are of a remarkable quality and provide a valuable record of trades now extinct in their traditional form. 
Bastin employed his photographs to illustrate his books, the products of a writing career of over forty years. His first work, 'Insects: their Life-Histories and Habits' (1913) set out the aim he was to follow in all his writing on insects: 'An attempt is made to set forth in simple terms the salient facts on entomology'. This was followed by 'British Insects, and How to Know them' (1917), 'Introducing British Butterflies' (1937), and three final volumes published in 'Hutchinson's Nature Library', 'Freaks and Marvels of Insect Life' (1954), 'Plants without Flowers' (1955), and 'Insect Communities' (1956). Several of his books were translated into other European languages, including German, and appeared in American editions; he also contributed to other works. 
Bastin died of heart failure on 22 March 1962 at 36 St Catherine's Road, Southbourne and was cremated at Bournemouth crematorium on 27 March. He had always been a retiring man and his death away from his adopted home of Reading, where he had lived for over seventy years, passed virtually unnoticed. Nevertheless, he impressed his contemporaries, and Richard Ford of Yarmouth, Isle of Wight, described him as 'a wonderful naturalist and observer of entomology' (private information). He began his career in an era of widespread popular enthusiasm for the practice of natural history, before entomology became a more specialized pursuit and before the practice of collecting and selling specimens from the wild had lost favour. Bastin's principal achievement was that of a popularizer of natural history through his books, photographs, and models, which ensured that his meticulous craftsmanship and powers of observation were recorded and transmitted to the benefit of others. 


@@@@@


doc= 38438


Taunt, Henry William (1842-1922), photographer, was born in Penson's Gardens, St Ebbe's, Oxford, on 14 June 1842, the only son of Henry Taunt ('c'.1821-1882), a plumber and glazier, and his wife, Martha Darter ('c'.1813-1886). He was educated at Penson's Gardens Sunday school and St Ebbe's national school and also at the church school in West Ilsley, Berkshire, his mother's home village. After leaving school about 1852, he worked with his father and in several shops in Oxford before joining Edward Bracher, an early Oxford photographer, in 1856. He started as a basic utility hand and took his first photograph, a group in Exeter College quad, about 1858. When Bracher sold his business to Wheeler and Day, the High Street stationers, in 1863, Taunt became their photographic manager. On 17 September 1863 he married Miriam Jeffrey (1837/8-1929), an Oxford dressmaker, the daughter of Stephen Jeffrey, a gardener; the couple had no children. 
In 1868 Taunt set up as a photographer on his own account, opening a small but central shop at 33 Cornmarket Street in 1869. His photographs of the Oxford area and the River Thames soon attracted praise and he publicized them through magic-lantern lectures and in his book, 'A New Map of the River Thames' (1872), which included paste-down prints and his own survey of the river between Oxford and London. In 1874 he moved to larger premises at 9-10 Broad Street and he had a branch at Easton Street in High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, between about 1875 and 1889. In 1889 Taunt leased Canterbury House in Cowley Road, renamed it Rivera after the River Thames, and established his main photographic and printing works in the grounds. A dispute over renewal of the lease of his Broad Street shop forced Taunt into bankruptcy in 1895 with debts which he estimated at over $3000. He moved his central premises to 41 High Street and later to no. 34 but, from 1906, he operated solely from Rivera. By 1922 he had amassed over 60,000 negatives, though his assistants, notably Randolph Adams, took many of the later photographs. In his later years he became a prolific author of local histories and guidebooks, publishing over fifty titles; he also diversified into printing and became a major publisher of picture postcards. Between 1893 and 1906 he was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. 
Taunt was a tall, distinguished-looking man with a full beard, almost invariably seen wearing nautical garb and a yachting cap. He was a competent musician and was at one time organist and choir leader at St Mary Magdalen Church in Oxford; his sense of fun was demonstrated by humorous poetic jingles and annual children's entertainments but he was also a fierce campaigner, battling for clean city water in 1880 and against electric tramways in 1906. A Conservative nationally, he deplored local party politics and stood unsuccessfully as an independent candidate for the city council's west ward in 1880 and 1881. He never suffered fools gladly and was convicted of assault in 1878 after a fight with an apprentice. Henry Taunt died at Rivera on 4 November 1922 and was buried on 9 November in Rose Hill cemetery, Church Cowley Road, Cowley; his wife survived him. Like many other nineteenth-century photographers, Taunt documented the local urban and rural scene but his artistic temperament and historian's eye raised his work on to a higher plane and gave it an enduring appeal. 


@@@@@


doc= 38440


Sutcliffe, Francis Meadow (1853-1941), photographer, was born on 6 October 1853 at Headingley, Leeds, Yorkshire, the eldest son of the painter Thomas Sutcliffe (1828-1871) and his wife, Sarah Lorentia Button (died 1915). Thomas Sutcliffe attempted to establish a career as a watercolour painter selling to Yorkshire patrons, but he died young; after an elementary education at a dame-school, his son Frank tried to support the family by taking up the relatively new technology of photography. By this time the family was living on the Yorkshire coast near Whitby, a town with which Sutcliffe's name and work was to become inextricably linked. 
Frank Sutcliffe was one of the first generation of practitioners to take on photography and to devote a lifetime to investigating its potential. His work demonstrates photography's role as a direct, expressive medium through which he was able to convey his vision of the life of ordinary people and the landscape in which he lived and worked. In this he was very different from many earlier photographers who had often been businessmen looking for new openings or painters seeking ways of making a living in a changing world. He resented the fact that he had to make his living as a portrait photographer, working first in Tunbridge Wells, Kent, and then for over half a century in Whitby. His father had brought him into contact with prominent men in the art world including John Ruskin, whom Sutcliffe visited and photographed at his home, Brantwood, in 1873. Throughout his career he nurtured higher ambitions, though he was also a shrewd and hard-working businessman and was routinely in touch with the successful commercial photographers of the day, such as Francis Frith. Thus Sutcliffe led a double life, taking portraits of holidaymakers during the summer season and producing photographs for himself which were exhibited and admired around the world. His work was shown at and won prizes in exhibitions from London to Chicago and Tokyo; prints made from his negatives have been on sale to visitors to the Yorkshire coast, and more widely, for over 120 years. 
Sutcliffe's business in his Skinner Street studio rooted him to Whitby and Eskdale, but what seemed to him initially to be a severe disadvantage actually proved an immense strength in his work. He left the most complete and revealing photographic record of a late Victorian town and the people who lived there. Not only was he a superb photographer, but he was known by everyone in the community, who co-operated with him in photographing the everyday life of the area, its fishing activities, and the changing seasons. His most famous photograph, entitled 'Water Rats' and taken in 1886, shows the misty east side of Whitby, with young boys playing by a boat in the harbour water. There was some contemporary comment from locals concerning the indecency of photographing naked boys (who were, moreover, on the run from the truancy officer), but the image is hardly erotic. It is probably best interpreted as a realist image filtered through a high art lens: Sutcliffe was clearly experimenting with the traditional conventions of the academic nude in an attempt to illustrate how photography could reach to the level of art. 
Sutcliffe's misty landscapes, with the sun breaking through the sea fret and figures in the foreground set against hazy backgrounds, were early examples of naturalistic photography of the kind promoted by P. H. Emerson. In both his photography and his writing, Sutcliffe showed an awareness of the techniques and the ideas of other visual artists, such as the French painter Jean-Francois Millet. His work embodied a sophisticated approach previously seen in painting, combined with the strength of the direct recording powers of the camera. His style and subject matter were much admired and much copied, and he was one of the photographers asked by Kodak to demonstrate the potential of their new snapshot cameras, including panoramic cameras. 
Sutcliffe married a woman from a local family, Eliza Weatherill Duck ('b'. 1847/8), the daughter of a bootmaker, on 1 January 1875 and brought up one son and three daughters in Sleights, near Whitby, where he built himself a substantial house on the proceeds of his photographic business. A prolific writer on photographic subjects, he contributed to the 'Amateur Photographer', the 'Photographic Journal', and many other periodicals. For over twenty years he wrote a photography column in the 'Yorkshire Weekly Post'. In 1922 he retired from photography to become the curator of the Whitby Museum, and in 1935 he was made an honorary fellow of the Royal Photographic Society. Frank Sutcliffe died at his home in Carr Hill Lane, Sleights, on 31 May 1941 and was buried in the churchyard at Aislaby, overlooking the Esk valley. His work is in the collection of the Whitby Literary and Philosophical Society in the Whitby Museum, and in national collections such as the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television in Bradford. 


@@@@@


doc= 38442


Grimshaw, (John) Atkinson (1836-1893), landscape painter, was born on 6 September 1836 at 9 Back Park Street, Leeds, the third son of six children of David Grimshaw ('b'. 1811), a policeman, and his wife, Mary Atkinson. In 1842 the family moved to Norwich, where Grimshaw briefly attended the grammar school. In 1848 the Grimshaws moved back to Leeds, where David Grimshaw obtained a job on the railways; the family also kept a grocer's shop in Brunswick Row. By 1852 Grimshaw had obtained a position as a clerk with the Great Northern Railway Company. He had begun to paint by the late 1850s and does not seem to have received any formal training as an artist. Family tradition relates that his mother disapproved of this activity, threw his paints on the fire, and even turned off the gas in his room. 
On 24 October 1856 Grimshaw married his cousin, Frances Theodosia (1835-1917), daughter of James Dibdin Hubbard, editor of the 'Wakefield Journal'. The couple first lived in Wallace Street, New Wortley, Leeds. In 1861 Grimshaw gave up his railway job to paint full time. His early paintings were small in scale and consisted of still-life studies of birds' nests, fruit and flowers, and woodland scenes. His few attempts at figure painting were extremely tentative and hesitant. In emulation of Millais, Grimshaw signed his earliest pictures with a Gothic-style monogram 'JAG', then changed to using 'J. A. Grimshaw' and then 'John Atkinson Grimshaw'. By the late 1860s, however, he had decided on the form 'Atkinson Grimshaw' as his preferred name which was how he was usually known. 
Grimshaw's early paintings were influenced by the work of the Pre-Raphaelites. The Leeds stockbroker Thomas Plint owned a significant collection of modern paintings, including works by Millais, Holman Hunt, and D. G. Rossetti. Plint lent some of these works to the Leeds Philosophical and Literary Society, of which Grimshaw's father was a member. Another important influence was the Leeds-based painter of Pre-Raphaelite landscapes John William Inchbold (1830-1888), a friend of John Ruskin. Grimshaw was attracted to Ruskin's rallying call from 'Modern Painters' to 'go to nature in all singleness of heart' (Ruskin, 416), and for a brief period in the mid-1860s Grimshaw painted in minute detail in vivid colours on a white ground, emulating Inchbold and other Pre-Raphaelite artists. These were mainly views of the Lake District, for example 'The Bowder Stone' (Tate Collection), which followed a visit to the area in 1863. He also used photographs as an 'aide-memoire' for these lakeland views, and throughout his life may have relied on photography as a basis for some of his paintings. However, by the late 1860s Grimshaw had turned to the depiction of moonlight, which was to become his trademark. 
In 1870, after moving around Leeds, the Grimshaw family settled at Old Hall, Knostrop (dem. 1960), a seventeenth-century stone-built manor house 2 miles east of Leeds town centre. The setting would have had tremendous appeal to Grimshaw, whose Romanticism manifested itself in the titles of his paintings, often related to the works of Romantic poets, including Keats and Longfellow, and also in the names of his children. Old Hall remained the Grimshaw family's main home for the next twenty-three years; of the couple's fifteen children only six survived to adulthood. 
The 1870s were Grimshaw's most successful decade artistically and financially. He was represented by Thomas Agnew & Sons of Bond Street, London, who bought his paintings between 1871 and 1880 and showed his work at their London and provincial galleries. During this time the main elements of Grimshaw's most frequent subject matter and customary style emerged: damp, autumnal lanes featuring a lonely house and single figure, often illuminated by moonlight, seen through a trellis of bare branches. In 1874 the Royal Academy accepted 'The Lady of the Lea', a painting in this mode, for its annual exhibition. Grimshaw was to show there again in 1880, 1885, and 1886. Scenes of Liverpool, Hull, and Glasgow docks were another important subject, providing the artist with an endlessly varied compositional motif. Typically these works utilized a formula of converging buildings and dock-side shipping, a wet road reflecting passers-by and the lights from the shop windows, for example 'The Old Custom House, Liverpool, Looking North' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool). 
For a period from the mid-1870s until 1886 Grimshaw was also attracted to the style and technique of Lawrence Alma-Tadema and J. J. Tissot, producing similar pictures of fashionable ladies in settings from ancient Rome and in domestic interiors replete with a wealth of detail, for example 'Fiametta' (Cartwright Hall, Bradford) and 'Summer' (priv. coll.). In 1885, Grimshaw also exhibited at the recently established Grosvenor Gallery, London, a painting entitled 'A Vestal' (priv. coll.). Recognition encouraged the artist to rent a second home in Scarborough on the Yorkshire coast, overlooking North Bay. The town was to become Grimshaw's favourite subject, for example 'Lights in the Harbour' (Crescent Art Gallery, Scarborough), and he painted its streets and bay more often than any other locality. 
In the midst of this prosperity came disaster when Grimshaw was forced to guarantee a bill for a friend who defaulted. The details are unclear but family history dates the years of struggle and 'mass production' of paintings from about the beginning of the 1880s. The bill was probably taken over by the Harrogate solicitor Walter Battle, whose art collection included many Grimshaws. These may have been acquired as part payment of the debt. It must be supposed that the greatly increased output of paintings from the early 1880s was in response to the financial crisis. 
Grimshaw also painted a series of great views of London and the Thames, for example 'Reflections on the Thames, Westminster' (Leeds City Art Gallery). Such paintings are majestic in concept and realization; most have a blaze of light on the river and an all-enveloping film of colour. When Grimshaw needed to show human activity, figures were taken from engravings after Frank Holl and Gustave Dore. Family tradition also relates an artistic connection between Grimshaw and Whistler, who became acquainted when Grimshaw took a studio in Manresa Road, Chelsea, about 1885. Whistler supposedly remarked that he thought he had invented the nocturne until he saw Grimshaw's moonlights. 
In the last years of his life Grimshaw moved towards a simpler tonal arrangement in a series of river estuary paintings and two beach scenes, as well as some snow scenes painted in the last winter of his life, such as 'Snow and Mist: Caprice in Yellow Minor' (Leeds City Art Gallery). Grimshaw's paintings of Victorian streets and river life resonated with the influence of the poets Grimshaw loved: Keats, Tennyson, Longfellow. He died on 31 October 1893 at Old Hall, Knostrop, Leeds, and was buried on 4 November at Woodhouse cemetery, Leeds. 


@@@@@


doc= 38443


Marzials, Theophile-Jules-Henri (1850-1920), poet and songwriter, was, according to his gravestone, born at Bagneres de Bigorre, Hautes Pyrenees, France, on 20 December 1850. Though his family was living in France his birth was registered in Brussels. He was the youngest of the five children (two sons and three daughters) of Antoine-Theophile Marzials, a French protestant pastor, and his wife, Mary Ann Jackson, daughter of Thomas Jackson (1783-1873), Wesleyan Methodist minister. Francois-Thomas, later Sir Frank Marzials (1840-1912), who became accountant-general of the army and wrote biographies of writers, was his elder brother. In 1857 the family settled in London, at 2 Brunswick Row, Bloomsbury, on the appointment of Antoine-Theophile as pastor of the French protestant church at St Martin's-le-Grand. 
Marzials Anglicized his Christian names as Theophilus Julian Henry, but was known on his books and to friends as Theo. As a lyricist he sometimes used the pseudonym Mike Beverley. In September 1870 he joined the staff of the British Museum, as junior assistant in the principal librarian's office. According to John Betjeman, Max Beerbohm remembered Marzials 'with flowing moustaches, long hair and a silk tie that fell in folds over the lapels of his coat'. One day the superintendent of the museum's round reading-room witnessed Marzials, unaware of his presence, lean over the gallery and call out: 'Am I or am I not the darling of the reading room?' (Munro, 9). 
In June 1881 Marzials's hours at the British Museum were reduced in view of ill health and his 'punctuality and general good conduct' (Paden, 61). That year he took several months' leave without pay to visit Corfu, but on applying again in November 1882 was advised to resign on grounds of health. He was granted a pension of $38 a year. 
In his young days Marzials was remembered by Ford Madox Hueffer in 1911 as 'the handsomest, the wittiest, the most brilliant and the most charming of poets' (Hueffer, 48). In 1872 he had published as a pamphlet 'Passionate Dowsabella', a poem put the next year into his verse collection 'The Gallery of Pigeons'. Also in this volume was 'A Tragedy', with its concluding lines, 'Drop / Dead. / Plop, flop. / Plop.', which was anthologized by Richard Le Gallienne (1923), but by the end of the twentieth century was being claimed as the worst poem ever written. A review of the book said: 'Mr Marzials dwells among marble columns, oleanders, rebecks, pleasances, large-lipped women, soft brown limbs, and lissome thighs' ('Athenaeum', 26 July 1873). 
Marzials found great success with songs like 'Twickenham Ferry' (words and music, 1878); a setting of Christina Rossetti's 'My Love is Come'; and an English version of 'A Summer Night' (1881) by Arthur Goring Thomas, for whose opera 'Esmeralda' (1883) he and Alberto Randegger provided the libretto. Marzials became a friend of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, at whose house in Cheyne Walk he sang, and an intimate friend of Edmund Gosse, through whom he gained Swinburne's permission to set some of his poems to music, including 'Ask Nothing More of Me, Sweet', which became a popular ballad of the 1880s. Altogether Marzials published more than eighty songs. 'Pan Pipes' (1883), settings of Elizabethan and seventeenth-century songs, had coloured illustrations by Walter Crane. 
In 1884 Marzials was living in Florence, and wrote to Gosse of 'the life I so longed and prayed and worked for all those weary alien sodden years at the Museum' (Munro, 10). There he composed songs for the duchess of Teck and made an impression on her daughter May, later Queen Mary. In 1889 he stayed in Venice with John Addington Symonds, who wrote, 'He appears and disappears like a sprite, always eloquent and always bizarre' (ibid., 11). 
In 1894 Marzials was at the dinner in Old Compton Street in London to mark the first number of 'The Yellow Book', which published poems by him in volumes 3 and 7. By then he was addicted to chloral. But in 1900 Gosse found him saner than before: 'Those people who say that he is incoherent, off his head, and so forth, must be misled by the rapidity of change which has always characterised his talk' (Munro, 13). In 1911 Hueffer believed Marzials was dead, and recalled his habit of carrying chocolate creams loose in his pocket: 'On the last occasion when I happened to catch sight of him, looking into a case of stuffed birds at South Kensington Museum, he had eaten five large chocolates in the space of two minutes' (Hueffer, 48). 
From 1897 Marzials had lived, first at Blandford, Dorset, then shortly afterwards with his unmarried sister, Emilie-Louise, at Colyton, Devon, moving after her death to a ground-floor room at Elm Grove Farm, Colyton. A regular visitor found him occupying his bed in one corner day and night, beside a saucer of beetroot in vinegar, its smell mixing with chlorodyne, the fumes of an oil-lamp, and the steam from a stock pot always on the stove. A piano in the room was on occasion moved outdoors so he could play under the stars. Although he was always well groomed, he seldom wore socks, and slipped on boots without laces to walk outside. He had been seen barefoot in the garden in the early hours singing in a soft voice, taking up a flower now and then, kissing it, and murmuring, 'O, my pretty' (Munro, 15). He died at Colyton on 2 February 1920 and was buried in the cemetery there, under a stone with his dates and the inscription 'Fight the good fight of faith'. 


@@@@@


doc= 38445


Gilbey, Sir Walter, first baronet (1831-1914), wine merchant and horse breeder, was born on 2 May 1831 at Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire, the sixth son of Henry Gilbey, coach proprietor, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William Bailey of Stansted, Essex. Educated at Bishop's Stortford grammar school, Gilbey was briefly apprenticed to an estate agent cousin before taking employment with a parliamentary agent in London. At the outbreak of the Crimean War he joined his brother Alfred in applying for a civilian post in the War Office, and the two men travelled to the front, where they were engaged in administrative duties throughout the hostilities. In 1857, several years after their return to England, the brothers established themselves in the wine trade. 
On the advice of their elder brother, Henry, himself a prosperous wine merchant, the junior Gilbeys acquired premises on the corner of Berwick Street and Oxford Street in London and, with the assistance of a generous injection of capital from their brother, embarked on a course which, by 1860, was to make them the third largest importers of wine in Britain. Despite Gladstone's equalization of duties on colonial and foreign wines (to the disadvantage of the Gilbeys, who dealt solely in colonial products), the business flourished by means of direct sales to retail grocers via a country-wide system of local agencies. By 1869 the Gilbey holdings included a warehouse complex and gin distillery in Camden Town, London, while the 1880s witnessed the purchase of whisky distilleries in Scotland and a vineyard complex in the Medoc. 
The operation of this highly lucrative business was due in no small measure to Walter Gilbey's organizational skills. Intelligent delegation, allied to great care in staff selection and attention to market research, ensured a smoothly efficient business, whose financial returns afforded Gilbey the leisure to concentrate on cultivating his own interests. Indeed, by the late 1860s it was no longer necessary for him to be involved in day-to-day company affairs and, although he retained an active financial and management interest until his retirement in 1905, he became increasingly a country gentleman, and less of a wine merchant, as the years went by. 
Six years after his marriage in 1858 to Ellen (died 1896), daughter of John Parish of Bishop's Stortford, Gilbey purchased Hargrave Park, not far from his native town, and he lived there for the next ten years. By 1874 an increasing family and a growing interest in land management prompted the sale of Hargrave Park and the purchase of the 8000 acre Essex estate of Elsenham Hall, where Gilbey was to remain for the rest of his life. Here his restless, and apparently boundless, energies were expended in the development of the estate, establishing the celebrated Elsenham jams and promoting fruit and lavender growing on the home farm. He proved a characteristically generous landlord and a pillar of strength to many charities; at the same time, he was widely celebrated as a host, both at Elsenham and at his London residence, Cambridge House in Regent's Park. A staunchly anti-tory supporter of home rule, Gilbey resisted the blandishments of W. E. Gladstone and refused to stand for parliament, being content to restrict his public life to the magistracy and deputy lieutenancy of Middlesex. For all his professions of socialism in his later years (which were probably little more than contrived eccentricities), he appears to have had little genuine political interest. 
Gilbey's tastes were essentially those of a country gentleman. He assembled one of the richest libraries of sporting and agricultural works in Britain, and was an avid collector of paintings and engravings reflecting his love of country life and, more especially, of the horse. His lengthy biographies of Moreland and Stubbs both attracted critical acclaim; he also wrote a variety of books, pamphlets, and articles, dealing primarily with equine matters, though not without the occasional foray into the worlds of cockfighting and poultry keeping. His general interest in rural affairs led to the endowment, in 1896, of the Gilbey lectureship in the history and economics of agriculture at the University of Cambridge. 
Respected throughout the agricultural world for his enormous practical knowledge of animal husbandry, Gilbey had been one of the first to recognize the essential importance of breeding superior livestock to meet the needs of an agricultural economy which was assuming an increasingly pastoral character by the 1870s. Moreover, his speeches and writings on the dangers of over-reliance upon overseas supplies of cavalry-type horses did much to resuscitate British horse breeding from the doldrums into which it had recently descended. He was closely instrumental in the foundation of the Shire Horse Society and the Hackney Horse Society, respectively in 1878 and 1883, and of the Hunters Improvement Society in 1885, and in the establishment of the royal commission on horse breeding in 1888. 
A practical man first and foremost, Gilbey built up his own stud of shire horses, and also set about assembling quality horses of the hackney breed. An exacting critic of horseflesh, his almost encyclopaedic knowledge of breeding and stud management and his unerring judgement brought him into personal contact with several members of the royal family. He regularly advised the prince of Wales on equine matters, and it was due largely to the intercession of the prince that he was created baronet in 1893. To his various honours, including the presidency of the Shire and Hackney Horse societies, was added the presidency of the Royal Agricultural Society of England in 1896. 
Selfless service to the cause of agricultural and equine improvement over a period of some forty years was the hallmark of this tall, slim man, of genial and unaffected manner and fastidious tastes. His ample generosity, natural courtesy, and hatred of injustice endeared him to all with whom he came into contact. Although deeply distressed by the death of his wife in 1896, he continued to pursue his many interests and did not finally retire from the wine business until 1905. Walter Gilbey had never enjoyed the soundest of health, and a lower than normal body temperature meant that he was regularly the victim of colds, bronchitis, and kindred maladies. Laid low with bronchitis once again in late October 1914, he died on 12 November 1914 at his home, Elsenham Hall, Essex. He was buried in St Michael's Church, Bishop's Stortford, on 19 November, mourned by his four sons and four daughters. The baronetcy, and the bulk of his property passed to his eldest son, Walter. 


@@@@@


doc= 38446


Macdonogh, Sir George Mark Watson (1865-1942), army officer, was born on 4 March 1865, the son of George Valentine Macdonogh, deputy inspector of the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich. Macdonogh was commissioned lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 5 July 1884. Of considerable intellectual ability and with a penetrating analytical mind, the diffident and taciturn Macdonogh, who was to spend most of his military career in staff appointments without seeing active service, was promoted captain on 22 October 1892. He and his fellow engineer, James Edmonds, passed the entrance examinations for the Staff College, Camberley, in 1896 so far ahead of other candidates that the publication of results was delayed and the usual order varied to try and conceal the degree of their intellectual superiority. Neither found the course stimulating and, while Edmonds used the opportunity to write a history of the American Civil War, Macdonogh qualified as a barrister at Lincoln's Inn in 1897. An excellent linguist, Macdonogh married a Finnish woman, Aline Borgstrom of Helsingfors (Helsinki), on 8 November 1898, and became fluent in a number of Scandinavian languages; their only son died in 1915. 
After graduation from Camberley, Macdonogh's first staff appointment was as deputy assistant adjutant-general in Dublin from November 1898 to November 1899, and this was followed by that of secretary to the School of Military Engineering at Chatham from December 1899 to August 1903, in the course of which Macdonogh received his majority on 1 April 1901. He was then deputy assistant quartermaster-general for the Thames district; but he found his real vocation when appointed general staff officer, grade 3 (GSO3), in the War Office on 27 October 1906; he advanced to GSO2 in January 1908 and to GSO1 in December 1912, and was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 22 January 1909 and colonel on 30 October 1912. Macdonogh was responsible with Edmonds, whom he succeeded in charge of MO5 in the military operations directorate, for the drafting of measures to control aliens in the event of war. However, Macdonogh enjoyed an uneasy relationship with the director of military operations, Henry Wilson, who distrusted Macdonogh for his conversion from Methodism to Roman Catholicism. It was a distrust heightened by Macdonogh's being one of the few officers in the War Office prepared to contemplate coercing Ulster into accepting Irish home rule during the Curragh incident in March 1914. 
On the outbreak of war in August 1914 Macdonogh was posted as GSO1 for intelligence to the general headquarters (GHQ) of the expeditionary force, and on 7 November 1914 he became brigadier-general, general staff. Macdonogh served GHQ well, especially during the first battle of Ypres and again when providing timely warning of a forthcoming gas attack on the Second Army in December 1915. He was summoned back to the War Office on 3 January 1916 as director of military intelligence with the rank of major-general. In this capacity he pushed for operations which would contribute to the weakening of German domestic morale, presenting a paper to this effect to the war cabinet in October 1917. He had created the propaganda department, M17(b), as soon as he reached the War Office and from the summer of 1917 onwards carefully orchestrated what became a model subversion campaign. Macdonogh's agents and painstaking methodology provided him with an extremely accurate picture of the state of the German army so that by May 1917 he had compiled an entire order of battle for their forces in the west with the exception of a single 'Landwehr' unit. He was also able to predict the date, time, and location of the German spring offensive in March 1918. However, Macdonogh was distrusted by Sir Douglas Haig and by Haig's chief of intelligence, John Charteris, not only because of his Catholicism but also because he did not share their over-optimistic assessments of the imminent collapse of the German army. Thus Haig recorded in his diary on 15 October 1917 that Macdonogh 'is a Roman Catholic and is (perhaps unconsciously) influenced by information which reaches him from tainted [that is, Catholic] sources' (Haig MSS). In turn, Macdonogh had considerable doubts about Haig's strategy, and engaged in a particularly acrimonious correspondence with Charteris, whom Macdonogh regarded as 'a dangerous fool' (Kirke MSS). 
Macdonogh was appointed adjutant-general with the rank of temporary lieutenant-general on 11 September 1918, substantive rank as lieutenant-general coming on 1 January 1919. He was briefly considered as a possible liaison officer to the White Russian army of Admiral Kolchak, but remained adjutant-general until 10 September 1922, and retired from the army on 11 September 1925. For his wartime services Macdonogh was created CB in 1915 and KCMG in 1917, the appointment as KCB following in 1920 and the GBE on his retirement. 
Macdonogh then entered business, held a variety of directorships in banking and manufacturing, and became president of the Federation of British Industries in 1933-4. He was also active in a number of institutions such as the Zoological Society of London and the Royal Institute of International Affairs, while his interest in the plight of his wife's country brought him the presidency of the Anglo-Finnish Society, the vice-presidency of the Finland Fund, and membership of the Finnish Aid Bureau in 1940. He was also a commissioner for the Imperial War Graves Commission, a member of the royal commission on local government from 1923 to 1929, and, between 1939 and 1941, a member of the central committee for the regulation of prices. Macdonogh died in the Memorial Hospital, Teddington, London, on 10 July 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 38448


Duff, Adrian Grant- (1869-1914), army officer, was born on 29 September 1869, the third son of the Liberal MP who was to become governor of Madras, Sir Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff (1829-1906), and his wife, Anna Julia Webster (died 1915). Having been educated at Wellington College and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, Grant-Duff was commissioned second lieutenant in the Black Watch on 23 March 1889. He received his lieutenancy on 22 October 1890 and was further promoted to captain on 3 August 1898 following active service as commandant of the base depot during the Tirah expedition in 1897. He also served in the Transvaal during the closing stages of the South African War in 1902 before serving as adjutant to a rifle volunteer battalion. After passing through the Staff College, Camberley, he was appointed to the War Office in February 1905 as staff captain, becoming successively deputy assistant quartermaster-general and general staff officer, grade 2, there in March 1906. On 22 October 1906 he married the Hon. Ursula Lubbock ('b'. 1885), daughter of first Baron Avebury: they had one son and three daughters. 
In October 1910 Grant-Duff, who had been promoted major on 12 December 1907, was appointed assistant military secretary to the committee of imperial defence, working on the 'war book', the catalogue of procedures to be followed by government departments in the event of war. Having received the CB for his services in 1913, Grant-Duff returned to his regiment at Aldershot in October and took command with the rank of lieutenant-colonel on 24 May 1914. Despite his father's political affiliation, Grant-Duff was utterly contemptuous of politicians and especially of the Asquith government, whose muddled handling of the Curragh incident in March 1914 he regarded as an appalling case of dragging the army into politics. Indeed he was deeply conservative and extremely pessimistic as to the future of British society. Nor did he approve of Haldane's army reforms although, unlike many contemporaries, he did not advocate conscription as a solution to the army's perceived manpower difficulties. Regarded as a brilliant and able soldier, Grant-Duff took his battalion to war in August 1914 but was killed in action in the battle of the Aisne in France on 21 September 1914. He was buried in Moulins new communal cemetery, Aisne; his son was also killed in action, with the Black Watch, in the Second World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 38450


Richardson, Sir George Lloyd Reily (1847-1931), army officer and commander of the Ulster Volunteer Force, was born in Bengal, India, on 20 September 1847, the eldest son of Major-General Joseph Fletcher Richardson (1822-1900) and his wife, Mary Hannah (1828/9-1908), daughter of James Reily. His father, who belonged to a Devon family with a tradition of service in India, was a Bengal cavalry officer who served in the Second Sikh, Second Burma, and Mutiny wars, and was commended for his 'heroic conduct' ('The Times', 19 May 1900), commanded the 6th Bengal cavalry from 1854 to 1876, and retired to England. 
George Richardson was educated at Streatham, London, and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. In March 1866 he was commissioned ensign in the 38th (1st Staffordshire) regiment, then stationed in Bengal. In March 1869 he transferred to the Bengal staff corps, and he served in his father's regiment and the 18th Bengal cavalry. He was promoted lieutenant in March 1869, captain in March 1878, major in March 1881, and lieutenant-colonel in March 1892. In 1878 he married Florence Ellen (died 1924), fourth daughter of Fleetwood Williams CSI, of the Bengal civil service. 
Richardson served in the Hazara campaign (1868) on the north-west frontier, and in the Second Afghan War (1879-80), when he was commended by the adjutant-general of India for his pursuit of camel-raiders, 'a dashing bit of cavalry work, which reflects great credit on Captain Richardson' (Richardson papers, 1957-05-31, 13 Aug 1880). He served in the Mahsud Waziri expedition (1881) and the Zhob Valley expedition (1890). He commanded the 18th Bengal lancers from 1891 to 1897. In 1893 he commanded the Indian cavalry contingent at the London wedding of Prince George (later King George V). 
Promoted colonel in March 1896, Richardson served in operations on the Samara and in the Kurram Valley, from August to October 1897 commanding the flying column there, during the Pathan revolt on the north-west frontier. He also took part in the Tirah campaign (1897-9), including at the capture of the Sampagha Pass. From July 1900 to July 1901 he commanded the Indian cavalry brigade in the China expeditionary force, following the Boxer rebellion in 1899, and led it in the attack on the Temple of Heaven in Peking (Beijing). 
In 1902 Richardson was promoted brigadier-general, and commanded the Hyderabad contingent, and in 1903 the Agra brigade. In 1904 he was promoted major-general and commanded the 6th (Poona) division. In 1906 he was promoted lieutenant-general, awarded a good-service pension, and appointed colonel of his old regiment, redesignated the 18th Prince of Wales's Own Tiwana Lancers. He retired in April 1908, and settled in Ireland. Small and wiry, he was a highly accomplished horseman, successful at polo and on the turf, and in jumping competitions. He was appointed CIE (1893), CB (1898), and CSI (1900), and was knighted KCB in 1909. 
In July 1913 Richardson was appointed general officer commanding the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF). The leaders of the Ulster Unionists had been preparing for armed resistance to the imposition of Irish home rule, and in March 1913 had asked Earl Roberts to command their volunteer 'Army of Ulster' (Jeffery, 115). Roberts declined, and tried to find a suitable officer. In April 1913 Roberts discreetly approached Richardson, who had served under Roberts in India and Afghanistan but was neither a member of his 'ring' nor close to him. Reportedly Richardson would not accept 'until he was guaranteed his existing pension' (Beckett, 49). He was paid $1500 per annum, the largest UVF expenditure other than armaments. On taking up the position Richardson moved to Belfast, and his appointment was made public in September 1913. 
The UVF was an unpaid paramilitary 'democratic army' (Bowman, 45), reportedly some 110,000 strong, representative of the Ulster protestant loyalist majority, and including over 120 serving and former British army officers. Initially it was inadequately armed with largely obsolete weapons and drilling with wooden rifles. Richardson wrote to Roberts that soon the UVF 'would be able to hold its own any-where', and admired the civilian Ulster Unionist Council to whom he was responsible: 'Carson is a splendid Leader & Craig is a wonderful organiser' (Roberts papers, 7101-23-46-184, 19 Sept 1913). Richardson had no formal disciplinary power; local units had considerable autonomy and sometimes disobeyed orders. He modified the UVF organization and inspected units. The UVF's purpose was partly image-making, to persuade the British government and public of Ulster's determination to resist home rule, but for this it needed military credibility. 
Richardson appeared prominently at UVF reviews and parades, and was photographed and filmed. He shared secret contingency planning for 'the coup', taking control of Ulster after home rule, and for countering possible British government military intervention. A UVF officer later wrote that Richardson and his staff 'lived in daily dread of arrest, forfeiture of pensions or assassination' (Stewart, 167). He was also involved in planning gun-running to arm the UVF with effective modern rifles, though on this he was apparently cautious. In February 1914 Major Frederick Crawford of the UVF bought German and Austrian rifles and ammunition from a Hamburg arms dealer, and sailed them towards Ulster. With the arms at sea Richardson wanted to cancel the operation, but was overruled and participated in its final stage. On the night of 24/25 April the rifles and ammunition were successfully landed at Larne, co. Antrim, and elsewhere. 
The outbreak of the First World War ended the Ulster confrontation. The Ulster Unionists supported the war and the UVF was largely recruited into the 36th (Ulster) division of Kitchener's New Army. Richardson, too old for wartime army command, continued to command the residual UVF. He assisted in the formation of the 36th division but later apparently 'sat neglected and neglecting in his Headquarters', regarding his position as 'little more than a sinecure' (Bowman, 184, 206). In April 1919, for reasons now unclear, Richardson resigned his UVF command, and in May the UVF ended. Carson thanked him for 'all the loyal service you so willingly gave us' (Richardson papers, 1957-05-32, 7 May 1919). 
Richardson resumed his retirement, residing in Gloucestershire and Earl's Court, London. He did not include his UVF command in his 'Who's Who' entry. Following the death of his first wife, he married, second, on 18 February 1928, Ethel Mary Judith Yorke (1885-1976), younger daughter of James Edward Penrose of Woodhill, Cork, and Hartley Wintney, Hampshire. Richardson died on 9 April 1931 at the home of his wife's family, Alton Lodge, Hartley Wintney. 


@@@@@


doc= 38451


Connelly, Cornelia Augusta (1809-1879), Roman Catholic nun and educational reformer, was born on 15 January 1809 at 1 Filbert Street, Philadelphia, USA, the youngest of the six surviving children of Ralph Peacock ('c'.1767-1818), a merchant and land speculator who had emigrated from Yorkshire, and his wife, Mary (1768-1823), the daughter of Jacob Swope, a German doctor, and widow of John Bowen, an English sugar planter in Jamaica. Cornelia had three brothers, two sisters, and a half-brother and half-sister. An orphan at fourteen, she was adopted by her childless half-sister, Isabella, who had married into the wealthy Episcopalian Montgomery family. Cornelia was brought up a Presbyterian but was baptized in the Episcopalian church in 1831. Well educated in Philadelphian upper-middle-class tradition, she had become, in one bishop's words, 'a woman of great intellectual powers' (McCarthy, 28). On 1 December 1831 she married the Revd Pierce Connelly (1804-1883), a recently ordained Episcopalian minister. They moved immediately to Pierce's new parish in Natchez, Mississippi. Their five children were born between 1832 and 1840. 
In December 1833, at Pierce's prompting, the Connellys began a serious exploration of Catholicism. Pierce resigned his parish in August 1835, sold their house, and moved with his family to Rome for further study, Cornelia having been received into the Catholic church at New Orleans prior to embarkation. She believed her husband would also become a Catholic and then live out his life as a layman. In Rome, however, he petitioned not only to be received but also to be considered for ordination. Canon law allowed this if both partners willingly agreed to live separate and chaste lives. Pierce was received in 1836 but, with him no nearer ordination after a year's stay during which Cornelia met the pope and many leading English Catholics, they returned to Natchez in 1838, having lost much of their investment during a financial recession. They resettled less comfortably off in Grand Coteau, Louisiana. Here their fourth child died in infancy and their third of multiple burns aged two and a half. 
This time of suffering was the turning point in Cornelia's long and gradual transition from minister's wife and mother living on the plantation frontier of Mississippi to Catholic nun and founder of a Roman Catholic religious congregation in England. As a paid music teacher at the Sacred Heart Convent, she now experienced her first sustained exposure to the life of religious sisters and Catholic education. She and Pierce took a mutual private vow of celibacy in October 1840 after his final decision to seek ordination, and her diary for September 1841 records her decision to pursue her vocation as a nun. Their vow was made canonically binding on 1 April 1844, when they signed a deed of perpetual separation before Vatican witnesses in Rome. A period of living with the Sacred Heart nuns in Rome led her to conclude by February 1845 that she had no call to enter their society. Encouraged by the prominent Catholic layman Lord Shrewsbury, Nicholas Wiseman, Cardinal Fransoni, and, finally, Pope Gregory XVI, she agreed to found a new religious congregation in England rather than America. Cardinal Wiseman, archbishop of Westminster, saw her as the right woman to establish an educational congregation suitable for middle-class English converts wanting to become nuns. After three months in Paris living with the Sisters of the Assumption she moved to England in August 1846. Pierce, who had been ordained in July, was already there as assistant chaplain to Lord Shrewsbury. Up to this point the two younger children had lived with Cornelia, but as she began her noviciate they were sent to boarding-schools. 
In October, Cornelia and three other women opened the first convent of the Holy Child Jesus in Derby, where they taught in poor schools. On 21 December 1847 she made her vows and was installed by Wiseman as the superior-general of the Society of the Holy Child Jesus, the first new native congregation of women to be founded in England since the Reformation. Its work was educational, ranging from poor schools and industrial schools for young working women to day and boarding-schools for the middle classes, and, from 1856 to 1864, teacher training. Her educational ideas and the pedagogy of her schools and college were expressed in the 'Book of the Order of Studies in the Schools of the Sisters of the Holy Child Jesus' (1863). The society's mother house was moved to St Leonards in Sussex, from which new houses and schools were opened in London, Liverpool, Preston, and Blackpool during the 1850s. Their first American house was founded in Pennsylvania in 1862 and that in France in 1869. In 1863 Connelly was given the ruins of the Old Palace at Mayfield, Sussex, the former synod hall of the archbishops of Canterbury, by the duchess of Leeds. In its day the largest remaining medieval hall in England, its restoration was a point of pride among English Catholics. On completion in 1873 it became the noviciate and later the mother house. Mother Connelly was recognized by many as a courageous woman and outstanding educator. Her determination to act firmly and to listen to her conscience, even when it did not accord with the advice of clergy, did not always win her friends. Her position was also adversely affected by external criticisms and the publicity which stemmed from a course of action taken by Pierce Connelly. Unable to accept the reality of matrimonial separation, he initially sought a key role in the society and then, turning against the Catholic church, used it in a public anti-Catholic campaign. From 1848 onwards he used the children in an attempt to control Cornelia, exercising his legal right to refuse her access and removing them from the country. He followed this with an unsuccessful court action for the restitution of conjugal rights, 1848-58. The many forms of suffering which Cornelia experienced, as well as her vigour and fortitude, showed in the constitutions which she drew up for her society. These were never approved by Rome in her lifetime. She died at the convent at Mayfield on 18 April 1879 of chronic nephritis and was buried in the chapel there. After her death her rule was approved and her reputation re-examined. In 1992 she received the title Venerable, the first step towards canonization. 


@@@@@


doc= 38452


Connelly, Pierce (1804-1883), apostate Episcopal priest and anti-Catholic pamphleteer, was born on 9 August 1804 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the eldest of four sons of Henry Connelly, a cabinet-maker, and his second wife, Elizabeth Pierce. He married Cornelia Peacock ['see 'Connelly, Cornelia (1809-1879)] on 1 December 1831; they had two children who survived to adulthood, Adeline and Pierce Francis (the latter became a sculptor in Italy and the United States). Brought up as a Presbyterian, Connelly became an Episcopalian at the University of Pennsylvania (BA 1821, MA 1824). He read theology under William White, bishop of Pennsylvania, and was ordained deacon (1826) and priest (1828). 
Appointed rector of Trinity parish, Natchez, Mississippi, in 1831, Connelly read anti-Catholic pamphlets, met the royalist exile scientist Joseph Nicolas Nicollet, and decided that Roman Catholicism taught slaves to be docile more effectively than Anglicanism. He resigned his cure in 1835, moved to Rome, and was converted on Palm Sunday (27 March) 1836. (His wife had converted in December 1835.) The international financial crisis of 1837, which ushered in the 'hungry forties', forced their return to the United States, where they taught school in Grand Coteau, Louisiana, from 1838 to 1842. Connelly believed that he had a vocation to the priesthood, and convinced Cornelia that they should give up sexual relations. They returned to Rome in 1843 and received a papal decree of separation; Pierce was re-ordained and Cornelia entered a convent. During this time, the family was 'reconstituted' once a week for the children to play in their parents' presence. 
In 1846 the Roman Catholic bishop Nicholas Wiseman asked Cornelia to start a religious order to educate middle-class girls. Simultaneously, John Talbot, sixteenth earl of Shrewsbury, asked Pierce to become his assistant chaplain at Alton Towers. Both moved to England that summer, but Connelly soon grew frustrated. Wiseman did not give him the respect he wanted, nor was he permitted to visit Cornelia as he had in Rome. Moreover, Cornelia had found her vocation as founder of the Society of the Holy Child Jesus, and no longer obeyed Pierce. When he learned that Wiseman was moving Cornelia and the order from Derby to St Leonards, he took refuge in December 1848 with Henry Drummond at Albury Park, Surrey. Drummond, an anti-Catholic tory banker, supported Connelly for the following six years. Hoping to show that Roman Catholicism was a marriage wrecker, Drummond convinced Connelly to sue his wife for restitution of conjugal rights. Connelly eventually lost his case, for it was clear that he had exercised his free choice to convert, become celibate, and end their marriage. Throughout, the case of 'Connelly v. Connelly' (court of arches, 1849; judicial committee of the privy council, 1851) fed the newspaper-reading public with tales of sex, greed, and power. 
Connelly wrote anti-Catholic pamphlets, publishing some under the pen-names 'Pascal the Younger' and 'Pen Cler Jocelyn'. His petition to the House of Commons in connection with his court case was so prurient and libellous that it was printed 'for the use of Members only'. He perhaps inspired one of the most notorious anti-Catholic slurs ever uttered in the house, when Drummond declared in 1851 that convents were 'either prisons or brothels' ('Hansard 3', 115.266). Some of his pamphlets charged that priests slept with nuns, that casuist moral theology condoned crimes, and that Roman Catholicism was essentially persecutory and dictatorial. His 'Reasons for Abjuring Allegiance to the See of Rome: a Letter to the Earl of Shrewsbury' (1852) entered the anti-Catholic canon, appearing on both sides of the Atlantic and remaining in print into the twentieth century. 
Debarred from preferment in the Church of England, to which he now adhered, Connelly moved to the continent, wrote for the 'Daily Telegraph' (using the pen-name 'Thorough'), and in 1867 founded St James's Episcopal Church in Florence, for American visitors who did not wish to attend the English chapel. He developed bronchial pneumonia at the age of seventy-nine, and died on 16 December 1883. 
Pierce Connelly had a pointed chin, broad forehead, long nose, and large ears set high on his prematurely bald head, which characteristics, several observers remarked, gave him an impish appearance. His career illustrates the public role of converts in Victorian denominational controversies, and gives an insight into the milieu of the anti-Catholic campaigner. 


@@@@@


doc= 38453


Gilbert, John (1812-1845), zoological collector and explorer in Australia, was born on 14 March 1812 in Newington Butts, London, the son of William Gilbert ('b'. 'c'.1793), a carpenter, and his wife, Ann ('b'. 'c'.1792); they were from villages in Kent just 3 miles apart. As a teenager Gilbert was apprenticed to John Gould (1804-1881), who was then employed as taxidermist to the Zoological Society of London but later became an illustrious publisher and bird artist. Gould taught him the principles of the art of taxidermy, a specialist skill of which he became a master. Very little is known about his private life; he seems to have married twice, to a widow, Catherine Alice Crump, on 6 September 1829, and to Esther Sadler on 29 November 1836. He may have had a daughter, though clear evidence of any offspring is lacking. He apparently had two younger brothers (William ('b'. 1813), and Thomas ('b'. 1818)) and a sister, possibly called Rachel. 
Gilbert became the first curator of the Shrewsbury Museum in 1836, but was dismissed after only a few months for trying to install his wife in his rooms at the museum. After applying to his former employer for help he was hired as field assistant on Gould's much-heralded 1838 expedition to Australia. He soon proved his worth as a collector and naturalist. At first Gould and he worked together in Tasmania, but soon Gould became so sure of his capabilities that, in early 1839, Gilbert was sent on his own to Western Australia. He also collected on the Cobourg peninsula of Northern Territory, at that time a totally unexplored area, between 1840 and 1841. 
In 1841 Gilbert returned to Britain, but such had been his success in Australia that Gould almost immediately sent him back. Gilbert worked his old patches in Western Australia for a time, having many adventures, such as nearly being shipwrecked on the notorious Houtman Abrolhos islands. He eventually moved on to New South Wales, working his way overland to the lush Darling Downs of southern Queensland. Here he had a fateful encounter with the German explorer Ludwig Leichhardt. In October 1844 he joined Leichhardt's overland expedition from Brisbane to Port Essington (north of Darwin); after many trials and tribulations the party was ambushed by Aborigines at Dunbar Creek near Mitchell River, Cape York peninsula, on 28 June 1845, and Gilbert died almost instantly when a spear pierced an artery in his neck. He was buried at the scene of the attack the next day. 
Gilbert collected more new species of Australian birds and mammals than any other collector, past or present. Of the 785 or so species of Australian birds or mammals that are known to exist, Gilbert was the first collector of fifty-nine (7.5 per cent). There are Gilbert specimens in museums all over the world, but the most important are in Liverpool, London, and Philadelphia. Among the many bird species he discovered were the paradise parrot, 'Psephotus pulcherrimus', which is now probably extinct; the Gouldian finch 'Chloebia gouldiae', possibly the most colourful bird in the world; and Gilbert's whistler (otherwise known as Gilbert's thickhead) 'Pachycephala inornata gilbertii', first collected by Gilbert in Western Australia. Of a long list of mammals which he discovered, perhaps the most appropriate to mention is Gilbert's rat-kangaroo 'Potorous tridactylus gilbertii', which was rediscovered at Two Peoples Bay in Western Australia in November 1994, after having been thought to be extinct since the 1870s. No photographs or pictures of Gilbert have been located, but he is said to have been short, dark, and spare; he was a good bushman, a crack shot, an excellent zoologist and taxidermist, and could turn a neat phrase with his pen. He seems to have been an industrious and efficient soul who did not suffer fools at all. 


@@@@@


doc= 38454


Strange, Frederick (1810x18-1854), natural history collector, was probably born at Aylsham, Norfolk, between 1810 and 1818. His parentage is unknown, although Strange is an ancient Norfolk surname. In 1836 he left England, probably as a crew member of the 'Cygnet', to become one of the first European settlers of South Australia. At first he was engaged in fishing, but in 1838 accompanied the explorer Charles Sturt (1795-1869) on surveys, and in 1839 was attendant to the surveyor T. Bowes Strangways on his expedition to the north of Adelaide. On this trip a small saltwater creek was named Strange's Creek. In 1839 Strange again accompanied Sturt, on his expedition with Governor Gawler to the Murray River. He also met John Gould, the English ornithologist, and this meeting may have inspired him to become a professional natural history collector. 
By 1840 Strange had moved to New South Wales, where he became mate of the coastal steamer 'Tamar', based at Gosford. About this time he married Rosa Prince, of Sydney; they had four (possibly five) children between 1841 and 1853. By May 1843 Strange had moved to Sydney, becoming a full-time collector and dealer in natural history specimens. The following year he met Gould's collector, John Gilbert, and John MacGillivray, naturalist of HMS 'Fly'. Both men seem to have stayed with Strange at this time, and henceforth Strange appears to have acted as their agent. Later in 1844 (and also in 1847, 1850, and 1851), Strange collected at Moreton Bay, near Brisbane. 
Between May and September 1845 Strange made a trip back to Adelaide, apparently as an agent for a Mr Newman. On his return to Sydney, he sent many requests for employment to John Gould, accompanied by glowing testimonials; Strange correctly assumed that Gilbert had perished on the Leichhardt expedition from Moreton Bay to Port Essington (1844-6). Gould did briefly use Strange's services, but the partnership broke up amid much acrimony; Strange apparently drew money on both Gould and the Australian Museum's curator, George Bennett, and in 1848 Gould complained that Strange's latest collection had arrived back in England in bad condition. The final straw came when Strange flooded the market with molluscs, sending identical shells to the two most senior experts in Britain, Hugh Cuming and George Sowerby. 
In 1848 Strange went to New Zealand on HMS 'Acheron''s surveying voyage under John Lort Stokes; the ship arrived back in Sydney in November 1849. In 1852 Strange visited England with his family, arriving with a large natural history collection; they had returned to Sydney by March 1853. In 1854 he entered into a trading venture to the islands off north-east Australia, leaving Sydney in the 'Vision' in September 1854. On 15 October Strange's party was attacked by Aborigines on the Second Percy Island, of the Capricorn group; Strange and three others were killed. 
Frederick Strange, despite difficulties with literacy (his grammar and spelling were both extremely eccentric) and money management, was an able man in the field and collected much of scientific importance. Among the many new forms which he discovered were the yellow-footed rock-wallaby 'Petrogale xanthopus', the plains wanderer, 'Pedionomus torquatus', and the superb blue wren, 'Malurus cyaneus cyanochlamys'. 


@@@@@


doc= 38456


Bynoe, Benjamin (1803-1865), ship's surgeon and naturalist, was born at Christ Church, Barbados, on 25 July 1803, the son of Samuel and Elizabeth Bynoe. Nothing is known of Bynoe's education and though he was sometimes styled MD there is no record that he obtained this qualification in the British Isles. However, Bynoe obtained his 'London diploma' on 18 March 1825 and on 20 May 1825 he became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons. 
In September 1825 Bynoe passed for appointment as assistant surgeon, Royal Navy. Four weeks later he joined the surveying ship 'Beagle', on its voyage to South America. When the 'Beagle''s senior surgeon was invalided in July 1828, Bynoe was appointed acting surgeon. The 'Beagle' surveyed Patagonia, Tierra del Fuego, and the Strait of Magellan. For three months in 1829 Bynoe joined a small party crewing the tender 'Adelaide'; they surveyed the Magdalen and Barbara channels. Bynoe was also aboard the 'Adelaide' during its survey of the Gulf of Penas. His name was given to two landmarks on that notoriously dangerous coast: Cape Bynoe (Bynoe Point) and Bynoe Island. They rejoined the 'Beagle' at Port Famine in May 1830. By October Bynoe was on half-pay, lodging in the New Kent Road area of London. 
On 5 July 1831 Bynoe qualified as a surgeon, but he found promotion elusive and rejoined the 'Beagle' as assistant surgeon; they sailed in December 1831. Joining them on this voyage was Charles Darwin, sailing as private naturalist. Darwin profoundly influenced Bynoe, who subsequently became an ardent collector. In April 1832 the 'Beagle''s surgeon was invalided and Bynoe again became acting surgeon. The ship visited the coasts of South America; while at Valparaiso, Bynoe treated Darwin with calomel after he had become unwell, possibly with the illness which was to recur throughout his lifetime. They then travelled on to the Galapagos Islands, Polynesia, New Zealand, Australia, Mauritius, and the Cape; he returned to England via Brazil, and arrived at Falmouth in October 1836. After his return Bynoe's rank of surgeon was officially confirmed, and he was appointed surgeon of the 'Beagle' in February 1837, on its voyage to survey the Australian coast. In September 1839 Captain Wickham named a coastal feature Bynoe harbour (Bynoe Bay). The Bynoe inlet and Bynoe River, on the Gulf of Carpentaria, commemorate Bynoe's skill as a surgeon, as it was here that he saved an officer's badly damaged foot. The 'Beagle' reached England in September 1843. Bynoe married about this time and he and his wife Charlotte lived at various addresses near the Old Kent Road, London. 
In early 1844 Bynoe was appointed surgeon superintendent of the convict ship 'Blundell', destined for Norfolk Island. Later he was appointed surgeon on the survey vessel 'Fly', travelling with John MacGillivray, the earl of Derby's private natural history collector on the ship's survey of the Great Barrier Reef and Torres Strait. During his absence Bynoe was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons. In March 1846 Bynoe joined the 'Lord Auckland', a convict transport to Hobart, but he was landed at the Cape of Good Hope with pneumonia and returned to England. Throughout the winter of 1846-7 Bynoe worked for his certificate proving that he had 'performed the capital operations of surgery on the dead body' (Keevil, 105). In February 1847 Bynoe was sent to Cork to aid victims of the potato famine, but he fell ill himself with dysentery and fever. 
Bynoe returned to London in October 1847 and in succession joined the 'Ocean', the 'Ganges', and the 'Wellington'; in 1850 he joined the 'Monarch', and in November 1851 the 'Aboukir', a convict transport. Although in increasingly poor health, he joined the 'Madagascar' in 1853. In 1860 he was appointed staff surgeon but he did not return to sea again; he was put on the retired list on 23 January 1863. Bynoe died at his home, 440 Old Kent Road, London, on 13 November 1865. He was survived by his wife. 
Professionally, Bynoe was a ship's surgeon, but he was immortalized in geographical features and in the names of Australian plants and animals, notably the Acacia 'Acacia bynoeana', the Golden Whistler 'Pachycephala melanura bynoei', and the kangaroo 'Halmaturus binoe'. Bynoe collected many natural history specimens; many still exist in museums. Of his birds and mammals, about twenty-five were new to science. 


@@@@@


doc= 38460


Swinhoe, Robert (1836-1877), diplomatist and naturalist, was born on 1 September 1836 in Calcutta. His family had served British interests in India for several generations; his father, Robert, was a lawyer in Calcutta. The Swinhoe family (variously spelt Swinho, Swinhow, Swindhoe or even Swynnow) originally came from Northumberland. Robert returned to England with his parents while still an infant. He studied at King's College, London, before matriculating at the University of London in 1853. In 1854 he was given a temporary position as interpreter in the foreign service in Hong Kong; he travelled out with his wife, Christina ('nee' Lockie). In 1855 he was transferred to the British consulate at Amoy (Xiamen); he was promoted second assistant there in 1856 and he later worked in Shanghai. 
In March 1856 Swinhoe visited Taiwan and, as well as performing his official duties, he amassed the first ornithological collection ever made there. With collections he made later in China and Taiwan, it is of considerable scientific importance. His first scientific paper, 'Remarks on the fauna of Amoy', appeared in 'The Zoologist' in 1858. 
In 1858 HMS 'Inflexible' sailed from Amoy to Taiwan, with Swinhoe as interpreter. They explored the entire coast, and penetrated considerable distances inland. Swinhoe made important collections of animals and plants. In 1860 he was recalled from leave to act as staff interpreter for General Napier and the combined English and French forces during the north China campaign, of which he published a 'Narrative' in 1861. 
In December 1860, at the age of twenty-four, Swinhoe was appointed vice-consul in Taiwan, the first foreign diplomatist to be based there. He became ill in November 1861 and went back to Amoy for treatment, returning to Taiwan a month later. For the next year the British consulate was based on the SS 'Adventure', moored in the Tamsui (Danshui) River, after which it was moved to San Domingo, the old Spanish fort in Tamsui. 
Swinhoe returned to London in May 1862 due to illness. In Britain he was elected honorary member of the British Ornithologists' Union. His highly praised paper 'On the mammals of the island of Formosa' was published in 1862. In 1863 he compiled the first list of Chinese birds, updated in 1871, which increased the known species of that country from 474 to 675. 
In 1863 Swinhoe returned to Tamsui to resume his duties. Here he built an aviary for captive breeding of the rare, endemic Swinhoe's pheasant. In spring 1864 he explored the Keeling and Suao areas, and later visited the Pescadores and the Kaohsiung-Hengchun coast. In August 1864 he was transferred to Kaohsiung, being promoted to consul in 1865. In 1866 he became consul at Amoy, then at Ningpo (Ningbo) in 1867. Here he began to suffer from paralysis, and was transferred to the healthier station of Chefoo (Yantai) in 1873. Ill health did not stop Swinhoe's ornithological studies, for he arranged to be carried about the countryside in an assortment of wheelbarrows and sedan chairs. 
In October 1875 Swinhoe was retired on medical grounds and returned to London, where he was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1876 and continued to work on his extensive natural history collections. He died at his home at 33 Carlyle Square, Chelsea, on 28 October 1877; his mortal paralysis is thought to have been caused by syphilis. Very little is known of his personal life, although he mentions a child in an official letter dated 1862. Swinhoe left his estate, valued at under $3000, to his widow. He had at least two younger brothers, Peter and Charles (1836-1923). The latter also became a famous naturalist; a colonel in the Indian army, he collected an important series of birds in Afghanistan between 1880 and 1881, and was a world expert on Indian lepidoptera. 
Swinhoe's extensive travels in China, and particularly Taiwan, resulted in the discovery of many new forms of animals and plants. He published over 120 articles on natural history, and left extensive collections (the birds alone numbering 3700), most of which are at the Natural History or Liverpool museums. Among the many forms named after him, probably the most famous are Swinhoe's pheasant 'Hierophasis swinhoii', Swinhoe's snipe 'Gallinago megala', and Swinhoe's storm petrel 'Oceanodroma monorhis' -- the last two of which Swinhoe himself scientifically described. 


@@@@@


doc= 38462


Church, Arthur Harry (1865-1937), botanist, was born on 28 March 1865 at 32 Oxford Place, Plymouth, the eldest son of Henry Church('b'. 1830/31), a saddler, and his wife, Mary Head, 'nee' Brown ('c'.1824-1887). He was educated at Ashburton grammar school where, at sixteen, he became a pupil teacher. On the death of his mother, he received $100, enabling him to go to University College, Aberystwyth, in 1887. There he met Emma Palmer Pratt (1868-1916), eldest child of Henry Pratt, a Warwick chemist and relation of the Victorian botanist Anne Pratt (1806-1893); they married in 1898 and had three daughters. In 1889 Church obtained an external London BSc degree and won one of the two scholarships offered to mature students by Queen's and Jesus colleges, Oxford, entering Jesus in 1891. He graduated with first-class honours in botany in 1894 and was appointed demonstrator in the department of botany. In 1897 Church did much to restore the neglected Oxford Botanical Museum (later dispersed) then at the botanic garden. In 1904 he took the London degree of DSc and acted as lecturer in natural sciences at Jesus, where he was a research fellow from 1908 to 1912. He was lecturer from 1910 until 1930, when he retired early; in 1921 he was elected FRS. 
Church's most influential work, 'Thalassiophyta', with its celebrated opening words, 'The beginnings of botany are in the sea', appeared in 1919. 'Thalassiophyta' was part of the flood of material Church published that year on his return to work after the deaths, in 1916, of his elder surviving daughter, Rosemary (from tuberculosis), and his beloved wife (from gastroenteritis). Their deaths led him to believe that his work had caused him to neglect them. The events of the First World War and the deaths of so many of his friends and pupils had compounded his despair, leading to a depression at times verging on insanity. By 1927 he had a wider knowledge of the facts of botany than any English botanist of his generation. He had, in addition, most of the characteristics of genius -- creative power, vigour, independence, and originality. The whole pageant of plant evolution was considered in his revolutionary botany. He was not one to be hampered by clinging detail, yet he was painstaking in his analysis of floral structure, phyllotaxis, and algal life cycles. His highly original, and no less controversial, ideas were mainly published in 'Oxford Botanical Memoirs' (1919-25). Church held that the invasion of the land was by plants with massive structure and elaborate life history, not by the then fashionable little green filaments. How he came upon his new synthesis is unclear but his thesis was taken up most wholeheartedly by his disciple, the Cambridge botanist E. J. H. (John) Corner (1906-1996), in his Durian theory of the origin of the flowering plant tree (1949) and especially in his influential textbook, 'The Life of Plants' (1964). 
Church's prose style is difficult, the sentences long and involved, but nothing can be skipped in his tight argument. His early work on phyllotaxis was rejected by the Linnean Society and his findings, still quoted today, were published independently. He edited 'Oxford Botanical Memoirs' himself and their conciseness may reflect his personal financial liability. He fell out with the Clarendon Press over the production of his sumptuous 'Types of Floral Mechanism', so that only one volume of the work appeared, in 1908, though he continued work on it until 1915. It was illustrated with his own drawings, many of them in colour; they are some of the finest produced in modern times. Most were subsequently preserved in the British Museum (Natural History), and their strikingly bold, almost 'Jugendstil', images were used on greetings cards in the 1980s. On field classes he would take his heavy plate camera with him; he was an outstanding photographer. 
Church taught all aspects of botany save the directly physiological. His lectures were masterful, intellectually stimulating, and entertaining, almost theatrical, at their best, though in later years they became more garrulous and digressive. He was 'an unassuming, lively, genial, humorous little man of astonishing learning, almost a recluse, but with a mind that roamed the world' (Corner, 1). His humour was often cynical, irreverent, and anticlerical; his shy and retiring ways did not endear him to his senior colleagues, and university politics did not interest him, these 'flaws' leading to Sir Arthur Tansley's referring to him as a genius manque. 
Church died at his home, 246 Iffley Road, Oxford, on 24 April 1937 and his papers were dispersed. Most, many of which had been given to, or intended for, Corner, were brought back to Oxford in 1977, some having survived the looting by allied troops of Corner's house in wartime Singapore. A laboratory in the department of plant sciences at Oxford was named after him in 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 38467


Lewis, Sir (John) Herbert (1858-1933), lawyer and politician, was born at Mostyn Quay, Whitford, Flintshire, on 27 December 1858, the only son of Enoch Lewis (1812-1885), merchant and shipowner (great-nephew of Thomas Jones of Denbigh, Methodist leader, 1756-1820), and his wife, Catherine Roberts (died 1868), of Plas Llangwyfan, Denbighshire. He was educated at Denbigh grammar school, briefly at McGill University (Montreal), privately with Dr E. Pan Jones, and at Exeter College, Oxford, where he read jurisprudence and graduated with a fourth in 1879. He continued his legal training in Chester and London before he established the Liverpool practice of Herbert Lewis and Davies in 1885. His partner, Alfred Thomas Davies, became the first secretary of the Welsh department of the Board of Education. On 16 November 1886 he married, at the Welsh Presbyterian church, Toxteth, his cousin Adelaide Hughes (1862/3-1895), daughter of Charles Hughes JP, publisher, of Wrexham. After her death he married Ruth Caine ('b'. 1871/2), daughter of William Sproston Caine, the Liberal MP and temperance advocate, on 8 July 1897. There was a son and a daughter of the second marriage. 
Lewis was active in local politics from 1886 and was appointed treasurer of the North Wales Liberal federation. He was elected alderman and first chairman of Flintshire county council in 1889 and took part in implementing the provisions of the 'Welsh Intermediate Education Act' of 1889 and the 'Technical Education Act' of 1889 in the county. He remained chairman until 1893 and continued his involvement with the county council until 1913. 
Lewis entered parliament in 1892 as a Liberal, representing Flint Boroughs until 1906 and Flintshire until 1918, when he was elected the first MP to represent the University of Wales, a seat for whose creation he had campaigned. He held it until his retirement in 1922. A close colleague of David Lloyd George and Tom Ellis, he practised a radical nonconformity which came early to the fore when in the 'Welsh revolt' of 1894 he joined Lloyd George, D. A. Thomas (later Lord Rhondda), and Frank Edwards in refusing the Liberal whip over disestablishment of the Church in Wales. A leading figure in the Cymru Fydd (Young Wales) movement that flourished in the final decades of the nineteenth century, he was consistent in bringing a range of Welsh concerns to parliament's attention. His long and persistent campaign to obtain for Wales a share in the museum grants voted annually by parliament led to the establishment of a national museum in Cardiff and a national library in Aberystwyth, and his advocacy, with that of others, achieved status for the library as a place of deposit under the 'Copyright Act' of 1911. He was a vice-president of the library from 1907 to 1926 and president from 1926 to 1927. He was also involved in the development of the university colleges in Wales and with others, notably Lord Rendel and Tom Ellis, succeeded in obtaining a royal charter establishing the University of Wales in 1893. 
Lewis was appointed junior lord of the Treasury in 1906, parliamentary secretary to the Local Government Board in 1909, and parliamentary secretary to the Board of Education in 1915. At the Board of Education, with its president H. A. L. Fisher, he worked for educational reform, particularly the 'Education Act' (1918), the 'Libraries Act' (1919), and legislation concerning teachers' superannuation and educational grants for former servicemen. On leaving parliament in 1922 he was appointed GBE. In retirement he was able to indulge further his lifelong interest in travel, in 1924 revisiting India, where his daughter was involved in missionary work. 
Lewis was sworn of the privy council in 1912 and was an alderman of Flintshire county council from 1889 to 1913; he was also constable of Flint Castle, a freeman of the boroughs of Flint and Aberystwyth, vice-president of University College of North Wales, Bangor, an honorary LLD of the University of Wales (1918), deputy lieutenant of Flintshire, and president of the Library Association of the United Kingdom (1920-21), and was awarded the gold medal of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion in 1927. 
In June 1925, when visiting Aberystwyth, Lewis slipped and fell into a quarry, seriously injuring his spine. Thereafter he was confined to the family home at Penucha, Caerwys, Flintshire, where he died on 10 November 1933. He was buried at the Calvinistic Methodist cemetery of Ddol Chapel, near Caerwys, on 13 November. His widow, Lady Lewis, who was appointed OBE in 1918 and one of the first women JPs in 1921, survived him. 
An obituarist writing in the 'North Wales Times' (18 November 1933) noted that during his time in parliament Lewis did more constructive work for Welsh institutions than anybody else before or since. Throughout a long career in public service he was consistent and effective in his support of nonconformity, of the Welsh language, and of Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 38468


Glasier, John Bruce (1859-1920), politician, was born (according to his accounts) on 25 March 1859 in Glasgow. He was the second of eight children of John Bruce of Irvine, a farmer and cattle dealer, and Isabella McNicoll of Shiskine, Arran, daughter of Alexander McNicoll, fisherman, crofter, and Gaelic poet. Bruce had left his wife and family to live with the much younger Isabella, so John Bruce Glasier, his brother, and six sisters were all born out of wedlock. 
John Bruce Glasier grew up in the Ayrshire countryside, herding sheep and reading Burns's poetry, when not attending the parish school of Newton Ayr. After his father's death in December 1870, his mother adopted the surname Glasier (for reasons unknown). When Glasier was thirteen, she moved the family to Glasgow (where some of her relatives lived). This could have been to improve the employment prospects of her children. Glasier was soon apprenticed as an architectural draughtsman and his sisters entered office work. The family lived for several years at 250 Crown Street, near the Gorbals. 
In Glasgow, Glasier initially came under the influence of his mother's uncle Neil Robertson. Robertson, a cabinet-maker, a strict Calvinist, and owner of a good collection of books, imbued his great-nephew with religious zeal: so much so, that Glasier at fourteen pledged himself to become a minister. However, Glasier's avid reading of Huxley and Darwin, as well as Burns, Byron, and Shelley, led him first to a crisis of faith and then to radical ideas. 
Glasier was artistic by temperament. Like so many of his generation of socialist pioneers, he aspired to be a poet and long wrote verse. His architectural work gave way to work as a designer in ornamental ironwork. Like William Morris, he often spoke of the rights of men and women under socialism to enjoy and express themselves through art. 
By the early 1880s Glasier was a notable advocate in Glasgow of land nationalization and socialism. He spoke at numerous radical and literary meetings as well as on soapboxes on Glasgow Green. His early socialism was fiery, even revolutionary. It drew on his experiences of being unemployed and on his reading. He and his friend Shaw Maxwell joined the Land League after hearing Michael Davitt speak in Glasgow in December 1879. Maxwell edited, and Glasier wrote for, a Glasgow Land League newspaper. Later, they both joined the Scottish Land Restoration League, and attended the inaugural meeting held by Henry George in Glasgow in February 1884. In the summer of 1884 Glasier was a founder member of the Social Democratic Federation (SDF). 
Throughout his life Glasier was influenced by hero-figures. After Davitt came William Morris, and then Keir Hardie. Glasier was entranced when he heard Morris speak in Edinburgh and Glasgow in November 1884. When Morris and his associates left the SDF and founded the Socialist League, Glasier became secretary of its Glasgow branch, a post he held until 1889, when he moved to Alloa to work in a foundry. Glasier preached an ethical and Utopian socialism, and about this time, like Morris, was influenced by the anarchist ideas of Prince Kropotkin. He wrote much for Morris's newspaper 'Commonweal'. In these years and later Glasier looked the part of the romantic politician, the vagabond poet, or the Pre-Raphaelite aesthete. After the disintegration of the Socialist League, Glasier remained a nominal member of Morris's Hammersmith Socialist Society, but otherwise resumed his role of lone socialist propagandist until he joined the Independent Labour Party in late 1893. On 21 June 1893 he married Katharine St John Conway ['see 'Glasier, Katharine St John Bruce (1867-1950)]. The Glasiers were to be an effective socialist partnership. Unlike the Webbs, the Glasiers had children: Jeannie, Malcolm, and John Glendower. 
For much of the Independent Labour Party's first twenty-five years Glasier was one of its 'Big Four' leaders, along with Keir Hardie, James Ramsay MacDonald, and Philip Snowden. He served on the party's national administrative council from 1897 to 1909, when the Big Four resigned over the annual conference's failure to back them fully in a dispute concerning Victor Grayson, and again from 1910 to 1919. Glasier succeeded Hardie as party chairman (1900-03). After editing 'ILP News' for several years, he took on editing the 'Labour Leader' (January 1905 - April 1909) after Hardie sold the paper to the Independent Labour Party. Although sales rose from 13,000 to a peak of 43,000 in 1908, Glasier's editorship came under growing criticism, particularly for his proneness to defend the increasing pragmatism of the party's leadership. Stanley Pierson has commented that after 1900 Glasier's socialism 'lost much of its inspirational quality and became apologetic' (Pierson, 'British Socialists', 197). 
Glasier was at his best as the socialist evangelist. He and his wife, Katharine, made very great financial and physical sacrifices for the socialist cause. The Glasiers' finances were rescued in 1909 by a trust fund of $15,000 set up for them by a wealthy Boston widow, Elizabeth Glendower Evans. Glasier rarely put himself forward for public office. He served as a Chapel-en-le-Frith parish councillor for a period from 1903, having, to his surprise, topped the poll. He stood unsuccessfully for Birmingham, Bordesley Green, in the 1906 general election. Otherwise, he stood aside and supported Hardie and, for a period, MacDonald. He attended the Second International's congresses from 1896 and delighted in opposing Marxists, both British and continental European. Like Hardie, Glasier condemned both the South African War and the First World War. 
John Bruce Glasier suffered cancer of the bowel from 1915. After brave attempts to contain the disease by diet and by Christian Science, he became housebound in 1919. In his last months he wrote 'The Meaning of Socialism' (1919) and 'William Morris and the Early Days of the Socialist Movement' (1921) and compiled a collection of his verse, 'On the Road to Liberty'. He died at 37 Windsor Road, Levenshulme, Lancashire, on 4 June 1920. 


@@@@@


doc= 38470


Chillenden, Thomas (d. 1411), prior of Christ Church, Canterbury, was of unknown origins, though his family doubtless took its name from Chillenden in Kent. Professed a monk in the priory of Christ Church, Canterbury, in 1365, he attended Canterbury College at Oxford, becoming a bachelor of canon law by 1378. He then studied canon law at the Roman curia, receiving the degree of DCnL by 1383. He himself compiled an index to the fourth book of the 'Decretals' of Gregory IX ('Repertorium quarti libri decretalium') and gave lectures on the fourth book of the 'Clementines' (''Reportata' on the Clementines'). These are bound together in Oxford, All Souls College, MS 53. This document has not attracted much scholarly interest, but may be of significance, as indicating the interest of English canonists in marriage law. He also wrote a commentary on the 'Regulae juris' (Longleat, MS 35, fols. 187-206). During his priorate the monks added to the library twenty-four writings dealing with canon law and another eleven works concerning civil law. But a work entitled 'Repertorium sexti libri decretalium' (BL, Royal MS 2 C.), which has been attributed to Chillenden, is in fact by a monk named John, and appears to be one of the books acquired during his priorate. 
Chillenden served as one of the treasurers of the convent, before being elected prior in 1391. In his first year as prior he restarted the building of the nave of the cathedral church that had been halted after the murder of Archbishop Simon Sudbury in 1381. It took nine years to complete, and is now regarded as one of the supreme triumphs of English Perpendicular architecture. In addition Chillenden pursued an active policy of urban investment. In London the priory acquired the houses and shops that had formerly belonged to Robert Little, and built new shops within the city and at Southwark. At Canterbury new buildings were put up in Burgate and Stourstreet; a new inn called The Crown was purchased and another, exceptionally large, inn, The Chequers, was constructed. At the same time extensive repairs were undertaken on the priory manors, and new barns, granaries, and stables were erected, many with tiled roofs. Nineteen mills -- both water- and fulling-mills -- were either newly constructed or extensively repaired. Within the monastery precincts Chillenden was largely responsible for the restoration of the chapter house, the making of a new altar with a silver-gilt table that weighed 903 lb, and extensive improvements to the prior's lodging and chapel and to other monastic buildings. A century after his death John Leland described him as 'the greatest builder' among the priors ('John Leland's Itinerary', 248). That seems an accurate assessment, although Henry Eastry (died 1331) must have been a close rival. 
After he became prior, Chillenden sought to retain some control over the finances of the monastery. He did not give up his position of treasurer, but combined it with that of the prior. Thus all the income from the manors, oblations, and other sources, came into his office, and he then gave the obedientaries -- such as the cellarer and the sacrist -- sufficient revenues to meet their responsibilities. He also reorganized the priory's system of leasing its manors, but it is not true, as R. A. L. Smith believes, that Chillenden was responsible for suddenly and swiftly ending a long policy of direct exploitation of priory estates. After the black death the monks had experimented with a variety of ways to manage their estates, moving back and forth between leasing and direct management. In the 1380s a number of east Kent manors had been taken back 'in hand' and were being directly managed by priory servants, but other manors continued to be leased. Chillenden subsequently leased out the east Kent manors, but for fixed quantities of grain and stock, not money rents. 
Chillenden was occasionally involved in national affairs. In 1383 he served as proctor for the University of Oxford in a dispute with St Frideswide's Priory. He was appointed by the crown one of the commissioners to inquire about the goods of Gueldres merchants in England. He was the last prior of Canterbury to attend parliament and was summoned by Richard II to the council held at Oxford in 1399, which advised the king regarding the papal schism. In 1404 he was elected bishop of Rochester, but refused to accept episcopal office. He attended the church council at Pisa in 1409 as representative of the crown as well as of the Canterbury convent. He died on 15 August 1411, and before his death had become so emaciated that his skin would scarcely cover his bones. 


@@@@@


doc= 38472


Rycaut, Sir Peter (1578-1653), merchant and financier, was born at Antwerp, the son of Andrew Rycaut (son of Peter Rycaut of Brabant) and his Spanish wife, Emerentia, daughter of Garcia Gonsala. He settled in London in 1600 and used his connections in Spain, Portugal, Italy, and the Low Countries to build up a thriving Mediterranean trade. He also allied himself with leading Dutch merchants in London through his marriage to Mary (died in or after 1660), daughter of Roger van der Colge (or Vercolge) and stepdaughter of Walter Artson the elder. Their ten sons and three daughters were baptized between 1611 and 1634; ten children survived into adulthood, including the youngest son, Paul Rycaut. The couple were active in the Dutch, French, and Italian reformed churches in London, as well as in their local Anglican parish of St Christopher-le-Stocks after moving from St Swithin's Lane to Cornhill. 
By the 1620s Rycaut was a multiple shipowner, with a controlling interest in the 'Centurion', 'St George', 'St Peter', 'Peter and Andrew', 'John and James', 'Benjamin and John', and other substantial ships. He had also become a merchant banker, corresponding in particular with his Annony relatives in Antwerp and the Spinolas in Genoa, part owners in his ships. He came accordingly under suspicion of being a front for foreign interests, or at least a pawn, vulnerable through his birth as a Spanish subject. In 1621 he lent a large sum to his friend Gondomar, the Spanish ambassador in London, to enable him to purchase and ship to Lisbon 100 pieces of ordnance for the service of the king of Spain. The arrangements for repayment in Portugal failed, and subsequent attempts to recover the debt with interest were to preoccupy the Rycaut family for more than forty years. When their cause was taken up by Cromwell, it was to contribute to the breach with Spain in 1655. In the shorter term Peter Rycaut's attempts to attach goods at Genoa belonging to Gondomar's successor led the Spanish viceroy of Naples to seize his 500 ton flagship, the 'St George', and Rycaut was suspected of selling her clandestinely to Spain. It took four years to clear his name; but he then defended himself so ably that it proved a turning point in his career. 
Henceforth Rycaut's money and contacts were increasingly employed in the government's service. As an agent for the 'asentistas' he helped to arrange that Spanish silver for Flanders, formerly routed via Genoa, was instead brought to Dover, where two-thirds was unladen and reminted in London against bills of exchange redeemable in the Low Countries. This resulted in a regular flow of silver into the kingdom from 1631 to 1647. In 1635 he headed the group of merchants granted a monopoly to import and refine the gold and silver used in the manufacture of wire thread. He invested substantially in the government's West Indies venture of 1636. He was the treasurer of the royal fishing association, at considerable personal loss, while both in his own name and indirectly he lent heavily to the crown in 1639-40. In return he received letters of denization on 27 July 1637 (although his naturalization bill was lost in committee in 1641), and was knighted on 30 April 1641. Shortly afterwards the husband of his eldest daughter, Mary, John Mayney, received a knighthood and baronetcy, and his eldest son, Peter, was contracted to the sister of a crown ward, Viscount Strangford. Rycaut himself had joined the landed gentry in 1639 with the purchase of two fine properties of 500 acres each: The Friars, Aylesford, a former Carmelite priory on the Medway near Maidstone, in Kent; and King's Barns Manor, Upper Beeding, in Sussex, on the Adur beside Bramber Castle. 
Rycaut was arrested at The Friars in August 1642 when parliamentary troops led by the notorious Colonel Sandys discovered arms and plate hidden in the roof. He was taken under guard to Upnor Castle and thence to London, where he managed to purchase his release. But in 1643, after raising a royalist troop of five hundred horse and lending $1000 to Sir John Mayney to buy arms in Holland, he had to escape to Rouen, which remained the family's continental base for some years. He was declared a delinquent and his estate sequestered, the first $5000 of his assets going straight to Sir William Waller's army. Over $2000 of this sum was in East India goods; and a further $1600 in the form of a bond by the East India Company (to which he had sold the 'Peter and Andrew') was also surrendered. Rycaut retaliated with actions to arrest the company's goods in Genoa, Venice, and Leghorn, which gave his friends on the board an excuse to resist further parliamentary demands. 
Letters from Rycaut were captured at Naseby in 1645 and he was exempted by name in the Newcastle propositions of 1646 from holding office or approaching the court again. His London house and the priory were both turned into parliamentary magazines, and the latter also served as headquarters for the committee of Kent -- plans for recapturing it played a large part in royalist conspiracies. Nevertheless he was allowed in 1647 to return to England, and then to The Friars, and his sequestration was lifted in 1648 after he had taken the covenant and compounded for a sixth of his remaining estate. But in 1650 the family was suspected (rightly) of remitting money to Charles II, and his books were again impounded. He died in Cornhill, London, on 22 February 1653 and was buried on 1 March in the church of St Peter and St Paul at Aylesford, where his wife later joined him. What little remained of his great wealth was mismanaged by his sons, and in 1657 they had to sell The Friars. As they complained at the Restoration, probably with little exaggeration, but to equally little avail, 'Sir Peter for his Services and Loyaltie... was sequestred his houses rifled plundred and his Family turned out of doores, soe that he suffred in his Estate to the value of One Hundred Thousand Pounds' (SP 29/17, fol. 91). 


@@@@@


doc= 38473


Cook, Sir Albert Ruskin (1870-1951), physician and missionary, was born on 2 March 1870 in the London suburb of Hampstead, the twelfth of thirteen children of William Henry Cook (1825-1882), a family physician who practised in Tunbridge Wells and then in London, and his wife, Harriet Bickersteth (1830-1918), daughter of Edward Bickersteth, rector of Watton in Hertfordshire and sister of Edward Henry Bickersteth, bishop of Exeter. Both Cook's grandfather and uncle had strong connections with the Church Missionary Society (CMS). The classical scholar Arthur Bernard Cook was his brother. 
As a youth Cook -- who had grey-blue eyes and reddish hair -- lived in London. Two years after his father's death the family moved from their home in Abbey Road to a leased house in Carlingford Street, near Hampstead Heath. After a few years at preparatory school he won a scholarship to St Paul's School, London, in 1881; initially he followed the arts curriculum, but later he turned his efforts towards science. From 1889 to 1893 Cook attended Trinity College, Cambridge (BA, 1893). During these years he established a reputation as an excellent student, and supported himself by tutoring fellow students and by selling antiquarian books. On 13 July 1893 he received a Shuter scholarship from St Bartholomew's Hospital, where he underwent his clinical training. He qualified MB in 1895 and MD in 1901. Nine days after qualifying in 1895 he submitted an application to join the CMS, which eventually accepted him as a medical missionary for service in Uganda, then a British protectorate. 
On 3 September 1896 Cook and a party of eleven other CMS missionaries, including his future wife, Katherine Timpson (died 1938), whom he married in 1900, left England on the SS 'Khedive', bound for Aden, where they changed to the SS 'Canara' for the journey to east Africa. On 1 October 1896 Cook and his colleagues landed at Mombasa. After an 84-day, 850-mile overland journey, during which Cook attended to 2230 patients, the CMS party arrived in Mengo, near Kampala, on 19 February 1897. Two days later Cook started seeing patients in a shed which originally had been a smithy. Within a month he was examining fifty to eighty patients daily. On 14 May 1897 Cook opened Mengo Hospital, which consisted of two houses with reed walls, thatched roofs, and mud floors, and had beds for twelve patients. By the mid-1930s, Mengo Hospital had become the cornerstone of one of the best medical infrastructures in sub-Saharan Africa. Apart from providing accommodation for 132 Africans, twelve Europeans, and twenty-four Indian patients, Mengo Hospital maintained a training school for African medical assistants and a radiological department with the country's only complete X-ray apparatus. Additionally Mengo Hospital was associated with the Lady Coryndon Maternity Training School, which opened in June 1921. Cook received a medal with two clasps for his services during the Nubian uprising of 1897-8. 
During his years in Uganda Cook also performed some significant scientific work, often in conjunction with his brother John (1871-1946), who also worked as a physician in Uganda between 1899 and 1920. In February 1901, for example, the brothers Cook diagnosed the first cases of sleeping sickness, a disease which eventually claimed the lives of at least 200,000 Ugandans who lived beside Lake Victoria or on the Buvuma Islands. During the following years, Cook identified the treponema of relapsing fever and published his findings in the 'Journal of Tropical Medicine'. 
Apart from his regular duties at Mengo Hospital and his scientific work, Cook also engaged in missionary work. On 8 March 1904 he started on a ten-week, 642-mile safari by bicycle, with his wife and Bishop Alfred Tucker of the CMS, to Acholi, where the party established a mission station. The following year he went on a similar journey, which lasted more than six months, to southern Sudan, where he helped to organize a mission station at Bor, a small settlement north of Juba on the River Nile. To support future missionary activities among the Dinka people at this remote location, Cook wrote several manuals in the Dinka language. 
After the First World War Cook strove to improve the quality of maternity and child welfare throughout Uganda. To achieve this goal he performed work for the government-sponsored Social Purity Campaign, which sought to reduce the number of cases of venereal disease in the country. Cook and his wife also sought donations for the construction of the Lady Coryndon Maternity Training School which, by 1929, was serving more than 10,000 patients annually. In 1923 he published 'Amagezi agokuzalisa', a textbook in Luganda for midwifery students, and about the same time he helped to create a network of twenty-two country health stations staffed by trained midwives. Cook's 'Handbook of Midwifery for Teaching Native Midwives' was published in 1931. 
By the early 1930s Cook's medical career was drawing to an end. In 1932 he was knighted in recognition of his many contributions to the establishment and development of western medicine in Uganda. Although he retired on 2 March 1934 Cook continued to work as a consultant to Mengo Hospital. He also served as president, and later as honorary vice-president, of the Uganda Literary and Scientific Society, which published the prestigious 'Uganda Journal', to which Cook contributed several articles. In 1937 Cook and his wife, Katherine, represented Uganda at the coronation of King George VI. On 17 May 1938 she died as a result of complications associated with a severe bout of malaria. In 1945 the Uganda Literary and Scientific Society published Cook's 'Uganda Memories, 1897-1940', a classic book which is essential for understanding not only his medical work but also the history of the early British colonial period in Uganda. 
Cook remained active until the end of his life, primarily working on his diaries or writing scientific and historical articles. During the last years of his life he became addicted to morphine, reportedly because he suffered from chronic insomnia and missed his late wife. On 23 April 1951 he died at his home at Makindye Hill, near Kampala, Uganda. After receiving the only royal funeral to have been granted to a European, he was buried next to his wife at the cathedral of St Paul, Namirembe Hill, Kampala. The marble cross that marks his grave is inscribed, on the orders of the king ('kabaka') of Buganda, 'to a true friend of Uganda'. Cook was survived by an only daughter, Margaret, who also was a physician. Cook and his wife also had an adopted son, David, who lived primarily with a missionary colleague, Sister Emily Watney; he was killed on active service during the Second World War. 
As befitted his professional and religious callings, Cook was a gentle, quiet, dedicated, and humble man, with simple tastes. He was well liked by everyone who knew him. His pioneering work in establishing an adequate health-care system for the Ugandan people remains his greatest legacy. 


@@@@@


doc= 38474


Archer, Sir Geoffrey Francis (1882-1964), colonial governor, was born on 4 July 1882 at 10 Somers Place, Paddington, London, the second son of Francis Bradley Archer, a banker, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Jackson. With the assistance of his maternal uncle, Frederick Jackson, who was then acting commissioner there, Archer went in 1901 to Uganda in search of a career. The informal arrangements then possible are illustrated by his appointment to the east African administrative service; he took up his first post at Mombasa early in 1902 with the help of Sir Charles Eliot, the commissioner there. By his own account, Archer's apprenticeship was not taxing, and routine office work was eclipsed by travel, hunting, and the foundations of a lifelong interest in ornithology. At the end of 1902 he was appointed assistant collector, and in 1904 was transferred, at his request, to Baringo as assistant district commissioner. 
In April 1907 Archer was promoted district commissioner and, after a surveying course in England, took up a new post at Mumias. Appointed to establish administration in the northern frontier district of Kenya, Archer organized a northern frontier constabulary with which, in 1909, he opened up the region, established a post in Masabit, and laid the basis for rudimentary administration. In 1911 he was promoted officer in charge of the district. 
In May 1913 Archer was transferred to the Somaliland protectorate, where since the beginning of the century British rule had been opposed by the followers of Sayyid Muhammad Abdullah Hassan. As acting commissioner and acting commander-in-chief while H. A. Byatt went on leave, later as deputy to Byatt, and finally, from 1914, as his successor, Archer was fully occupied in various schemes to suppress the revolt of the man contemporary British sources call 'the Mad Mullah' and whom to this day Somalis consider the father of independence. Successive military expeditions had ended in expensive failure, in a territory of little strategic and economic importance to the empire. 
During the First World War, Somaliland was necessarily an imperial backwater. Operations against Sayyid Muhammad continued but remained inconclusive. As elsewhere in the British and French empires, in Somaliland European officials were aware of local sympathy for the Ottoman sultan-caliph, but in administered areas there was no serious eruption of trouble. Archer indeed spent considerable time in the later war years on ornithological observation and research. In February 1917 he was a member of the British delegation to the coronation of the Abyssinian empress. On 16 May 1916 he married Olive Mary ('b'. 1893/4), daughter of Charles Bulkeley Godman. There were no children from the marriage. 
With the end of the war the British undertook decisive operations against Sayyid Muhammad. Greatly assisted by the Royal Air Force, these led in 1920 to capture of the rebel stronghold at Tali (Dali); the Sayyid died of illness in November. Among the British honours distributed was Archer's KCMG. 
Archer's tenure in subsequent posts was so brief as to have made little impact. In 1923 he was appointed governor of Uganda, where he toured energetically and took a keen interest in the flora and fauna but left no mark on the administration. In November 1924 he was unexpectedly appointed governor-general of Sudan to succeed Sir Lee Stack, whose assassination in Cairo had precipitated a crisis in Anglo-Egyptian relations, not least in Sudan itself, where Egypt and Britain were nominal co-domini. 
Archer's governor-generalship in Khartoum was unhappy and ended in failure. The first 'outsider' appointed to a post that had been occupied by Sir Reginald Wingate, Field Marshal Kitchener, and, indeed, General Gordon, Archer failed from the outset to win the loyalty of the Sudan political service, an elite administrative cadre. A crisis was not long in coming. In 1926, Archer's conciliatory and widely publicized visit to Sayyid 'Abd al-Rahman al-Mahdi, son of the famous Sudanese Mahdi, was used as a pretext by the governor-general's senior staff, who complained to Lord Lloyd, British high commissioner in Cairo. Lloyd took private advice, which indicated that the rupture between Archer and his leading subordinates was complete, and Archer had to resign. The circumstances of his resignation (about which there were rumours concerning his personal as well as professional conduct), and his subsequent ill health, brought an end to his active career at the early age of forty-four. 
Archer's long retirement was spent first in business in India and later in the south of France. His east African experience resulted in two books: 'The Birds of British Somaliland and the Gulf of Aden', with E. A. Bodman (4 vols., 1938-1960): and 'Personal and Historical Memoirs of an East African Administrator' (1963). Archer died on 1 May 1964 at Palais des Dunes, La Croisette, Cannes, France. 


@@@@@


doc= 38475


Moore, Sir Henry Monck-Mason (1887-1964), colonial governor, was born in Wimbledon on 16 March 1887, the youngest of the seven children of the Revd Edward W. Moore and his wife, Laetitia M. Monck-Mason. As a youth Moore, who was affectionately known to his friends as Monkey, attended Rokeby preparatory school, King's College School in Wimbledon, and then received Rustat and Skinner scholarships to Jesus College, Cambridge, where he was awarded the BA degree in 1909 in classics. After failing the Indian Civil Service examination, Moore obtained an eastern cadetship in the Ceylon civil service. In November 1910 he arrived in Ceylon and was attached to the secretariat and then to the Colombo 'kachcheri'. During his years in Ceylon he served in a variety of positions in Colombo, Negombo, and Avisawela. In 1914 he received a promotion to fourth assistant colonial secretary. 
During the First World War Moore, who had initially enlisted in the Royal Horse Artillery as a gunner and driver, held a temporary commission in Royal Garrison Artillery. He served in the Salonika campaign and the British expeditionary force. In August 1919 he returned to Ceylon and became assistant colonial secretary. The following year he worked as the private secretary to the governor. In December 1921 he married Daphne Ione Viola, the only daughter of W. J. Benson, who was in the consular service; the couple had two daughters. Moore became colonial secretary in Bermuda in 1922. Two years later he became principal assistant secretary in the Lagos secretariat, Nigeria, and in 1927 was promoted to deputy chief secretary. During his tenure in Lagos he served as secretary to two committees for Northern and Southern Nigeria. 
In 1929 Moore went to Kenya to assume the post of colonial secretary. At that time the colony was in the throes of a political crisis because its Indian population was struggling for equality and demanding to be placed on a common roll with the European settlers instead of on an Indian communal roll. As colonial secretary Moore served as the leader of the official majority in the legislative council and repeatedly conducted negotiations with representatives from the Indian and European settler communities. Additionally, in 1930, he served as the colony's acting governor. 
In 1934 Moore became governor and commander-in-chief of Sierra Leone. Among other achievements, he facilitated the protectorate's social and economic development, ended forced labour, built roads, improved medical and sanitary facilities, and introduced African administration. He served a tour in 1937-40 as assistant and then deputy under-secretary of state at the Colonial Office. Initially he was in charge of the West Indian and Far Eastern departments and the economic section. Additionally, he was the Colonial Office's representative on committees investigating civil aviation and oil distribution. 
In January 1940 Moore succeeded Air Chief Marshal Sir Robert Brooke-Popham as governor of Kenya. During his tenure he allowed the European settlers to make considerable political and economic gains. In 1942 he became chairman of the east African supply and defence council, which co-ordinated the defences of Kenya, Tanganyika, and Uganda. More importantly, his common-sense wartime leadership enabled Kenya to enlarge its military establishment, participate in the allied victories in Ethiopia and British and Italian Somaliland, and deploy King's African rifles units to north Africa, Madagascar, and south-east Asia. His wife served as chair of the joint Red Cross and St John committee and as president of Kenya's Women's Emergency Organisation. 
After leaving Kenya, Moore served as governor of Ceylon from 1944 to 1948. In this position he facilitated the decolonization process and the emergence of an independent Ceylon 'in an atmosphere of general peace and good will' ('The Times', 28 March 1964). He co-operated closely with D. S. Senanayake, the Ceylonese leader; and he in particular facilitated the implementation of the Soulbury constitution, which provided for a two-chamber parliament and for full internal self-government. He also served as Ceylon's first governor-general in 1948-9 under the new order. 
Although not as well remembered as some colonial governors, Moore nevertheless made significant contributions in several of the countries in which he served. In Sierra Leone, for example, he helped to lay the foundation of a more extensive administrative system, which previously had been centred primarily in the capital, Freetown, and had extended no further than a small group of minor chiefs. During his wartime service in Kenya, Moore proscribed the Kikuyu Central Association, a nationalist group led by Jomo Kenyatta, and gaoled many of its leaders. This was a politically unpopular step, especially with much of the Kikuyu community which was seeking to expand the political role of Africans, but one that Moore deemed necessary because of the ongoing military campaign in neighbouring Ethiopia. However, his most enduring legacy was his success in engineering a peaceful transition to independence in Ceylon. 
In recognition of his numerous contributions Moore received many awards, the most significant of which included appointments as CMG in 1930, KCMG in 1935, and GCMG in 1943. He also received an honorary LLD degree from the University of Ceylon. In 1949 Moore, who had been suffering from arthritis, retired to Cape Town, South Africa. He died on 26 March 1964 at the Volkshospital, Hof Street Gardens, Cape Town, South Africa. Lady Moore survived him. His 'Times' obituarist described Moore as 'a first-class administrator, with a tidy mind and a fund of common sense' (28 March 1964). 


@@@@@


doc= 38476


Renison, Sir Patrick Muir (1911-1965), colonial governor, was born on 24 March 1911 at 14 Cavendish Drive, Tranmere, Birkenhead, Cheshire, the son of William John Henry Renison, a marine insurance company assistant secretary, and his wife, Violet Douglas, 'nee' Willoughby. He was educated at Uppingham School and Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. A large, rather rubicund individual, he excelled on the rugby field but was a mediocre student. 
On graduation in 1932 Renison entered the colonial service, and was seconded for his first three years to the Colonial Office in Downing Street as an assistant principal. In 1935 he went to Ceylon, and in the following year he married Eleanor Hope Gibb. They had one daughter. Renison served in Ceylon until 1944, before returning for another four years to the Colonial Office. This was an unusual career, as few overseas administrators ever served in the Colonial Office in London, which was staffed by members of the home civil service, selected by competitive examination. Ceylon, moreover, with the possible exception of Palestine and Malta, was the most 'advanced' of Britain's colonial territories, already well on the way to dominion status with the full panoply of responsible government and semi-ministerial powers. 
In 1948 Renison became colonial secretary in Trinidad and Tobago. Four years later he was appointed governor of British Honduras, a quiet backwater, and then in 1955 governor of British Guiana, a much more demanding position. In the previous year his predecessor had suspended the left-wing government of Cheddi Jagan, reinstituting direct rule. Renison proved adept at sidestepping political land-mines and made some progress in improving relations between the East Asian and African communities, while reducing suspected communist influence and gradually restoring some power to the elected members of the legislative council. He was made CMG in 1950 and KCMG in 1955. 
Renison's success in British Guiana led to his appointment as governor of Kenya in 1959, during the closing days of the Mau Mau emergency, despite the fact that he had never served in Africa. Iain Macleod, the new secretary of state, was determined to transfer power to African moderates as quickly as possible, and decided that there were political advantages in appointing a non-Africanist to this demanding post. He was soon disappointed, as Renison was quickly 'captured' by the Kenya administration and, unlike Macleod, persuaded of the need to proceed slowly. Although Renison remained governor until the end of 1962, policy was increasingly determined in London, driven by Whitehall's response to the demands of African nationalists, and the governor and his advisers in the Kenya administration found themselves increasingly bypassed. The first Lancaster House conference in January 1960 saw the acceptance of African primacy and rapid progress to independence under an African government. This was confirmed by the 1961 election, which centred on Jomo Kenyatta's release from detention, and by the second and third Lancaster House conferences in 1962 and 1963 which devised the new independence constitution. 
Renison is best remembered in Kenya for dismissing Kenyatta, still in detention, in a radio broadcast after the election of 1961 as 'the leader to darkness and death' (Kyle, 114). The governor appears to have accepted uncritically the results of an investigation into the origins of Mau Mau, which defended Kenyatta's detention as the organizer of Mau Mau. This report, by F. C. Corfield, was belatedly published in 1960 as part of an attempt by elements in the Kenyan administration to prevent Kenyatta's political rehabilitation. In the end, however, Renison had to back down, first accepting Kenyatta's release, then his election to the legislative council, and finally his appointment as joint leader of government business with Ronald Ngala, leader of the Kenya African Democratic Union (KADU). Renison managed to survive both these changes and the appointment of Reginald Maudling as secretary of state in 1961, but he soon fell out with Maudling's acerbic successor, Duncan Sandys. Many observers had not expected the governor to return from the second Lancaster House conference in spring 1962, which led to the formation of a coalition government between Kenyatta's Kenya African National Union (KANU) and Ngala's KADU, but he had soldiered on, attempting to establish a relationship of trust with the Kikuyu leader. 
The marriage of Renison's daughter to the son of the Kenya National Farmers' Union leader, Lord Delamere, did little to reassure Africans, all too vividly highlighting the ties between Government House and the colony's settler aristocracy. Sandys, moreover, quickly became dissatisfied with the pace of progress and disliked Renison's low-profile manner. The new secretary of state wanted a more political, pro-nationalist, and publicity-seeking proconsul to preside over the final stages of the transfer of power. In November 1962 he recalled Renison to London for consultations and then abruptly sacked him to make way for the politically adept Malcolm MacDonald. 
Renison was made a GCMG but, at the age of fifty-one, his career was effectively over. A former rugby player, he served briefly in 1963 as adviser to Lord Hailsham on sport and physical recreation before becoming the following year joint vice-chairman of the British Red Cross Society. He was also a governor of Queen Elizabeth House at Oxford. Shattered by his dismissal, Renison's health rapidly deteriorated, and he died in a London hospital, Beaumont House, Beaumont Street, Marylebone, on 11 November 1965. 


@@@@@


doc= 38477


Byatt, Sir Horace Archer (1875-1933), colonial governor, was born on 22 March 1875 in Avenue Road, Tottenham, Middlesex, the eldest son of Horace Byatt, schoolmaster, of Midhurst, Sussex, and his wife, Laura Archer. He graduated with a BA degree in classical honours at Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1898. There followed a long career in the colonial service, starting in Nyasaland in 1898 and then in Somaliland from 1905, where he rose to commissioner and commander-in-chief in 1911-14. He was colonial secretary, Gibraltar, in 1914; lieutenant-governor and chief secretary, Malta, in 1914-16; and then came the major part of his career, as administrator of former German East Africa in 1916-20 and governor and commander-in-chief of the League of Nations Mandated Territory of Tanganyika in 1920-24. He was finally governor and commander-in-chief of Trinidad and Tobago in 1924-9, after which he retired. He was knighted in 1918. In 1924 he married Olga Margaret Campbell, of Argyll; they had three sons. 
In a career notable chiefly for its cautious approach, Byatt's main impact was in the peaceful transfer of power from the Germans to the British in Tanganyika. The country was in a parlous state after the fiercely fought east African campaign; most of the German settlers had fled, and trade and revenue stood at less than half of the pre-war level. Byatt had a very small administrative staff (108 officers) and as a consequence he left much of the German system in place, continuing to employ 'akidas', or German government-appointed chiefs. Auctions of the former German estates were held and these went mainly to the British, Indians, and Greeks, though some land was given back to Africans. Byatt said in 1922 that 'the future of the country lay in developing native cultivation only' (Taylor, 58), and this was in line with the terms of the mandate and the Colonial Office's thinking. He established departments of agriculture, forestry, education, and lands and survey, though the scarcity of the staff meant that progress was slow. Unfortunately he continued the German education policy of having a separate government education system, which ignored and competed with the missionary one, and this was in contradiction to Colonial Office policy, which stressed partnership. 
In administration Byatt was criticized for having little interest in the districts, where officers were left to their own devices, using 'akidas' or chiefs as agents. However, he replaced the tribute which chiefs collected by government salaries, with Colonial Office approval, as this was a step in the direction of Nigerian-style 'indirect rule'. A well thought out scheme of indirect rule, however, had to wait for his successor, Sir Donald Cameron. Byatt at least had some achievements to his credit: he had finally abolished slavery in 1922, reorganized the police force, introduced the Indian penal code, and managed to curb influenza, sleeping sickness, and yaws. The economy recovered well; by 1925 revenues had begun to equal expenditure and Tanganyika was exporting twice as much as before the war. Some of Byatt's difficulties lay in implementing the mandate, the terms of which were not published until 1922, and he faced delays in receiving answers to amplify details. Cameron was distinctly critical of his work. A later historian commented that Byatt was 'a narrowly competent man, unimaginative, unpopular, and unwell, but he shared the good intentions of the colonial office' (Iliffe, 262). 
Byatt spent a shorter period as governor of the crown colony of Trinidad and Tobago, from 1924 to 1929. This was a difficult period to take over the governorship, as the colony faced political unrest with an upsurge of radical labour activity, led by Captain Arthur Cipriani, a white Creole who founded the Trinidad Working Men's Association. In a multi-ethnic population of black people and east Indians, working-class solidarity was beginning to appear above the ethnic divide. Unrest increased with a slump in cocoa prices in the mid-1920s, and the Trinidad Working Men's Association pressed for better wages and working conditions, as well as constitutional reform. In 1925 the first elections in the colony were held, for a new legislative council, though the white planters still exerted political domination. Byatt was involved in a crisis over his power to nominate six of the members. He nominated five but left the sixth place vacant until after the election, claiming he wanted to retain flexibility. In fact he nominated another white member to the three already nominated, and this caused protests in the Indian community who hoped it would be an Indian. The Colonial Office also disapproved of his decision but eventually dropped the matter. Byatt did at least persuade the Colonial Office to raise the limit on individual loans by the agricultural loan bank, so as to assist poorer farmers. He retired to Britain in 1929 and died four years later, at 2 Beaumont Street, St Marylebone, London, on 8 April 1933. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 38479


Blundell, Sir Michael (1907-1993), farmer and politician in Kenya, was born on 7 April 1907 at 33 Campden House Court, Kensington, London, the third of four sons of Alfred Herbert Blundell, a London solicitor, and his wife, Amelia Woodward Richardson. His father's family came from Appletreewick in the Yorkshire dales. He was educated at Wellington College from 1921 to 1925, and was destined to go to Magdalen College, Oxford, but the school had an offer from an old Wellingtonian in Kenya to take on an assistant on his farm. Fired by a visit to the Empire Exhibition at Wembley in 1924, Blundell decided to take up the offer. 
Blundell arrived in Mombasa in October 1925 with two tin trunks, a shotgun, and $100. The farm was in Kipkarren in western Kenya, an area of European settlement set up for ex-soldiers after the First World War. Blundell's role as a trainee was to manage the African farmworkers and to drive a tractor which had replaced the ox-teams for ploughing. He shot regularly for the pot and for sport and went on hunting safaris, mainly on foot. It was a pioneering life which brought him into close contact with Africans, whom he quickly learned to respect. In 1927 he moved to manage a farm at Solai, near Nakuru in the Rift valley. He later bought the farm in partnership with his elder brother Jack, who was killed in the Second World War. Blundell played the piano and sang well. He found friends with whom he could indulge in his love of music, and in 1936 visited Austria to study singing and became absorbed in the great lieder cycles, but soon returned to Kenya. Farming in Africa remained the formative influence of his life. 
A burly figure, with strong features, Blundell had prodigious energy, both physical and mental. He was fascinated by the new challenges posed by Africa and studied his environment in depth. His mastery of botany enabled him to write a popular book, 'The Wild Flowers of Kenya', published in 1982. This was revised and enlarged as 'The Wild Flowers of East Africa' and published as a definitive guide by Collins in 1987. Above all, Blundell was a natural leader, not afraid of making forthright statements even if they offended older settlers in the small European community of Kenya. The Rift valley became the platform for his move from full-time farming to the political arena, which he chronicled in two books of memoirs, 'So Rough a Wind', published in 1964, and 'A Love Affair with the Sun', published posthumously in 1994. 
Following the onset of the Second World War, Blundell was drafted in 1940 to command a battalion of pioneers, recruited largely from western Kenya. They took part in the Abyssinian campaign, fighting through to the capture of Addis Ababa, the assault on Gondar, and the defeat of the Italian forces. He was made an MBE in 1943. The battalion was afterwards upgraded to a royal engineer unit and sent to the Fourteenth Army, working mainly in Ceylon and India until the war ended, when they all returned to Kenya. Close comradeship with his soldiers made Blundell aware of African aspirations for political advance. Before leaving the army he was promoted colonel to an organization preparing for the reintegration of troops to civilian life. 
In 1946 Blundell married and returned to his farm in Solai, bringing with him his wife, Geraldine Lotte Robarts (died 1983), previously the wife of an army officer. Just before the war he had been singled out to serve the farming community as a member of the coffee board of Kenya. Now the government appointed him a commissioner in charge of settlement schemes for European ex-soldiers, over 300 of whom had come to the highlands. This was an important step intended to increase agricultural production. Although he gave up this job after a year, Blundell later used his political clout to press the rights of these farmers -- who had been led to believe that Kenya would remain a British colony -- to fair compensation from the British government. He was already involved in government and deputized briefly for the Rift Valley member of the legislative council in 1947. The following year, in the general election, he stood for the seat and defeated Lord Francis Scott, a doyen of settler politics, to embark upon his own political career. 
In a country of 5 million people, the resident European community of about 35,000 had been the dominant group in the political life of Kenya since the 1920s. They acted as an opposition to the government officials and nominees who held power. Their policy priorities were simple: European leadership, the sanctity of the 'white highlands', a communal electoral roll, and separate education for the races. Blundell stood firmly on this platform. He was the epitome of the younger breed of settlers embarking on modern farming methods and growing cash crops. In 1948 he sold his land in Solai and moved to a higher farm at Subukia, east of Nakuru, where he grew pyrethrum and built a new house. A year later he was appointed chairman of the pyrethrum board of Kenya, a post he held for four years. He was re-elected unopposed in the 1952 election and soon became leader of the European elected members. However, there was a growing rift between the older members, who wanted to maintain the 'status quo', and those who saw the need for political change. 
The testing time came with the declaration of Mau Mau emergency in 1952. This uprising, mainly among the Kikuyu and their cousin tribes in the central province, shook the governments in Nairobi and London. Blundell was in the thick of political developments. Faced with attacks on farms and murders of loyal Kikuyu, the European members were strongly critical of the conduct of what had become a limited war. Blundell showered the new governor, Sir Evelyn Baring, with advice, and proposed strengthening the administration of Kikuyu areas. He was at Government House when a mob of angry Europeans demonstrated outside. Baring sent him out with some of his colleagues to address and ultimately disperse them. On a visit to London, Blundell was invited to explain his views to ministers and to the media. In 1954 he became minister without portfolio in the Kenya government and a member of the war council. With the arrival of British troops and expanded administrative and police forces the violence was controlled. The focus turned to intensive development of agriculture in the African areas. Blundell threw himself into this as minister for agriculture, animal husbandry, and water resources (1955-9). He promoted the 'Swynnerton plan' to extend the planting of cash crops by African farmers and directed a revolution in land tenure to give them freehold land titles. 
Meanwhile there had been a change in political alignments. Blundell and some of his colleagues broke away in 1954 to form the United Country Party (UCP). This grouping with liberal and multiracial aims aroused the opposition of many Europeans. Blundell considered that this polarization was a mistake and the UCP was wound up three years later. He resigned from the government in 1959 and became leader of the New Kenya Group, now as a specially elected member. He was determined to create a nation of all races under African majority leadership, and spoke widely -- and to African audiences in Swahili -- in preparation for the conference on the future of Kenya which was to be held early in 1960. 
Blundell now played a key role in negotiating the constitutional developments leading to Kenya's independence. He was trusted by the political leaders in the Conservative Party, though not implicitly by the colonial secretary, Iain Macleod. The result of the Lancaster House conference in January 1960, when it became clear that the British government would accept majority rule based on universal suffrage, was a shock to European opinion in Kenya. Blundell himself was alarmed by the speed of change to African rule, but he had to bear the opprobrium. On arrival at Nairobi airport he was met by cheering Africans, and by angry Europeans who threw thirty coins at his feet, declaring 'Judas, you have betrayed and left us' (Blundell, 'So Rough a Wind', 283). Though ostracized by the bulk of the white community, he worked on in politics, returning to his old job at the agriculture ministry in 1961 after being re-elected with strong African support. His energies were applied to implementing settlement schemes for landless Africans. He was made a KBE in 1962, and in 1963 finally retired from active politics, just before Kenya gained independence. However, this was not the end of his service to the country of which he proudly became a citizen. He devoted himself to the running of Egerton Agricultural College (later a university), and was chairman of its board in 1962. He took great pride in funding the building of a rural school in the area from which most of his troops in the Abyssinian campaign had come. His skills were also sought in commercial boardrooms. He was chairman of East African Breweries from 1964 to 1977, a major job which he carried out with conspicuous success. 
In his later years Blundell became a doyen of Kenya politics, respected and consulted by presidents and senior visitors. Ironically, he was looked upon as an advocate with the government by the Europeans in Kenya, coming forward in this capacity in 1990, at the age of eighty-three, to give evidence to the Kenya electoral review committee. His greatest joy was to sit on the veranda of his final home, Ridgeway, in Kiambu district, near Nairobi, and look out over the garden which he had created. After the death of his wife in 1983 he lived at Ridgeway with his daughter and his two granddaughters, and died there on 1 February 1993. He was cremated, and his ashes interred at St Paul's Church in Kiambu. 
Blundell served two homelands, Britain and Kenya, with distinction. His major achievement was to pave the way for white Kenyans to come to terms with majority rule; but first and foremost he saw himself as an African. 


@@@@@


doc= 38480


Urquhart, Francis Fortescue, of Urquhart (1868-1934), bachelor don, was born on 1 September 1868 at 21 Malagnou, Geneva, the third (second surviving) son and fifth (last) child of David Urquhart (1805-1877), diplomatist and writer on international affairs, and his wife, Harriet Angelina Fortescue (1824-1889), also a writer. Her brother Chichester Fortescue, Baron Carlingford, was a father figure during Francis Urquhart's youth: the name Fortescue was added at Carlingford's request when he died childless in 1898. 
Urquhart's childhood home was in Montreux, with summers at the Chalet des Melezes, which his father had built in 1865, 1000 metres above St Gervais-les-Bains, in the French Alps. His mother became a Roman Catholic in 1877, and he was educated in that tradition at Hodder Place near Stonyhurst (1879-80), Beaumont College in Old Windsor (1881-6), and Stonyhurst College (1886-9). In 1889 he took an external London BA in classics. Urquhart entered Balliol College, Oxford, as an exhibitioner in 1890: he won the Stanhope historical essay prize, took a first in modern history (1894), and was elected to a tutorial fellowship in 1896. The first Catholic tutor in Oxford since the Reformation, and a pious one at that, his presence did much to reconcile conservative Catholics with the university; but he did not seek converts, which helped to settle the suspicions of conservative Anglicans. 
Urquhart lived in Balliol for nearly forty years, holding office as junior dean (1896-1907), domestic bursar (1907-19), and dean (1918-34). A conscientious but uninspiring tutor, his interests were more in art and architecture than literature or history, and he made no contributions of his own to historical scholarship. He took little part in university affairs except the development of the Oxford Catholic chaplaincy -- he was instrumental in the appointment of his friend R. A. Knox as chaplain in 1926. Nevertheless, he became one of the best-known and most warmly remembered dons of his time. His main role, recalled L. E. Jones, 'was social, not pedagogic... he appeared to have endless leisure for loitering in the Quad by day and gossiping in his rooms by night' (Jones, 33). Late in the evening during term time his rooms above Balliol's back gate became an informal salon for undergraduates of all sorts to mix and talk. In vacations he often took a chosen few with him touring, and every summer except 1915-18 he invited groups of a dozen or so to stay with him at his father's chalet, which became known as the Chalet des Anglais. He had first taken a reading party there in 1891; in 1896 he bought the chalet from his elder brother, David Urquhart (1855-1928). It burnt down in 1906 while he was on a trip round the world, but he had it rebuilt. Between 1891 and 1931, when his health failed, he had about 300 chalet guests for a week or two of morning reading and afternoon mountain walks. About half were Balliol undergraduates, including C. V. Connolly, L. P. Hartley, J. S. Huxley, F. S. Kelly, M. Harold Macmillan, and W. T. Monckton, but other colleges were also well represented -- by T. S. R. Boase and R. J. G. Boothby (both Magdalen); R. H. S. Crossman, W. G. Hayter, J. P. R. Maud, J. H. A. Sparrow (all New College); and Q. McG. Hogg (Christ Church). 
Urquhart had a slim, athletic frame, blue eyes, and a handsome, smooth face with heavy, slightly pouting lips; his hair was thick and curly -- light brown in youth, white later. The nickname Sligger, by which he was generally known after about 1892, was derived from 'sleek one' through 'slicker'. He liked handsome young men, and photographing them, but was probably celibate. Only one special relationship is evident, with Stephen Hewett (1893-1916), whose letters from the trenches he edited for publication. Walter Pater may have used Urquhart as the model for some features of the subject in 'Emerald Uthwart' (1892). Anthony Powell, a pupil of Urquhart's, placed his recurrent character Sillery in a setting based on Urquhart's salon, but denied otherwise drawing on him. 
Urquhart died of lung disease at the Acland Nursing Home, Oxford, on 18 September 1934, and was buried in Wolvercote cemetery three days later after a solemn requiem mass at the church of St Aloysius. He left most of his $15,000 English estate to Balliol. In 1959 lord Lyon king of arms accepted that the chiefship of the clan Urquhart had been vested in him (1928-34), and had passed on his death to his distant American cousin Wilkins Fisk Urquhart of that ilk (1896-1976). Urquhart bequeathed the Chalet des Anglais to his Balliol friend R. A. B. Mynors. At the close of the twentieth century it was still being used for undergraduate reading parties. 


@@@@@


doc= 38481


Prosser, Richard (bap. 1747, d. 1839), Church of England clergyman and tutor, was baptized on 26 July 1747 at Market Drayton, Shropshire, the third son and fourth child of Humphrey Prosser (1694-1781), gentleman, and Eleanor Witherston (1708-1779), his wife, who both have prominent gravestones in the floor of the church at St Margarets, Herefordshire. 
Prosser was admitted to Balliol College, Oxford, as a commoner in 1767, graduated BA in 1770, and proceeded MA (1773), BD (1784), and DD (1797). He was elected a chaplain-fellow in 1773, having been ordained deacon in London in 1771. He took his full share of the various college offices, was a university proctor in 1783-4, and earned a reputation as a painstaking tutor. The anatomist Matthew Baillie was one of his pupils. In his time there was a series of fellowship election disputes in which he was consistently for ability against interest. Later, as one of Balliol's elder statesmen with Baillie, he promoted the same principle, and, by a testamentary codicil made in 1828, established six exhibitions to encourage 'the Intellectual Improvement of the Undergraduates of Balliol College', prescribing 'that no Exhibition shall ever be given to any Undergraduate whose literary and scientific attainments are not respectable and worthy of distinction'. He was the first of the tory disciplinarians who in such ways laid the foundations of Benjamin Jowett's Balliol. 
Prosser was nominated curate of Spelsbury, Oxfordshire, in 1790, and in 1792 took the Balliol living of All Saints, Colchester, where he was an active resident incumbent. After the customary year of grace he resigned his Balliol fellowship. He married Sarah (1753-1824), daughter of the wealthy barrister Samuel Wegg FRS (1723-1802), of Colchester and Acton, on 20 June 1796. Soon after his marriage Prosser was preferred to the rectory of Gateshead by Shute Barrington, bishop of Durham, and in 1804 was collated to the third prebendal stall of Durham Cathedral. In 1808 he was appointed archdeacon of Durham, to which the rectory of Easington was annexed until 1832. He became very attached to Easington, to which he gave communion plate in 1817, and he also built (1814) and endowed (1833) a parochial charity school there. Sarah Prosser died on 4 March 1824 and was buried in Durham Cathedral, with a memorial; their only child, Richard Samuel (1797-1809), was also buried there. In 1826 Prosser bought the mansion of Belmont, designed by James Wyatt, in the parish of Clehonger, Herefordshire, and associated lands. He lived mainly at Belmont thereafter, and resigned the archdeaconry in 1831, but continued to reside as a canon at Durham for three months every year until he was ninety. 
A scholarly man with an extensive library, from which he bequeathed to Balliol an illuminated fifteenth-century translation of the letters of Ovid into Norman French, and a 'Vulgate Bible' printed in 1521, Prosser left instructions that his own manuscript writings were to be burned. His only publications were sermons preached at a visitation at Newcastle (1797), to the House of Commons (1801), and at the consecration of Henry Bathurst, bishop of Norwich (1805). 
Prosser died at Belmont on 8 October 1839 and was buried in Clehonger church, where there is a memorial. Thirty-five years as a golden canon of Durham had made him a very wealthy man. His principal heir was Francis Richard Haggit MP (1824-1911), only son of Lucy Haggit, daughter of Prosser's sister Frances Parry; he changed his name to Francis Richard Wegg-Prosser by royal licence in 1849. Ironically much of the wealth accumulated by Prosser out of the unreformed Church of England assisted the recovery of English Roman Catholicism, because Wegg-Prosser, a convert in 1852, used much of it to establish and endow the Benedictine community which became Belmont Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 38482


Godwyn, Charles (1701-1770), antiquary and book collector, was born at Thornbury, in Gloucestershire, and was baptized there on 9 March 1701, the first child of Samuel Godwyn ('c'.1668-1705?), who in 1702 succeeded his uncle Scudamore Godwyn as vicar of Wapley and rector of Filton, and his wife, Elizabeth Tipton, formerly of Bristol. The last in a veritable tribe of Godwyn clerics descended from Thomas Godwin, bishop of Bath and Wells, Charles had a brother, Samuel Godwyn (died 'c'.1747), who was a Bristol surgeon. Having been educated in Bristol, Charles was admitted to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1718, graduated BA in 1721 (MA, 1724; incorporated at Cambridge, 1734), and was elected a probationer fellow of Balliol in 1722. He was ordained deacon and priest at Oxford in 1727 and 1728 respectively, and graduated BD in 1740. Though he held in turn the Balliol rectories of Riseholme, Lincolnshire (1746-52), All Saints, Colchester (1752-3), and Marks Tey, Essex (from 1753), he resided in Balliol all his adult life. 
Godwyn took a full part in the business of the college -- which was relatively desultory in his time -- and was instrumental in obtaining a major benefaction from Henry Fisher ('c'.1693-1773), vicar of Bere Regis, Dorset, which enabled the construction of a new building. He acquired a reputation as a painstaking tutor; Frederick, the profligate son of the poet Edward Young, was one of his charges. In other respects Godwyn's life was remarkably parallel to that of his eccentric colleague Joseph Sanford, devoted to private study and antiquarian pursuits. Like Sanford he was intimate with Benjamin Kennicot. Also like Sanford he published nothing but contributed freely to the work of others, especially John Hutchins and Richard Chandler, both of whom acknowledged the joint contribution of Sanford and Godwyn in prefaces to their books. And it was to his 'old friends' Sanford and Godwyn jointly that George Coningesby ('c'.1693-1766), rector of Pencombe, in Herefordshire, and a kindred spirit, left his extensive library of printed books and manuscripts in trust for Balliol. Godwyn also corresponded with other antiquarian scholars such as Philip Morant and Charles Gray (1696-1782). A selective and scholarly numismatist, at some stage he acquired the coin cabinet of Heneage Finch, fifth earl of Winchilsea (died 1726). By the end of his life he had amassed and catalogued over 3000 coins, mostly Greek, Roman, and English, starting with the early Saxon kings, and medals, including a notable long series of papal medals. 
Godwyn was fully active until shortly before his death but in his later years he was troubled by fits, induced, he thought, by taking tea. He collapsed in his rooms on 23 April 1770, while his servant was out getting some cheesecakes, and died soon afterwards on the same day despite, or perhaps because of, the efforts of a physician to revive him by opening a vein in his temples. On 26 April, at his request, he was buried with minimal ceremony in Wolvercote church, some 2 miles from Oxford city centre. He had no known connection with Wolvercote church or village and probably chose it because it was an obscure rural location but not inconvenient for the six college servants whom he asked to carry him to his grave for a guinea each. An anonymous vacuous poetic lament was published in the 'Reading Mercury and Oxford Gazette' on 14 May. 
Godwyn made numerous modest bequests to friends and servants, including 20 guineas for the son of Thomas Bustin, who looked after his horse, and to Mr Robert Ashfield, a local parishioner, whom he asked to burn his papers, apart from his catalogues and recent accounts. There was a group of three family portraits in his rooms which he left to his cousin Mrs Mary Bromfield of Conduit Street, London, but they are still at Balliol. His books (about 1600 volumes, mostly on historical subjects), pamphlets (mostly on theological and literary subjects), coins, and medals he left to the Bodleian Library. He appointed the university itself to be his executor and residual beneficiary. About two-thirds of his library, including several important works of David Hume which had not been previously acquired, were retained by the Bodleian. As he had instructed, the books not required were sold, Fletchers' bookshop in the Turl disposing of the remainder in 1773 after members of the university had had their pick; the pamphlets formed the nucleus of a collection still known as the Godwyn pamphlets, numbering, with subsequent additions, over 30,000; the coins and medals, with Godwyn's meticulous catalogues, were transferred to the Ashmolean Museum in 1920. The residue of the estate, about $1000, was invested for the benefit of the Bodleian. There is no memorial to Godwyn at Wolvercote, or in Balliol, but his name is on the great marble Bodleian benefactors' tablet. 


@@@@@


doc= 38483


Nicholson, John William (1881-1955), mathematical physicist, was born on 1 November 1881 at 7 High Terrace, Darlington, first child of John William Nicholson ('b'. 'c'.1853), ironworks clerk (afterwards a works manager, of Redcar), and his wife, Alice Emily ('b'. 'c'.1860), daughter of John Kirton, painter. Nicholson had a brother and two sisters. From Middlesbrough high school he went to the University of Manchester where he graduated BSc in physics in 1902 and MSc in 1905. He went to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1902 and was equal tenth wrangler in part one of the mathematical tripos of 1904 and gained a 1:2 in part two in 1905. He won the Isaac Newton studentship in 1906 and numerous other awards and prizes. He also took a London BSc (second class in mathematics, first class in experimental physics, 1903) and DSc (1906). 
In 1912 Nicholson was appointed (controversially, as there was an established internal candidate) professor of mathematics in the University of London at King's College. He collaborated there with T. R. Merton on the measurement and interpretation of spectral line intensities. Balliol College, Oxford, recruited him as fellow and tutor in mathematics and physics in 1921, and he became a university lecturer in mathematics at Oxford in 1927. He was elected to the Royal Society in 1917 (council member 1920-21), and was an influential member of many scientific bodies, including the Royal Astronomical Society (a fellow from 1911), the Rontgen Society (president 1921-2), and the British Association committee on mathematical tables (chairman 1920-30). 
Nicholson assisted Arthur Schuster with the third edition of 'An Introduction to the Theory of Optics' (1924), and made some ninety journal contributions on diverse topics. His most significant work was on an atomic structure model he derived from a study of unassigned lines in the spectra of stellar nebulae and the solar corona. This he unveiled at the Portsmouth British Association meeting of August 1911, and developed in 'Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society' during 1912. In his first note (dated from Trinity College, 25 October 1911), he described an atomic model comprising a tiny heavy positively charged nucleus around which electrons rotated in a circular orbit equidistant from each other. A four-electron element which he called 'nebulium' was identified as the origin of the mysterious nebular lines, which he was able to account for quantitatively using the model. Turning to the coronal spectra, a further protoelement, 'protofluorine', was proposed. In his second note about it (dated again from Trinity, 28 April 1912) he introduced Planck's constant into his analysis, suggesting that 'the angular momentum of an atom can only rise or fall by discrete amounts'. He appears to have been the first to relate quantum theory to atomic spectra. Niels Bohr knew of Nicholson's work and discussed it in the first of his 1913 trilogy on atomic structure ('Philosophical Magazine', July 1913), tactfully objecting ('inter alia') that Nicholson's model was inherently unstable. In his old age, Bohr was more dismissive: 'It was a play with numbers', he said (Bohr). 
In 1922, with the Astronomer Royal and the mistress of Girton among the witnesses, Nicholson married Dorothy Maud Wrinch (1894-1976), feminist and mathematician. In 1930, as Jean Ayling, she published a polemic on marriage and parenthood, 'Retreat from Parenthood'. The couple had one child, Pamela (1927-1975). In the later twenties Nicholson published little and his teaching deteriorated. In May 1930 he was treated in Norwood Sanatorium for alcoholism. Shortly afterwards a conjugal separation was agreed. On 12 October 1930 he was removed from Balliol to the Warneford Hospital in Oxford, where he was confined as a certified lunatic. Incurable insanity became a ground for divorce by the 'Matrimonial Causes Act' of 1937; Nicholson and Wrinch were divorced in 1938. He died at the Warneford from heart disease on 10 October 1955. His funeral was held at Redcar four days later. Nicholson had made a will in favour of Wrinch on their wedding day; it was proved on her behalf despite their divorce and her remarriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 38484


Jenkyns, Henry (1795-1878), Church of England clergyman and classical scholar, was born on 22 June 1795, eighth of the nine children of John Jenkyns (1753-1824), vicar of Evercreech, Somerset, and Jane (died 1825), daughter of James Banister, a Bristol merchant. The eldest child was Richard Jenkyns, master of Balliol College. Henry Jenkyns was educated at Eton College and at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he was a scholar (1813-18). He took a double first in 1816, and graduated BA in 1817 (MA 1819, BD and DD 1841). 
Oriel College, at that time academically dominant in Oxford, elected Jenkyns to a fellowship in 1818, which he held until 1835. He played his part in college affairs (he was treasurer in 1831) and politics -- leading a faction which opposed the appointment of John Henry Newman as dean in 1833 -- but he was never a college tutor. Throughout the twenties he was private tutor to two sons of Charles Manners Sutton, speaker of the House of Commons, and he was frequently absent from Oxford with them at Eton or Westminster. His only substantial publication, an edition of the 'Remains' of Thomas Cranmer, appeared in 1833. At that time Oxford's conservative churchmen were bent on inflating the reputations of the protestant martyr-bishops, and Cranmer's 'Remains' was scholarly propaganda in that campaign. The four volumes are meticulously edited, but Jenkyns's no-popery sentiments are apparent in his long preface and footnotes. 
In 1833 Jenkyns became the first professor of Greek and classical literature at the University of Durham. His brother-in-law Thomas Gaisford, dean of Christ Church and a former canon of Durham, was instrumental in his appointment. On 31 March 1834 Jenkyns married his second cousin Harriet (1807-1876), daughter of Henry Hobhouse. They had four daughters and four sons. He was a leading member of the tiny senate which guided the University of Durham through its formative years, and was sub-warden for eight periods between 1840 and 1860. He was acting professor of divinity from 1835, but did not resign as professor of Greek and classical literature until 1840. The inaugural lecture he gave in 1834, published as 'A Lecture on the Advantages of Classical Studies', is remarkable for its prolixity and lack of substance. But his divinity teaching lectures, a systematic two-year course on church history, dogmatic theology, and forms of worship, were models of clarity, organization, and orthodoxy which attracted migrants from Oxford and Cambridge. According to Fowler, Jenkyns commanded the admiration and respect of his students. Although somewhat cold and aloof, he had a caustic sense of humour which occasionally enlivened the otherwise rigid decorum of his lecture room. The lectures were not published, but several sets of notes taken from them survive at Durham in the university library. 
Jenkyns was collated to the third stall in Durham Cathedral in 1839, the last canon of Durham to be installed before the 'Ecclesiastical Commissioners Act' of 1840 reduced the value of such dignities, and he was formally appointed professor of divinity in 1840. It was intended that the canonry should eventually be annexed to and support the professorship, but the two were not formally linked until later. In 1864 he resigned his professorship and retired to Botley Hill, Bishop's Waltham, near Southampton. He was nevertheless able to enjoy the unreformed emoluments of his golden stall (nearly $4000 per annum) until his death. He voluntarily surrendered $1000 per annum to cover the cost of his replacement as professor but, controversially, he continued to enjoy in retirement a net income which was three times as much as his successor would ever earn. He died at Botley Hill on 2 April 1878, and was buried next to his wife in the graveyard of Curdridge church. 


@@@@@


doc= 38488


Voynich, Ethel Lilian (1864-1960), novelist, translator, and musician, was born on 11 May 1864 at Lichfield Cottage, Blackrock, Ballintemple, near Cork, the youngest daughter of the mathematician and logician George Boole (1815-1864) and his wife, Mary Boole, nee Everest (1832-1916), niece of Sir George Everest after whom the mountain is named. Soon left a widow, the gifted but eccentric Mary Boole took her five young daughters to London, where she worked as a librarian at Queen's College, managed a student hostel, taught mathematics, and wrote about impossible philosophies. 
Lily Boole was a sensitive child, with searching eyes and a head of golden hair. She early showed a gift for music and a love of poetry. At the age of eight she developed erysipelas and was sent to an uncle in Lancashire, who treated her harshly but ensured her progress on the piano; she also spent periods in Ireland and Cornwall. Of a religious but romantic disposition, she was fascinated by Lamennais and Mazzini (in imitation of whom she wore black, in mourning for the world). In 1882 she received a small inheritance which enabled her to study piano for three years at the Hochschule der Musik in Berlin; she then lived in Paris for a while. She returned to England an atheist and radical, eager to view nihilism in Russia. She sought introductions from emigres including Prince P. A. Kropotkin and Stepniak (Sergey Kravchinsky), whose 'Underground Russia' (1883) had been a revelation to her. Stepniak taught her enough Russian to travel about his country meaningfully in 1887-9, which she did while teaching English and music and living on the fringe of revolutionary circles. 
In 1890 the Society of Friends of Russian Freedom was founded in London and Stepniak became editor of its journal, 'Free Russia'. Lily Boole joined the committee and laboured tirelessly, translating Russian tales as well as works by Stepniak himself; he considered her an outstanding translator and introduced her 'Stories from Garshin' (1893) and 'The Humour of Russia' (1895). Through him she had meanwhile met and then, by some accounts, married in the summer of 1892 (a formal marriage was not registered until 1902) the colourful Polish refugee Wilfrid Michael Voynich or Habdank-Wojnicz (1865-1930), who helped create the Russian Free Press Fund. E. L. V. (as she was now commonly called) worked energetically for this, holding her own in debate with volatile male revolutionaries. Some thought her domineering, but many recognized the talent soon to find expression in 'The Gadfly' (1897). The idea for this novel had crystallized at the Louvre in 1885 in front of a portrait of a young man in black, by the sixteenth-century Florentine painter Franciabigio, a reproduction of which E. L. V. cherished until her death. She researched the historical background in Florence in the summer of 1895. Although she maintained her only direct models for 'The Gadfly' to be Lamennais (for Montanelli) and Kropotkin's comrade Charlotte Wilson (for Gemma), it is said that she went to Italy with a lover, Sigmund Rosenblum -- the future spy Sidney Reilly -- and used him in the delineation of her hero. 

'The Gadfly', an evocation of the Risorgimento, has a delirious, Dostoyevskian intensity. Its plot is melodramatic and its language sentimental, but it derives astonishing moral power from its clear statement of right and wrong. It proved popular with socialists, especially in Russia, where it was translated in 1898. Shaw safeguarded E. L. V.'s dramatic rights by producing it as a play; Conrad claimed to hate it; Lawrence pronounced it excellent but disliked its treatment of pain. The lack of authorial tact in 'The Gadfly' is actually its strength, because offset by triumphant historical reality; by contrast, E. L. V.'s fiercely anti-clerical 'Jack Raymond' (1901) and 'Olive Latham' (1904), novels of undeniable passion and power, do appear to wallow in man's beastliness to man, and morbidity is seen also in 'An Interrupted Friendship' (1910), which reverted to the subject and character of the Gadfly. 
Wilfrid Voynich lost interest in revolution and became a successful rare-book dealer. During the First World War he shifted from London to New York; E. L. V. followed only in 1920, having stayed behind to do social work with the Quakers. In the United States she devoted herself to music, for which she said her writings had been only a prelude. She translated (1931) 'Chopin's Letters', adding an idiosyncratic preface; taught piano and composition; and wrote much music of her own, mostly circulated privately, including part-songs, motets, the oratorio 'Babylon', and the cantatas 'Epitaph in Ballad Form' and 'The Submerged City'. 
During the Second World War, Ethel Voynich returned briefly to her Gadfly with the novel 'Put off thy Shoes' (1945). 'The Gadfly' itself was meanwhile becoming an icon of communism: it was translated into eighteen languages of the USSR and operas were based on it, as well as the celebrated film with music by Shostakovich; Soviet readers ranked its author among the world's great novelists. Only in 1955, quite by chance, was she made aware of this, but she soon received Soviet royalties, then a mark of exceptional regard. 'The Gadfly' was revived in the English-speaking world, Bertrand Russell declaring it one of the most exciting novels he had ever read. 
Ethel Lilian Voynich died of pneumonia during the night of 27 July 1960 at Apartment 17, London Terrace, 450 West 24th Street, New York, where she had resided for much of her thirty years' widowhood. 


@@@@@


doc= 38493


Reeves, William Pember (1857-1932), diplomatist and political activist, was born on 10 February 1857 in Lyttelton, Canterbury, New Zealand. He was the second of eight surviving children of William Reeves (1825-1891), businessman, originally of Clapham, and his wife, Ellen (1833-1919), daughter of John Pember, also of Clapham. Reeves's parents emigrated to New Zealand after incurring losses on the stock exchange. His father dabbled in farming and politics before becoming part owner of the 'Lyttelton Times' newspaper. Born within a month of their landfall in the fledgeling colony of Canterbury, Reeves seems to have been influenced by his mother's sense of social and intellectual superiority which, throughout his life in New Zealand, made him distant from his coevals. He was educated in Christchurch: at Lincoln College preparatory school (1862-3), the high school (1866-7), and at Christ's College Grammar School (1867-74). He won scholarships for distinction in the classics, English, languages, and history. In 1874 he intended to enter the University of Oxford to read law, but in 1876 was forced by illness (possibly a nervous breakdown) to return to Canterbury without a degree. 
His health restored for a time, Reeves was a determined sportsman who represented Canterbury at cricket and rugby. But he was not physically robust, and was dogged throughout his life by migraines and nervous debility. He became a law clerk, and in 1880 was admitted to the bar in a profession which he loathed. Realizing a talent for journalism, he reported for the 'Lyttelton Times', becoming its editor (1889-91), and wrote outstanding leaders on political and social issues at a time of emergent class politics. In 1887 he entered parliament as an opposition MP on a radical platform of wealth redistribution. In 1890, under the pseudonym Pharos, he published articles on theories of socialism, reflecting his attraction to the ideas of Henry George, Ferdinand Lassalle, and the Fabians, rather than Marx. 
On 10 February 1885 he married Magdalen (Maud) Stuart Robison ['see 'Reeves, Magdalen Stuart (1865-1953)], daughter of a bank manager in Christchurch. She was a match for his intellect, a suffragist, and also a Fabian. However, calamity marked Reeves's personal life and caused him great distress. His elder daughter, Amber (1887-1981) ['see 'White, Amber Blanco], was an exceptional Cambridge scholar, but outraged Reeves by having an affair with H. G. Wells (already on his second marriage), and by becoming pregnant before marrying someone else. Wells later depicted the scandal, and caricatured Reeves, in 'Ann Veronica' (1909). Beryl, a second daughter, was born in 1889, but to Reeves's lasting grief his son, Fabian ('b'. 1895), died in action as an airman in 1917. 
Although he was limited in political experience, Reeves's skill as a witty and acerbic debater and his championship of the working class led to a cabinet post as minister of education and justice in the 1891 Liberal ministry. After the 1892 general election he became minister of labour. In a period of industrial strife and class antagonism, he pioneered improvements in the employment conditions of shop workers, seamen, and factory workers. His most renowned achievement was the 'Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act' (1894). Although defective in practice, it introduced the principle of compulsory arbitration to resolve industrial disputes. Reeves increasingly cavilled at the cabinet's waning radicalism, but was himself denounced for attempting to prevent the immigration of Asians and paupers. 
In 1896 Reeves escaped the hostility of his colleagues to become New Zealand's agent-general in London (a post renamed high commissioner in 1905). He excelled at representing the colony's economic interests, and was much in demand as a speaker and commentator on New Zealand's development. An accomplished poet and historian, he also published one of New Zealand's most admired general histories, 'The Long White Cloud: Ao tea roa' (1898). This was followed in 1902 by a scholarly account of social legislation, 'State Experiments in Australia & New Zealand' (2 vols.). He also contributed New Zealand entries to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 
In London Reeves revelled in his reputation as a radical legislator, and delighted in the friendship of Herbert Samuel and Fabians such as the Webbs, G. B. Shaw, and H. G. Wells. A member of the Fabian Society, he wrote a tract entitled 'The State and its Functions in New Zealand' (1896). Unable to afford the expense of standing for Westminster, though it was mooted in 1898-1900, he became active in London politics, and helped Sidney Webb to get re-elected to the London county council as a Progressive in 1907. His interest in social and imperial reform coincided with the views of Liberal Imperialists. He influenced Alfred Lyttelton, secretary of state, with a scheme for constitutional reform of the former empire, not as a federation, but with a council and secretariat. By 1907 the scheme was watered down, but the essence of Reeves's approach was ultimately adopted in the form of the British Commonwealth. He also embraced the concept of national efficiency, becoming one of the twelve members of the cross-party Co-Efficient Club founded by the Webbs in 1902. Reeves worked for the adoption of old-age pensions, but by 'socialism' he meant state paternalism to avert social unrest; he disapproved of New Zealand strikers who exploited flaws in the arbitration system. He held orthodox financial views, and abandoned imperial preference as a way of protecting nascent colonial industries, in favour of free trade. Reeves's expertise was recognized in his membership of the commercial intelligence committee of the Board of Trade and of the 1905-9 royal commission on shipping rings. 
Obliged by a new prime minister to resign as high commissioner, Reeves was made director of the London School of Economics and Political Science by the Webbs in 1908. He had already been occasionally involved in the school as a lecturer and a crown nominee on the University of London senate. He also fitted the Webbs' requirement for a free-trader in the post. Reeves dramatically improved the school's finances, but he failed to provide leadership and was unpopular with many of the academic staff. He fell out with the chief administrator, and Sidney Webb pressured him to resign in 1919. 
Reeves enthusiastically supported the cause of Greek expansion, about which he wrote several articles and pamphlets. He presided over the Anglo-Hellenic League (1913-25), became a supporter and friend of Prime Minister Eleutherios Venizelos, and, although he had rejected the trappings of privilege associated with British honours, accepted the Greek order of the Saviour (1914) and the order of George I (1920), as well as an honorary doctorate from Athens University (1914). He travelled widely but returned only once to New Zealand, in 1925-6, on behalf of the National Bank of New Zealand, of which he was chairman (1917-31). He was feted as a prodigal son on his tour, but no longer had firm roots there. 
In appearance Reeves was tall and lean, and in character reserved and morose. Anxiety-ridden and thin-skinned, he could be kindly and amusing, but was often caustic. Reeves suffered from cancer of the prostate. He died at his London home, 31 Pembroke Square, on 15 May 1932 and was cremated at Golders Green cemetery, survived by his wife and daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 38495


Magnusson, Eirikur (1833-1913), librarian and Icelandic scholar, was born in the parsonage of Berufjordur in east Iceland on 1 February 1833, the second son and third child of the Revd Magnus Bergsson (1799-1892), then curate of Berufjordur, and his wife, Vilborg Eiriksdottir (1804-1862). When his elder brother became ill, he was given the chance of advanced education and, after elementary Latin tuition by his father, entered Reykjavik Latin school in 1849 and received his dimissory certificate in 1856. He then attended Reykjavik Theological College and received the degree of 'candidatus theologiae' (BD) in 1858 with first-class honours. In 1857 he married Sigridur Einarsdottir (1831-1915) of Reykjavik; they had no living children, but they fostered two children of his brother and sister. 
Magnusson's initial intention was to offer himself as a curate to his father in his better-endowed living of Kirkjubaer i Hroarstungu, but events took a different turn. Among the many British travellers who visited Iceland in the mid-nineteenth century was the Quaker Isaac Sharp, who had been sent by the British and Foreign Bible Society to make arrangements for a new Icelandic version of the 'Bible', to be made in Iceland and published by the society. An Icelandic proof-reader well-versed in English was needed in London for this project. Magnusson was already noted in Reykjavik as an exceptionally skilful linguist, especially in English, and was chosen by the Icelandic church authorities. He left for London (via Copenhagen and Berlin) in 1862-3; he was to remain in Britain for the rest of his life. 
On his journey Magnusson met A. C. Swinburne's friend George E. J. Powell, with whom he struck up a friendship which was to be extremely profitable for him. Not only was Powell to prove a financial crutch in the next eight lean years, but he also helped Magnusson to produce his first English publication, a translation of a large portion of Jon Arnason's classic collection of Icelandic folk-tales (2 vols., 1864-6), and introduced him to William Morris. Morris became Magnusson's faithful friend and collaborator for over thirty years, during which the two men laboured hard at making medieval Icelandic literature known to a larger public; their efforts culminated in the six-volume 'Saga Library' (1891-1905). In order to keep himself and his wife, Magnusson also worked on a miscellaneous collection of linguistic and literary projects, such as an edition and translation of the devotional poem 'Lilja' (1870), and he gradually acquired a circle of influential friends who were to support his election to an under-librarianship at Cambridge University Library, to which he was appointed in 1871, and which he held until his retirement in 1909. 
At Cambridge, Magnusson proved an enthusiastic member of the small band, led by Henry Bradshaw, who strove to modernize the workings of the university library. His ingenuity in library matters may be seen in the reports of the library syndicate in the 1870s and 1880s, and the numerous papers which he published on various aspects of librarianship show his endless goodwill and remarkable practical sense in his profession. 
Not content with library work, Magnusson also helped W. W. Skeat to build an Old Icelandic component, which he taught from the early 1880s, into the Anglo-Saxon tripos. He was given the title of lecturer in Icelandic in 1893, and retained it until H. M. Chadwick took it over. He proved an excellent, if pedantic teacher, as Sir Israel Gollancz and Dame Bertha Philpotts were to testify. He also published solid contributions to Scandinavian studies, the most notable (after his work with Morris) being his 'Rolls Series' edition of 'Thomas saga erkibiskups' (1876-83), a series of papers on runology, work on the 'Elder Edda', and on the history of the first Commonwealth. At the very end of his life he produced a remarkable verse translation of J. L. Runeberg's epic poem 'King Fialar' (1912). Most of this work has been superseded by the efforts of later scholars, but much of it, especially the papers on calendar runes which Magnusson published in the 1870s and 1880s in the 'Transactions of the Cambridge Philological Society', was pioneering work. He also built up a valuable collection of facsimiles of Scandinavian 'clog calendars', which is now held in the Cambridge University Library. 
Magnusson's fierce patriotism led him to support every move to set Iceland free from its dependence on Denmark, and here he was to prove an unyielding and furious opponent of anyone who was, in his opinion, acting against Iceland's best interests. He did not confine himself to patriotism on paper: twice (in 1875-6 and 1882-3) he promoted collections to buy food and led expeditions to save people in north and east Iceland from starvation, undergoing considerable personal discomfort when chartering cargo vessels, which he himself led to the harbours of the most affected districts. These works of charity were not always popular with other Icelanders, however, as the country had not been universally affected by these natural disasters: in his later effort he was savagely attacked by his main enemy in England, Gudbrandur Vigfusson, with whom he had already clashed over the 1866 'Bible' translation. However, for over forty years Magnusson's home in Cambridge was renowned among Icelanders for the warmth of his and his wife's hospitality. 
Magnusson died at 7 The Terrace, Camden Square, London, on 24 January 1913 of heart failure after a long urinary illness. His papers and correspondence, both immense, are (other than official papers at Cambridge) in the National University of Iceland Library in Reykjavik. 


@@@@@


doc= 38497


Wood, Thomas (1607-1692), bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, was born in Hackney, Middlesex, on 22 July 1607, the third son of Thomas Wood (died 1649), clerk of the spicery to James I, and his wife, Susan Cranmer (died 1650). A scholar at Westminster School, he was a student at Christ Church, Oxford, from 1627, graduated BA on 27 April 1631, and proceeded MA on 24 April 1634. The following year he became rector of Whickham-on-Tyne, co. Durham, but he seems to have spent little time there, his only recorded activity as rector being the baptism of one Grace Clavering in 1636. A chaplain to the king, in 1641-4 he was occupying the November turn. He proceeded BD at Oxford on 15 May 1641, and DD on 13 March 1642. 
In 1645 the committee for compounding noted that neither Wood nor his curate, Pescote, had taken the covenant. Ejected from his rectory for scandal on 4 June 1651, he later claimed that the cause was his being a royal chaplain; the ejection was confirmed on 12 June 1655 and a successor, Cuthbert Stote, was admitted four months later. For at least some of this decade Wood lived abroad on family money. 
After the Restoration, Wood regained Whickham by order of the House of Lords on 18 June 1660. He also became a canon of Durham that year and for a while was fairly assiduous in his residence in the area. In 1666 he married the same Grace Clavering he had previously baptized: the daughter of Sir James Clavering of Axwell Park, Newcastle, she belonged to one of the leading local families. Three years earlier, while retaining his prebend at Durham, he had become dean of Lichfield; there he was both neglectful of his duties and at odds with his bishop, John Hacket. The quarrel escalated to the point where Hacket deprived Wood of all say in the restoration of Lichfield Cathedral and, when he remained obdurate, excommunicated him publicly. Wood retaliated in 1668 by getting the court of arches to excommunicate the bishop. Archbishop Gilbert Sheldon privately sympathized with Hacket over his difficulties with his 'most untractable and filthy natured dean' (Spurr, 192), but concerned that public dissension would only provide ammunition for nonconformists and others disposed to criticize the church, intervened to effect a 'modus vivendi'. In 1669 Wood became particularly assiduous in his Durham duties. 
Following the death of Bishop Hacket on 28 October 1670 and after much backstairs negotiation, Wood's elder brother Sir Henry obtained the bishopric for him through the influence of Barbara Villiers, duchess of Cleveland, whose daughter Mary was about to marry Sir Henry's son. Wood was enthroned in 1671, but continued his previous behaviour. Scandalized by his neglect of duty, Sheldon was thinking of suspending him but died in 1677 before this could be effected. Archbishop William Sancroft finally suspended him in July 1684, but only after priming Bishop Francis Turner of Rochester to put the case tactfully at court and to establish that 'the King and Duke abandon the bishop as sordid and refractory' (Spurr, 191). The suspension remained in force until Wood was brought to submission in 1687. Wood had excused himself from residing in his diocese on the grounds that he had no house in which he could dispense episcopal hospitality: Sancroft handed the sequestrated income to the dean, Lancelot Addison, with a commission to erect such a house. The splendid result is the only episcopal residence in Europe known to have been built as a punishment of the resident, but though Wood was forced to accept it, he succeeded in avoiding residing there. 
Wood died at Astrop Wells, Northamptonshire, on 18 April 1692 and was buried at Ufford, Suffolk, four days later. In his will he remembered only his college and his family homes, after making provision for his wife, there being no children. He left money to found an almshouse for ten old women in Hackney, and another for ten old men at Ufford, and a sum of $200 for the poor of Hackney, as well as a sum of $3000 for the use of the junior masters of Christ Church and a further estate of $200 p.a. in Norfolk for their maintenance. 


@@@@@


doc= 38498


Broome, Arthur MacLoughlin (1779-1837), animal welfare campaigner, was born on 18 February 1779 and baptized in Sidbury, Devon, on 28 August 1785. He was apparently the son of Arthur (or Thomas) and Frances Broom. He entered Balliol College in March 1798 and took his BA degree in 1801. Broome was ordained a deacon in 1802 and a priest the following year by the bishop of London. Between 1812 and 1815 he held the curacy at the Kent parishes of Brook and Hinxhill and, from 1816 to 1818, at Cliffe-at-Hoo. In June 1820 he was appointed vicar of St Mary's-Bromley-St Leonard in Middlesex (later Bromley by Bow), but resigned in 1824, presumably to concentrate on his duties as secretary of the newly formed Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA). 
It is not known how Broome developed his concern for the treatment of animals. In 1822 he published an edited version of Primatt's 1776 essay 'The Duty of Mercy and Sin of Cruelty to Brute Animals', in which he claimed he had 'always felt peculiarly interested' in the subject for its 'moral and religious' implications (Primatt, x). The many editorial comments in the book reveal Broome's interest in the question of whether animals had souls, his fondness for the beauty of nature, and his fear that the practice of cruelty rendered 'human nature proportionably less fit for humanity' (27). The passing of Richard Martin's act to prevent cruelty to cattle in 1822 encouraged Broome to form a society which would enforce the act and promote 'the practice of humanity' (RSPCA, 'Prospectus', 201). In 1823 he stated his intention to donate profits from the sale of the second edition of 'The Duty of Mercy' to the as yet non-existent 'Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals'. In addition he hired an inspector in December 1823 to watch Smithfield market and prosecute offenders against Martin's act. 
The society met for the first time on 16 June 1824. In attendance were the well-known MPs Thomas Fowell Buxton, William Wilberforce, and Richard Martin. Broome was elected secretary and the group immediately set to work: in the first twelve months its inspectors procured 149 convictions and numerous tracts were distributed. However, the new society met with 'prejudice and ridicule' and was frequently criticized for attacking pastimes of the lower classes, such as dog-fighting, while leaving upper-class sports, such as fox-hunting, untouched ('Courier'). In addition, the society's finances were suffering. By January 1826 it owed over $168, mostly to printers, and had borrowed over $110 from committee members (more than $80 from Broome himself). As secretary Broome was legally responsible for the debts and hence was imprisoned at king's bench on 27 April 1826. The length of time he spent in gaol is unknown: his absence was noted at an SPCA meeting on 18 May of that year, but he was present at the following meeting on 26 June. By this time his enthusiasm for the society, if not the cause, seems to have diminished: Lewis Gompertz (1784-1861), who had been appointed secretary temporarily during Broome's absence, took over the post completely in 1828 after Broome failed to attend a number of meetings. The committee paid respects to their 'benevolent founder', and Broome remained on the governing committee until 1832; however, he disappears from society records after that time (RSPCA, 'Minute Book', 56). He published a third edition of 'The Duty of Mercy' in 1831. His whereabouts between 1832 and 1837 are unknown. He died, probably unmarried, on 16 July 1837 of consumption at 44 Bull Street, Birmingham, and on 21 July was given a pauper's burial there at St Philip's Church (now the Anglican cathedral). There is no mention of his passing in the RSPCA records. The society he founded was granted royal patronage by Queen Victoria in 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 38500


Steuart, George (c.1730-1806), architect, was a highland Scot from Atholl, Perthshire. He is supposed to have been a Gaelic speaker, like his brother Charles, a landscape artist who exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1764 and 1790. George probably started his career as a house-painter, but from 1770 he practised as an architect, first in Berners Street and afterwards in Harley Street, London. Indebted throughout his career to patronage from the third and fourth dukes of Atholl, his first recorded commission was a town house in 1770 for the third duke of Atholl at Grosvenor Place. 
Steuart is best-known for three major country houses, Barons Court, co. Tyrone (1779-82), for the eighth earl of Abercorn, Attingham Hall, Shropshire (1783-5), for Noel Hill, created Baron Berwick in 1784, and Stoke Park, Wiltshire (1786-91), for Joshua Smith. Barons Court has since been twice rebuilt, leaving little of Steuart's work, and Stoke Park was largely demolished in 1950; so it is to Attingham Hall, the grandest eighteenth-century house in Shropshire, now a property of the National Trust, that we must turn to experience Steuart's personal style at first hand. 
Attingham exhibits Steuart's characteristic trait of columns and windows with extremely attenuated proportions. The Ionic columns on the entrance portico are so tall and slender that they appear at first sight to be of metal. The house has an unusual plan, rather like a royal palace with separate suites on either side for king and queen. At Attingham the masculine suite is on the west side, leading from the library to the dining-room, and the feminine on the east, leading from the conservatory to the drawing-room. The two suites meet in the entrance hall, the whole disposition conforming with contemporary French notions of the expression of appropriate character in architecture and interior decoration. Lady Berwick's circular boudoir, indeed, is elegantly painted with Louis XVI-style decoration recalling interiors such as Marie Antoinette's cabinet de toilette at Fontainebleau. The attenuated proportions of Attingham recurred in Steuart's Lythwood Hall, Shropshire ('c'.1785; remodelled 1950), in his unexecuted designs of 1780 for Onslow Hall, Shropshire, and in his ambitious Stoke Park, Wiltshire. 
Steuart also designed two churches in Shropshire: All Saints', Wellington (1790), and New St Chad's, Shrewsbury (1790-92), one of the most inventive churches of its date in the country. In the former, the slender cast-iron supports in the internal galleries have been removed, but they survive at St Chad's. This was a radical volumetric composition in which, rather in the manner of the contemporary French architect Claude-Nicholas Ledoux, Steuart overturned the unifying compositional methods of baroque architects. Instead, he broke up the building into disparate, self-contained parts in a kind of architectural egalitarianism. Above the Doric entrance portico rises an imposing west tower of three separate parts: the first stage, rusticated and square, supports an octagon which is surmounted by a domed cylindrical rotunda surrounded by detached Corinthian columns. A circular hall under the tower leads to an elliptical vestibule and so into the vast circular nave -- an unusual but practical solution to the problem of seating a large congregation focused on the pulpit. Steuart was one of the first architects since Sir Christopher Wren to give thought to the planning of a setting for Anglican liturgy. The excellent construction of the church, in local Grinshill stone, was supervised by John Simpson (1755-1815), the engineer of the Caledonian Canal, who built bridges for Thomas Telford. 
Towards the end of his life Steuart lived at Douglas on the Isle of Man, where the dukes of Atholl were the governors and principal landowners. In the 1790s he built the pier and lighthouse at Douglas, and the court houses at Douglas and Ramsey, his last work being Castle Mona, Douglas (1801-6), for the fourth duke of Atholl. He died on 20 December 1806 at his home, Lough House, Douglas, and was buried in Kirk Braddan churchyard. Drawings by him survive at Attingham Hall and in the drawings collection of the Royal Institute of British Architects. 


@@@@@


doc= 38502


Aethelwig (d. 1077/8), abbot of Evesham and administrator, was the son of an otherwise little-known thegn named Ordwig. Claims made in Thomas of Marlborough's 'History of the Abbey of Evesham', that he was a man 'of great nobility of family' (Sayers and Watkiss, 161), are almost certainly false. It is unknown when or at what age Aethelwig became a monk. The principal Worcester sources agree that he was skilled in secular business and the law, and even before he became abbot he was entrusted with great responsibility by his superiors. His duties included administration of the diocese of Worcester for Bishop Ealdred, perhaps while Ealdred was in Germany in 1054. As prior of Evesham under Abbot Manning (1044-58), Aethelwig began extending the abbey's holdings. Whether this was the reclamation of unjustly lost estates or territorial aggrandizement remains largely a matter of perspective. In 1058, suffering from a paralysing disease, the incapacitated abbot nominated Aethelwig as his successor and sent him to King Edward, in whose presence Aethelwig was consecrated by Bishop Ealdred at Gloucester on 23 April. 
According to Thomas of Marlborough, Aethelwig immediately became one of Edward's closest councillors, and continued to exert influence over Harold II. Although this is otherwise unattested in narrative or documentary sources, such a role is not implausible. When Ealdred left Worcester for York in 1062, Aethelwig was considered a possible replacement. He lobbied hard for the appointment, and his administrative skills made him a strong candidate, but the bishopric eluded him. Unfortunately for Aethelwig, the papal legates sent to decide on the matter were looked after by the cathedral prior, Wulfstan, who entertained them on a lavish scale while maintaining a display of heroic asceticism. Archbishops Ealdred and Stigand, the legates, and earls Harold and Aelfgar all came to support Wulfstan's candidacy and 'the prudent stratagem of man gave way to the providence of God' (Darlington, 'Vita Wulfstani', 47). 
Although Aethelwig's abilities failed to win him a diocese in the age of the Gregorian reform movement, they were recognized by William the Conqueror, who was anxious to use English clergy as a means of stabilizing the English west midlands. Aethelwig acted quickly after Hastings to recognize the new king and offer his services, which were so far accepted that he was given authority over Worcestershire, Gloucestershire, Oxfordshire, Warwickshire, Herefordshire, Staffordshire, and Shropshire, and remained 'de facto' justiciar over this great swathe of England, constituting almost the whole of Mercia excepting Cheshire, until his death a decade later. As a result, Evesham, like Worcester, was partially protected against Norman domination, at least while Aethelwig and Wulfstan lived. Indeed, while other churches struggled to preserve their endowments, Evesham's rapid territorial expansion continued. Many estates were acquired at the expense of Worcester, and Wulfstan's biographer Hemming, who excoriated Aethelwig's appropriations, was forced to acknowledge his power. The abbot launched a campaign of lawsuits against Wulfstan, and the decimation of the old nobility, coupled with Aethelwig's local pre-eminence, expertise, and family connections, allowed him to seduce many of the bishop of Worcester's vassals into his own service, greatly extending Evesham's lands. A royal writ commanding Aethelwig and Thorkell (another English survivor) to protect the lands of Westminster Abbey at Perton (Staffordshire) shows that even before the revolt of 1069-70 Aethelwig had assumed some of Eadwine's functions as earl of Mercia, and his attestations place him at the king's side at least twice in the early post-conquest years. 
The most famous evidence for Aethelwig's secular and military importance in these years is a writ of military summons in which King William required the abbot to summon 'all those who are in your bailiwick and jurisdiction that they have all the knights which they owe me duly equipped', and commanded him to attend in person with the five knights of Evesham's 'servitium debitum' (Bates, no. 131). Its trustworthiness is uncertain, but this document has long been central to the discussion of the early military obligations of Anglo-Norman tenants-in-chief. If genuine, it is the earliest surviving writ of military summons and as such an important part of the military history of the period. 
Aethelwig was not directly involved in the suppression of the northern revolt that erupted in 1069, but he responded impressively to its aftermath. Thomas of Marlborough recorded how with his customary efficiency Aethelwig handled the provision of 'disaster relief' for the refugees who trudged to the monastery in search of food and protection, dividing the task of caring for child refugees among his monks and servants. Even so, five or six refugees, including many children, died daily at the abbey at the height of the crisis. According to John of Worcester, Aethelwig played a far more dynamic role in the suppression of the revolt of the earls in 1075, when together with Wulfstan, Walter de Lacy, and Sheriff Urse of Worcester he led an army that prevented Roger de Breteuil, earl of Hereford, from crossing the River Severn and joining forces with Earl Ralph. The latter lost his nerve, and one of the most dangerous rebellions of the early Anglo-Norman period collapsed. 
While extending his secular power, Aethelwig was equally effective at fostering the growth of his abbey. Under his leadership, a community of twelve monks grew to contain thirty-six. He built a new chapel dedicated to the increasingly fashionable St Nicholas, and the monastery received many pilgrims, notably overseas visitors from Aquitaine and Ireland. Although Aethelwig himself was not regarded as a saint, even at Evesham, Marlborough's 'History' places heavy emphasis on his extensive charity towards visitors, the poor, and his brethren. At a more secular level, he lent his money and his legal expertise to help Bishop Wulfstan see off the attempt of Thomas of Bayeux (who succeeded Ealdred as archbishop of York) to subject his diocese to York in 1071, and 'as both judge and witness' helped Lanfranc to recover some alienated Canterbury lands. He also lent money to the poverty-stricken Abbot Serlo of Glastonbury. He oversaw the monastery of Winchcombe after the imprisonment in 1066 of Abbot Godric (who was eventually moved to Aethelwig's keeping), and again after the death of Abbot Galandus in 1075. 
Aethelwig also played a role in the re-establishment of monastic life in Northumbria, in what can be construed as a revival of Anglo-Saxon observance far from the centres of Norman power. About 1073-4 Prior Aldwin of Winchcombe undertook to restore the monastic observance in the north and attracted two Evesham monks to the project. Aethelwig appointed Aldwin to be abbot of a new community, which with the assistance of Bishop Walcher of Durham occupied and restored the ruins of Bede's old monastery at Wearmouth-Jarrow, and which in turn supplied a new cathedral chapter at Durham with monks. About the same time one of the Evesham monks, Reinfrid, founded what became Whitby Abbey, which in turn became the mother house for St Mary's Abbey at York. Aethelwig may also have contributed to the short-lived establishment of a Benedictine community to serve Dublin Cathedral in the late eleventh century, since some of the monks came from Winchcombe. 
Aethelwig was present at the Council of Winchester/Windsor of 1072, where he witnessed the agreement over the primacy between Canterbury and York, and he also attended the Council of London in 1075. His last datable act, in 1077, was to take Evesham into a confraternity organized by Wulfstan with other abbots of western England and the dean of Worcester, which has been seen as an attempt by Aethelwig and Wulfstan to lock key elements of Anglo-Saxon observance into the monasteries of the region before the Norman takeover of the English church there was complete. 
By then Aethelwig had long suffered frequent attacks of gout. Marlborough records that 'Worn out by this affliction for a considerable time before his end, he finally departed this mortal life on 16th February... at a good age' (Sayers and Watkiss, 175). The year in question was 1077, according to Marlborough, but this may mean 1078, depending on the dating system used. Aethelwig left behind a community considerably richer than the one he had inherited and three times its size. He also left a great sum of money, no less than 'five casks of silver' (ibid.), for a planned reconstruction of the ancient abbey church, a task that was undertaken with great enthusiasm by his successor, Abbot Walter. Only minuscule fragments of the Norman church survive, however, though its plan has been established by excavations. 
Though the community at Evesham continued to thrive, Aethelwig's agglomeration of estates unravelled quickly. Wulfstan, who was no longer overshadowed by the astute abbot, reasserted himself to recover some of Worcester's estates, while other properties passed into the hands of Odo of Bayeux and Urse d'Abetot. At Evesham this was seen as an attack on the monastery after the death of its formidable leader, but it is possible that the estates that Aethelwig gained were personal rewards for royal service, to which the abbey had no right after his death. He may, however, have left a more durable legacy in English government, for it has been suggested that the 'Shires of the Mercian law' first attested in the early twelfth-century 'Leges Henrici Primi' may represent a continuance of Aethelwig's jurisdiction. 


@@@@@


doc= 38506


Ponsonby, Henrietta Frances, countess of Bessborough (1761-1821), noblewoman, was born on 16 June 1761, in Wimbledon, Surrey, the second daughter of John Spencer, first Earl Spencer (1734-1783), and his wife, Margaret Georgiana Spencer (nee Poyntz) (1737-1814). George John Spencer (1758-1834) was her brother. Tall, handsome, and possessed of a penetrating mind, Harriet (as she was called) was never able to escape comparison with her celebrated sister, Georgiana Cavendish, duchess of Devonshire (1757-1806). However, Harriet was devoted to the duchess to the point of obsession, and willingly allowed her to take centre stage. Like her sister she was intimately involved in whig party politics. Her letters were of the highest quality and remain a valuable source for students of the period. 
Harriet grew up in the shadow of Georgiana, whose natural ebullience and charisma won her a large following even before she was married. Yet, when it came to be Harriet's turn to marry, she chose to strengthen the association with her sister rather than loosen it. Her husband, Frederick Ponsonby, Viscount Duncannon, later third earl of Bessborough (1758-1844), was the duke of Devonshire's cousin. She admitted to having misgivings about his character, but told her friends she liked the idea because, 'by marrying him she made no new connections, for now her sister's and hers would be the same' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/29/4/7, fol. 77). The Spencers also supported the match, but feared that the Duncannons would fall into debt if they tried to emulate the lifestyle of the Devonshires. Unfortunately their worries proved to be prophetic. Harriet and Lord Duncannon married on 27 November 1780 at Spencer House, and soon became immersed in the reckless hedonism of the Devonshire House circle. In imitation of her sister she became addicted to gambling and acquired several hundred thousand pounds' worth of debts. Furthermore, Harriet's misgivings about her husband turned out to be justified. Duncannon acquired a reputation for being an abusive and jealous husband who was prepared to go to extreme lengths to gain control of his wife's financial settlement. On several occasions the Devonshires and the Spencers were forced to intervene on Harriet's behalf. Nevertheless, the marriage produced four children over seven years: John William Ponsonby, later fourth earl of Bessborough (1781-1847), Frederick Cavendish Ponsonby (1783-1837), Caroline ['see 'Lamb, Lady Caroline (1785-1828)], and William, later first Baron de Mauley (1787-1855). 
In 1784 Harriet campaigned alongside her sister in support of Charles James Fox at the Westminster election. The duchess was blamed by the press for exchanging kisses for votes, although the true culprit appears to have been Harriet. After the election she continued to act as her sister's lieutenant but had to accept the permanent presence of Lady Elizabeth Foster, who had become the duke of Devonshire's mistress and the duchess's confidante. It was at this time that she had a series of love affairs, one of which almost resulted in an elopement. However, Harriet seemed to find some stability with the playwright Richard Brinsley Sheridan (1751-1816). This affair was public knowledge in whig society but Lord Duncannon discovered it only in 1789. After Harriet broke her promise to end the relationship, Duncannon began divorce proceedings. They had reached an advanced stage when the duke of Devonshire persuaded him to attempt a reconciliation. This time Harriet kept her promise; several years later, however, Sheridan developed an infatuation tinged with madness for her which remained unabated at the time of his death. 
In 1791 Harriet and the duchess were involved in a shares scandal that resulted in huge financial losses for them both. Harriet suffered a total physical collapse which left her partially paralysed. Although the family insisted publicly that the illness was due to a miscarriage, there is circumstantial evidence that the real cause may have been either a botched abortion or an attempted suicide. She was beginning to recover when Devonshire discovered that the duchess was pregnant by Charles Grey. He agreed not to divorce her if Harriet would consent to take Georgiana abroad, using her poor health as the pretext. Consequently the Duncannons led a cavalcade to Europe which included their daughter, Caroline, the duchess of Devonshire, Lady Elizabeth Foster, and her daughter, Georgiana, Countess Spencer, and several friends. Either the climate or proximity to Lord Duncannon brought on a relapse of Harriet's illness. The party moved to southern Italy in search of dry air and warmth. During their stay in Naples in 1793 Harriet met and fell in love with a handsome diplomat twelve years her junior called Granville Leveson-Gower (1773-1846). This was her last and most serious love affair. Harriet rapidly recovered and by the time of her return to London in 1794 her lungs and mobility were restored. Her affair with Leveson-Gower continued for a further fifteen years, producing Harriette Arundel Stewart (1800-1852) and George Arundel Stewart (1802-1875). However, like the duchess and her child with Charles Grey, she was unable to acknowledge either child as her own which caused her lifelong pain. 
Harriet's relationship with her legitimate children was close and loving. Although she frequently clashed with her daughter, Caroline, Harriet adored her and worried about her future. She tried to persuade her against marrying William Lamb, the future Lord Melbourne, doubting that he understood her high-strung daughter. The marriage, famously, was a disaster. Harriet was devastated by the death of her sister in 1806. 'No one knows, G,' she wrote to Leveson-Gower, 'not even you -- how I suffer' (Leveson-Gower, 2.230). Her sense of loneliness was increased by two more blows. First Lady Elizabeth Foster married the duke of Devonshire in 1809, causing Harriet to question whether she had been deceived by her all along. In the following year Granville Leveson-Gower married her niece, Georgiana's daughter, Lady Harriet Cavendish, causing considerable heartache to Harriet, and awkwardness and embarrassment between the related families. In later years she felt bitter about the relationship and wondered if he had ever loved her as much as she loved him. Harriet remained a popular figure in London and Paris, but as her age advanced she preferred the comforting familiarity of whig society. Her greatest consolation was in her relationship with her sons and grandchildren. She would frequently stay with them, and died on 11 November 1821 in Florence, Italy, while on holiday with her youngest son and daughter-in-law, and was buried in the Cavendish vault at All Saints', Derby. 


@@@@@


doc= 38507


Gower, Henrietta Elizabeth Leveson-, Countess Granville (1785-1862), society hostess, was born at Devonshire House, Piccadilly, London, on 29 August 1785, the younger daughter of William Cavendish, fifth duke of Devonshire (1748-1811), and his first wife, Georgiana Cavendish (1757-1806), eldest daughter of John Spencer, first Earl Spencer. Her devotion to her mother, 'the beautiful duchess', was the mainspring of her happy childhood, while her elder sister, Georgiana (known as 'G'), and her young brother, Lord Hartington, were the focus of her liveliest affections. The duke was aloof and rarely seen. The Chatsworth schoolroom, under the supervision of Selina Trimmer, had other pupils, including the natural son and daughter of her father and his mistress, Lady Elizabeth Foster, who herself lived with the Devonshires in perfect amity. Moreover, the flock of cousins from the family of her aunt, Henrietta, Lady Bessborough, often stayed at Chatsworth. 
Patrician by birth, the scion of a great whig family, Hary-O (as she was known in the family before her marriage) spoke in the 'bleating drawl' of the Devonshire House set. Although no beauty, she had wit, intelligence, and shrewdness; her sharp eye missed little but 'in high croak and spirits' viewed with tolerance the world of drums, dandies, gossip, and matchmaking in which she moved. After her sister's marriage in 1801 to George Howard, later sixth earl of Carlisle, she wrote to her almost daily, until Lady Carlisle's death in 1858. These letters to 'G', observant, critical, aware of the ridiculous but always amused, treating of subjects engrossing to both, are endearing indications of the sisters' deep attachment. Their affection surmounted their differing interests: Harriet's eldest son was to remark that his mother did not 'care a rap about politics' while Lady Carlisle thought of 'nothing else' (Fitzmaurice, 1.180). 
With her mother's death in 1806, Lady Harriet's position at home became as unhappy as it was awkward. Lady Elizabeth Foster took over the direction of Devonshire House where she, the unmarried daughter, should have reigned. It was an invidious position: for three years she made the best of the absurdities and the vexations caused her by Lady Elizabeth. When it became apparent, in 1809, that the duke would shortly bestir himself into making his liaison lawful, Lady Bessborough set about finding a suitable husband for her niece. Lord Granville Leveson-Gower (1773-1846) had for seventeen years been her own lover, with whom she had two children. None the less, she encouraged his courtship of her niece, who had known him all her life and had never cared much for him. Now she was captivated by this exceptionally handsome man, a member of parliament, who was intelligent and had every advantage of birth. The handkerchief was tossed in July, his proposal made in November, and she married him on 24 December 1809 and loved him to the end of her life. 'Granville, adored Granville, who would make a barren desert smile', she wrote. There were five children of this very happy marriage, including Georgiana ['see 'Fullerton, Lady Georgiana Charlotte] and Granville George Leveson-Gower (1815-1891), second Earl Granville, the foreign secretary. The two illegitimate children of Lady Bessborough and Granville were absorbed into the family and loved. In 1815 a viscountcy for Granville, and in 1833 an earldom, gave Lady Granville the name by which she is most widely known. Perhaps the zenith of her days was reached when Lord Granville was appointed ambassador to France (in 1824-8, in 1830-35, and again in 1835-41), where she acted as his hostess, entertaining the cosmopolitan Parisian society. Her fond descriptions of the Paris embassy house and the caustic accounts of daunting receptions, of people, of dress and manners make irresistible reading in the volumes of her letters published in 1894, 1940, and 1990. 
Lord Granville died in 1846. In her desolation his widow turned to her brother, now the sixth duke, in the 'utter and hopeless breaking of my heart'. Much of her time was spent at Chiswick finding a new consolation in evangelical piety. She died of a stroke on 25 November 1862 at her home, 13 Hereford Street, Park Lane, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 38509


Forster, Mark Arnold- (1920-1981), journalist and author, was born on 16 April 1920 at Cheriton Nursing Home, Westlecott Road, Swindon, the only son of William Edward Arnold-Forster (1886-1951), painter, publicist, and gardener, and his wife Katharine (Ka) Laird, 'nee' Cox (1887-1938). Though nothing in his low-keyed adult manner was to advertise it, his parents' families included leading politicians and writers, among them Matthew Arnold and W. E. Forster; his mother had been close to Rupert Brooke and his group as well as to Virginia Woolf. Shortly after his birth his parents went to live in a picturesque Cornish house, Eagle's Nest, Zennor, Cornwall. Seared by their experiences in the First World War, they saw a paramount need for international understanding; they therefore placed their son, aged seven, in a boarding-school in French Switzerland, and at nine in Kurt Hahn's school at Salem in Germany. When Hitler's coming to power in 1933 drove Hahn into exile, Arnold-Forster was one of two British boys who followed the headmaster to a new school in Scotland at Gordonstoun, Moray, and he stayed on until 1937. This upbringing made him fluent in French and German; Hahn's stress on hard living and ethical aspiration rather than on academic achievement meant that he had to cram at a technical college to win a place in mechanical engineering at Trinity Hall, Cambridge (which he never took up), but it also prepared him for the war just ahead. 
After a year's apprenticeship (1938-9) with the Blue Funnel Line, involving a voyage to Manchuria, Arnold-Forster went into the Royal Navy. He served on a destroyer on the Murmansk convoy and then (1942-4) on motor torpedo boats in the channel; ultimately a lieutenant in command of a flotilla, he won the DSO, DSC, and three mentions in dispatches -- awards essentially for leadership, earned by a very young man who at the time looked about sixteen. His tasks included engaging the 'Scharnhorst', 'Gneisenau', and 'Prinz Eugen' and their enemy boat escort; torpedoing a tanker; limping home from a battle with a broken-down engine and enemy boats for a time (as he radioed) 'still in company'; being nearly rammed by a German destroyer; laying mines under fire off the French coast; and working for naval intelligence. These experiences shaped his personality. The humorously understated wartime manner clung to him; to experience his kindness and sense of responsibility in peacetime -- a later colleague wrote -- made one 'understand why he was a great commander in war' ('The Guardian', 28 Dec 1981). As a reservist (holder of a seagoing mate's ticket and an inland waters captain's ticket) he was, for a few months in the mid-1950s, to undertake 'special duties' in the Mediterranean. Did his wartime experiences somehow burn him out, not then but after a lapse of years? His own view was that he enjoyed the war, especially its absurd side, and learned the need for prudence and self-control. 
After an awkward interlude spent lecturing to German prisoners of war, Arnold-Forster in 1946 joined the editorial staff of the 'Manchester Guardian', then about to add to its international prestige a growing circulation in London and the south such as to make it by the 1960s a national newspaper. He worked first in Manchester and then in Germany, where he wrote sensitively about the miseries of the immediate post-war period and about the Berlin blockade; the well-researched account of the blockade which he wrote much later ('The Siege of Berlin', 1979) shows his respect for the Social Democratic and Christian Democratic leaders who did much to uphold morale. In 1949 he became labour correspondent, a key job he did for eight years, at a time when trade unions were an estate of the realm as well as a pillar of the Labour Party; in 1955-7 he doubled this with deputizing for the London editor, in charge of the small office where most of the specialist writers and the few London reporters worked, covering what on other papers required large staffs. 
This was Arnold-Forster's finest period as a journalist. His coverage not only of industrial disputes but of the Bevanite split in the Labour Party showed enterprise, knowledge, and insight; his distrust of the Bevanites (anyhow less than that of the editor, A. P. Wadsworth) hardly showed in his sober reports. Colleagues held him in deep respect and affection as a man of utter integrity, personal and professional, considerate, soft-spoken, yet determined to get the best out of himself and others. His personality was bound up with a physique slight but wiry, high forehead, pointed chin and nose, subdued colouring; he looked almost as if he had been pressed between the pages of a book. He dressed anyhow; new clothes looked rumpled as soon as he put them on. On 12 January 1955 he married Valentine Harriet Isabella Digne Mitchison ('b'. 1930), also a journalist, daughter of the Labour politician G. R. Mitchison and the novelist Naomi Mitchison. Both were descended from the 'intellectual aristocracy' (Annan, 269) and kin to successive secretaries of state for war, H. O. Arnold-Forster and R. B. Haldane. They had five children; their house, large and much lived-in, was a place of hospitality and warmth. 
Many colleagues thought Arnold-Forster a potentially ideal editor of the 'Manchester Guardian', but when the editorship fell vacant in 1956 it went to his exact contemporary Alastair Hetherington. Partly because of this, Arnold-Forster agreed to join the then new Independent Television News as deputy to the editor, Geoffrey Cox; more impelling reasons were his interest in the new medium and, with a growing family, a need for more money. Cox, however, wanted Ian Trethowan (not at once available) and sacked his deputy after a year. Arnold-Forster then worked for 'The Observer' as chief reporter, later as news editor and political correspondent. He won some scoops (one, characteristically, because the Liberal leader Jo Grimond liked him and said more than he had intended) but disliked the weekly rhythm of production; he raged when he correctly forecast Lord Home as the next leader of the Conservative Party and the editor, David Astor, inserted R. A. Butler's name instead. In 1963 he and Astor agreed to part. 
After an anxious, uncertain period Hetherington offered Arnold-Forster a way back to the 'Guardian' as chief leader writer, later as diplomatic editor. Here, as on 'The Observer', Arnold-Forster did serious investigative work, particularly on defence and on the European Economic Community. He was 'a thorn in the flesh of the Foreign Office' ('The Times', 28 Dec 1981); though not ultimately opposed to Britain's joining 'Europe', he concentrated, like many others, on the detailed absurdities he uncovered in the common agricultural policy and in Brussels directives, and easily gave the impression of niggling rather than of having made a fundamental choice. He took time off to write 'The World at War' (1973), a lucid account of the Second World War to accompany the award-winning television series; it became a best-seller. When Hetherington retired in 1975, Arnold-Forster, though aware that he might be thought too old for the editorship, was hurt not to be consulted, let alone considered. This sidelining, which grew under the next editor, Peter Preston, probably contributed to the persistent ill health which he suffered in his fifties, a series of minor strokes in particular. In 1979 he developed cancer of the upper colon; he died of it at his home, 50 Clarendon Road, Notting Hill, London, on Christmas day 1981, and was cremated at West London crematorium on 5 January 1982. 


@@@@@


doc= 38510


Jenkins, Peter George James (1934-1992), journalist and author, was born on 11 May 1934 at 5 Penn Road, Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, the elder child and only son of Kenneth Edmund Jenkins (1906-1993), a pharmaceutical chemist, and his wife, Joan Evelyn Croger (1907-1981), a teacher. From 1938 he grew up at Bury St Edmunds, where his father kept a leading chemist's shop, and from 1945 was a boarder at the nearby Methodist school, Culford. Though his parents were outsiders (Welsh and Londoner) and he was to develop Labour sympathies, his upbringing -- he later wrote -- was so like Margaret Thatcher's that 'I know [her]': he knew at first hand the shopkeeper's sense that the 1945 Labour victory was the triumph of Antichrist. He too had longed to flee 'the excruciating tedium of petty bourgeois life in a small provincial town' (Jenkins, 'Mrs Thatcher's Revolution', 82-4). 
His early years were marked by estrangement from his alcoholic father -- part of a family conflict that was to end in his parents' separation. After two years' national service in the Royal Navy (1952-4), which briefly commissioned him sub-lieutenant, he read history at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, taking a first in part one and in part two a second (division one). Because his father (who wanted him to settle in Bury as a solicitor) would not help to maintain him at Cambridge, he launched as an undergraduate into freelance journalism. He had long wanted to write; after a year in the United States on a Harkness fellowship, in 1958 he joined the 'Financial Times', where gifted young reporters were set to producing quick, well-researched background articles. 
Jenkins made his mark and, in 1960, became deputy to the labour correspondent of 'The Guardian', John Cole, whose job he took over in 1963. Also in 1960, he married the first of his two wives, each descended from the 'intellectual aristocracy' but distinguished in her own right. With Charlotte Strachey (1935-1970), a woman of fine-drawn beauty but frail health, he lived to begin with in a milieu part intellectual, part raffish. Through both family background and closeness to Newmarket, he had a lifelong passion for horse racing and, at first, a marked gambling streak; he fancied at one time becoming a gentleman jockey, often dressed like a bookmaker, and enjoyed the cockles-and-champagne aspect of the sport. The purchase of a house in then barely gentrifying Crescent Grove, Clapham, and the birth of a daughter, marked a settling down, but Charlotte developed Hodgkin's disease and, after thirty months' distressing illness, died on 2 April 1970. He then married on 28 December 1970 Mary Louisa (Polly) Toynbee ('b'. 1946), altogether a stronger person, who herself became a leading journalist and author; they had two daughters and a son, and combined busy careers with many friendships and a warm, hospitable family life. 
Writing on labour affairs while trade unions were still an estate of the realm lay at the heart of serious political journalism. Jenkins did far more than report industrial disputes. He won a series of resounding scoops on matters then important: the draft report (1963) of the National Economic Development Council on incomes policy, another -- damning -- draft report on the newspaper industry, George Brown's preference for devaluation over deflation (1966), Harold Wilson's attempt to create a legal framework for industrial relations. The last was the subject of a vigorous, revealing instant history, 'The Battle of Downing Street' (1970); Jenkins's witty handling was typified by his dubbing James Callaghan, instrumental in preserving the unions' hold over the Labour Party, 'the keeper of the cloth cap'. He got these stories from ministers and senior officials who liked and respected him as an equal; few -- Richard Crossman was one -- tried to manipulate him. Scoops apart, he learned the art of piecing together bits of information to understand what was going on in Whitehall. 
To keep him, 'The Guardian' in 1967 matched the 'Sunday Times''s offer to make him political columnist; he became policy editor from 1974. His interests were in the world at large; he modelled himself, as far as British conditions allowed, on Walter Lippmann's famous column, writing two, three, or four times a week. His main themes were the relative decline of Britain, which he felt keenly, and the need, throughout Europe but especially in the Labour Party, to replace the socialist ideal with social democracy, combining liberal economics with the pursuit of collective social goals. His close friend Anthony Crosland inspired this consistent belief, as did the example of West Germany; Jenkins was a fixture at the annual Anglo-German Konigswinter conference and strongly supported British commitment to the European Community. In the 1980s he both influenced and was influenced by the 'gang of four' who founded the Social Democratic Party. Though he became an outstanding analyst of British politics, he could drop everything to report vividly what the people in the street (or the picket line) had to say. 
A stint as Washington correspondent (1972-4) brought out his courage: before the Watergate scandal broke, he wrote that Richard Nixon's re-election 'should be viewed with repugnance and deep foreboding'; it would confirm American society in its 'deform[ation] by callousness, brutality and greed' and obscure 'the simple moral fact that killing people -- even Asians -- is wrong' (Jenkins, 'Anatomy of Decline', 49-51). He showed similar courage in opposing the Falklands War: 'by what gigantic lack of proportion' was the loss of the islands 'to be seen as a major national humiliation?' (Taylor, 232). 
By the 1980s Jenkins's writing had shed some of its irreverent wit and acquired gravitas. Restless at 'The Guardian', he found little satisfaction at the 'Sunday Times' (1985-7) but bloomed again as associate editor of the new 'Independent'. He started reviewing plays (for 'The Spectator', 1979-81) and writing them. 'Illuminations' (1980), about a Crosland-like politician, had a short run; though often effective, it was old-fashioned in construction. A television comedy series, 'Struggle' (1983), made fun of the 'loony left' -- observable in his home borough of Lambeth in London. With a long-standing interest in visual art and in Italy, he wrote for the revisionist journal 'Modern Painters' and bought a house in Umbria. He became a prison visitor. His chief interest remained writing about politics. In a penetrating book, 'Mrs Thatcher's Revolution' (1987), he argued that although Thatcherism was more style than ideology, and the changes wrought were part of a European trend, the prime minister had significantly changed British society by curbing the unions and dispelling the sense of decline. What was now needed was to enlarge the rights of the citizen as consumer, parent, tenant, and patient. With this in Jenkins's mind went continuing scepticism about the Labour Party; in 1992 he considered voting Conservative. If he had lived he would doubtless have rallied to Labour under Tony Blair, but while he was at the height of his powers a lung disease, fibrosing alveolitis, failed to respond to treatment; he died in University College Hospital, London, on 27 May 1992, and was buried at Putney Vale on 1 June. 
Jenkins was of striking appearance, short, top-heavy (soon tubby), with a large head and expressive features, dark eyes, and thick eyebrows often puckered in amusement. He was unusually spontaneous: his moods showed. His sense of fun and enjoyment communicated itself -- summed up by the motto on his gravestone, 'seize the day'; so at times did his impatience or his justified sense of his own worth. By some he was disliked, by others loved; few were indifferent to a personality with a strong tang. 


@@@@@


doc= 38511


Ashton, Margaret (1856-1937), local politician and philanthropist, was born on 19 January 1856 at Ashfield, Wilmslow Road, in Withington, Manchester, the third of the six daughters and three sons of Thomas Ashton (1818-1898), a wealthy cotton manufacturer, and his wife, Elizabeth (1831-1914), daughter of Samuel Stillman Gair of Rhode Island, USA, and Liverpool. Thomas Gair Ashton, first Baron Ashton of Hyde, was her elder brother. She was educated at home and brought up in the family traditions of public service, Liberalism, and nonconformity. She never married, and lived as the 'daughter at home' at Ford Bank, Didsbury, Manchester. Her father, the major influence on her life, was a leading Manchester Liberal and Unitarian, renowned for his philanthropy (especially his contribution to the expansion of Manchester University during the 1870s). 
From 1875 Margaret Ashton worked on a voluntary basis as the manager of the Flowery Fields School in Hyde, which had been founded by her grandfather, Thomas Ashton (1775-1845), for the children of mill workers. Her first involvement in politics came in 1888, when she helped to found the Manchester Women's Guardian Association, an organization which encouraged women to become poor-law guardians and to take a more active role in local politics. In 1895 she joined the Women's Liberal Association, and the following year became a founder member of the Women's Trade Union League. 
Her father died in 1898 and her mother moved to London, leaving Margaret Ashton free to pursue her own political ambitions and interests. She was elected to the Withington urban district council in 1900; in 1903 she was co-opted onto the Lancashire local education authority. In 1908 she stood as an independent candidate and was the first woman to be elected to the Manchester city council. As a councillor she devoted herself to the issues of women's health and education, and campaigned to improve the conditions of employment for women. She supported new legislation to improve the wages and conditions of factory girls, to raise the age of employment of children, and to abolish the sweated system. Ashton House, a municipal hostel for working women, was named in tribute to her work in 1910. In 1911 she was elected a governor of Manchester High School for Girls, and was made a member of the court of governors of the university; she was awarded an honorary MA in recognition of her work for women's education in Manchester. 
Margaret Ashton was a member of Manchester's public health committee, and chaired its maternity and child welfare subcommittee. The fall in infant mortality in Manchester between 1914 and 1920 was in part due to her implementation of health reforms, especially her support for municipal mother and baby clinics, and the introduction of free milk for young children and nursing mothers. Her interest in the infant welfare movement was encouraged by Dr Catherine Chisholm (1878-1952); in 1914 they founded the Manchester Babies' Hospital, which Miss Ashton helped to support financially and in which she retained a lifelong interest. 
In 1906 Margaret Ashton resigned from the Liberal Party when it became clear to her that it did not intend to give women the vote. She became chair of the North of England Society for Women's Suffrage, and financially supported its newspaper, the 'Common Cause'. A constitutional suffragist, she regarded the vote as essential for improving women's lives, but did not approve of the militant tactics of the Women's Social and Political Union. Politically, she gradually moved to the left, urged on by her conclusion that women would obtain the vote only with the support of the Labour Party, which she joined in 1913. The suffrage agitation diminished with the outbreak of war in 1914; Margaret Ashton was a committed pacifist, who believed that if women had the vote, wars would be impossible. She was one of the founders of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom (WIL) in 1915. Her pacifism made her unpopular both on the council and in her own family: she was branded 'pro-German' and ousted from the council in 1921. Her civic work was never properly recognized; a portrait by Henry Lamb to commemorate her seventieth birthday was refused by the Manchester City Art Gallery as a protest against her pacifist views. 
After she left the city council, Margaret Ashton continued her work for the babies' hospital and the WIL; she joined the National Council of Women, and helped to found the Manchester Women's Citizens Association. Although active for most of her life, she was hampered in her last years by poor vision and heart trouble. She died at her home, 12 Kingston Road, Didsbury, on 15 October 1937 and was cremated at the Manchester crematorium on 22 October. 
Margaret Ashton's work for suffrage gave her a national platform, but she always regarded Manchester as the main focus of her philanthropic and political work. 'I owe everything to Manchester', she once said; in return, Manchester owes her a considerable debt. 


@@@@@


doc= 38512


Barrett, Rosa Mary (1855-1936), social reformer and feminist, was born in Jamaica, the youngest of the four surviving children of William Garland Barrett (1812-1865), Congregational minister and sometime missionary to Jamaica, and his wife, Martha, 'nee' Fletcher (1811?-1893). One brother was the leading Congregationalist George Slatyer Barrett; another was the scientist and electrical engineer Sir William Fletcher Barrett. 
As a girl Rosa Barrett spent her pocket money on engaging a nurse to mind the children of charwomen who were out working, and in her early twenties she founded the first creche in Dublin at Kingstown. It became the Cottage Home for Little Children, for which she acted as honorary secretary for fifty years and which is still in operation today. Most of its first hundred admissions of children up to eight years old resulted from a family crisis -- usually the father's death, desertion, or drunkenness and violence -- which necessitated the mother working outside the home and meant that she was unable to care for her children in the daytime. In a few cases the children were placed -- with the surviving parent's permission -- for adoption with approved families in Canada. But for the most part poor mothers were enabled, by payment of a penny a day or less, to go out to work without fearing for hungry infants left to the dangers of an unsupervised home or the street. Rosa Barrett aimed to ensure a head start of proper feeding and good care for the poorest children in the community. She publicized the work of such creches and the social need for them in 'Our Kingstown Nursery' (1880), 'Guide to Dublin Charities' (1884), and 'The Cottage Home for Little Children: a Retrospect' ('c'.1905). 
Rosa Barrett went on to found the Irish section of the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) in 1889, after having discovered badly treated pauper children in a so-called 'home' in Tuam. She called over an NSPCC inspector from London to investigate, and the persons responsible for the child neglect were imprisoned. Unfortunately the Catholic clergy were suspicious of the NSPCC on account of the number of protestants, including Rosa Barrett, on its Dublin committee. For her part, it is very possible that Rosa Barrett saw herself as something of a protestant mission worker and child rescuer in a benighted Catholic land. 
In 1896 Rosa Barrett published a paper read before the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland entitled 'Foreign Legislation on Behalf of Destitute and Neglected Children' and in 1899 she published her pamphlet 'The Rescue of the Young'. Her work 'Juvenile Criminals' (1900) was awarded the medal of the Howard Penal Reform League. Rosa Barrett later became the hagiographic biographer of Ellice Hopkins, the rescuer of child prostitutes and campaigner for raising the age of legal consent for girls to sixteen. Ellice Hopkins's 'thrilling accounts of her public work' for the White Cross Men's Sexual Purity League constantly made Rosa Barrett feel ashamed (Barrett, 'Ellice Hopkins'). 
Rosa Barrett supported other causes, including temperance, women's suffrage, and peace. Prominent in the Irish Women's Temperance Association, Rosa Barrett was also a co-founder with Lady Aberdeen of the National Women's Health Association for Ireland in 1907, which organized a public education campaign to combat tuberculosis, and she was later chosen to represent the Irish Women's Suffrage Federation in London in 1912, lobbying Irish MPs regarding Asquith's 'Reform Bill'. In 1915 Rosa Barrett gave her public support to the unpopular 'unpatriotic' Women's International Congress in The Hague, which called for women's participation in foreign affairs and an alternative to war for settling international disputes. She herself was a widely travelled woman, having visited Canada, South Africa, Norway, and Sweden, among many other countries, and for several years she was the compiler of Ward Lock's 'Irish Guides'. 
Towards the end of her life Rosa Barrett completed her brother William Fletcher Barrett's book on Christian Science, 'The Religion of Health' (1925). Later still she seems to have become involved with spiritualism, publishing accounts by a medium -- 'The Seekers' (1928) and 'Beyond' (1929). She died at her home, Cedarcot, 106 Handside Lane, Welwyn Garden City, on 28 August 1936. Although Rosa Barrett's practical work throughout her life was unremittingly serious and passionately altruistic, a correspondent in 'The Times' (2 September 1936), who knew her personally, testified to her being a woman of keen humour and great charm. 


@@@@@


doc= 38513


Barrow, Florence Mary (1876-1964), relief worker and promoter of improved housing, was born on 27 January 1876 in Birmingham, the only daughter of Richard Cadbury Barrow (1827-1894), Quaker businessman and mayor of Birmingham (1888-9), and his wife, Jane ('b'. 1831), daughter of the Quakers Hannah King and her husband, Benjamin Harrison. She was educated at Edgbaston high school and Mason College, Birmingham. At the age of eighteen, in 1894, she started a class in adult literacy for Birmingham women, thus pioneering the adult schools movement there. She went on in 1900 to train as a social worker at St Hilda's Settlement in Bethnal Green. August 1914 found her in Marseilles working in a quarantine department with Serbian refugees from the Balkan war of 1912. 
In 1916 Florence Barrow was sent from Newcastle by sea to Murmansk in order to do Quaker relief work in Buzuluk, western Russia, helping what would later be termed 'displaced persons' -- two and a half million Poles, Jews, and Belorussians who were in a desperate situation. She helped set up nurseries for abandoned children, feeding centres, co-operative craft workshops, pharmacies, even a circulating library. She witnessed the Russian Revolution of 1917 and noted: 'Men work for the common good but find it harder than they thought. Famine threatens; the rich are robbed of their spoils but selfishness appears under new forms.... New ideas and ideals seethe... who can prophesy what will emerge?' (Barrow, 'Stray memories', 4). She then crossed Russia by trans-Siberian railway, reached Japan, and then America, finally crossing the U-boat-infested Atlantic in a camouflaged vessel in order to report back to the Society of Friends in London. 
In 1919 Florence Barrow was sent by the Friends' War Victims' Committee to distribute Quaker food relief in a starving Germany still punished by the allied blockade: '[German] feeling very bitter in Breslau,... and as [the doctor] showed us one tiny distorted form after another it was almost more than one could bear' (letter, 28 Sept 1919, Temp. MS 590/3). From 1921 to 1924 she was head of Quaker relief operations among Poles in Brest Litovsk: 'I think that she must be an ideal head; she is evidently very capable... and seems only to be head by reason of her extra care for everyone' (J. Fry, letter to Friends' House, 23 Jan 1922, Temp. MS 590/3). Her monument there was the orphanage she left behind. 
On her return to Britain in 1924 Florence Barrow co-founded the Birmingham Conference on Politics, Economics and Citizenship (COPEC) House Improvement Society that pioneered municipal slum clearance and the regeneration of inner-city housing there. She was the driving force for over thirty-seven years behind 'practical schemes of reconditioning, reconstruction, conversion and rebuilding' ('The Friend'). At the age of fifty-six, in 1932, she left Birmingham for Syria, Salonika, and Egypt to work once more with refugees. During the later 1930s the Quakers sent her as a secret agent to Nazi Germany and Austria, taking messages to and from endangered Jews. She later said she had found it 'very trying to know that every conversation might be overheard' ('Birmingham Evening Mail', 4 March 1964) and reported to the Gestapo. 
Back in Birmingham at the start of the war, Florence Barrow continued to work on inner-city housing reform as honorary secretary of COPEC and to organize the reception of Jewish refugees into the city. In 1958 the city of Birmingham gave her its civic gold medal for services to its urban housing programme, including the provision of low-rented accommodation for single working women and 'sheltered housing' for the elderly and for handicapped people. The city regretted to report that her active days as a social worker were almost finished. She was eighty-two. 
Quiet, gentle, almost timid in manner, and only 4 feet 6 inches tall, Florence Barrow's 'outward appearance gave little indication of the power within' ('Warwickshire Monthly Meeting', 14 Nov 1964, 'London Yearly Meeting Proceedings'). She died at Bryony House, Selly Oak, Birmingham, on 3 March 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 38514


Bell, Julia (1879-1979), geneticist, was born on 28 January 1879 at Sherwood, Nottinghamshire. She was tenth of the fourteen children of James Bell, printer, and Katherine Thomas Heap. She was educated at Nottingham Girls' High School and in 1898 entered Girton College, Cambridge, to study mathematics. Illness prevented her from taking the exam and in 1901 she was awarded an aegrotat degree. At that time women were permitted to take courses at Cambridge but not to graduate. This anomalous situation meant that in 1907 Julia Bell went to Ireland to receive her MA from Trinity College, Dublin, which from 1904 to 1907 offered this facility to Cambridge women. 
From 1902 until 1908 Bell was a postgraduate student at the Cambridge observatory where she worked on the solar parallax under A. R. Hinks. During this period she was also doing mathematical calculations for the Revd Osmond Fisher on the physics of the earth's crust. It was Bell's skill as a mathematician which brought her to the attention of Karl Pearson, professor of applied mathematics and director of the Galton Laboratory for National Eugenics at University College, London. In 1908 he appointed her as one of his assistants. Bell did her calculations from home in Nottingham for a while but eventually settled in London. She had a connection with the Galton Laboratory lasting over fifty years. 
Her appointment by Pearson was fortunate in a number of ways. Pearson espoused women's rights and in 1885 had been a co-founder, with Olive Schreiner, of the Men and Women's Club which promoted contact between the sexes on the basis of social and intellectual equality. His laboratory employed a number of distinguished women working in science both before and after Julia Bell joined it. Pearson was interested in the application of statistical methods to the study of heredity, and this was to become the dominant scientific interest in Bell's life. However, Pearson was hostile to the Mendelian theory of discrete and particulate inheritance. Instead he held to the theory of small, continuous variations which he believed better accorded with the Darwinian theory. Thus, while statistical techniques at the Galton Laboratory advanced considerably, an increasingly arid dispute with Mendelism prevented the full flowering of heredity studies. 
From 1908 until 1914 Bell was involved in a series of mathematical investigations linked to heredity. These helped further the science of statistics but, based as they were on Pearson's biometrical theory of heredity, their value as contributions to the study of inheritance can be questioned. Bell was involved in the Galton Laboratory's most ambitious project, 'The Treasury of Human Inheritance', which collected and recorded pedigrees of human hereditary diseases and anomalies. This project took several decades and ran to five volumes of observations (published 1909-58), each volume containing several distinct monographs. Bell contributed to volumes 2 (1922-33), diseases of the eye; 4 (1934-48), diseases of the nervous system; and 5 (1951-8), digital abnormalities. The 'Treasury' proved an invaluable source of information for students of heredity, and contained several pertinent interpretations of the data by Bell. 
It was Bell's increasing interest in the more observational side to the study of heredity that led her to train as a doctor. In 1914 she entered the London School of Medicine for Women at the Royal Free Hospital, qualifying MRCS LRCP in 1920. She returned to the Galton Laboratory to continue her studies of heredity, and throughout the 1920s she practised medicine one day a week. She was awarded membership of the Royal College of Physicians in 1926 and elected fellow in 1938. She always retained an interest in the professional status and intellectual concerns of the medical world and at the age of eighty, in 1959, published an article in the 'British Medical Journal' on the effects of rubella in pregnancy. 
Bell was employed as a full-time research worker by the Medical Research Council (MRC) until 1944. From 1926 to 1944 she was Galton research fellow at University College, London. In 1936 she also joined the MRC neurological unit at the National Hospital, Queen Square. During the 1930s she assembled family pedigrees on, among other conditions, ataxia, Huntington's disease, and haemophilia, travelling considerable distances to track down family pedigrees. The first stage of Bell's professional life during the 1920s was not without its frustrations. She was constrained by the necessity to get her grants renewed and to bargain up her salary with the MRC. Her position reflected the insecurity of many women in science on short-term research contracts. 
In 1932 the most significant decade of Bell's scientific career began with her appointment to the genetics committee of the MRC. She accepted the appointment with characteristic diffidence although it was clearly in recognition of both her statistical skill and medical knowledge. Between 1933 and 1944 she became a permanent member of the MRC scientific staff. Serving with the committee gave her the opportunity to work with the foremost geneticists in Britain, including R. A. Fisher who in 1933 replaced Pearson as director of the Galton Laboratory, and J. B. S. Haldane who from 1933 to 1936 was professor of genetics at University College. Fisher was a Mendelian and his appointment to the laboratory signalled the decline of the influence of the biometrical school of heredity there. 
Bell was now in a position to bring her unique qualities to overtly Mendelian studies of heredity. Her collaboration with Haldane, whom she regarded as being a great stimulus, was particularly fruitful. While collecting material for 'The Treasury of Human Inheritance' in 1936 Bell came across evidence of a linkage between haemophilia and red-green colour blindness in males. A notice of this was sent by Bell and Haldane to 'Nature' on 15 October 1936 and a full-length exposition, written jointly, appeared in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society' in 1937. The paper detailed one of the first actual pedigrees confirming a significant male genetic linkage. 
Bell continued work on linkage, publishing in the 'Journal of Neurology' in 1943, with J. P. Martin, evidence of a link between mental retardation in males and the X chromosome. In 1940 Bell produced another important paper in 'Annals of Eugenics' on the rate of consanguinity in England and Wales. 
Bell's formal position in academia never matched her achievements, probably because of a combination of gender bias and limited opportunities in genetics. She was, however, in a unique position, with both statistical and medical training, to make a significant contribution to the development of genetic science. She was one of the pioneers who laid the foundations for the mapping of human chromosomes. 
In 1941 Bell's career in statistics was rewarded by the presentation of the Weldon memorial prize and medal for biometry by Oxford University. In 1944 she retired from the Galton Laboratory but was appointed honorary research associate and, until 1965, remained on its staff. She continued to be an active researcher, helping prepare the fifth volume of 'The Treasury of Human Inheritance' for publication in 1958. Relations with Lionel Penrose, who took over directorship of the Galton Laboratory in 1945, were good and it was on his initiative that her eightieth birthday in 1959 was celebrated by a reception at University College. 
Julia Bell never married. She had a large circle of friends and family. Her numerous letters to colleagues reveal a talent for friendship and wide interests outside science which she listed in 'Who's Who' as music, plays, and reading. She remained independent until, at the age of ninety-seven, she was obliged to enter St George's Nursing Home, 61 St George's Square, Westminster, where she died on 26 April 1979 aged 100. 


@@@@@


doc= 38515


Bennett, Louise (1870-1956), suffragist, trade unionist, and pacifist, was born in Temple Road, Temple Hill, near Dublin, the eldest of five daughters and five sons of an auctioneer and antiques valuer called Bennett and his wife, Susan Boulger, daughter of an army officer. Her family were prosperous protestants who had lived in Ireland since the late eighteenth century. 
Educated at an English boarding-school and at Alexandra College, Dublin, and then in Bonn where she studied music, Louie Bennett at first lived the life of a cultivated lady with literary pretensions. She wrote two novels, 'The Proving of Priscilla' (1902) and 'A Prisoner of his Word' (1908). She was forty years old when she started on her serious life's work of social intervention to which she then devoted herself with total commitment for the next forty years. In August 1911 she founded the Irishwomen's Suffrage Federation, becoming its first secretary. It was also at that time and in joint pursuance of that cause that she met her lifelong companion Helen Chenevix -- one of the first women graduates from Trinity College, Dublin. Together they worked to link the various Irish suffrage societies. 
It was the bitter labour conflicts in Dublin in 1913 that awakened Louie Bennett to full realization of the desperate situation of Irish women workers -- 'the slaves of slaves' -- who were very near starvation level. She founded the Irish Women's Reform League and thereafter became the leading activist and organizer in the cause of economic justice and human dignity for the sweated women workers of Ireland. Starting with the printing trade and then the laundry workers, Louie Bennett fought decade after decade not just for better wages but also for improved sanitation, ventilation, light, heat, shorter hours, and paid holidays -- all to 'humanize' industrial working life. Louie Bennett was a co-operative socialist, believing in workers' control and a minimum equal living wage for both men and women. Although born a 'lady', she was a familiar sight standing on the picket line with girl strikers in the rain. 
Louie Bennett's other cause was pacifism. Although converted to the cause of Irish independence by the Easter rising in 1916, she herself always insisted on non-violent struggle -- in this agreeing with the murdered Francis Sheehy Skeffington and with 'A. E.' (George William Russell). Her commitment to pacifism made her unpopular both with belligerent pro-Britons and with militant Irish nationalists. Her pamphlet, 'Ireland and a People's Peace' (1918), advocated both national self-determination and international co-operation, criticizing Sinn Fein both for its failure to see the importance of international interdependence and for its violence. In it she argued that 'No revolution is permanently achieved by violence: such violence, even in the name of freedom, is tyranny.' Between 1920 and 1922 Louie Bennett participated in efforts to end the Irish civil war by negotiation and in 1921 she went to Washington to give evidence before the American commission on conditions in Ireland. 
In Dublin in 1926 Louie Bennett presided over the congress of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, of which she had been a founder member since 1915 and whose international president, Jane Addams, was the woman Louie Bennett admired most in the world. In 1928 she wrote an article in the 'Irish Statesman' supporting Litvinov's call to the League of Nations for general and immediate disarmament. And when appointed the first ever woman president of the Irish Trades Union Congress in 1932, she was prescient enough to warn her hearers of the dangers of Fascism. 
After the partition of Ireland, Louie Bennett continuously tried to keep every channel of friendly contact open between south and north, working to establish the basic co-operative links of transport, communications, power lines, and drainage. Her hope was to see a peacefully reunited, federal Ireland. The last cause she worked for in her old age was the outlawing of nuclear weapons. 
Louie Bennett was of middle height with shrewd, twinkling dark brown eyes expressive of her humour, liveliness, and strength of feeling. She was a thoughtful, forceful speaker who exuded dignity and determination. When she died at her home in Killiney, near Dublin, on 25 November 1956 at the age of eighty-six she was called the best-loved woman in Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 38516


Cadbury, Dame Geraldine Southall (1865-1941), social and penal reformer, was born Geraldine Southall at 5 Highfield Road, Edgbaston, on 29 June 1865, the daughter of Alfred Southall (1838-1931), chemist, and his wife, Anna Strangman, 'nee' Grubb (1841-1912). She inherited a propensity for social activism from her Quaker parents; her father was a temperance worker who taught a working men's adult school class, while her Irish mother was a supporter of women's suffrage. She was educated at Edgbaston High School for Girls, and briefly at the Quaker school, The Mount, in York. On 8 September 1891, at the Friends' meeting house, Birmingham, she married Barrow Cadbury ['see below']. They had three children: Dorothy Adlington (1892-1987), Paul Strangman (1895-1984), and Geraldine Mary (1900-1999). 
A committed Quaker, Geraldine Southall Cadbury reconciled her faith with the couple's increasing wealth by engaging in social reform; throughout her life, her activism was motivated by her Quaker faith. In 1904 she began a lifelong connection with the Birmingham Lying-in Charity and its services to poor mothers, officially opening its new maternity hospital buildings in Loveday Street in November 1907. She and her husband donated a nurses' hostel in 1933, and shortly before her death she was planning the hospital's new premises. Among her educational interests were the Birmingham People's Free Kindergarten established by Julia Lloyd in 1904, and the provision of open-air schools for inner-city children, the latter drawing on her own maternal experience. The health of her elder son as a child had caused concern and in 1907 the couple built a family home, Cropwood, in the Lickey Hills, designed on open-air principles. Seeing the beneficial effects on their own child, the Cadburys donated two open-air schools to Birmingham, Uffculme in 1911, and Cropwood itself in 1922. 
Cadbury's other educational concerns were the Sunday school class where she taught from 1905, and her women's adult school class at Moseley Road which she led from 1907. In 1907 she and Barrow Cadbury founded Westhill Training College for Sunday School Workers, providing the building and most of the project's financial support. Her part in its establishment was recognized in 1917 by the National Sunday School Union when she was elected as its first woman president. In her presidential address, 'Stand by the children', she announced her campaign for the year, the 'difficult boy and girl' and the Sunday school's role in their reclamation for society, thereby uniting her interest in Sunday schools with the cause for which she is best remembered, the reform of the treatment of young offenders. 
On 1 April 1905 at the instigation of a local justice, J. Courtney Lord, Birmingham established the first separate court for children in England. Modelled on American children's courts, the experiment led to the provision of juvenile courts in the 'Children's Act' of 1908. In the same year as the court's inception Cadbury was invited by a fellow Quaker, Ellen Sturge, to accompany her on her regular visits to the courts. Together with Marian Priestman, another local Friend, she became a volunteer probation worker, supervising the case of every girl offender, investigating her home circumstances, and advising the appropriate course of action. She followed this up after sentencing by corresponding with every girl, always enclosing a stamped addressed envelope for a reply. Her work convinced her of the need for a safe home where children could be accommodated while on remand, and in 1910 she and Barrow Cadbury provided Birmingham with the first purpose-built children's remand home in Britain. They donated the site on the Moseley Road, established a voluntary management committee under their direction, and paid for the erection and furnishing of the building, which was largely designed by her. As for other buildings donated by the couple she drew detailed sketches of what she required, which were then handed to the architect to work up into building plans. 
During the First World War, Cadbury organized temporary accommodation for hundreds of Belgian refugees at the Friends' Institute in Moseley Road and ran a Belgian maternity home at 19 Carpenter Road, receiving the medal of Queen Elisabeth of Belgium in 1918 in recognition of her services. A committed pacifist, she was one of the 156 members of the British committee of the Women's International Congress at The Hague (28 April - 1 May 1915), to which she and her daughter Dorothy had intended to travel but were refused passports. 
In the post-war period Cadbury was increasingly recognized as an expert on juvenile justice policy locally and nationally. Between 1911 and 1927 she was co-opted onto Birmingham education committee's special school sub-committee. In 1920, following the 'Sex Disqualification (Removal) Act' of 1919, her position in Birmingham children's court was formalized when she and Marian Priestman became the city's first two women magistrates, and from 1923 she chaired the justices' panel in the children's court. In 1922 she was appointed to the Home Office's advisory committee on probation, and in 1925 to the Home Office departmental committee on the treatment of young offenders, the committee that laid the ground for the 'Children's Act' of 1933. 
As part of her investigations for the young offenders committee, Cadbury visited Maurice Rouvroy's Belgian observation home for young delinquents in 1926. Established in 1913 the Centraal Observatiegesticht at Moll was a child-centred community where young offenders were psychologically assessed. Cadbury had a long-standing interest in psychology; Dr George Auden acted as psychological adviser to her Moseley Road Remand Home from its establishment, and from the early 1920s the Birmingham children's court used two local doctors, W. A. Potts and Hamblin Smith, as experts in child psychology. The visit to Moll convinced her of the value of observation homes and when the young offenders committee reported in 1927 it recommended that at least three British observation centres should be established to provide psychological reports on all offenders under the age of twenty-one. Much to her disappointment, and that of the Howard League, financial constraints prevented the recommendation's inclusion in the 'Children's Act' of 1933, and it was not until after her death that the first British observation home was established in Birmingham, by her husband and in her memory. 
During the 1920s Cadbury took part in campaigns against the death penalty, and from 1923 supported the work of what later became the National Council for the Abolition of the Death Penalty. She also travelled widely, investigating juvenile justice provision in Europe, America, New Zealand, and Australia, often combining her interests with Barrow's business travels and visits to Quaker international gatherings. In 1928 the fruits of her travels fed into her designs for a new children's court complex in Steelhouse Lane, Birmingham, only the second purpose-built juvenile court in England. Presented to the city by the couple, the court was officially opened by the home secretary, Sir William Joynson-Hicks, on 17 July 1928. Her beliefs were incorporated into its fabric in the form of the ceremonial key which showed Justice unveiled and without a sword, symbolizing justice with understanding. 
Cadbury was instrumental in the establishment of the Birmingham Child Guidance Clinic, founded by Birmingham city council's education committee in 1931, initially for an experimental period of three years. It was funded by the Commonwealth Fund of New York supplemented by an anonymous local donation of $1500, which may well have come from her. In 1935 she and Barrow Cadbury founded Copeley Hill Hostel for boys and Carpenter House Probation Hostel for girls. She also continued to be appointed to Home Office committees, including the committee to inquire into juvenile courts in the Metropolitan Police district (1930-41), the juvenile court rules committee (1932), the conference on girls aged 15-17 appearing before London juvenile courts (1934), and the committee to consider observation centres (1938). From 1935 she was vice-president of the International Association of Children's Court Judges. Her book 'Young Offenders Yesterday and To-day' (1938) stressed the transformative power of education and personal intervention in the lives of the young, and articulated her long-held belief that the juvenile court was there to protect rather than to punish, and that child offenders were not intrinsically flawed but were reacting to their environment, poverty, poor parenting, and a lack of alternative role models. 
In May 1937 Geraldine Cadbury was appointed DBE 'for public and philanthropic services in Birmingham' ('London Gazette', 11 May 1937, 3089), a worldly honour that as a Quaker she seriously considered declining. She rarely used the title, preferring to be known as Mrs Barrow Cadbury. She died at her home, 40 Edgbaston Park Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 30 January 1941. 
She was survived by her husband, Barrow Cadbury (1862-1958), cocoa and chocolate manufacturer and social reformer, who was born in Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 27 September 1862, the son of Richard Cadbury (1835-1899), cocoa manufacturer, and his first wife, Elizabeth Adlington (1838-1868). His mother died when he was six years old. After schooling locally, at the age of eleven he was sent to a 'Realschule' in Stuttgart, before attending a Quaker school at Hitchin from the age of fourteen. This was followed by two years at Owens College, Manchester, and an apprenticeship in London. In 1882 he completed a two-month tour of Canada and the USA, investigating American chocolate manufacture, before joining the family firm. On his father's death he became one of four directors of a new limited company under the chairmanship of his uncle, George Cadbury. From 1914 Barrow was vice-chairman of Cadbury Brothers Ltd. In 1918 he negotiated a merger, against his uncle's wishes, with J. S. Fry & Sons of Bristol to form a new holding company, the British Cocoa and Chocolate Company. On George Cadbury's death in 1922 Barrow became chairman of Cadbury Brothers Ltd until his retirement in 1932. 
Quiet and reserved, Barrow Cadbury's Quaker faith and pacifist principles were central to his life. He was active in his local meeting at George Road and from 1898 at Highgate Mission. In the same year he was made an elder of the Warwickshire monthly meeting and later served as clerk to the quarterly meeting. Nationally he was a regular attender at yearly meeting and a member of the meeting for sufferings. In 1923 he played a key role in the building of Friends' House in Euston Road, London, raising much of the necessary funds as treasurer of the building committee. Like his father, he had a lifelong interest in adult education and taught a working men's class throughout his life. Following his father's death he inherited the management of his recently built Moseley Road Institute for adult education. He served on the council of the National Adult School Union and was its treasurer (1907-22), and president (1926-7). 
Before the First World War, Barrow Cadbury was involved in Anglo-German friendship initiatives, hosting visits by German peace delegations in 1906 and 1911, and participating in several return delegations to Germany, the last shortly before the outbreak of war in 1914. During the war he was an early member of the Fellowship of Reconciliation in 1915, and supported the work of the Friends' War Victims Relief Committee, the Friends' Emergency Committee for the Relief of Enemy Aliens, and the Friends' Ambulance Unit in which his son, Paul, served. He maintained his witness for peace during the 1930s when he supported George Lansbury's Embassies of Reconciliation initiative. After the Second World War he collaborated with a fellow Quaker, Kathleen Lonsdale, on a series of letters to world leaders pressing for peace and disarmament, the last of which was written in 1957 a few months before his death. 
Barrow Cadbury shared his wife's interest in penal reform and served as a magistrate from 1906 to 1940, often presiding in the children's court. Following Geraldine's death Barrow Cadbury continued to support the causes she espoused, and purchased Forhill House intending to establish an observation home for young offenders in her memory. However, delays with Forhill prompted him to begin experimental work at Fircroft College, Selly Oak, where her Moseley Road Remand Home had been evacuated following bomb damage, and which in effect became the first British observation home. He persevered with Forhill, which was officially opened on 30 May 1947 as a Senior Boys' Remand and Observation Home and presented to the city in Geraldine Cadbury's memory. 
In 1920 the couple had converted a large proportion of their fortune into the charitable Barrow Cadbury Trust. Birmingham Civic Society awarded its gold medal to them in 1931 in recognition of their contribution to the city. Although he never coveted public honour and often worked anonymously, Barrow Cadbury was granted the freedom of the city of Birmingham in 1932. He died at his home, 73 Wellington Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 9 March 1958. 


@@@@@


doc= 38517


Clark, Alice (1874-1934), campaigner for women's rights, was born on 1 August 1874, at Green Bank, Street, Somerset, the fourth of the six children of William Stephens Clark (1839-1925), shoe manufacturer and social reformer, and Helen Priestman Bright (1840-1927), daughter of John Bright (1811-1889) of Rochdale, politician. Her family's wealth derived from the shoemaking enterprise, C. and J. Clark Ltd, in Street. Alice Clark was a birthright member of the Society of Friends, counting some noted Quaker women ministers among her forebears. Hilda Clark (1881-1955) was her sister. 
Most of her education was undertaken at home, but in May 1891 Alice Clark began a period of formal schooling at Brighthelmston, Southport, a school founded by Hannah Wallis, also a Quaker. She completed her studies there in December 1892, having passed the Cambridge matriculation examinations. Unlike her three sisters, however, she did not then continue her formal education at university or college. Instead, she chose to enter the family firm to pioneer a new career for women. She began an informal apprenticeship in 1893, learning each of the various processes of shoe manufacture and selling. 
Alice Clark's family circle included a number of women who had taken a leading part in the formation of an organized movement for women's rights in the 1860s, including her mother, and her great-aunts, Priscilla Bright McLaren, Margaret Tanner, and Mary and Anna Maria Priestman. She followed their example, working continuously on behalf of women's rights from early adulthood. From the 1890s she campaigned on behalf of women's suffrage as a member of the Women's Liberal Federation, helping form a branch in her locality. Temperance was another cause which she pursued during these years, alongside adult education. 
Ill health first interrupted Alice Clark's business career in 1897. After a period in a Black Forest sanatorium, she returned to work in the Clark factory, supervising several of the manufacturing processes, and managing the home order office and correspondence with customers. In 1904, when the firm became a limited company, she was appointed one of the original five life directors of C. and J. Clark Ltd. In 1909 she again became seriously ill and tuberculosis of the throat and lungs was diagnosed. The prognosis was not hopeful, but she made what was considered a striking recovery. The period of convalescence, however, was prolonged and only completed in 1912. 
This crisis was followed by a change of direction, and Alice Clark withdrew from an active role in the family firm for some years. Her illness had coincided with ever more violent confrontations between the authorities and militant women's suffragists, a development she viewed with some anguish. In 1907 Alice Clark had herself taken up a non-violent form of militancy when she attempted to resist the payment of taxes. Now she increasingly lent her support to the constitutional National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, a branch of which was formed in Street in 1910. Following her recovery, she sought a more active role in its campaigns and made herself a new home in London. There she rapidly moved into the leadership of the National Union, joining its executive committee in 1913. She also became its assistant parliamentary secretary at a critical time, as the National Union pursued a working alliance with the Labour Party with the aim of pressuring the Liberal government to enact votes for women. 
In 1914 Alice Clark was awarded the Charlotte Shaw fellowship at the London School of Economics. Her research, undertaken with direction from Dr Lilian Knowles, was published as 'The Working Life of Women in the Seventeenth Century' (1919). This was among the earliest studies in the field, and underwent several reprintings. It represents the foremost of those 'pessimistic' accounts which argue that the advent of capitalism undermined the economic and social position of women. Some of its findings have been confirmed by subsequent research. Others have been thrown into question, perhaps most notably the periodization which Alice Clark applied to the process of industrialization, and her tendency to see the position of women in the seventeenth century in too rosy terms. None the less, her study constitutes one of the most comprehensive surveys available on this topic. 
During the First World War Alice Clark took a prominent part in the work of the Friends' War Victims Relief Committee, notably in aid to refugees in France, and in the organization of post-war famine relief in Austria. 1922 saw her return at last to full-time work at the Clark factory. In this last period of her working life she became an innovator in marketing, in staff training, and in personnel management, and continued to promote technical and adult education in Street. During her final years Alice Clark left the Society of Friends, turning instead to the doctrines of Christian Science. She died on 11 May 1934, at Millfield, her home, in Street; her remains were cremated at Arnos Vale, Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 38518


Clark, Hilda (1881-1955), physician and humanitarian aid worker, was born on 12 January 1881 at Green Bank, Street, Somerset, the youngest of the six children of William Stephens Clark (1839-1925), shoe manufacturer and social reformer, and Helen Priestman Clark (1840-1927), daughter of John Bright (1811-1889), politician, and his first wife, Elizabeth Priestman. The historian and campaigner for women's rights Alice Clark (1874-1934) was her sister. The family's wealth derived from the shoemaking enterprise, C. and J. Clark Ltd, in Street. Hilda Clark was a birthright member of the Society of Friends. She counted some noted Quaker women ministers among her forebears, while her aunt, Dr Annie Clark, was among the first women to train in medicine in Britain, and her mother and great-aunts helped to found a range of women's rights organizations from the late 1860s. 
Hilda Clark was an athletic child, a keen gymnast and an intrepid horsewoman. Her education began at home, and was continued at two Quaker-run schools: Brighthelmston, at Birkdale in Southport, Lancashire, about 1896-7, and The Mount, in York, from about 1897 to 1900. She then went on to medical training at Birmingham University, about 1901, moving to the Royal Free Hospital, London, in 1906 to complete her studies, graduating MB BS in 1908. There she met Edith Mary Pye, a superintendent of nurses, with whom she enjoyed a lifetime's companionship and shared endeavours in the fields of humanitarian aid and internationalism. Edith Pye later wrote of the Clark family that 'their Quaker faith permeated their whole existence, and their relations with the world around them' ('War and its Aftermath', 5). Hilda Clark, like many young Quakers of her generation, was especially influenced by the Quaker summer school movement begun by John Wilhelm Rowntree. This movement sought to promote among Quakers both a greater intellectual rigour with regard to their religious faith, and a fuller engagement with contemporary social problems. Her family background ensured an active interest in public affairs, especially through her commitment to radical politics, temperance, women's suffrage, and internationalism. Her vital and energetic presence was valued by colleagues in the many causes that she pursued. 
Clark's medical career began in 1909 with an appointment at the Birmingham Maternity Hospital. Her growing interest at this time, however, was in public health. The following year she left her hospital post to establish a tuberculosis dispensary in her home village of Street. There she provided the controversial tuberculin vaccine treatment under the guidance of Camac Wilkinson, a specialist committed to the promotion of this therapy, which offered an alternative to sanatorium treatment. Both her sister, Alice Clark, and Edith Pye were among her private patients at this time, each making a successful recovery from episodes of the disease. Hilda Clark eventually published the results of her work at the Street dispensary in 1915 in her 'Dispensary Treatment of Pulmonary Tuberculosis'. In 1911 she was appointed a tuberculosis officer by the public health authorities in Portsmouth and subsequently published several articles in this field. Her advocacy of tuberculin treatment eventually proved the source of some local controversy, however, and she resigned from her post in 1913 to pursue an ambition to establish a working-class general practice in London. 
Following the outbreak of the First World War, Clark was among those who proposed that the Society of Friends undertake refugee relief work in France. She herself was among a Quaker expeditionary force sent there in November 1914, and soon she became supervisor of a maternity hospital for refugees established at Chalons. There she was joined at various times by Edith Pye and Alice Clark. Subsequently she added to her responsibilities the supervision of a convalescence home, while also spending some time in Paris each week at the headquarters of the Quaker relief effort. Eventually her own health broke down, and in 1917 she left France for recuperation in England, where afterwards she returned temporarily to her post as tuberculosis officer in Portsmouth. In 1919 Clark heard from a close family friend, General Jan Smuts, of the famine in Austria. She set off in July 1919 to investigate the need for aid, and her report led to the Quaker Austrian famine relief effort, in pursuit of which she returned to the field, administering aid from Vienna. Subsequently she toured the United States to raise funds for similar famine relief efforts in the Soviet Union. 
In 1922 Clark's name reappeared in the medical directories after an absence of several years, though she seems never to have returned to her medical career. Instead she devoted herself to the causes of the League of Nations, the Women's Peace Crusade, and the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom in which her closest friends, Edith Mary Pye and Kathleen Courtney, were also active in the inter-war period. This work took her to Geneva on a number of occasions, and also on fact finding missions in Poland, Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria, and Turkey during the 1920s. In the 1930s she became a public speaker and broadcaster on international affairs, and worked for the relief of refugees from the Spanish Civil War through the International Commission for the Assistance of Child Refugees. She also aided refugees from Nazi Germany and from Austria through the Friends' Service Council. 
After their home in London was bombed in 1940, Clark and her household moved to Kent, where she helped with the work of the Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Families Association. Becoming increasingly disabled with Parkinson's disease, she returned to Street in 1952, where she died at her home, 4 Overleigh, on 24 February 1955. She was buried in the Street meeting-house burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 38520


Hobhouse, Emily (1860-1926), social activist and charity worker, was born on 9 April 1860 at St Ive, in Cornwall, the fifth of the six surviving children of Reginald Hobhouse (died 1895), archdeacon of Bodmin, Cornwall, and his wife, Caroline (died 1880), daughter of Sir William Salusbury-Trelawny, eighth baronet. Her youngest brother was Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse (1864-1929), and they maintained their childhood companionship in later life. Her uncle was Arthur Hobhouse, Baron Hobhouse (1819-1904); he and his wife, Margaret or Mary, provided for her materially and supported her campaigning work. Emily was educated at home by her mother and governesses, with one term at school in London in 1876. She remained at home, living in a way that was typical for unmarried women of her class, caring for her parents and doing parish work, but after her father's death she broke away from that life and went to the USA and Mexico to do philanthropic work for Cornish miners who had emigrated. She went to the mining town of Virginia, Minnesota, and although she found that the few Cornish miners there had little need of her help, being set apart by their 'sobriety, energy, skill and work' (Fry, 47), she undertook various mission welfare and temperance projects. After a broken engagement to an American businessman, John Carr Jackson, and the loss of much of her money, she returned to England in 1898. 
Hobhouse became interested in the struggle for women's emancipation, and in November 1898 was elected to the executive of the Women's Industrial Council (founded in 1894). She worked as an investigator for the council, producing reports on child labour, and in 1900 was involved in a scheme to set up a company providing housing for 'educated working women' in London ('Women's Industrial News', Dec 1900). She was also a supporter of the women's suffrage movement, although she did not endorse the militancy of the suffragettes. 
Following the outbreak of the South African War (11 October 1899) Hobhouse became a member of the South African Conciliation Committee, launched on 1 November 1899 with Leonard Courtney as its president, one of a number of organizations formed to combat the often violent 'jingoism' of the war's supporters. She was the honorary secretary of its women's branch, formed early in 1900, and organized a number of protests against the war. Anger and concern about the effects of the war increased during 1900, after reports reached Britain of the British army's scorched-earth policy, which drove Boer women and children from their farms to be housed in refugee camps (subsequently described as concentration camps). 
Emily Hobhouse set up a philanthropic committee, the South African Women and Children Distress Fund, to collect money to help the women and children, and, despite the reservations of her friends and family, travelled to South Africa in December 1900 to investigate conditions and to distribute funds. She obtained military permission to visit some of the camps and spent several months travelling between different camps in the Orange River and Cape colonies. She saw at first hand the disease and death, especially of children, that had resulted from overcrowding and lack of food and medical facilities. She worked with local women to improve conditions in those camps to which she was given access, and returned to Britain in May 1901. She travelled back on the same ship as Sir Alfred Milner, the British high commissioner, from whom she was surprised to learn that he had been sent more than sixty reports of her activities in South Africa. 
Hobhouse and other members of her committees campaigned extensively to publicize the conditions in the camps, often against officially orchestrated hostility. She had some correspondence with members of the British government, including St John Brodrick and Joseph Chamberlain, and her report to the South African Distress Fund was published in June 1901. Influenced by Hobhouse, with whom he had had an interview, the Liberal leader, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, asked in a speech on 14 June: 'When is a war not a war? When it is carried on by methods of barbarism in South Africa' (Wilson, 349). Hobhouse's report had become a famous indictment. The government responded by appointing six women as a committee of inquiry into the camps, headed by Millicent Fawcett. Although conditions in many camps had been improved since Hobhouse's visits, the Fawcett committee shared her opinion about the lack of suitable accommodation and the poor organization of the camps, and their report, published in February 1902 ('Parl. papers', 1902, 67), made many of the same recommendations that she had made almost a year earlier. 
Emily Hobhouse was refused membership of the committee, and when she tried to re-enter South Africa in November 1901 was not allowed to land, and was forcibly transferred to another ship and deported. She returned to South Africa in 1903 and set up various resettlement and rehabilitation projects, including the establishment of industrial schools for lace-making, spinning, and weaving, and in 1907 was appointed an adviser to manage public funds for the schools. Her co-worker and the honorary treasurer of the Boer Home Industries was the Quaker Anna Ruth Fry (1878-1962), who compiled the first of the three memoirs of Hobhouse's life (1929). 
In 1907-8 the organization of the schools was taken over by the new governments in Transvaal and the Orange River Colony and Hobhouse resigned her post, returning to Europe in October 1908. In honour of her work for South Africa, Hugo Naude was commissioned to paint her portrait, which was hung in the Pretoria Museum of Cultural History. She maintained friendships with many of the Boer leaders and others in South Africa, including Olive Schreiner and Mahatma Gandhi. 
Emily Hobhouse lived mainly in Italy until the outbreak of the First World War, when her commitment to pacifism found practical expression in her work for the international women's movement for peace, and she worked at its secretariat in Amsterdam for three months in 1915. In 1916 she travelled through Germany and Belgium to investigate conditions for refugees, interned civilians, and prisoners of war, and met the German foreign minister, Gottlieb von Jagow (1863-1935), who, she claimed, gave her the impression that he wanted her to suggest peace talks to the British authorities. She returned to England and helped to promote schemes for the exchange of prisoners of war. 
After the armistice Hobhouse helped to set up a relief fund for enemy children -- the Fund to Aid Swiss Relief -- whose work was incorporated with that of the Save the Children Fund in April 1919, and she was also chairwoman of the Russian Babies' Fund. In September 1919 she visited Austria as a representative of the Save the Children Fund and compiled a report on conditions in Vienna and Leipzig; she set up a relief fund and oversaw its administration locally. For that work she was honoured by the city of Leipzig, and the German Red Cross gave her its decoration of second class. A marble bust of her was placed in the Rathaus of Leipzig, a copy of which was also sent to the war museum in Bloemfontein. 
Hobhouse maintained her connections with South Africa, where subscriptions were raised to enable her to buy a house at St Ives, in Cornwall, in 1921, although she remained there only for two years, moving to London in 1923. She spent the last few years of her life working on an autobiography and a memoir of her work in South Africa, neither of which she was able to complete, although much of it has been published. A draft of the autobiography is held by the state archives in Bloemfontein. She published three accounts of the South African War: 'War without Glamour, or, Women's War Experiences Written by Themselves, 1899-1902' (1924); 'The Brunt of the War and where it Fell' (1902); and a translation of the diary of Alida M. Badenhorst, 'Tant'Alie of Transvaal (A.M. Badenhorst): her Diary, 1880-1902' (1923). 
Emily Hobhouse contracted pleurisy after a long illness and died in London on 8 June 1926. A memorial service was held for her at St Mary Abbots Church, Kensington, and on 26 October 1926 her ashes were buried at the Bloemfontein war memorial, South Africa, where only she, President Steyn, and General de Wet are buried. The ceremony testified to her status as a heroine among the Boer people and is recorded in a number of photographs, some of which are in Hobhouse family collections and others in the war museum at Bloemfontein. Her reputation remained strong in South Africa, where many tributes were published. J. C. Smuts wrote of her 'great spirit of human service' and 'the strong and vivid personality which at times made her difficult to work with', concluding that 'She lies buried in the hearts of a grateful people' (Fry, 10-11). 


@@@@@


doc= 38522


Fry, Joan Mary (1862-1955), relief worker and social reformer, was born on 27 July 1862 at West Hill, Highgate, Middlesex, the second daughter of the seven daughters and two sons of the judge Sir Edward Fry (1827-1918) and his wife, Mariabella Hodgkin (1833-1930). Her distinguished younger siblings included (Sara) Margery Fry, Ruth Fry (1879-1962), and Roger Eliot Fry, whose children she helped to bring up. She was educated by governesses at home (1867-82) within a family that was especially interested in the natural sciences and questions of political justice, and she was imbued with a profound dedication to moral duty. In certain ways her upbringing was very restricted -- by its upper-class privilege, by the Victorianism that prevented her from walking anywhere unaccompanied or unchaperoned until she was thirty, and by an internalized Quaker puritanism that forbade any visit to the theatre until she was sixty. Nevertheless, she emerged from that background an independent-minded spiritual 'seeker' and an immensely influential social interventionist. 
After years of solitary study -- she taught herself some Hebrew and 'New Testament' Greek -- Joan Fry became an outstanding public interpreter of a Quakerism that combined fellowship and individual freedom. In her Swarthmore lecture, 'The Communion of Life' (1910), she said: 'Quakerism is nothing unless it be... a practical showing that the spiritual and material spheres are not divided,... the whole of life is sacramental and incarnational'. In 'Friends and the War', published in September 1914, she wrote: 'We believe there is something Divine in all men, which will respond 'if' we call it out by acting on our belief'. An absolutist pacifist, she was appointed chaplain to imprisoned conscientious objectors during the First World War. She also attended many military tribunals and courts martial of conscientious objectors to check that justice was done. She was the only woman allowed to see and speak to these prisoners in military camps, and in one case at least she protested against a prisoner's mistreatment only just in time to save his life (F. Brockway, 'Bermondsey Story', 1949, 67). 
In July 1919 Joan Fry and three other British Friends went to defeated Germany to see how they could mitigate the disastrous impact of the continued allied blockade. Her reports, for dissemination in Britain (later deposited in RS Friends, Lond.), testify to famine and the diseases of famine, including galloping consumption and epidemics of child rickets and pneumonia. In the face of Germany's distrust and outright hatred of the victorious British she organized so massive and effective a relief distribution network, focusing on the needs of women, children, and university students, that the Germans coined a new word for feeding -- 'Quakern'. During the occupation of the Ruhr in 1923 she reported seeing French officers walking about Duisburg with whips, and intervened on behalf of Germans imprisoned by the French military. She visited the Berlin workhouse and refuge for the homeless in September 1923 and in the following month in Nurnberg she recorded seeing '7 men in the new 'Hitler' uniform'. In acknowledgement of her efforts for peace and reconstruction in defeated Germany the University of Tubingen made her an honorary doctor of political economy in 1924. 
In 1926 Joan Fry turned her attention to social misery in Britain. She made many visits to the coalfields, including those in south Wales, and helped to start feeding centres for the children of unemployed miners and to encourage small community self-help industries. Her greatest contribution was her work for the Friends Allotment Committee (1928-51), which enabled the unemployed miners throughout Britain to grow vegetables on unused land without losing any part of their dole. George V wanted to confer an honour on her in recognition of this work but she refused to profit from others' misfortune. Joan Fry was not tall but she had a remarkable 'presence' and was 'austere and tender' (Fawell, 7), with white hair, one humorous, loving eye -- she had lost the other in early childhood -- and an eagerness to join in the good things of life with others, especially children: she would win races against them at ninety. She died, unmarried, at her London home, 40 Temple Fortune Hill, on 25 November 1955 and was cremated at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 38523


Higgs, Mary Ann (1854-1937), social reformer, was born on 2 February 1854 in Devizes, Wiltshire, the eldest of three children of William Kingsland (1826-1876), a Congregational minister, and his wife, Caroline Paddon (1818-1888?). In 1862 the family moved north on William's accepting the invitation to be minister at College Chapel, Bradford. Initially taught at home with her brothers, Mary went at the age of thirteen to Miss Scott's, a local private school. In 1871 she won an exhibition to the College for Women, Hitchin, which in 1873 transferred to Girton College, Cambridge. The first woman to take Cambridge's natural science tripos, she gained second-class honours in 1874, belatedly receiving an honorary MA many years later. 
After eighteen months as assistant lecturer at Girton, Mary Kingsland taught mathematics and science at the recently established grammar school for girls in Bradford, later teaching also at the Saltaire School, Shipley. Her hopes of helping her father in the church were dashed when he died of consumption in 1876. Until she married a fellow Congregationalist, Revd Thomas Kilpin Higgs (1851-1907), Mary Kingsland helped to support her family. After her marriage, which took place on 5 August 1879, Mary moved to Staffordshire, where Thomas was minister at Hanley Tabernacle; here, their first three children were born. Concern for her health prompted a move to Withington, near Manchester, in 1888, but difficulties in the church and failing health led Thomas to resign in 1890. That year a fourth child was born. After several unsettled months the family moved to Oldham, Thomas serving as minister of Greenacres Congregational Church for sixteen years until his death. 
Mary Higgs's interests were wide-ranging: besides church work, she collaborated with W. T. Stead and others on a 'Twentieth Century New Testament' (1898, 1900), reportedly practising Greek while making puddings in the kitchen. Subsequent religious works included poems, meditations, and a prize-winning essay, 'Christ and his Miracles in the Light of Modern Psychology' (1905). This reflected her desire to reconcile her essentially mystical faith with her interest in science, particularly the new discipline of psychology to which W. T. Stead had introduced her. 
Mary Higgs's pioneering social work was also inspired by her friendship with Stead -- best-known for his expose of under-age prostitution in London in the 1880s -- and others, including Ebenezer Howard, originator of the garden city movement. She in turn inspired the foundation in 1902 of the much imitated Beautiful Oldham Society, and was active in its wide-ranging programme to improve the town's appearance and build a garden suburb. Her involvement led to her writing a weekly column in the 'Oldham Standard' and the 'Oldham Chronicle': addressed to 'Young Oldham', it appeared from 1910 to 1937, under the pseudonym 'Mrs Minerva'. She also played a part in wider moves to improve the provision of playing fields and to cut down smoke pollution. 
Higgs wrote and lectured on many social questions, notably unemployment and child development. From 1905 she collaborated with Dr John Paton, principal of the Nottingham Congregational Institute, to arrange yearly summer schools for the study of social questions: they were attended by experts from the settlement movement, temperance campaigns, and other fields of social work. She was an early advocate of family allowances, widowed mothers' pensions, and insurances for other life events. Her Oldham home, Bent House, served as a base for countless welfare organizations, many brought together in the Council of Social Welfare. Mobilizing an army of helpers, she established a paper-sorting industry to employ destitute women, pioneered mother and infant welfare centres, and founded Oldham's first evening play centre. Other initiatives included a mission and club for unemployed men, opened in 1909, and a wartime women's workroom, the model for what became known as Queen Mary's workrooms. 
Mary Higgs is, however, best-known as an advocate of vagrancy reform. About 1899 she found a room where women could stay in emergencies; later, with a benefactor, she set up three women's lodging-houses in Oldham. She was, however, keen to discover for herself why women shunned existing shelters, and over many years from 1903 took the highly unusual step (for a middle-class woman) of visiting workhouse wards and common lodging-houses dressed as a tramp. Her vivid accounts of the dirt and degradation which she encountered and of the downward spiral of destitution in which homeless women found themselves helped to fuel demands for more and better regulated women's lodgings, and for lodgings geared to the needs of migrant workers. Many of her descriptions were brought together in 'Glimpses into the Abyss' (1906), anticipating by over twenty years George Orwell's similar but much better known 'Down and out in Paris and London' (1933). This work drew on her research into conditions in other countries and linked the need for legislation with evolutionary theories. She became an acknowledged authority, giving evidence at inquiries such as the 1906 departmental committee on vagrancy, producing practical manuals, and acting as a prime mover in founding the National Association for Women's Lodging-Homes in 1909. In 1916 opposition to conscription led Higgs to join the Society of Friends, being already sympathetic to its beliefs. She became an elder, and in later years worked through the Quakers and with the Vagrancy Reform Society on vagrancy-related issues, giving evidence to the departmental committee on the relief of the casual poor (1930). Her later work (practical and written) focused on the rising tide of homeless unemployed boys and men, and included running experimental schools for unemployed boys (1929), helping to set up training farms for Young Wayfarers, and opening a fellowship and service club and hostels in Oldham for unemployed men (1933-5). Her own spirituality found expression in her editing of 'The Way to the Joyous Life' (1937), a selection of W. T. Stead's devotional writings. 
Known to many as Mother Mary, Mary Higgs died on 19 March 1937 at 4 Macartney House, Chesterfield Walk, her daughter's house in Greenwich, soon after receiving an OBE for her services to Oldham. She was cremated on 23 March at Golders Green and her ashes were interred at Greenacres Congregational Church on 3 April, amid widespread tributes to her tirelessness, humour, practicality, and vision. 


@@@@@


doc= 38524


Knight, Elizabeth (1869-1933), doctor and campaigner for women's suffrage, was born on 31 August 1869 at Hive House, Northfleet, Kent, the third child and only daughter of John Messer Knight (1813/14-1880), a cement manufacturer, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Lucas. The family was Quaker; the firm of Knight, Bevan, and Sturge was eventually amalgamated with others in Associated Portland Cement Manufacturers Ltd. Elizabeth Knight was educated at Kensington high school and at Newnham College, Cambridge (1888-91), where she read classics but did not take a degree. She trained at the London School of Medicine for Women, qualifying in 1904, and then practised as a general practitioner in London until her death, with a brief interlude in 1912-13 when she returned to Cambridge to study for the diploma in public health. 
Elizabeth Knight joined the Women's Freedom League, one of the main societies campaigning for women's suffrage, and in 1908 was imprisoned after attempting to interview the prime minister, H. H. Asquith, at 10 Downing Street. She turned her prison experience to good use by writing a pamphlet, 'Social and Sanitary Conditions of Prison Life'. She was a stalwart of the tax resistance campaign, by which women refused to pay taxes while unrepresented in parliament, was prosecuted on several occasions, and received two further prison sentences. Elizabeth Knight was a wealthy woman, having inherited a share of her father's estate, and a generous benefactor to the suffrage cause. By 1913 she was treasurer of the Women's Freedom League, holding this position until her death, and during her lifetime she subsidized the league's paper, 'The Vote'. During the First World War Elizabeth Knight actively opposed the 40D regulation, which involved the compulsory examination of women suspected of having transmitted venereal disease to a member of the armed forces. In 1920 she helped to found the Minerva Club, which was open to men and women in sympathy with progressive thought and which attracted members from all branches of the erstwhile militant suffrage movement. A very long lease on its premises in Bloomsbury, on the west side of Brunswick Square, was paid for by Dr Knight, who also furnished the club and supported it financially during her lifetime. In the years before women achieved full enfranchisement in 1928, she ran the press and publicity campaign for the equal political rights campaign. Elizabeth Knight never married, but adopted a daughter, Elsie Glover Knight. She died at 13 Victoria Road, Brighton, on 29 October 1933, after being injured there in a road accident. 


@@@@@


doc= 38525


Hughes, Mary (1860-1941), social worker, was born on 29 February 1860 at 80 Park Street, Mayfair, London, the youngest of the nine children (four daughters and five sons) of the Christian socialist Thomas Hughes (1822-1896), author of 'Tom Brown's Schooldays', and his wife, Anne Frances Ford ('c'.1826-1910). The social interventionist Jane Elizabeth Senior (Mrs Nassau Senior) was her paternal aunt. She was educated by governesses at home. From the age of twenty-three she kept house for her uncle John Hughes, vicar of Longcot, Berkshire, where she became a poor-law guardian and district councillor. 
In 1896 Mary Hughes moved to the East End of London as an unofficial, voluntary parish worker at St Jude's, Commercial Road, Whitechapel, where her sister Lilian was the wife of the vicar, the Revd Henry Carter. There she began her real life's work of sharing -- and trying to shoulder -- the troubles of the most afflicted, despairing people in London. She went into the slum dwellings, the workhouses, the doss houses, the lock wards (where sufferers from venereal disease were treated), and the infirmary, growing more and more at one in solidarity with the outcast. To the respectable world it seemed that she became ever more careless of herself and her surroundings -- especially after she lost her sister and brother-in-law through the sinking of the 'Titanic'. In 1915 she moved into the community settlement Kingsley Hall in Bow. She lived on bread and margarine and vegetables with a very little cheese, and always refused a fire, declaring 'Indignation keeps me warm!' 'For thirty years she had no new clothes, no holiday and no proper bed' (Pyper, 26). In 1917 she was made a JP for the Tower division, Shoreditch, sitting on rates and educational cases, sometimes being moved to tears by the tragedy behind the cases, and herself paying the fines the law demanded. 
In 1918 Mary Hughes was accepted into the Society of Friends. She moved back to Whitechapel and became a poor-law guardian and regular visitor at the children's home and poor-law infirmary. Every day the unemployed would knock on the door of her two-room flat in Blackwall Buildings asking if she knew of any work available. In 1928 she moved to a converted pub at 71 Vallance Road, Whitechapel, which she renamed the Dew Drop Inn and offered as a social centre and refuge for the homeless of the neighbourhood. Predictably, the poorest were also verminous, and it was said of Mary Hughes that 'Her lice were her glory'. She called herself a communist, acquiring the nickname Comrade, and took part in the marches of London's unemployed, no matter how threatening or how threatened they were by mounted police. 'She was always there', wrote Father Groser (Hobhouse, 114). When Gandhi visited Kingsley Hall in 1931 he asked to see her. She died in the East End at St Peter's Hospital, Whitechapel, on 2 April 1941, a lifelong pacifist appalled by those Christians in Britain calling for retaliation against the German blitz. George Lansbury wrote: 'Our frail humanity only produces a Mary Hughes once in a century' (ibid., 92). 


@@@@@


doc= 38526


Macmillan, (Jessie) Chrystal (1872-1937), barrister and political activist, was born on 13 June 1872 at 8 Duke Street, Edinburgh, the only daughter in the family of nine children of John Macmillan, a wealthy tea merchant and past master of the Edinburgh Merchant Company, and his wife, Jessie Chrystal Finlayson. She was educated at St Leonard's School, St Andrews, and in 1892 was among the first women admitted to Edinburgh University, where in 1896 she took a BSc with first-class honours in mathematics and natural philosophy. She then attended the University of Berlin, before taking her MA in mental and moral philosophy at Edinburgh in 1900. 
Chrystal Macmillan worked for the women's suffrage campaign in Scotland, as a member of the Scottish Federation of Women's Suffrage Societies, under the leadership of Sarah Siddons Mair. She was honorary secretary of the Women Graduates of the Scottish Universities (Parliamentary Franchise) Committee, which in 1906 initiated a court case over the rights of their members to the parliamentary franchise. Under legislation of 1868 the Scottish universities had four MPs; the electorate was the general councils of the universities, which included all their graduates. Macmillan, along with Elsie Inglis, Frances Melville, Margaret Nairn, and Frances Simson, argued through lawyers at the Court of Session that the word 'person', used throughout the statute, included women. The case was rejected, as was their appeal. In 1908 the case was taken to the House of Lords, where Macmillan argued it in person before the lord chancellor. Not herself a lawyer at this time, she showed considerable skill in presenting her case, but the case was rejected. Perhaps inevitably, the popular press dubbed her Portia. She moved to London, where she served on the executive of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS), and became active in the International Woman Suffrage Alliance, serving as secretary from 1913 to 1920. In this capacity she was in contact with the outstanding feminists of every country of the world, and was among the international compilers of 'Woman Suffrage in Practice' (1913). She had also published two pamphlets, 'The Struggle for Political Liberty' (1909) and 'Facts versus Fancies on Woman Suffrage' (1914). 
Chrystal Macmillan was a committed internationalist, believing that what all people had in common was more important than the frontiers that divided them. Immediately before the outbreak of war, she helped draft an international manifesto of women, signed by the representatives of twelve million women, and delivered it to the foreign secretary, Sir Edward Grey, and the European ambassadors in London on 31 July 1914. The manifesto entreated them to attempt conciliation and arbitration to avert 'the threatened unparalleled disaster'. After the fall of Antwerp, Chrystal Macmillan and Mary Sheepshanks negotiated money guarantees from the Belgian ambassador, and then took the first food convoy across the U-boat patrolled North Sea to Flushing. As an opponent of the war, Chrystal Macmillan resigned from the NUWSS. In December 1914 she proposed to Dr Aletta Jacobs, the leader of the Dutch suffrage movement, that an international women's congress be held at The Hague to 'discuss the principles on which peace should be made and, if so agreed, to act internationally'. The conference was held in April 1915, with Chrystal Macmillan one of only three British women able to attend: the British government had closed the North Sea to shipping, but Chrystal Macmillan was already in Holland. The congress elected delegates to carry its resolutions in person to the heads of belligerent and neutral governments, to petition them to negotiate an end to the war. Chrystal Macmillan was sent to make the case for a peace mediated by neutral countries to Scandinavia and Russia, without success. Later she visited the United States, assisting the opposition to America's entry into the war. In May 1919 she was a delegate to the International Congress of Women in Zurich, which issued the first public criticism of the punitive terms of the treaty of Versailles. Together with other leading international feminists, she then took the women's resolutions on disarmament and economic co-operation to the victorious allies at the Paris peace conference, only to be ignored once more. 
After the war, with the vote won, and the legal profession opened to women for the first time, Chrystal Macmillan entered the Middle Temple, and was called to the bar on 28 January 1924, one of the first generation of women barristers. 'She was the right kind of lawyer', wrote Cicely Hamilton in 'Time and Tide' (16 October 1937): 'one who held that Law should be synonymous with Justice... Her chief aim in life -- one might call it her passion -- was to give every woman of every class and nation the essential protection of justice. She was, herself, a great and very just human being... She could not budge an inch on matters of principle but she never lost her temper and never bore a grudge in defeat.' An equal rights feminist and a Liberal in politics, in 1923 she was one of the founders of the Open Door Council, which campaigned to remove legal restrictions on the employment of women and opposed protective legislation. She served on the executives of the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship and the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene (which continued Josephine Butler's work for the civil rights of prostitutes and opposed the state regulation of prostitution). She gave expert evidence to various parliamentary committees, including that on the guardianship of children, and to the royal commission on unemployment insurance. She was particularly interested in the right of women to retain their own nationality on marriage to a foreigner, giving evidence to the select committee investigating it in 1922, and leading a deputation on the issue at The Hague in 1930. An expert on the legal status of women, she wrote the article on that topic for the fourteenth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. 
In June 1937 Chrystal Macmillan had to have a leg amputated. She died from heart disease at 8 Chalmers Crescent, Edinburgh, on 21 September 1937, and was cremated on 23 September in Edinburgh. In her will she left bequests to the Open Door International for the Economic Emancipation of the Woman Worker, and to the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene. A memorial prize is awarded annually in her name by the society of the Middle Temple to the highest placed woman student in the bar's final examinations. 


@@@@@


doc= 38527


Marshall, Catherine Elizabeth (1880-1961), suffragist and internationalist, was born on 29 April 1880 at Harrow on the Hill, Middlesex, the elder of two children of Francis E. Marshall (1847-1922), mathematics master at Harrow School, and his wife, Caroline, 'nee' Colbeck (died 1927), formerly a teacher. Catherine Marshall was first educated privately and then for three years (1896-9) at St Leonard's School, St Andrews, and was stimulated by music, travel, and discussion (which had a politically and ethically liberal bias). But no career seems to have been planned for her. 
The suffrage movement transformed Marshall's life. Assisted by her parents, she built up a strong local suffrage society in Keswick (where the family lived after her father's retirement): it was a branch of the non-militant National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS). She developed her remarkable flair for organization and became known for innovative and effective work. The London-based executive and administration of the NUWSS did not well serve the dynamic new societies at the periphery (and especially in the north), so Marshall and kindred spirits in the NUWSS used the organization's fundamentally democratic, but out-of-date, constitution to gain acceptance for a new structure. Based on a balance between the national council and new provincial councils the new constitution was accepted at a tense council meeting in March 1910 against considerable opposition from the old guard. Power was distributed more evenly between London and the provinces, giving an effective voice to a whole new constituency with a wider geographical and class base. 
Although the activities of the militant suffragettes are more widely known, the essential work of one-by-one conversion of the public, members of parliament, and ultimately of party leaders, was accomplished largely by the NUWSS. The organization had been developed into a remarkable political tool under the leadership, as honorary parliamentary secretary and honorary secretary respectively, of Catherine Marshall and Kathleen Courtney, who both worked full-time at national headquarters between 1911 and 1914. Tall, well dressed, well informed, and dynamic, Marshall could hold the attention of an outdoor audience of miners, and was also a familiar figure to members of parliament, as she pressed the converted for action, cultivated sympathizers, and shamed backsliders. 
When private members' bills on women's suffrage were stalled repeatedly by the Liberal government, Marshall worked towards having suffrage adopted as party policy. First the Labour Party was brought to full official support for the cause by intense lobbying in the trade unions, among working women, and in the party hierarchy, and by help from the NUWSS in elections. By 1913 some leading Liberals and Unionists also recognized the inevitability of adopting franchise reform, but the war, by delaying the expected general election of 1915, prevented the culmination of Marshall's strategy. At the outbreak of war in August 1914, the NUWSS put its political work on hold. Soon divisions, previously papered over, surfaced in a new form. Marshall, with like-minded suffragists in Britain and elsewhere, wanted the suffrage movement to work towards a well-informed and hate-free climate for peacemaking after the war. Millicent Fawcett, president of the NUWSS, saw talk of peace as treacherous, finding approval especially among those who had disliked the Labour Party connection. By the end of the struggle the NUWSS was back in the hands of middle-class Londoners and Marshall and her friends had resigned from office. 
The history of the non-militant women's suffrage campaign, written by Marshall's opponents, omitted not only any in-depth account of the debacle but almost all mention of Marshall's pre-war achievements: even the archives of the NUWSS may have been 'weeded'. Marshall herself, throughout her life, wrote only short articles addressing current causes. 
Marshall had thought deeply about the role of force in politics, and rejected the force-based arguments of anti-suffragists and militants alike. Her conclusions, that good government rested on the consent of the governed, and that to base governance on physical force was particularly inimical to the rights of women, translated readily to the international sphere. For Marshall, to work for a more peaceful world was to work for the women's cause. She helped to plan the Women's International Congress at The Hague in April 1915, but she was prevented by government action from attending it. She went on to help develop the British section of the International Committee of Women for Permanent Peace, later the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom (WILPF), and from early 1916 she became involved with the No-Conscription Fellowship, where, with Bertrand Russell, she was particularly engaged in the political field, monitoring the experiences of conscientious objectors and keeping the issues in the public and parliamentary eye. 
Meanwhile, Catherine Marshall fell in love with (Reginald) Clifford Allen, later Lord Allen of Hurtwood (1889-1939), the charismatic chair of the No-Conscription Fellowship, and suffered deeply when he was imprisoned; he was physically frail, and his health deteriorated rapidly in prison. By mid-1917, Catherine Marshall was compulsively driving herself towards breakdown, and Allen's health was further threatened by his intention of embarking on a hunger and work strike in prison. By the end of the year, Marshall had collapsed and Allen was released seriously ill. When both were convalescent they spent several months together in what seems to have been a 'trial marriage'; Marshall was devastated when the relationship ended. She found solace in theosophy and in spiritual dancing, and, more concretely, in renewed work for peace. She recovered her health just in time to go to the Women's International Congress in Zurich in May 1919, attended by women from defeated as well as victorious nations; the congress was among the first to critique the peace terms and the covenant of the League of Nations. 
Throughout the inter-war years, Marshall's career was on a roller-coaster, swinging between time spent caring for ailing parents, bouts of phlebitis and other severe (but unnamed) illness, and periods of intense international peace work. She was present (with the protection of Prince Max of Baden) when the Reichstag in Berlin accepted the humiliating peace terms of 1919; and at the time of the invasion of the Ruhr in 1923-4, she went as WILPF envoy to the heads of state in France and Germany, and also visited workers involved in non-violent resistance in the Ruhr itself. 
During the early years of the League of Nations, Marshall was often in Geneva, at the headquarters of the WILPF. Refusing to be sidelined into causes thought suitable for women, she directed her attention to those issues which might serve in the overall objective of an enduring peace, and used her lobbying skills in the cause of treaty revision, increased openness in League of Nations membership and procedure, disarmament, protection of minorities, the principle of self-determination, the just working of the mandate system, and economic reform, as well, always, as the appointment of more women to positions of international power. As in the pre-war suffrage movement, the work was mostly carried on out of the spotlight, attempting to build opinion by influencing individual statesmen behind the scenes. Unlike the suffrage cause, however, successes were small and rare, and no ultimate triumph came. Marshall was increasingly debilitated by ill health, as the peace movement was by the rise of fascism. 
In the late 1930s Marshall brought renewed energy to bear on the cause of Czech refugees, working for their reception and settlement in Britain, and making a home for some at the house by Derwentwater inherited by herself and her brother Harold; but her service to them was palliative rather than political. After the Second World War she settled in Golders Green, Middlesex, in a remarkable house at 2 Linnell Drive, built in the 1920s for herself and Harold, who, however, married in 1927 and lived elsewhere. Her lifelong incompetence in managing money caused Harold considerable concern, and once landed her in court for non-payment of taxes, but theirs remained an affectionate relationship. She continued to be active in the local Labour Party branch, and with other social, political, and international concerns. Remembered as a woman of humour and courage, Catherine Marshall died in the New End Hospital, Hampstead, on 22 March 1961 after a fall at her home. 
The trajectory of Marshall's life, rising to a brilliant effectiveness in her late thirties and forties, and declining thereafter, is in part attributable to the lack of openings for a gifted woman in public life, and in part to poor health; the two may have been connected. When she died, her achievements were little known, but were to be recovered by the end of the century. 


@@@@@


doc= 38528


Melville, Frances Helen (1873-1962), promoter of higher education for women in Scotland and suffragist, was born at 4 Abbotsford Park, Merchiston, Edinburgh, on 11 October 1873, elder daughter of Francis Suther Melville (1815-1895), depute clerk of the Court of Session, and his second wife, Helen Alexandrina Kerr (1841-1910). She was one of a family of five brothers and two sisters. Her early years were spent in Edinburgh, where she was educated at George Watson's Ladies' College. She went abroad as a music student to Germany for a year, but returned to be one of the first women to matriculate in 1892 at Edinburgh University after the 'Universities (Scotland) Act' of 1889 permitted women to matriculate and graduate from the Scottish universities. Her academic ability was reflected in her first-class honours MA degree in philosophy in 1897. From 1896 to 1899 she was a tutor in Professor Pringle Pattison's classes in logic, psychology, and metaphysics. 
As one of the new band of women students Frances Melville made her mark. She was president of the first Women's Representative Committee at Edinburgh University, a forerunner of the Women's Union, at a time when the voice of women in the university was very tentative. She was present at the first meeting of the Edinburgh University Women's Debating Society and chaired the society in its first year. She took part in one of the early debates on whether women should have the franchise, signifying her interest in women's suffrage, which was to be a lifelong commitment. 
In 1899 Melville became a lecturer in mental and moral science at the Cheltenham Ladies' College, but this proved a brief appointment because in 1900 she was appointed warden, in succession to Louisa Lumsden, of University Hall, St Andrews University, a hall of residence for women students. Under Louisa Lumsden the aim of creating a Scottish Girton at University Hall, where residential and corporate spirit would embody the ideals of women's education, had created conflicts over the relationship of hall students to other women students in the university and also in terms of the relationship of University Hall to the university itself. During her wardenship Melville did much to reduce the tensions arising from the perception of the hall as being elite and separate, although she recognized the benefits of residential academic life. She saw to the day-to-day running of the hall and the management of its accounts and correspondence, as well as giving guidance and advice to students. She was a woman of strong, even stern, features and one student later recalled her as rather remote: 'In her earlier days young students were too much awed by her stately figure and carriage to recognise the warmth of her heart, the love of fun and the need for sympathy and affection which underlay a dignified and reserved manner. ('Alumnus Chronicle', 45-6)' She also studied for the degree of bachelor of divinity, which she was awarded in 1910, and had the distinction of becoming the first woman to receive this degree at a Scottish university.Frances Melville left St Andrews in 1909 on her appointment as mistress of Queen Margaret College, Glasgow University, following the death of Janet Ann Galloway. Once again she was moving into an area of university life where pioneering roots were strong. Queen Margaret College had been founded by the Glasgow Association for the University Education of Women in 1883 and had become a separate college for women within Glasgow University in 1892. Most women students at the university were taught in separate classes at the college. As mistress of the college she brought to the post her wide experience of university life and her interest in the cause of women students. Her views on women's education were set out in her contribution to a collection of essays, 'The Position of Woman: Actual and Real' (1911). She argued that women's education had been influenced to a damaging extent by preconceived ideas about women's capacities and prospects in life, and in particular by the artificial tension between the two ideals: of domesticity, for those intending to marry; and of professionalism, for those who were likely to be self-supporting. She favoured a general education for all women to develop their intellectual and critical faculties in the way that education for men was intended to do, but not necessarily by the same curricula and methods as were traditionally used in boys' schools and universities. 
At Glasgow the effect of the First World War, wider social changes, and the sheer increase in numbers of women students gradually saw the full integration of women students into mixed university classes. It became impractical to run duplicate classes and the college closed in 1935. The university gave up the college buildings and Frances Melville retired to Dalry, Kirkcudbrightshire. In 1927 she was awarded an LLD by Glasgow University, the first Scottish woman graduate to receive this distinction. An appointment as OBE followed in 1935. 
Frances Melville was deeply involved in the cause of women's suffrage and a range of women's issues throughout her life. She played a prominent role in the Edinburgh National Society for Women's Suffrage and the Scottish Universities Women's Suffrage Union. She frequently gave talks or wrote papers on women's topics; in October 1902 she gave a talk in Edinburgh to the National Union of Women Workers of Great Britain entitled 'University education for women in Scotland: its effects on social and intellectual life'. In an obituary appreciation of her it was suggested that 'it cost her some effort to make the public appearance that was expected of her', yet the listings of her activities and appointments suggest that she overcame this ('Glasgow Herald', 10 March 1962). 
Frances Melville was directly involved in the 'Scottish women graduates' case' from 1906 to 1908. Since the 'Representation of the People (Scotland) Act' of 1868, the universities in Scotland had returned two members of parliament, elected by graduates, as members of the general councils of the universities. As an election loomed in 1906 a group of women graduates applied to receive voting papers as members of the general council. Among these women was Frances Melville. The others were Margaret Nairn, Chrystal MacMillan, Frances Simson, and Elsie Inglis. They took the universities of St Andrews and Edinburgh to the Court of Session in a case which argued that as graduates they were entitled to receive voting papers and that under the 1868 act 'person' did not mean only male voters. They lost the case on appeal in 1907 and took it to the final court of appeal, the House of Lords, in November 1908. The case aroused great national interest, giving these suffragists an arena for their arguments to be presented and to demonstrate their ability and worthiness of receiving the vote. Although present, Frances Melville did not speak during the House of Lords case, leaving it to Chrystal MacMillan, who had been their eloquent spokeswoman throughout. The appeal, as expected, was lost. 
Frances Melville was later honorary president of the Glasgow Women Citizens' Association and was also a member of the Glasgow Society for Equal Citizenship. She remained active in the political field and in 1938 stood as an independent candidate for a Scottish universities by-election caused by the death of Ramsay MacDonald. Sir John Anderson was elected, but she came second in the poll (ahead of a Scottish nationalist and another independent candidate) with 5618 votes. During her time in Glasgow she served as a justice of the peace, and was a member of the Royal Philosophical Society of Glasgow, the Lady Artists' Club, and the Glasgow Archaeological Society. During both world wars she was involved in a wide range of volunteer work. 
From early on Frances Melville recognized the importance of women grouping together to promote a cause, thus creating a unity of purpose and network of support. This was most evident in the support she gave to the British Federation of University Women, an organization formed in 1907 in Manchester to create such a network of shared experience and support for the many associations of university women which had been set up throughout the country. She was responsible for the setting up of the St Andrews Association of University Women in 1909 and later served in 1935 as president of the British Federation of University Women, writing an unofficial history of the organization in 1949 and becoming honorary vice-president. In her honour a room in the headquarters at Crosby Hall was named after her. Frances Melville died at her home, 16 Merchiston Place, Edinburgh, on 7 March 1962, and was buried in Warriston cemetery, Edinburgh, on 9 March. Her obituarist noted that 'it was by the graces, no less than the strengths of her indefatigable encouragement and guardianship of women's interests that thousands of her students were equipped for later life and work' ('Glasgow Herald', 8 March 1962). 


@@@@@


doc= 38530


Playne, Caroline Elizabeth (1857-1948), pacifist and historian, was born at Forest Green, Avening, Gloucestershire, on 2 May 1857, one of two daughters of George Frederick Playne (1824-1879), Gloucestershire cloth manufacturer and fellow of the Geographical Society, and his Dutch wife, Margarettia Sara, the daughter of I. G. J. van den Bosch. Her mother tongue was Dutch. There is uncertainty about much of Caroline Playne's life; in 1881, after her father's death, she was living with her mother in Hampstead, London. Although there is no record of her having studied at a British university, she was elected an associate member of the University Women's Club in 1908 as a woman 'in the pursuit of arts, science or literature'. By that time she had published two novels, 'The Romance of a Lonely Woman' (1904) and 'The Terror of the Macdurghotts' (1907), and had published a paper, 'The evolution of international peace', countering the aggressive social Darwinism of her day with the internationalism of Grotius, Kant, Kropotkin, L. T. Hobhouse, and Tolstoy, which she had read to the Anglo-Russian Literary Society. Her later work demonstrates that she was also very widely read in French and German. 
Unusually among her contemporaries, Caroline Playne was one of the few women, such as Violet Paget (Vernon Lee), Kate, Lady Courtney of Penwith, and Sophia Sturge, who were alert, long before 1914, to the danger of an imminent, cataclysmic European war. Already by about 1904 she had become a founder member of Britain's National Peace Council supporting the recently founded international court at The Hague and in 1908 she attended the International Peace Congress in London attended by Bertha von Suttner, whose biographer she later became. When the First World War finally broke out, Caroline Playne was devastated. She immediately joined the Emergency Committee for the Relief of Distressed Enemy Aliens (Germans trapped in Britain); she joined E. D. Morel's Union for the Democratic Control of Foreign Policy; she worked for the Nailsworth Peace Association and the National Peace Council that was then arranging a postal service for personal correspondence between the belligerent countries and was also trying to trace missing persons; she translated and published articles from the 'Berliner Tageblatt' that praised Quaker relief efforts for German internees and prisoners of war; she collected suppressed pacifist pamphlets; and she also kept private notes of the constant war propaganda in the British press and a private diary of the war years. 
The fruit of that 'internal exile' of 1914-18 was Caroline Playne's extraordinary pioneering work in cultural history and social psychology in the 1920s and 1930s. Although she was by then in her sixties and seventies, and might have been excused for longing to retire from 'this vile world', she forced herself to relive in spirit both the ominous pre-war years and the death-intoxicated First World War itself. Her aim was to demonstrate and analyse the preconditions for irrational, righteous mass slaughter, hoping that she might thereby inoculate German, French, and British readers against being quite so vulnerable to mass media propaganda again. Her 'Neuroses of the Nations' (1925) focused on Germany and France and their 'group-insanities' as mirrored in their idea of their own history and their popular culture. She followed this with 'The Pre-War Mind in Britain' (1928), 'Society and War, 1914-16' (1931), and 'Britain Holds on, 1917, 1918', (1933). Finally, in 1936, she published 'Bertha von Suttner and the Struggle to Avert the World War'. 
Caroline Playne analysed not just the popular press but also the drama, fiction, history writing, popular science, and political speeches of pre-war Europe, as she mapped how 'exaggerated nationalism, chauvinism and militarism... seized hold of the public mind with disastrous consequences' ('The Pre-War Mind in Britain', 1928, preface). She demonstrated how French, German, and British militarist polemicists were mirror images one of another, her greatest opprobrium being directed at the millionaires of the popular press, such as Northcliffe and Harmsworth, who deliberately upped their sales by stoking righteous, nationalist hate. In analysing mass culture and bourgeois culture as both the products and the determinants of social psychology, she anticipated media studies by over fifty years. It may be imagined how the triumph of Italian fascism and German Nazism and the approach of the Second World War with all its atrocities darkened the end of her life. She died at 26 Thurlow Road, Hampstead, London, 'a spinster of independent means', on 27 January 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 38531


Salter, Ada (1866-1942), socialist and pacifist, was born on 20 July 1866 at Raunds, Northamptonshire, the second daughter of the three daughters and a son of Samuel Brown, a farmer, and his wife, Sarah Ekins, both of them Wesleyan Methodists. In her late twenties she left her comfortable home to join the West London Mission, at first out of a spirit of religious evangelism, but once there she developed a sense of serious social purpose. In 1897 she transferred to the Bermondsey settlement, recently founded by John Scott Lidgett, as the worker in charge of girls' clubs. The girls were 'rough and tough' -- rag-pickers, wood-choppers, tin smiths in the local factories, who sometimes arrived drunk at the club. Her gentleness and affectionate concern for them won many of them over to her own values of kindness and a responsiveness to beauty, even in their grim world. 
In 1899 Ada Brown startled her friends and family by becoming engaged to a revolutionist five years younger than she -- the settlement's militant socialist, pacifist, agnostic teetotaller, Dr Alfred Salter (1873-1945). Very soon she was as enthusiastic as he for radical political, social, and economic change in a Britain of poverty and chronic unemployment. On 22 August 1900 they were married. As the wife of a poor people's doctor, who charged only 6died (or even nothing) for a consultation, Ada Salter willingly led a life of altruistic self-denial herself. They first lived in two rooms above the surgery in Jamaica Road, and later moved to 5 Storks Road, Bermondsey, whose unlovely situation and aspect Ada so startlingly transformed that thirty years later she was invited to write in 'The Lady' in 1940 about her garden in Bermondsey. Dr Alfred Salter worked from early morning until late at night -- seeing up to sixty patients in an evening; meanwhile Ada did unpaid social work among the poorest families he discovered in his practice as well as continuing her work with the settlement girls and beginning her political life with the then reformist Liberal Party, becoming president of the Rotherhithe Women's Liberal Association. 
The Salters began their lifetime practice of reserving the hours between 11 p.m. and 1 a.m. for their quiet time together, Alfred's ebullient idealism that could suddenly sink into acute depression being balanced by Ada's steadiness and serenity. They had one child, Joyce, born in June 1902. Very soon they were faced by the supreme challenge to their social conscience: should they protect their only child from the dirty, verminous, sick children of Bermondsey and eventually send her away to a Quaker boarding-school? They felt they could not give her the chance denied to the unprivileged slum children around them and Joyce attended the local Keeton's Road School. Twice she caught scarlet fever. In 1910 Joyce was attacked by the disease for a third time and on 10 June she died. 'Ada's sadness never quite left her' (Brockway, 43). Thereafter both parents dedicated themselves with even more commitment to the needs of the poorest parents and children in London. 
In May 1908 the Salters gave up their promising political career prospects with the Liberal Party in order to found the first branch of the young Independent Labour Party (ILP) in Bermondsey, and in November 1909 Ada Salter was the sole ILP candidate returned and the first woman borough councillor to be elected in London. Though widely expected to support the Progressive (radical Liberal) bloc on the council, she declined to vote with the Progressives 'unless my conscience or my own [ILP] organization so direct' ('Southwark and Bermondsey Recorder', 12 Nov 1909). Her refusal to support the Progressive aldermanic slate at the first meeting of the elected councillors allowed the Conservatives to retain control of the finely balanced council and ensured her ostracism from the Bermondsey Liberals, who denied her election to the housing and public health committees. She none the less developed her own municipal agenda: she hoped one day to introduce gardens and beautiful parks as well as maternity and child welfare centres into Bermondsey. In August 1911, when the whole working population of Bermondsey went on strike for decent employment conditions, it was Ada Salter who organized free meals for the women and children (as she would again in the 1926 dockers' strike, when she served as treasurer to the London Dock Strike Fund). Her first spell as a Bermondsey councillor ended with defeat in the 1912 elections. 
The First World War was a second tragic challenge to the Salters. As declared pacifists they had to witness the destruction not only of their idealistic vision of the international working class but also of much of their own welfare work for the London poor. They also had their house attacked by enraged stone-throwing mobs and Ada had to give long hours of work as trusted treasurer of the maintenance department of the No-Conscription Fellowship, supporting impoverished families of imprisoned conscientious objectors. The Salters purchased and used Fairby Grange in Kent as a convalescent home for released, weakened conscientious objector prisoners. One such ex-prisoner, the Jamaican carpenter Isaac Hall, reduced by mistreatment to a skeleton, was nursed by the Salters themselves and housed for nine months in their own home. In 1915 Ada Salter was accepted into the Religious Society of Friends, remaining a Quaker to the end of her life. At the end of the war she represented the British section of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom in Zurich and Vienna, bringing back hungry Austrian women and children to recuperate at Fairby Grange. 
Ada Salter returned to Bermondsey council in 1919, one of many Labour and Progressive beneficiaries of a leftward swing that overturned the long-established Conservative control of the borough. Re-elected three years later, she was chosen to be the first woman Labour mayor both in London and in the British Isles. (Dr Garrett Anderson had been the first woman mayor, of Aldeburgh, in 1908.) She refused to wear the mayoral robes or chain of office or to impose chaplain-led prayers on the council, instead starting meetings with a Quaker-style service. The inter-war years saw Bermondsey council fall under virtually unchallenged Labour control, but the wider social ambitions of the Labour majority were generally thwarted by the inadequate resources of an exclusively working-class borough. The most enduring feature of Labour Bermondsey would prove to be the environmental politics pioneered by Ada Salter. A lifelong gardener, she created the council's beautification committee (chairing it between 1923 and 1925) to promote the 'greening' of Bermondsey. In due course it planted 9000 trees and 60,000 plants in the hitherto dreary borough, and created two unlikely sounding species of dahlia -- the 'Bermondsey Gem' and the 'Rotherhithe Gem'. She struggled to convert churchyards into the only open spaces for children's recreation and to substitute cottage housing for the worst slums. The Wilson Grove estate, on the site of the Salisbury Street slum, displayed silver birches, cottages, and climbing roses within yards of Tower Bridge. Wilson Grove was intended to be the first instalment of a wider programme to replace slums with cottages. The project was given a fair wind by the short-lived Labour government of 1924, but in the long run this attempt to apply environmentalism to housing policy implied residential densities so low as to create major rehousing problems. It was consequently unacceptable both to the London county council (LCC) and to the Ministry of Health, which dispensed the housing subsidies on which a poor borough depended: no subsequent cottage-estate proposals in the borough would be endorsed by Whitehall, and Bermondsey would instead be covered by tenement blocks. 
Ada Salter's other principal council work was in the field of public health: together with her husband and other Labour colleagues she introduced several health clinics and a solarium to fight tuberculosis. These resulted in a drop in infant mortality and an even greater fall in maternal mortality in the borough. Though she remained a borough councillor until her death, Ada Salter also served as a Bermondsey guardian in the 1920s and as a London county councillor from 1925. She was elected first for the southern division of Hackney, where the local Labour Party was run by Herbert Morrison, once a protege of Alfred Salter in the pre-war ILP, but in 1928 she moved to home territory in West Bermondsey, the only constituency of the LCC to be represented by two women. This was also Alfred Salter's seat in parliament, but by now the charge once levelled against Ada that she was her husband's puppet carried no weight. She saw herself as 'not a militant feminist or a pioneer or anything like that' ('Evening News', 25 July 1939), but she had been prominent, with Margaret MacDonald and Mary McArthur, in early attempts to found women's branches of trade unions and had served on the executive of the Women's International League. Her municipal programme in 1934, when Labour finally gained control of the LCC (and she secured the highest Labour vote), was marked by an emphasis upon domesticity characteristic of female local politicians of the period -- 'in the affairs of State is needed the unselfish spirit of the good mother who considers the happiness and well being of all the members of her household rather than the aggrandisement of some' ('South London Press', 8 Dec 1942). She laid an equally characteristic stress upon the personal social services, calling for the humane administration of relief and a unified medical service for London separate from the poor law. She appealed to the female voter, hoping to 'induce the home-loving woman to serve the community as she serves her family by helping to secure a Labour majority' ('Daily Herald', 28 Feb 1934). As vice-chair of the LCC's parks committee, she continued to pursue her environmentalist objectives, identifying herself with the Labour advocates of a green belt policy, eventually secured in 1938. 
The Second World War was a tragic horror to both the Salters. Once again isolated as pacifists, even within the Labour Party, they lost many of their Bermondsey friends in the blitz, as well as their lifelong home. But worse still was the descent of the world into competitive barbarism once more. Ada struggled to hold her faith -- and to convince her despairing husband -- that the ultimate victory must, one day, be that of the forces of creativity and kindness. She died in Balham, London, from cerebral thrombosis on 5 December 1942, and was cremated at Camberwell crematorium five days later. Alfred was overwhelmed by the hundreds of written tributes to her from all over Britain. The Quaker James Hudson wrote: 'by her faith in the people for whom she laboured [she brought] ennoblement of spirit.... They revered her.... They often saw her frail figure threading its way on cycle through their streets.... They knew of her investigations, her encouragements, her committees without end.... Socialism in action; that is what she was. ('Friends' Quarterly Examiner', 1 March 1943, 12)' Over forty years earlier Alfred Salter had written to his wife: 'You and I... are living and working for the same goal -- to make the world, and in particular this corner of the world, happier and holier for our joint lives' (Brockway, 16). The Old English Garden in Southwark Park, the railings of which she had vainly attempted to save from being turned into Spitfires, had been commonly known as 'Mrs Salter's Garden' during her lifetime and was formally renamed the Ada Salter Garden in 1958. In 1960 the ashes of Ada and Alfred Salter were moved to a vault in a children's playground in Coxon Place, Bermondsey. 


@@@@@


doc= 38533


Skeffington, Johanna Mary Sheehy- (1877-1946), suffragist and Irish nationalist, was born on 24 May 1877 in the Millhouse, Kanturk, co. Cork, the eldest of four daughters and two sons of David Sheehy (1844-1932), mill owner, and his wife, Bessie McCoy (1851-1918), daughter of Richard McCoy of Curraghmore, co. Limerick. In 1887 the family moved to Dublin where Hanna (as she was always known) attended the Dominican nuns' convent school in Eccles Street. From 1896 to 1899 she studied modern languages in Dublin at the Catholic St Mary's University College for women, receiving a BA with second-class honours. In 1902, after further study in Paris and Bonn, she returned to Dublin and was awarded an MA in modern languages with first-class honours. She then became a part-time teacher of literature and languages, always handicapped by the fact that in Ireland all positions of educational authority in relation to Catholic girls were open only to nuns. 
The Sheehy family had a long tradition of nationalist politics. Hanna Sheehy's father had originally been a Fenian but then became a constitutional nationalist and MP for South Galway and later for County Meath. He was imprisoned six times for his opposition to British rule and landlordism. Hanna Sheehy's beloved uncle Eugene, known as 'the Land League priest', was a lifelong Fenian and member of the secret Irish Republican Brotherhood. The Sheehys appear as the Daniel family in James Joyce's 'Stephen Hero'. In Hanna's case her Irish nationalism soon became complicated by a feminism influenced not only by the injustice of her own precarious professional position, but also by her friendship with the ardent radical Francis Skeffington (1878-1916) ['see 'Skeffington, Francis Sheehy-], Joyce's 'hairy jaysus'. Skeffington was a socialist, pacifist, feminist, anti-vivisectionist, vegetarian teetotaller whose many principles did not prevent him from also being an endearing companion, warm-hearted, and capable of fun. 
The Sheehy-Skeffingtons, as they were known ever after, were married on 27 June 1903; their union was to be a passionately political as well as emotional partnership for thirteen years. In 1909 Hanna definitively broke with her religious background, refusing to have her newborn son, Owen Lancelot Sheehy-Skeffington, baptized; thereafter she could not teach in convent schools and was to be an outsider in Catholic Ireland. Having founded the militant Irish Women's Franchise League together with Margaret Cousins in 1908, Hanna suffered her first prison sentence as a suffragist in June 1912 for 'wilful damage' to nineteen panes of glass, property of the War Office. She was sentenced to two months' imprisonment -- a heavier sentence than that imposed on a wife-beater that same day. Meanwhile in London, her father, the Irish MP, voted in favour of forcible feeding of suffragettes on hunger strike. Hanna herself later embarked on a hunger strike in sympathy with English women prisoners but was released after five days without having been subjected to forcible feeding. It was also in 1912 that Francis Sheehy-Skeffington co-founded the radical paper the 'Irish Citizen' for which Hanna wrote numerous articles in support of Irish women's right to vote. In November 1913 Hanna was arrested while attempting to leaflet the Conservative leader Bonar Law in Dublin. She was charged with assaulting the police officer who had in fact seized and shaken her. Refusing bail, she went to prison and, in protest against the magistrate's refusal to hear her counter-charge, went on hunger strike until freed after five days. 
The watershed of Hanna Sheehy-Skeffington's life was the Easter rising of 1916. Francis Sheehy-Skeffington was an Irish nationalist but also a pacifist who had written many passionate advocacies of passive resistance as the way to win Irish independence. He was opposed not only to the First World War but also to the attempt by the Irish Volunteers and the Irish Citizen Army to overthrow British rule by force. Nevertheless he was arrested, unarmed and unresisting, while trying to prevent mob looting, and was shot without trial on Wednesday of Easter week by a firing party under a British officer. Thereafter Hanna, always more of an Irish nationalist and less of a pacifist than her husband, became deeply involved with Sinn Fein. In July 1917 she returned secretly to Ireland after a lecture tour of the United States that had raised significant funds for Michael Collins. She was arrested by the British government and imprisoned first in the notorious Dublin Bridewell and then moved to Holloway, London, only to be released after hunger striking. In 1920 she was elected Sinn Fein councillor on Dublin corporation and later, in 1925, on Dublin city council. After the establishment of the Irish Free State, Hanna continued to be a republican gadfly, supporting Maud Gonne and Charlotte Despard in the Women's Prisoners Defence League. Hanna was also a feminist gadfly among the nationalists, whether in Sinn Fein or in de Valera's Fianna Fail -- which she decided to join in 1926, only to resign in 1927 in protest against de Valera's agreement to take the oath of loyalty to the Irish Free State. However her feminism could hardly flourish in a Catholic Ireland that forbade women the basic freedoms of access to sex education, contraception, and divorce. She died in Dublin on 20 April 1946 and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery. Many tributes were paid to her warm, even gentle, private personality. She was judged 'the ablest of the women' in Irish public life by the 'Irish Times' of 23 April 1946. She had been a militant nationalist among the pacifist internationalist feminists, a republican among the free staters, a feminist among the nationalists, and an atheist in holy Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 38534


Sheepshanks, Mary Ryott (1872-1960), educationist, feminist, and internationalist, was born on 25 October 1872 at Bilton vicarage, near Harrogate, Yorkshire, the second of the thirteen surviving children of John Sheepshanks (1834-1912), later bishop of Norwich, and his wife, Margaret Ryott (1852-1943), a descendant of Oliver Cromwell. Mary Sheepshanks experienced her childhood home in Anfield vicarage, Liverpool, as austere and joyless -- she felt isolated and uncherished, causing her lifelong opposition to large families and total alienation from religion. The educational and other privileges granted her seven brothers fed into her feminism. At fourteen Mary was permitted to attend one of the first Girls' Public Day School Company high schools -- Liverpool High School for Girls (later the Belvedere School) -- where she distinguished herself in modern languages and literature. Her brilliant young teacher Lucy Silcox, later headmistress of St Felix School, Southwold, 'gave and inspired love' (Sheepshanks). Mary Sheepshanks read medieval and modern languages at Newnham College, Cambridge, discovering too late that her real bent was for moral sciences, psychology, and economics. While at Cambridge (1891-5) she began her commitment to social intervention, teaching adult literacy classes in the town. In October 1895, having been cut off by her family for her 'advanced views', Mary joined the Women's University Settlement, later the Blackfriars Settlement, in Southwark, the worst poverty blackspot in London. There, and later in Stepney, she became a pioneer social worker. 
In 1897 Mary was appointed vice-principal -- but 'de facto' principal -- of Morley College for Working Men and Women, becoming also a pioneer woman educational administrator. 'She possessed exceptional breadth of culture and determination of character' (Richards, 142). Mary Sheepshanks expressed her feminism at Morley by giving support to the tired working-class women students there, perceiving that they lacked the intellectual and social confidence of the men. She encouraged women's gymnastics, women's cycling, and debating clubs, enlisting Virginia Woolf (then Virginia Stephen) to teach history evening classes, and she also set up single inspirational lectures on Charlotte Bronte, the Women's Co-operative Guild, and heroines. 
Mary Sheepshanks's (leased) home during 1899-1919 was 1 Barton Street, Westminster, which she shared with a succession of women friends, including the Quakers Dr Hilda Clark and Alice Clark, Catherine Marshall, and Irene Cooper, all suffragists. She herself became a prominent suffragist speaker 1908-13 and invited Christabel Pankhurst and Amber Reeves to speak at Morley. Mary Sheepshanks's attitude to the suffragettes was ambivalent -- alienated by their violence, yet greatly admiring of their courage. In 1913 she was invited to go on a suffrage lecture tour that included visits to Brussels, Paris, Vienna, Munich, Berlin, Prague, Cracow, Warsaw, and Budapest, speaking in French or German on women and local government, industry, temperance, and education. Her letters to Bertrand Russell concerning the women's movement in Europe at this time are most illuminating (see Oldfield, 154-9). In June 1913 Jane Addams urged her to become secretary of the International Women's Suffrage Alliance and editor of its monthly paper, 'Ius Suffragii'. Mary Sheepshanks's feminism was inspired both by outrage at the brutal injustice suffered by women and by faith that emancipated, enfranchised women could help to humanize the world. 
When Europe descended into its competition in inhumanity in 1914, Mary helped draft an international manifesto of women protesting against the imminent catastrophe. In October 1914 her signed editorial in 'Ius Suffragii', 'Patriotism or internationalism', prophesied: '[The] world is relapsing into a worse, because a more scientific, barbarism than that from which it sprang' ('Ius Suffragii', 9, 1914, 184), and in November 1914 she already looked ahead to what must be done after the war: 'Armaments must be drastically reduced and abolished, and their place taken by an international police force.... Peace must be on generous, unvindictive lines,... only so can it be permanent.' Simultaneously she was organizing refugee relief on a massive scale, agitating for the admission of hundreds of thousands of Belgians into Britain 'for the duration', while also arranging relief and travel permits for 'enemy' German women stranded in Britain. She continued throughout the war to bring out the international and internationalist 'Ius Suffragii', obtaining and disseminating humanist feminist news across enemy frontiers via neutrals. In April 1915 Mary Sheepshanks was one of the pacifist suffragists who broke with Mrs Fawcett by supporting the Women's International Congress at The Hague, which founded the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom. 
At the end of the First World War, Mary, now based in Hampstead, was appointed secretary of the Fight the Famine Council, recently founded by Gilbert Murray, R. H. Tawney, Leonard Woolf, Maynard Keynes, Olive Schreiner, and others to educate public opinion concerning the need for a new, just economic order in Europe and to relieve the hunger consequent upon the allied blockade (one off-shoot of the council was to be the Save the Children Fund). In 1920 Mary, as representative of the council, lobbied the League of Nations unsuccessfully for the immediate admission of Germany and the revision of the punitive reparations clauses of the treaty of Versailles. In 1923 she spoke on international conciliation in Berlin, Einstein calling her speech 'masterly'; in Munich she needed socialist bodyguards at her speaking engagements because of Hitler's Bierkeller toughs. In 1927 Mary became international secretary of the Women's International League (WIL), based in Geneva, editing its monthly paper 'Pax International'. In September 1928 she headed another unsuccessful deputation to the League of Nations to present an urgent memorandum calling for a world disarmament conference. In 1929 she organized the first scientific conference on modern methods of warfare and the civilian population in Frankfurt, and in 1930 the first Conference on Statelessness in Europe (held in Geneva). Feeling increasingly isolated on the WIL international executive among its French or German 'left-extremists', however, she resigned in 1931. She then went on an undercover fact-finding mission to the Ukrainians of Galicia, whose brutal oppression by the Polish regime of Marshal Pilsudski she proceeded to publicize. Twenty years later, she was told that there were 300,000 Ukranian migrants now settled in Canada who loved her. 
During the late 1930s Mary Sheepshanks gave shelter in her own home to a succession of Trotskyist exiles, to Sudetenland socialists, and, increasingly, to German and Austrian Jews. Finally, in 1939, she had to renounce her lifelong pacifism and back the war against Nazi Germany. In 1945, however, she was deeply opposed to the dropping of the atom bomb. On 21 January 1960, confined by arthritis to a chair and faced with compulsory institutionalization, she took her own life, dying at her home, 15 Thurlow Road, Hampstead, London. 
Mary Sheepshanks was a tall, upright woman with bespectacled, brilliantly blue eyes and a brusque manner. Incomparably articulate, her exceptional intellectual competence masked deep personal insecurity; she found it difficult to believe she was liked. But the many colleagues who crossed swords with her never doubted her prescience, her altruism, or her integrity. 


@@@@@


doc= 38539


Hanmer, Sir Thomas, second baronet (1612-1678), gardener and writer, was born on 4 May 1612, the son of Sir John Hanmer, first baronet (died 1624), of Hanmer, Flintshire, and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of Sir Richard Trevor of Trefalun, Denbighshire. Following the premature death of his father in 1624, Hanmer inherited the baronetcy the former had gained in 1620. He was a page at the court of Charles I from 1625 until 1627, when in the Easter term he matriculated from King's College, Cambridge. 
At some point between 1630 and 20 February 1632 Sir Thomas married Elizabeth (died 1645), daughter of Sir Thomas Baker of Whittingham, Suffolk, a lady-in-waiting to the queen. Their children included John (died 1701), Thomas, and a daughter, Trevor. From 1638 to 1640, following the fashion, Sir Thomas embarked on a tour of the continent, but was home in time to be returned as MP for Flint in April 1640. 
In or before 1642 Sir Thomas was serving as a cup-bearer to the king, and on the outbreak of civil war he was appointed a commissioner of array for his county, with responsibility for raising a band of archers and a dragoon regiment. Early in 1644 Prince Rupert appointed him, with Dudley Wyatt, his representative in north Wales; meeting with the county commissioners, they agreed new local taxes. His property was raided more than once by parliamentarian soldiers, and on 15 May 1644 he obtained leave to go to France with his family. He was fined for delinquency by parliament at the minimum rate. 
In July 1645 Lady Hanmer died in Paris, and it seems to have been from there in 1646 that Sir Thomas supplied information to parliament about the king's negotiations with the French and Scots. Leaving his daughter in the care of a Huguenot group and dispatching his son Thomas to a Lisbon seminary, he secretly visited Hengrave Hall, Suffolk, and before February 1646 married Susan Hervey, daughter of Sir William Hervey of Ilkworth. Returning to France, the couple lived first at Nantes and then at Angers. During this period Sir Thomas compiled 'A description of France in 1648', which remained unpublished. His sons William and Thomas (died 1683) were born there about 1648 and 1650 respectively. 
After payment of a $1500 fine, Sir Thomas was discharged from sequestration in 1650 in the light of his 'signal service to the commonwealth' (as he was subsequently also from the 1655 decimation tax) and allowed to return to England. Initially he lived with his mother in her dower house at Halghton, before moving back to his ancestral home at Bettisfield. From then onwards Sir Thomas lived the life of a leisured gentleman, preoccupied with his family from his second marriage. He corresponded with and was closely associated with influential horticulturists including John Evelyn, John Rea, and John Rose, keeper of St James's gardens for Charles II. He was a copious note-taker and compiled a manuscript which, although completed in 1659, was not formally published until 1933 under the title 'The Garden Book of Sir Thomas Hanmer'. This contained descriptive and cultural notes dealing with herbaceous plants, trees, and fruit. His text gave a perceptive and rare insight into a gentleman's garden of the time and the use of the winter house or room, which was an early form of conservatory used for the unseasonal cultivation of tender plants. Sir Thomas is credited with being the first English author to mention the cedar of Lebanon, predicting its future importance. He also contributed a chapter to John Evelyn's unpublished text 'Elysium Britannicum'. 
Like many horticulturists of his time, Sir Thomas favoured tulips, but was interested in anemones, primroses, and cowslips, which he cultivated in his garden. His most outstanding tulip was one that he imported and named Agate Hanmer, which was characterized by having colours in parallel stripes. He was widely regarded as one of the most significant and influential gardeners of the Cromwellian and Restoration eras, being in the vanguard of those who sought to escape from the constriction and formalism of earlier garden design. 
Having been returned for Flintshire at a by-election in 1669, Hanmer was a moderately active MP. He was listed on several occasions as a government supporter and speaker, endorsing both the suppression of conventicles and the land tax proposed in 1670, and was claimed to be receiving a $500 p.a. pension. He died on 6 October 1678 at Bettisfield, and was buried at Hanmer. His eldest son from his first marriage, John, an esquire of the body to Charles II, succeeded not only to his baronetcy but also, in 1681, to the Flintshire parliamentary seat. 


@@@@@


doc= 38540


Bauer, Franz Andreas (1758-1840), microscopist and botanical artist, was born on 4 October 1758 in Feldsberg, Austria (now Valtice, Czech Republic). He was the second of the four sons of Lukas Bauer or Baur (1706/7-1762), a religious and court painter to the prince of Liechtenstein. After his father's death he was trained by his mother, Theresia, 'nee' Hirsch, and encouraged by Dr Norbert Boccius, prior of Feldsberg monastery. His first published drawing, at the age of thirteen, was of 'Anemone pratensis' (unsigned) in a work by von Storck (1771). On moving to Vienna about 1780, Franz and his brother Ferdinand Lukas Bauer (1760-1826) met Baron Nikolaus Joseph von Jacquin (1727-1817), director of the Schonbrunn Imperial Gardens, and improved their botanical techniques by working on his 'Icones plantarum rariorum' (1781-93). During the spring of 1786 Ferdinand Bauer was engaged by John Sibthorp (1758-1796) for a botanical tour of the Near East and returned with him to England. Two years later, Franz Bauer began a European tour with his friend Joseph Franz von Jacquin. On visiting London, after seeing his brother (then working for Sibthorp at Oxford), to use the library and herbarium of Sir Joseph Banks, Bauer was persuaded to work at Kew as a resident draughtsman to draw newly discovered plants. He took up the position in 1790, and was occupied in such work over the next eighteen years; all his drawings became the property of Banks. In addition he drew specimens for Robert Brown and Banks's other friends. For a short period Bauer acted as unpaid drawing-master to Queen Charlotte and the princesses and also had other pupils including T. C. Holland and William Hooker (1779-1832). After 1816 he worked for Sir Everard Home (1756-1832), Banks's physician, using his talent for microscopical detail to produce accurate drawings of animal and human organs for various papers, subsequently reprinted as Home's 'Lectures on Comparative Anatomy' (1814-28). Bauer became a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1804 and of the Royal Society in 1821. 
Although unofficially identified as 'Botanick painter to His Majesty' when working at Kew, Bauer's salary was paid by Banks, and ceased with his death in 1820. Banks bequeathed his library and herbarium to the British Museum and at one time it was intended that all the botanical books were to be sent to Kew with Bauer filling the post of librarian. That scheme failed but Bauer received a life annuity of $300 under Banks's will on condition that he continue to work at Kew, while various codicils and conditions caused further difficulties that halted other provisions for Bauer's future (Meynell, 'Francis Bauer', 211-12; Desmond, 'Kew', 409-10). With Robert Brown, Bauer was involved in implementing the provisions of Banks's will. 
Bauer remained at Kew throughout his life and produced drawings, including those for Lindley's 'Illustrations of Orchidaceous Plants' (1830-38) and William Hooker's 'Genera filicium' (1842), and even produced popular articles on the diseases of corn under his own name ('Penny Magazine', 2, 1833). Apparently Bauer simply followed his own bent, satisfying a curiosity and fascination with the floral mechanisms of the Orchidaceae and of micro-organisms. His sketchbooks of 1805 and 1813 reflect this continued interest in palynology and plant pathology, while a paper ('Transactions of the Linnean Society', 18, 1840, 475-82) demonstrated a concern to establish the priority of his research. Meynell ('Francis Bauer', 214) emphasized that a feature of Bauer's work was its continuity, with some projects taking several decades, although on occasion he produced single drawings for particular papers. 
Everyone for whom he worked valued Bauer's opinion on scientific questions, realizing that in order to achieve such detailed drawings he thoroughly understood the material. Baker established that Bauer had recognized in his drawings numerous microscopic features of pollen 'that were not cleared up until... half a century later' and concluded that, had his work been known, the science of palynology would have advanced much earlier. This contradicts the contention of Olby ('DSB', 1.520-21) that Bauer's microscopical paintings had little scientific worth since they were made without the benefit of modern laboratory techniques. It was during the studies of pollen that Bauer published his lithographs of 'Strelitzia depicta' (1818) that are virtually original watercolours. His knowledge, together with a general affability and modesty, encouraged his medical and botanical acquaintances to meet regularly at Kew as a discussion circle, while most scientists visiting London endeavoured to meet him. 
Bauer died at his home, Eglantine Cottage, 20 Waterloo Place, Kew Green, on 11 December 1840 at the age of eighty-two; he was buried on 16 December at St Anne's Church, Kew Green. The epitaph on a memorial tablet recognized that 'In microscopical drawing he was altogether unrivalled'; not surprisingly it was found that he had sixteen microscopes. Shortly before his death, Bauer had adopted Elizabeth Baker, his maid for the past twenty-five years, as his daughter. To the end of his life he is said to have retained his German accent and had difficulty in writing polished English (Haverfield). 
Together with his brother Ferdinand, Franz Bauer created a standard of botanical artistry combined with critical observation that has never been equalled. Banks had considered that any description of the plants portrayed in the 'Delineations of Exotic Plants' (1796-1803) was superfluous as the figures displayed every aspect. Bauer has since been regarded as one of the outstanding artists in the 'golden age' of flower painting (Desmond, 'Kew', 434); Blunt (Blunt and Stearn, 199), when deciding 'the greatest botanical artist of all time', stated 'I myself unhesitatingly give first place to Franz Bauer', believing he was 'the more perfect craftsman' when compared with his brother. Stearn ('Endeavour', 27, 35), however, felt that the two brothers had to be honoured together, as they stood 'unrivalled... as supreme masters of their craft which came nearer to perfection than that of any other artist before or since'. 


@@@@@


doc= 38541


Rohde, Eleanour Sophy Sinclair (1881-1950), garden historian and gardener, was born in Alleppey, Travancore, India, on 9 August 1881, the daughter of John Rohde, civil servant in India, and his wife, Isabel Crawford. Although her surname is German in origin, her grandfather John Rohde was employed in India as a judge in the East India Company and finally became inspector-general of gaols, and her father was commercial agent to the maharaja of Travancore and was later attached to the Travancore civil service. The family home in England after about 1920 was at Reigate, Surrey; earlier associations are unknown, though memories of Eleanour's childhood in her books are of England, not India. She entered Cheltenham Ladies' College at the age of fifteen, in September 1896. Four other pupils with the same surname were at the school in 1899, though any relationship with them is unknown. Examination results in 1900 show her passing second class in English language and literature and in the history of English literature (early English). 
In 1900 Rohde became a student at St Hilda's Hall, Oxford, to read modern history, and reports by external tutors comment on her deep interest in political science, her thoughtful work, and her receptive mind. She completed her studies in 1903 but, for reasons unknown, did not take the final examination. She became an assistant mistress at a private school in Kensington, London, after which she was private tutor to Lord Curzon's children, from 1906 to 1908, and then assistant mistress at Caldecote Towers, Bushey Heath, Hertfordshire. 
Between about 1908 and 1920 Eleanour Rohde's interests and activities ranged widely, though the chronology is uncertain. She was history tutor and vice-principal at St Hilda's from January to June 1910, standing in for Miss Christine Burrows when the latter was in America. She lectured for the Tariff Reform Association, and was an assistant on 'The Times History of War' at some time between 1914 and 1918. In 1913 she published a book on Piedmont, with illustrations by Estelle Canziani. Aspiring to a career in politics she was secretary for three years to Lord Curzon of Kedleston Hall, Derbyshire, but she found politics disagreeably quarrelsome and returned home to her parents' house, Cranham Lodge, 44 Croydon Road, Reigate, Surrey. The house, which had a fair-sized garden, was bought in 1920, and Eleanour resided there for the rest of her life, developing her historical and practical interest in herbs and unusual plants. 
Domestic herb cultivation for medicinal use had been urged by the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries in 1914 when imports ceased, and a training school was established at The Whins, Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire. Rohde attended in 1916, and in May 1919 she assisted Maud Grieve, who had set up the school, in the creation of the first herb garden to be exhibited at the Chelsea flower show. Rohde seems to have been an early member of the British Guild of Herb Growers from about 1918, and her book 'A Garden of Herbs' appeared in 1920. Thereafter she combined scholarship with practical gardening, dividing her time between writing books about old herbals, and growing herbs and unusual plants, issuing catalogues for the sale of plants at Reigate, lecturing (she lectured for Kent county council on gardening and fruit preservation), and designing herb gardens. Rohde joined a circle of illustrious, knowledgeable women who were renowned and pioneering experts in the 1920s and 1930s. She was also a close friend of Lieutenant-Colonel L. C. R. Messel and his wife, Maud, of Nymans, Sussex, the inspired Surrey gardeners, and made full use of their library. At her death 'The Times' judged that 'the mantle of Miss Jekyll had fallen on her' (24 June 1950). 
During the Second World War, Eleanor Rohde's efforts were necessarily more practical than scholarly, and led to the publication of her 'Hay Box Cookery' (1939), 'The Wartime Vegetable Garden' (1940), and 'Culinary and Salad Herbs' (1940). She also cultivated additional land, with the help of 'land girls' and prisoners of war. Although described as a retiring person, she is credited with much influence in reviving the growing of neglected herbs, and recalling and passing on the tradition of monastic gardens in cultivating fragrant and culinary plants. She was a member of the committee advising Mrs Hilda Leyel on the management of the House of Culpeper, and redesigned the kitchen garden at Lullingstone Castle, Kent, in 1946. From 1921 onwards she published many anthologies of poetry and prose on gardening, forming a strong bond with the Medici Society as her publishers between 1929 and 1938. Some of her many articles in 'Country Life', 'The Queen', 'The Sphere', 'The Field', and the 'Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society' were reissued in books. She became president of the Society of Women Journalists. 
Rohde's historical research in libraries and archives was always wide-ranging, thorough, and scholarly. Her 'Old English Herbals' (1922) and 'Oxford's College Gardens' (1932) reveal her deep reading of old herbals, histories of the university, and college archives. A visit to Palestine and Egypt lay behind her essays 'Garden-craft in the Bible' and 'Gardens of the pharaohs' (1927), and her travels in Italy illuminated 'The Scented Garden' (1931). She possessed strong imaginative and literary powers which made past scenes live before the eye. 
Rohde died at the Wallfield Nursing Home, West Street, Reigate, on 23 June 1950, aged sixty-eight, and was buried nearby at St Mary's Church. Her revised edition of 'Uncommon Vegetables and Fruits' (1943) appeared after her death in 1951, but her papers and books are thought to have been destroyed in a fire at Nymans. Her closest kin and heir was her cousin, Arthur Cotton Rohde, gentleman farmer of Ranfold Grange, Slinfold, Surrey. No trace of her garden at Reigate survived, as some of the land was sold to build two new houses, but rosemary at the gate continued to thrive: it came from Arthur Trower of Wiggie Farm, Redhill, who received a slip from the Wimbledon garden of Mary Ann Cross (George Eliot); it had been taken there from Shakespeare's garden in Stratford. 


@@@@@


doc= 38542


Bauer, Ferdinand Lukas (1760-1826), botanical artist, was born on 20 January 1760 at Feldsberg, Austria, the son of Lukas Bauer or Baur (1706/7-1762), court painter to the prince of Liechtenstein, and his wife, Theresia, 'nee' Hirsch. Three sons -- Joseph (1756-1831), Franz Andreas Bauer (1758-1840), and Ferdinand -- showed a talent for drawing and in their formative years were influenced by Prior Norbert Boccius (1729-1806). About 1780 Franz and Ferdinand moved to Vienna and there met Baron Nickolaus von Jacquin (1727-1817). Because of Ferdinand's talent, Jacquin set him to help prepare his 'Icones plantarum rariorum' (1781-93). Through Jacquin he met John Sibthorp and was subsequently taken on as illustrator for his 'Flora Graeca' (1806-40). In 1786 Bauer accompanied Sibthorp to Italy, the Aegean, Turkey, Greece, and Cyprus. Late that year he returned to England with Sibthorp to continue illustrating the 'Flora Graeca'. In London in the 1790s he also illustrated papers for the 'Transactions of the Linnean Society' and through this his work became known to Sir Joseph Banks, who was then looking for a botanical artist to go on a voyage of exploration to Australia. Bauer was recruited for HMS 'Investigator', commanded by Lieutenant Matthew Flinders RN. His salary for the voyage was paid by the Admiralty, he was under the orders of the naturalist to the expedition, Robert Brown, and he shared the artwork with William Westall. 

'Investigator' sailed from Spithead in July 1801 and after calling at Madeira and the Cape of Good Hope crossed the Southern Ocean to Western Australia. The vessel then sailed eastwards, touching various points and making natural history collections, along the southern coast and passing through Bass Strait to anchor at Port Jackson. More plants were collected in the neighbourhood of Sydney while 'Investigator' was refitted, and in late July 1802 she sailed up the Queensland coast, passing into the Gulf of Carpentaria in early November. In this remote place, with the hurricane season approaching, she was found to be unseaworthy; the survey was terminated shortly after and 'Investigator' sailed to Timor and thence back to Sydney where the vessel was declared irreparable and in June 1804 downgraded to the status of a hulk. 
Bauer remained in Australia collecting and drawing plants while (abortive) attempts were made to obtain a new survey ship. He resided in the settlement of Sydney but made a short trip during March and April 1804 to the Hunter River where he drew plants and collected herbarium specimens. He also sailed for Norfolk Island on 'Albion' on 21 August 1804, returning to Sydney on 11 March 1805 for the sea trial of the hastily refitted 'Investigator'. Bauer and Brown finally left Sydney on 23 May 1805 in the still-leaking 'Investigator' and arrived at Liverpool on 13 October. 
Bauer prepared well over 2000 plant and animal field drawings during the voyage of 'Investigator'. He remained in London from 1806 to 1814, during which time he completed some 234 watercolours from his original field sketches. The work was paid for by the Admiralty and most drawings passed to it. The British Museum acquired the Admiralty drawings in 1843. At his death Ferdinand Bauer's original pencil sketches of landscapes from Norfolk Island and some of his botanical drawings were bought by his brother Franz, who was by this time a plant illustrator at Kew. When Franz died in 1840 they were auctioned at Christies and bought by Robert Brown, now keeper of botany in the British Museum, and given to the museum. James Britten, writing in 1909, confirmed that the museum received botanical drawings from the Admiralty and others from Brown. Consequently Ferdinand Bauer's completed watercolours of Australian plants and animals and Norfolk Island field sketches are to be found today in the botany and zoology libraries of the Natural History Museum, London. 
Fifteen of his plates (seventeen drawings) appeared in Bauer's only publication, 'Illustrationes florae Novae Hollandiae' (1813-16), for which he engraved the copper plates himself. This work was originally conceived as illustrating Robert Brown's 'Prodromus' of 1810 but, because of cost, and the labour involved, this intention was not realized. A further ten illustrations prepared from Bauer's originals were engraved by other artists as uncoloured plates and published in the atlas accompanying Flinders's narrative of the 'Investigator' voyage (1814) and published along with William Westall's Australian coastal profiles. However, the post-Napoleonic war period was a time of depression and 'Illustrationes florae Novae Hollandiae' was not a commercial success. Consequently, with Europe now relatively peaceful, in 1814 he returned to Vienna, taking his original Australian field drawings with him. Bauer visited England only once more, in 1819, and died at Hietzing, Vienna, on 17 March 1826. At the subsequent auction, held in March 1827, many of these drawings were bought by Emperor Franz I. The majority of the surviving original field sketches, both coloured and pencil drawings, are now in the Naturhistorisches Museum, Vienna; many of them are dated, located, and colour-coded. They also include both plants and animals seen at 'Investigator' landing places -- that is from Madeira, South Africa, the various Australian collecting sites, Norfolk Island, and Timor -- and numerous orchids from New South Wales. The copper plates made for 'Illustrationes florae Novae Hollandiae' survive in London and an edition was printed from them in 1989. 
Some authorities feel that Bauer was the most accomplished botanical artist ever but he is little known because so few of his drawings were published. His watercolours are superb and the animal drawings in particular have a most lifelike quality. Accounts were published of these beautiful drawings from the 1960s onwards, but it was not until the 1990s that catalogues of the Bauer animal and plant watercolours in the Natural History Museum were prepared. The Bauer brothers are commemorated in the Australian plant genus 'Bauera' (Cunnoniaceae). 


@@@@@


doc= 38543


Adams, Katharine (1862-1952), bookbinder, was born on 25 November 1862 at Bracknell in Berkshire, the second daughter among the three children of the Revd William Fulford Adams (died 1912) and his wife, Catherine Mary Horton ('bap'. 1830, died 1912). As a child she lived at Little Faringdon, Oxfordshire, where her friends included William Morris's daughters, May and Jennie, and where she made some early experiments in bookbinding in cobbler's leather and in needlework. The connection with the Morris family proved useful when she began binding professionally during the 1890s. After a short period of training with Sarah Prideaux (1853-1933) and T. J. Cobden-Sanderson (1840-1922) in London in 1897, she set up a workshop in Lechlade, where her first commission came from Janey Morris. In 1901 she established the Eadburgh Bindery in Broadway, Gloucestershire. Adams initially worked alone, but was later able to employ two women assistants, whom she herself trained. For several years during this period she taught binding to the nuns at Stanbrook Abbey, although she was never quite reconciled either to the restrictions imposed upon the nuns or to the practical difficulty of teaching through a grille. She remained at Broadway until after her marriage to Edmund James Webb (1853-1945), an independent scholar, on 25 November 1913. Late in 1915 she and her husband moved into Oxfordshire, living at Noke and Islip before returning to Gloucestershire in the 1930s. She continued to bind under her maiden name of Adams throughout this period; her last binding was completed only a few years before her death. 
Adams's bindings were acclaimed from an early stage in her career, and (unlike many arts and crafts style bindings of the time) are still admired for their technical competence (Lewis, 33). She took first prize in bookbinding at the Oxford arts and crafts exhibition of 1898, and was soon receiving regular commissions from the engraver and typographer Emery Walker (1851-1933), St John Hornby (1867-1946), and the bibliophile Sydney Cockerell (1867-1962), who became a close friend. In the early years of the twentieth century she regularly exhibited both in London and abroad, showing her work not only in Belgium, France, and Germany, but as far afield as St Louis, Missouri, and Cape Town, South Africa, and winning several awards. She became the second president of the Women's Guild of Art, and in 1938 a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts. Important commissions included Queen Mary's psalter and 'The Buildings of the British Museum', presented to Queen Mary and George V respectively, the Ashendene Press 'Tutte le opere di Dante Alighieri', which has been described as 'possibly her finest binding' (Tidcombe, 139), and the Doves Press 'Bible', of which she and Cobden-Sanderson bound the only two copies printed on vellum. She was a highly accomplished gold finisher, described as a 'markedly individual' designer, and 'one of the few binders of any date or country who made a success of pictorial designs in gold on leather' (Nixon, 'Broxbourne Library', 224). Intricate 'pointille' work was a particular feature of her style, and her attention to detail is apparent from a letter in which she wrote of one of her bindings: 'The effect of the dotted background was quite intentional. The effect of light on the gold can be varied by the angle at which the tool is used. That background was worked with the book upside down -- if you turn it, you will see the difference. (Lewis, 35)' She designed many of her own finishing tools, including her signature tool: the initials KA in sanserif, separated by a catherine wheel. They are now in the British Library bindery, London. 
Although Adams described herself as someone who 'felt rather keenly the ups and downs of life' (Tidcombe, 137), her letters give consistent evidence of the 'great charm and keen sense of humour' mentioned in her obituary (Cockerell). A photograph of Katharine Adams taken 'c'.1930 (repr. Tidcombe), when she was aged about seventy, shows her with long grey hair swept back from her face, a broad forehead and high cheekbones, dark eyes, a steady gaze, and a firm but kind mouth. A less distinct photograph (repr. Tidcombe) taken 'c'.1905 shows her in profile, revealing a fairly short, perhaps slightly turned up nose, and a rather large chin. Her hair in the earlier photograph is dark, and caught up in a large coil at the back of her head. She died a widow at her home, The Cherries, St Briavels, Gloucestershire, on 15 October 1952, at the age of eighty-nine. 


@@@@@


doc= 38544


(Arthur) Ernest Barnsley (1863-1926), architect and designer, and 


@@@@@


doc= 38545


Sidney Howard Barnsley (1865-1926), architect and furniture maker. Ernest Barnsley was born on 17 February 1863, the sixth child of Edward Barnsley (died 1881), builder and manufacturer, of Birmingham and his wife, Amelia, 'nee' Heeley (?); Sidney Barnsley was the seventh and last child, born on 25 February 1865. Edward Barnsley was one of the partners in John Barnsley & Sons, one of the city's most successful building firms. Wesleyans in belief, prosperous, in touch with the city's intellectual elite, the Barnsley family shared in the progressive, civic culture of late Victorian Birmingham. It is not known exactly where Ernest and Sidney went to school, but in 1879 Ernest was articled to J. L. Ball, a young Birmingham architect, and Sidney may have joined him there later. They both attended classes at the city's School of Art. 
In 1885 they both went to London, where Ernest Barnsley worked, first for W. H. Seth-Smith, and then for J. D. Sedding, while Sidney Barnsley joined the office of Richard Norman Shaw. Both Seddings and Shaws were leading architectural offices of the day, alive with the new ideas of the arts and crafts movement. Here the Barnsley brothers formed lasting allegiances: in Shaw's office with W. R. Lethaby and Robert Weir Schultz, and in Sedding's with Ernest Gimson who came, like them, from a background of industrial wealth and progressive thought in the midlands. Gimson would soon be inseparable from their lives. Ernest Barnsley left Sedding's office in 1887 and set up in practice on his own in Birmingham, marrying Alice Mary Townsley ('b'. 'c'.1863) on 28 February 1888. Sidney Barnsley left Shaw early in 1888, and spent much of the next two and a half years in Greece with Schultz, studying Byzantine architecture at Lethaby's suggestion. (The fruits of his study can be seen in the beautiful little church of the Wisdom of God at Lower Kingswood in Surrey, which he designed on his return. His drawings for the church, together with relevant photographs, are in the possession of the Fine Art Society, London.) Gimson left Sedding's office at about the same time and spent two wandering years, sketching, looking for a cottage in the country, worrying about the prospect of working in an architectural office, and learning to make chairs and plasterwork with his own hands. 
Late in 1890, or early in 1891, Gimson, Lethaby, the newly returned Sidney Barnsley, two slightly older architects, Mervyn Macartney and Reginald Blomfield, and Stephen Webb, a designer, set up a cabinet-making workshop in London, to make furniture to their designs, under the name Kenton & Co. It produced some fine furniture, but closed down some time in 1892, leaving Sidney Barnsley so shocked by the taste of the cabinet-makers when left to themselves that he decided never to employ craftsmen, and almost always made up his own designs. Later that year he and Gimson decided to leave London and settle in the country. There is little documentary evidence of the spirit in which this decision was taken, but it turned out to be the most important decision of their lives, a journey to be followed by no more journeys. Their purposes have usually, and perhaps not wrongly, been inferred from what followed. 
Ernest Barnsley was persuaded to join them, against his wife's inclination, and in April 1893 they settled temporarily in the hamlet of Ewen, near Cirencester, in the Cotswolds. In 1894 they leased Pinbury Park, a sixteenth-century house standing by itself above the valley of the River Frome, 5 miles north-west of Cirencester. The property was repaired and altered for their occupation, an outbuilding was turned into a workshop, and they began to work, thinking of the countryside as the home of the crafts, hoping to gather others round them. The Barnsleys made heavy case-furniture (for example, cabinets and chests) in oak, with features borrowed from wagons and farm implements, while Gimson made light ladderback chairs and decorative plasterwork. Sidney Barnsley was the most focused of them. Lucy Morley (died 1944), a relation of Gimson's who kept house for them and married Sidney Barnsley in 1895, would take over their elevenses and find Sidney working away and the other two standing by, whistling tunes from Gilbert and Sullivan. The Barnsley brothers were very different. Sidney was slight and shy; designing furniture and making it from start to finish seemed to be all in all to him. (Gimson came to have something of the same intensity.) Ernest was a big, jolly, expansive man, practical, easy-going and something of a bon vivant. All three must have seemed socially incongruous in the country, half-gentry half-workmen, but Ernest was the one on whom 'the county' left their cards. 
By about 1900 Pinbury Park was getting too small for them. Ernest Barnsley now had four children and Sidney two. In 1900 Gimson married Emily Thompson. In the same year, Gimson and Ernest Barnsley went into partnership to produce furniture, but when they hired cabinet-makers from London and elsewhere they had to put them in a workshop in Cirencester. (Sidney Barnsley remained outside this project, working on his own.) In 1902, by agreement with their landlord, Lord Bathurst, they set up workshops in the outbuildings of the medieval and seventeenth-century Daneway House in the nearby village of Sapperton, using the house itself for showrooms, and built themselves houses in the village, paid for by Lord Bathurst in exchange for their unexpired lease. At Pinbury, Gimson had been unsure of his direction, cushioned (as they all were) by inherited wealth, and also occupied with his architectural work. Now he began to design furniture with energy and concentration. But within a few years a disagreement arose between him and Ernest Barnsley which destroyed their partnership and soured the country idyll. It is not clear whether it was a business or a domestic matter. But it drove a wedge between the three families, and from this time on Gimson and Sidney Barnsley, who were dear friends, were unable to meet in each other's homes. 
After the disagreement Ernest Barnsley designed no more furniture. His later work is all architectural: mostly, small domestic buildings in the locality, designed in a reticent version of seventeenth-century Cotswold stone building, and one very large one. In 1909 the Hon. Claud Biddulph, a banker, commissioned Barnsley to build a house on his estate at Rodmarton, south of Cirencester. For Biddulph and his wife Margaret the house was not just a dwelling but an opportunity to provide employment on their estate, and Barnsley's design was built, so far as possible, from local materials by the estate workmen. The interior was furnished to designs by Ernest and Sidney Barnsley and others, and again, much of the work was carried out by local labour. The house took -- as it was meant to take -- a long time to build, and Rodmarton Manor was not finished until 1929, after Ernest Barnsley's death. 
In Sapperton, Sidney Barnsley built a house for his family with big oak floorboards and whitewashed walls. In the garden he built a workshop with a wonderful view across the valley, where he worked each day by himself, producing tables and case-furniture. Some were simple oak pieces, others more sophisticated in making and materials, and none of them easily distinguishable from Gimson's work, except that Barnsley liked to set himself the challenge of difficult construction. As his work became known, there was no shortage of orders and in that sense the workshop paid for itself; but, like Gimson, he could afford not to charge realistically for his own time and overheads. His two children, 


@@@@@


doc= 38546


Cliff, Clarice (1899-1972), ceramic designer and art director, was born on 20 January 1899 at 19 Meir Street, Tunstall, Staffordshire, one of eight children of Harry Thomas Cliff, iron-moulder, and his wife, Ann ('nee' Machin). Her parents were working-class and of Staffordshire descent. Though not a family of pottery workers, her aunt ran the decorating shop at Alfred Meakin Ltd which the young Clarice visited regularly. 
Cliff was educated at the High Street elementary school, and later at Summerbank Road School, Tunstall. At thirteen, she was apprenticed as a painter to Lingard Webster & Co. Ltd, and moved to Hollinshead and Kirkham Ltd as an apprentice lithographer in 1915. She also began attending evening classes at the Tunstall School of Art. In 1916 she joined the Burslem earthenware manufacturers Arthur J. Wilkinson Ltd, a larger firm offering better prospects. Cliff continued her lithographic training at Wilkinsons, completing this in 1920. At this time, her artistic abilities were noticed by the decorating manager Jack Walker, brother-in-law of Arthur Colley Austin Shorter (1882-1963), the firm's managing director. As a result, Cliff was placed in the design studio. Between 1924 and 1925 she attended evening classes at the Burslem School of Art. 
Until 1925 Cliff had lived in the family home. In that year, though still unmarried, she moved into her own flat at 40 Snow Hill, Hanley. Cliff was a round-faced young woman who, though perhaps not a natural beauty, was fashionable in the style of the period. At about this time, Cliff's relationship with Colley Shorter, who was married with two daughters, developed beyond the purely professional. This distanced her from the other employees and those members of Shorter's family who ran the firm. Cliff's social life at the time appears to have been limited, and she devoted herself both to her work and to her relationship with Shorter. This relationship provided her with opportunities of which she was fully able to take advantage. In 1925 she was given her own studio in the adjacent Newport pottery, which Wilkinsons had acquired in 1920. In 1927 she attended a training course at the Royal College of Art. The same year she travelled to Paris to study art. 
On her return, Cliff developed a range of brightly coloured geometrical patterns, with the assistance of apprentice Gladys Scarlett. These were initially used to decorate surplus stock from the Newport pottery. In July 1928 Cliff coined the name 'Bizarre' for the range. Like much of Cliff's work of the late 1920s and 1930s, these designs were art deco in character, and were produced at a time when the style was only beginning to appear in England. Despite the low expectations of Wilkinsons salesmen, 'Bizarre' was an immediate success. Later in 1928 Cliff produced the 'Crocus' pattern, a simple design made up of a few brushstrokes. Developed from an earlier lithographic design, 'Crocus' became an enduring favourite, was adapted to a variety of different pottery shapes, and remained in production until 1963. 
In 1929 Cliff began designing new pottery shapes for 'Bizarre'. These were severely geometrical and modernistic. Of the principal shapes, 'Conical' appeared in 1929, 'Stamford' in 1930, and 'Le bon jour' and 'Biarritz' in 1933. Often inspired by designs illustrated in the French journal 'Mobilier et Decoration', certain shapes derived from Jean Tetard silver, the designs having initially been used without his knowledge or consent. 
Between 1929 and 1936 Cliff designed numerous patterns, including abstract designs, stylized flowers or fruit, and landscapes. Bold and lively, these were normally composed of solid areas of bright enamel colour. They were issued in ranges under titles including 'Bizarre', 'Fantasque', and 'Applique'. Other more limited ranges, such as 'Inspiration' and 'Latona', relied on particular glaze-effects. On occasion, Cliff is known to have borrowed patterns from outside sources, as well as from employees in her workshop. Besides tableware and other functional wares, she produced ornamental masks and figures, most notably 'Age of Jazz' (1930). 
Throughout the early 1930s, Cliff's pottery achieved enormous success, and the entire Newport factory was devoted to its production. The wares were sold through department stores and other retail outlets throughout the country, as well as being exported widely. In 1931 she was appointed art director. Cliff was adept at creating publicity, and the 'Clarice Cliff' name became an important marketing device. Its use as a backstamp was sometimes indiscriminate -- a fact which angered the influential designer and educator Gordon Forsyth when it was placed on a range of pottery designed by contemporary artists during 1933-4. 
From 1935 the popularity of 'Bizarre' (by then used to describe all Clarice Cliff pottery) waned considerably. In the later 1930s her designs became increasingly conservative, using muted colours or relief-moulded decoration. Wartime restrictions on the production of decorated pottery left her without a major role at the factory. On 21 December 1940 Cliff married Shorter, following the death of his first wife. The marriage was kept secret for almost a year. Following the Second World War, Cliff produced fewer designs, spending most of her time at Chetwynd, their Staffordshire home. She did not have children. By 1960 Shorter's health was failing, and he died in 1963. Cliff sold Wilkinsons the following year to W. R. Midwinter Ltd, and went into retirement. A retrospective exhibition of her work was held at the Brighton Museum and Art Gallery in 1972, to which she contributed catalogue notes. On 23 October that year, Cliff died in Staffordshire of heart failure. Her work has since enjoyed a considerable revival among collectors and students of art deco pottery. Small collections of her work can be seen in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and in the Brighton Museum and Art Gallery. 
Cliff has often been derided by modernist design critics who consider her work to fail their criteria for good design. She has also been accused of achieving success only through Shorter. Nevertheless, and notwithstanding her occasional plagiarism, Cliff produced and publicized many striking and adventurous designs. She challenged accepted women's roles through her design of pottery shapes, and achieved success without the benefit of a privileged background. Her major talent was perhaps not as a design originator, but lay in her ability to assemble a range of pottery which captured the mood of the period and the imagination of the public. 


