@@@@@


doc= 38547


Coates, Wells Wintemute (1895-1958), architect and industrial designer, was born on 17 December 1895 in Tokyo, Japan, the eldest of the six children of the Revd Dr Harper Havelock Coates (1865-1934), Canadian-born Methodist medical missionary and professor of philosophy and comparative religion at the Aoyama Theological College in Tokyo, and his Canadian wife, Agnes Sarah Wintemute (1864-1945), co-founder of one of the first missionary girls' schools in Japan. Wells Coates lived in Tokyo until he was eighteen in an austere but intellectually stimulating atmosphere of proselytizing Methodism. He was educated informally by his mother, a strong-minded woman who, when young, had trained as an architect, reputedly in the office of Louis Sullivan. An English friend of the family, G. E. L. Gauntlett, whose wife was Japanese, was Coates's intermittent tutor both in academic subjects and in such manual skills as brush drawing, paper-making and printing, boat-building, cooking, and the domestic rituals of serving food. Coates later referred to Gauntlett as 'the most versatile teacher I have ever known' (Cantacuzino, 11). His years in Japan nurtured his deep appreciation of everyday arts and the belief in reduction to essentials that was to be central to his architecture. 
In 1913 Coates set out on a world cruise, with his father and Gauntlett, on the SS 'Cleveland'. Already an avid and observant traveller, he kept a diary of the four months' voyage to China, Egypt, England, and finally New York, where he went up the Woolworth Building. He then enrolled at McGill University College in Vancouver, reading mechanical and structural engineering. His studies were interrupted by the First World War. He fought in the trenches in France and Belgium with the 2nd division of Canadian gunners before applying to train as a pilot with the Royal Naval Air Service. He made his maiden flight over Orleans and Blois on 18 July 1918, shortly before the armistice. His passion for the aeroplane was to be lifelong. 
Coates returned to the former McGill University College, now reincorporated as part of the University of British Columbia, and took the degrees of BA in 1919 and BSc in engineering in 1922. He went to England for postgraduate studies, achieving a PhD (engineering) degree at London University in 1924 with a thesis entitled 'The gases of the diesel engine'. His training in engineering brought particular intellectual rigour to his work in architecture and industrial design. 
As an architect Wells Coates was a late developer. His first London job was as a journalist on the 'Daily Express', whose proprietor, Lord Beaverbrook, favoured applications from fellow Canadians. The image of the hard-boiled journalist pounding out his story on the typewriter appealed to the raffish side in Coates. He became official science correspondent on the paper. In 1925, on a journalistic assignation in Paris, his interest was aroused in the work of Le Corbusier. Coates's London milieu was that of burgeoning modernism. He became a close friend of the architect Maxwell Fry, and in 1925, in Elsa Lanchester's nightclub the Cave of Harmony, he met Marion Grove (1906-1983), then a student at the London School of Economics. They married on 5 August 1927, and in 1930 their only child, Laura, was born. 
Coates had enormous confidence in his abilities. With no specific architectural training he took on, in 1928, the interior design of a shop in Cambridge for Crysede Silks, and then, in 1929, the internal planning of Cresta Silks' factory in Welwyn Garden City for the modernist textile entrepreneur Tom Heron, father of the painter Patrick Heron. This led to a succession of Cresta shops in glass, plywood, and steel, in which the flair and coherence of design detailing set new standards of retail design. 
By 1930 Coates was involved in discussions that led to his best-known and most influential project, Lawn Road Flats in Hampstead. He was fortunate in finding like-minded clients. The concept of a large-scale block of service flats for modern professional people was developed in collaboration with Jack Pritchard, one of Britain's few committed patrons of modernist architecture and design, and his wife, Molly, a psychotherapist. A new company, Isokon, was formed to build the flats, the name being derived from the term isometric unit construction. Each Isokon flat was equipped by Coates with purpose-designed minimal furniture and fittings; meals and laundry were to be provided centrally. The reinforced concrete Lawn Road Flats, completed in 1934, were socially experimental. As Coates wrote in an article in 'The Listener' (24 May 1933), 'We cannot burden ourselves with permanent tangible possessions, as well as with our real new possessions of freedom, travel and experience.' Coates's flats became a gathering point for the Hampstead avant-garde. The Bauhaus emigres Marcel Breuer, Walter Gropius, and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy were early residents. Nikolaus Pevsner looked back on Lawn Road Flats as 'giant's work of the 1930s' (Pritchard, 98). Their place in the history of the modern movement in Britain is significant. 
In the early 1930s Coates had been emerging as a leader of the British modernists. He was a founder member of two important groups which stood for the 'contemporary spirit': Unit One, an association of painters, sculptors, and architects, and the more specifically architectural MARS Group. Coates invented the title, which stood for Modern Architectural Research Group. MARS was the British branch of the Congres Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM) and Coates attended CIAM's famous Athens Charter meeting in July 1933, where he conferred with Le Corbusier and other leading European architects. 
While Lawn Road Flats was under construction, Coates was commissioned to design the interior of the new BBC studios in Portland Place in association with Raymond McGrath and Serge Chermayeff. His BBC news studios and special effects studios show his high skills of logical planning and technical inventiveness. His fascination with new forms and new materials made him a superlative product designer. A twelve-year association with Ecko, manufacturers of wireless sets and electric fires, began in 1932 with the AD 65, Coates's circular wireless in Bakelite which became a design icon of its time. 
The interior in which Coates's vision of 'new habits of life' was most apparent was the studio flat at 18 Yeoman's Row in London, where he lived from 1935 to 1955. The oriental influence is obvious in this practical, serene, pared-down living-working space with its large, low cushions and Japanese matting spread over rubber flooring, in which Coates himself, dressed in his kaftan, dispensing hospitality, was integral to the 'mise-en-scene'. 
Most of Coates's realized buildings in the 1930s were for luxury living. Embassy Court Flats (1935), an eleven-storey block on the sea front at Hove, was designed with verandas and sun terraces to give its wealthy residents maximum exposure to sea air. The more structurally interesting Palace Gate Flats in Kensington (1939) put into practice Coates's ideas for 'planning in section'. Hampden Nursery School in Holland Park (1936) was a 'total design' concept, in the vanguard of progressive educational ideas. 
But Coates's main ambitions lay in revolutionary mass housing. He pursued ingenious schemes for prefabricated structures, beginning with the two-storey Sunspan House first shown at the Daily Mail Ideal Home Exhibition in Olympia in 1934. During the Second World War he was transferred from the RAF to advise the Aircraft Industries Research Organization on Housing (AIROH), evolving the sectional unit AIROH aluminium house. The government put 75,000 into production, one complete house being produced every ten minutes in four transportable sections. After the war Coates remained a consultant to AIROH, designing a two-decker, three-unit, three-bedroom house for an associated company, and investigating needs for low-cost housing among the poorest populations of South America, proposing a series of experimental aluminium dwellings. Neither of these designs was ever manufactured. Simultaneously with the AIROH house, Coates developed his most potentially revolutionary scheme for standardized, prefabricated, lightweight, mobile room units, interchangeable from one site to another. He described them as 'Rooms in a Garden' and 'Rooms in a Frame'. His failure to find financial backing was a bitter disappointment to him. 
In 1944 Wells Coates was appointed OBE (military class) for services to the RAF, and was elected a royal designer for industry. One might have expected his career to burgeon in post-war Britain. But apart from the Telekinema for the Festival of Britain, none of his many projects reached fruition at this period. His greatly admired boat designs -- the Wingsail Catamaran cruising yacht (1948) and the 'Fey Loong' yawl (1954) -- were finally abandoned. In the early 1950s his visionary plan for a mixed-development Canadian new town at Iroquois on the St Lawrence River was rejected in favour of a cheaper scheme. 
Coates's life was in some ways a tragic one. He suffered from depressions, which appear to have intensified after the macabre death, in 1926, of his friend Alfred Borgeaud, who fell from the train in British Columbia on which they were both travelling. Coates retrieved and buried the mangled remains. After the early failure of his marriage, ending in divorce in 1937, his emotional life was in perpetual disarray. He was bad at managing finance, and his arrogance and tactlessness antagonized all but the most forgiving of his clients. But Wells Coates's extraordinary talent has never been in doubt. He left Britain a legacy of heroic modernism, of which his one-time assistant Denys Lasdun was main heir. 
In 1955 he departed for Harvard University, where, from 1955 to 1956, he was visiting professor of architecture and urban design. In 1956 he returned to Vancouver, where he worked on abortive projects for the redevelopment of the downtown city and a mass rapid transit system of his own invention, the Monospan Twin-Ride. A heart attack in 1957 was followed by another on 17 June 1958, when he died on Vancouver beach at English Bay after bathing and picnicking with friends. He was cremated a week later in Vancouver. 


@@@@@


doc= 38548


Dorn, Marion V. (1896-1964), designer, was born on 25 December 1896, probably at Menlo Park, near San Francisco, California, one of five children of Diodemus Socrates Dorn (1860-1913), lawyer, and Camille Johnson (1870-1932). Educated at Stanford University from 1912 to 1916 (bachelor of arts in graphic arts, Phi Beta Kappa), thereafter she shared a studio in Russian Hill, San Francisco, with her former tutor, the artist Henry Varnum Poor (1887-1970), her husband from July 1919 to 20 October 1923. Early in 1919 they moved to New City, New York, and Dorn gained notice as a designer of batiks. In Paris in 1923 she met the poster designer Edward McKnight Kauffer (1890-1954), and subsequently resided with him at 17 John Street, The Adelphi, London, from late 1923 to 1931, at Swan Court, Chelsea, from 1931 to 1 July 1940, and in New York until his death in 1954; they lived at 40 Central Park South from about 1942, and married in 1950. Dorn's New York studio was at 54th Street and Madison Avenue. 
Dorn's career was launched in Britain in the mid to late 1920s, when she maintained her graphic work and hand production of batik scarves, curtains, and decorative panels, while extending her practice to include interiors and rugs, the latter initiated about 1926. In the 1930s she ceased making batiks, instead having woven and printed fabrics made by Jean Orage, Edinburgh Weavers, and Warner & Sons Ltd. The latter two, especially Warners, also purchased her designs for their own production. Equally reciprocal was her association with the Wilton Royal Carpet Factory from 1928, resulting in the 1930s in over a hundred designs for hand-knotted carpets, some for Dorn's own clients -- among them the Savoy hotel group (including Claridges Hotel, the Berkeley Hotel, and the Savoy, 1931-9) and the Cunard, Orient, and Shaw Saville ocean liner companies (1934-9). Her rugs were conceived and marketed as limited-edition fine art productions, and for these she became best known, being dubbed 'the architect of floors' in 1932. In 1933 she joined a Wilton Royal Carpet Factory sub-committee to select modern designs for the firm's production, having turned down an invitation to become a director. In 1934 she formed a design consultancy, Marion Dorn Ltd, through which she completed interior design schemes, organized the production of fabrics, wallpapers, and furniture, and undertook book illustrations and graphic and textile designs. In addition, for her own clients machine-made carpets were also commissioned to supplement those hand-knotted for her by several firms other than Wiltons. 
From 1927 to 1939 Dorn's work was exhibited in many influential European exhibitions including those at Dorland Hall, London (1933 and 1934), Burlington House, London (1935), and the Universal Exhibition, Paris (1937). Exports to and exhibitions in the United States from 1929 to 1939, including at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York (1937), and the Golden Gate International Exposition, San Francisco (1939), maintained exposure there for her work in her absence. After returning to New York she worked with at least thirteen firms, including wallpaper manufacturer Basset and Vollum and textile manufacturers A. H. Lee, Goodall Fabrics, Jofa Inc., Mitchell-David, F. Schumacher & Co., and Silkar Studios; longer and more fruitful associations were with Greeff Fabrics Inc. (1956-64), who exported her fabrics to Britain through Warners; the wallpaper manufacturer Katenbach and Warren ('c'.1947-59); and the hand gun-tufted rug and carpet manufacturer Edward Fields Inc., producing over a hundred designs (1949-62). 
Known for her good looks and humour, Dorn was an astute self-publicist able to attract a fashionable clientele and collaborators -- from Noel Coward to Graham Sutherland, who exhibited ceramics in Dorn's showroom in 1939 -- and to grasp the technical requirements of rug and fabric production. In 1957 she received an honorary fellowship of the British Society of Industrial Artists for her outstanding contribution to textile design; the society's journal recorded that 'her masterly drawing and her unerring sense of pattern, colour and texture contributed to a result that had an immense and lasting influence on textiles in this country as well as abroad' (Hunter). She made a significant contribution to British modern interiors independently and in collaboration with architects such as Oliver Hill, Robert Lutyens, Serge Chermayeff, Eric Mendelsohn, Wells Coates, and Brian O'Rorke, and interior decorators such as Syrie Maugham, designing the cream rug in the widely illustrated 'all white' drawing room in Maugham's London flat (1933). Designs for moquette seating fabric for the London Passenger Transport Board ('c'.1937) were still being rewoven in 1954 and remained in London Underground carriages for another decade or so. Her printed textile designs with casually placed areas of colour over outlined motifs, well-suiting the then new commercial technique of hand-screen printing, shaped stylistic trends from 'c'.1935 to 1960. For Fields she made continued developments, promoting textured and boldly patterned floor coverings and the concept of 'area rugs'; with them she completed her last major commission (1960), the carpet for the diplomatic reception room at the White House, Washington, DC. She retired to Tangier, Morocco, in 1962, where she died on 28 January 1964 and was buried. Examples of her printed textiles are in the Gallery of Costume, Manchester, and the Victoria and Albert Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 38552


Molyneux, Edward Henry (1891-1974), couturier and art collector, was born at 29 Greencroft Gardens, Hampstead, London, on 5 September 1891, the only son and second child of Justin Molyneux ('b'. 'c'.1864, died in or before 1901), a commercial traveller, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Kenny ('b'. 'c'.1869, died in or after 1921). His parents were of Irish descent; his father was born in Kennington, in south-east London, and his mother in South Africa. By 1901 he, his sister Kathleen, and their widowed mother had moved to lodgings at 67 Cheriton Road, Folkestone. In the 1901 census his mother is described as living on her own means. In his teens Molyneux was educated at Beaumont College, a Jesuit boarding school near Windsor, but his education was cut short by the need to earn a living. 
Molyneux's talent for drawing enabled him to find work as a fashion illustrator. His sketches were published in 'The Planet' in 1909 and in the London edition of 'The Smart Set' from November 1909 to September 1910. He was also employed as a sketch artist by the British couturier Lucile (Lady Lucy Christiana Duff Gordon) at her branches in London and New York. When she opened her Paris house in 1912 she promoted Molyneux to designer, commenting in her reminiscences that he was particularly gifted at creating extravagant costumes for the stage. 
Following the outbreak of the First World War Molyneux joined the 9th battalion, Duke of Wellington's (West Riding) regiment. He served in France from 21 December 1915 as a temporary lieutenant and temporary captain. He was mentioned in dispatches three times and won the Military Cross, his wounds leading to the loss of sight in his left eye. After the war he was known as Captain Molyneux, or, in fashion circles, simply as the Captain. 
In 1919, backed by the press baron Lord Northcliffe, Molyneux set up his own fashion house at 14 rue Royale, Paris. While the 'Daily Mail''s description of Molyneux as 'one of the foremost Paris Fashion 'Dictators'' (advertisement in 'The Times', 28 July 1920) only a year after his launch probably reflects its proprietor's financial interest in the fashion house, Molyneux's move to larger premises at 5 rue Royale in 1921 is evidence of his success. On 22 October 1921 he married (Jessie) Muriel Dunsmuir (1890-1959), a daughter of James Dunsmuir and his wife, Laura Miller Surles, at the British consulate in Paris. James Dunsmuir was an industrialist and politician who served as the lieutenant-governor of British Columbia from 1906 to 1909. Molyneux and his wife divorced in 1924. 
As well as creating luxurious clothes for the hedonistic lifestyle of international high society, Molyneux continued to design for the stage, dressing many of the leading actresses of the 1920s and 1930s, bringing his name and style to a wide audience. They included Gladys Cooper, whom he dressed from 1922, and, from 1923, Gertrude Lawrence, whom Molyneux described as 'quivering' with chic ('The Times', 5 Nov 1968). Molyneux had met Noel Coward in 1922 and the two collaborated on several productions, including 'London Calling' (1923) and 'Private Lives' (1930), which starred Lawrence. Their friendship, although severely strained in the early 1950s, was long-lasting. 
Molyneux was good looking, athletic, and affable and his commercial success enabled him to share the social life and extravagant lifestyle of his clients. In 1922 he set up a nightclub, the Acacia, at 7 rue des Acacias which he ran with the American writer and hostess Elsa Maxwell. After closing the Acacia, the partners opened a second club, Le Jardin de ma Soeur, in the rue Caumartin, near the Opera. The floor show starred the black entertainer Josephine Baker and the club was described by Anita Loos as 'the most elegant place in which to greet the Paris dawn' (Milbank, 148). In spite of its social success, thefts by staff led to the club's closure after two years. Molyneux also spent time in the south of France, the summer playground of the rich, owning a luxurious villa, La Capponcina, at Cap d'Ail. During the 1920s he opened branches in the fashionable resorts of Monte Carlo (1925), Cannes (1927), and Biarritz. In 1926 he introduced his first fragrance, Numero cinq. 
During the 1930s Molyneux's design was at its most assured. His impeccably made and fitted clothes combined British understatement and French chic, and were characterized by simple elegance and graceful fluidity of line. Although he favoured navy blue and black, and crisp white collars, his style was restrained rather than severe. He knew when to introduce a vivid flash of colour and the polka dot became as much a signature as the carefully placed corsage that softened a waist or shoulder line. He influenced many younger designers who were to have successful careers, including the Irish-born John Cavanagh and Pierre Balmain, who trained with him in the 1930s, the British designer Hardy Amies, and Christian Dior. 
The year 1934 was particularly successful for Molyneux. He designed Princess Marina of Greece's wedding dress and trousseau for her marriage to the duke of Kent and the stage costumes for the Paris production of 'The Barretts of Wimpole Street'. The latter triggered a wave of Victorian and Edwardian styled fashions, which presaged Dior's 'new look' of 1947. (Molyneux and Dior were also linked by their employment of Madame Bricard, whose style and taste influenced their design.) Molyneux opened a branch in London in 1932 at 60 Grosvenor Street, moving to 48 Grosvenor Street in 1936. The London house was managed by his sister Kathleen. His clothes were sold in the United States of America in leading department stores and he claimed that his house was the largest exporter of couture in Paris before the Second World War. In 1936 he introduced a Molyneux Sports line to add to his collections of day and evening wear, hats, furs, and fragrances. Molyneux's clients included some of the best-dressed women in the world, including Wallis Simpson (later duchess of Windsor), the Princess Faucigny-Lucinge, and Lady Diana Cooper. As Balmain remarked, this 'elegant, aloof Englishman... held the fashion world in the palm of his hand, during the nineteen-thirties' (Balmain, 53). 
Following the German occupation of Paris in 1940 during the Second World War, Molyneux escaped to London via Biarritz. During the war he continued to design for the American market, sending two collections a year, raising valuable dollars for the British war effort. In 1941 he visited the United States of America on behalf of the Board of Trade to assess the American market for British silks, woollens, tweeds, and rayons. The following year he became a member and then chairman of the Incorporated Society of London Fashion Designers, holding the office until 30 December 1946. During his tenure the society worked with the Board of Trade to create a series of designs made according to government clothing regulations that could be used as templates by manufacturers. 
In 1945 Molyneux returned to Paris. He had kept his house in Paris open for the duration of the occupation for the benefit of his staff. Although some of his customers were German he was an active supporter of the resistance, who benefited from the use of his yacht. In 1950, fearing that he was losing the sight of his remaining eye, he closed both his London and Paris houses and sold the rights to his fragrances. He retired to Jamaica where he was a leading member of the homosexual community in Montego Bay. The loss of his business and the diagnosis that the discomfort in his eye was nothing more serious than the result of overtiredness triggered a difficult period of readjustment for him. Drinking sharpened his temper but gradually he came to terms with retirement, finding great pleasure in painting. He was a talented artist and exhibited his paintings at the Galerie Andre Weill in Paris and the Trafford Gallery in London in the 1950s and at the Hammer Galleries in New York in the 1960s. 
Molyneux was also a discerning collector of art. Having made and sold a collection of eighteenth-century art, he moved on to collect small-scale French impressionist paintings. In 1952 his collection was exhibited in the National Gallery of Art in Washington and the Museum of Modern Art in New York. Many of these paintings had formerly hung in his modernist flat on the Quai d'Orsay, which was featured in the American magazine 'Interior Style and Decoration' in 1937. In 1955 he sold his collection to the American collector Ailsa Mellon Bruce (1901-1969), who in turn bequeathed her collection to the National Gallery of Art in Washington. 
Molyneux utilized his talent for interior decoration in his many homes. In 1956 he built a new house at Biot in the Alpes Maritimes, where he cultivated carnations commercially for the French perfume industry. Noel Coward described the Domaine des Clausonnes as a 'dream', decorated in the 'most impeccable taste and immensely comfortable' ('Diaries', 358). Molyneux's fashion houses, which were known for their subdued elegance, were decorated in a distinctive shade of pearl grey and he was the only couturier whose staff wore a uniform colour to match the decor. 
In 1964 Molyneux decided to return to design, opening Studio Molyneux, selling high quality ready-to-wear, from a floor of his former house at 5 rue Royale. A group of French perfume manufacturers financed the new business. John Tullis, a second cousin, who was born in South Africa in 1923 and had worked for Molyneux before the Second World War, soon took over the direction of the collections. The first, shown in February 1965, was elegant and restrained and had little in common with contemporary fashion. Molyneux's decision to revive his career was ill advised as he had no sympathy for, or understanding of, the youthful fashions that typified the 1960s. He retired once more in 1969 and the business closed in 1977. Molyneux died on 23 March 1974 at his home in Monte Carlo, from double pneumonia following a heart attack. His commercial success and contribution to the fashion industry was recognized in 1950 when he was the first fashion designer to be appointed a royal designer for industry. 


@@@@@


doc= 38553


Murray, William Staite (1881-1962), potter and teacher of pottery, was born on 9 September 1881 at 103 High Street, Deptford, London, the third son of the six children of James Murray, merchant, and his wife, Arabella, daughter of Abel Staite, cheesemonger, of London. From an early age he showed an aptitude for drawing, and after short periods at Haberdashers' Aske's School in New Cross and possibly at nearby Colfe's School, he was sent around the age of twelve to cousins who were professional artists. This stay lasted for two years until his father, a strict Calvinist of Scottish descent, decided that the life of an artist held little prospects, and in 1895 he arranged employment witBlokkers, a firm of bulb and seed merchants at Akersloot in North Holland. Although far removed from the life of an artist, Murray gained a useful knowledge of botany, made a small collection of Delft and Nankin pottery, then a fashionable interest, and travelled widely, visiting Belgium, Germany, and France, where he studied painting. 
In the Netherlands, Murray was introduced to theosophy, a religious movement based on Buddhist and Hindu mysticism founded by Helena Petrovna Blavatsky in the United States some twenty years earlier. Very different from his own religious background, the sect offered Murray a meaningful structure for his own ideas. Later he was to become a committed Buddhist. About 1900 Murray was sent to the USA and Canada, probably to further his knowledge of horticulture, though nothing is known of his experiences there. 
Back in London, Murray's father made him manager of Blokker and Murray, bulb and seed merchants in New Cross, though the business was not a success. Through family connections he became friendly with Kathleen Harriet (died 1952), daughter of Richard Medhurst, a ship and chandlery business owner, who shared his love of painting. They married on 6 June 1905, setting up home at 111 Tyrwhitt Road, Lewisham, Kent. Keen to develop his artistic interests Murray attended evening pottery classes at Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts where its principal, William Dalton, himself an enthusiastic potter, had initiated a course. Murray also continued to paint and even tried bronze casting. Perhaps inspired by the 1910 exhibition of Song and Yuan dynasty Chinese pottery and porcelain at the Burlington Fine Arts Club in Savile Row, Murray was inspired to develop further his potting skills. In sharp contrast to the accepted court porcelains of the Ming dynasty the Song pots highlighted integration of form with glaze and decoration. The exhibition stimulated other artist potters, notably Reginald Wells and George Cox. 
For a time Murray became closely associated with the painter Cuthbert Hamilton, who was a friend of Wyndham Lewis, founder of the Vorticists, and he became part of a loose-knit group of radical painters, sculptors, and poets. Potting took up more and more of Murray's time, and a street directory of 1916 lists him as 'artist potter'. At this time he had a pottery at 18 Yeoman's Row, off Brompton Road, shared with Cuthbert Hamilton, where they made earthenware with painted decoration. Many of his designs carried out on shallow bowls espoused abstract Vorticist principles, often in asymmetrical compositions. The First World War curtailed production when from 1915 to 1918 Murray served in the machine-gun corps at Grantham. 
Following the end of the war Murray found a new direction in his work by setting up his own workshop in 1919 at his brothers' foundry in Rotherhithe, building a high-temperature gas-fired kiln with the aim of producing high-fired stoneware inspired by Song dynasty wares. A fascinating link with the work of the pioneering Martin brothers, makers of individual salt-glaze wares, took place when Murray visited Robert Wallace Martin, the last surviving brother. This was possibly to seek advice on high-temperature firing, as little technical information was generally available. 
Murray was also encouraged by the work of Bernard Leach, who in 1920 returned from Japan with the potter Hamada Shoji and set up a workshop in St Ives producing among other wares high-fired stonewares, and unlike Murray had the advantage of having spent time in Japan and China. Murray and Leach met in 1921 at an exhibition of the latter's work in London. A friendship was struck, and Murray visited St Ives, learned to throw on a Japanese wheel that was pushed round with a stick, and from Hamada learned much about high-temperature glazes and oriental brushwork. To improve the firing Murray experimented with a two-chamber oil-fired kiln, claiming in a letter to 'The Times' to 'have successfully used crude oil for burning pottery since 1923', a system which allowed a great measure of control (22 Sept 1926). The design was patented in 1926. 
From this time Murray worked only in stoneware, producing wheel-thrown bowls and magnificent bottles, many with brush decoration. In 1920 he moved to Wickham Road, Brockley, near Lewisham, where he worked with his only assistant, whom he named Molly as he did not like her forename. By 1924 Murray had made sufficient technical advances to produce convincing pieces in a Song-like style, and had begun to develop an individual style, with full-bodied forms often covered with such classic glazes as 'temmoku', 'hare's fur', and 'chun'. Patronage from such important collectors as George Eumorfopoulos and later Eric Milner-White, dean of York, helped to establish his reputation. His pots were shown at typical craft events such as the Red Rose Guild annual exhibition in Manchester, as well as in galleries usually devoted to fine art. In 1929 he moved to Court Cottage, Bray, Berkshire, taking Molly with him. 
In 1925 Murray was appointed head of pottery at the Royal College of Art, London, in preference to Bernard Leach, a position he held until 1939. He was tall and thin, and an influential teacher, though by his own and his students' accounts he did little actual instructing, preferring instead to 'create an atmosphere' in which students could develop. Notable students include R. W. Washington, Sam Haile, and Henry Hammond, who later became head of the ceramics department at Farnham School of Art. As a member of the radical Seven & Five Society and with artists including Barbara Hepworth and Ben and Winifred Nicholson, Murray showed his pots alongside paintings and sculpture, and could and did place substantial sums on his pieces. Some were left with little decoration, the thrown vessels relying on the strong form and rich glaze for their impact. Others were highly decorated with painted and incised decoration that often covered the whole piece. The finest were given titles such as 'Persian Garden' and to emphasize the abstract quality of the work 'Serenity', 'Cadence', and 'Aulos'. 
In 1939 Murray and his wife went to Rhodesia to visit relatives, and frustrated in their attempts to return by the Second World War they eventually settled at Odzi, near Umtali, Rhodesia. Although intending to return to England, news of rationing and austerity kept them in Rhodesia and Murray never made another pot. Kathleen died on 25 July 1952, the same day on which Murray received a letter of greeting from the International Conference of Potters and Weavers at Dartington Hall, Devon. Much of his time was devoted to forming a Buddhist Society in Umtali. Diagnosis of cancer encouraged him to make a brief visit to England where he took the opportunity to burn virtually all his papers and hold a farewell exhibition in November 1958 at the Leicester Galleries, London. He returned to Rhodesia in December, where he died of cancer at the general hospital, Umtali, on 7 February 1962. 
With Bernard Leach, William Staite Murray was one of the towering figures of the art and craft world in the 1920s and 1930s. As a near contemporary of Leach (Murray was six years older) they had a great deal in common in a shared interest in oriental aesthetics, in Far Eastern religions, and in high-fired stoneware ceramics, but after an initial friendship fundamental differences in approach to the role of craft in the modern world kept them apart. Murray regarded himself as an artist making art objects with no use other than to be beautiful, and did not share Leach's interest in the Arts and Crafts movement or his belief that craft could play a social role. Following a decline in his reputation as a major twentieth-century artist potter, a major retrospective in 1984 firmly established his strength as both potter and artist. His insistence that his work be seen as art is a debate that continues to engage artist-makers. Examples of his work are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, the Milner-White Collection at York City Art Gallery and Southampton Art Gallery, and the Crafts Study Centre at the West Surrey School of Art, Farnham. 


@@@@@


doc= 38554


Race, Ernest Dawson (1914-1964), furniture and industrial designer, was born on 16 October 1914 in Newcastle upon Tyne, the third of the three sons of Joseph Dawson Race (1880-1966), a banker, and May Tweddle (1882-1950). Joseph Race was born in Hankow (Hankou), China, a month after the death of his father, a Methodist minister. He returned to Weardale with his mother and was brought up there. Race moved with his family from Northumbria to Hammersmith when he was small. He was educated at St Paul's School in London, which he left in 1932, before moving on to be trained as an interior designer at the Bartlett school of architecture of London University where he followed a three-year course. On completing his studies he began making his living as a model maker but very soon, about 1936, turned to lighting design for the manufacturing company Troughton and Young, under the lead of its distinguished in-house designer, A. B. Read. The company was among the very few creating modern lighting designs in these years and the short apprenticeship that Race undertook there was undoubtedly very important for his later development. He left in 1937 to form his own firm, Race Fabrics, in London's Motcomb Street, through which he sold designs of his own which were hand-woven in India. The fact that he had a missionary aunt based in India, who ran a weaving workshop in Madras and whom he had visited for four months immediately after leaving Troughton and Young, made this possible. 
The wartime years were important ones for Race, who worked through them as a member of the Auxiliary Fire Service. It was during that time that he married Sara Hope Blower (known as Sally), who was born on 14 September 1912. Sally had also studied interior design at the Bartlett school. The couple married in 1941. At the end of the war Race was employed by the architects Colcutt and Hemp, but most of his creativity was dedicated to designing unit furniture at home. It was in this context that he met his future business partner, an engineer named J. W. Noel Jordan, who was trying to move into the area of furniture at the end of the war. After he put an advertisement in 'The Times', to which Race responded, Race and Jordan founded Ernest Race Ltd together. The former became the director and chief designer while the latter took on the role of managing director of the new venture. They began to manufacture furniture from aluminium alloy, having received a licence from the Board of Trade which made it impossible for them to use wood. 
Race's little 'BA' dining chair of 1945, the tapering T-section legs and seat and back structures of which were made of sand-cast aluminium, featured in the exhibition entitled 'Britain can make it', held in London's Victoria and Albert Museum in that year. It was visible in a number of room settings but also provided the seating in the tea-room at the exhibition. The chair was part of a complete dining-room set which included a table, a little coffee-table, and a sideboard. All of them were made from aluminium but had tops made of holoplast, a laminated plastic with a mahogany veneer. The manufacturing company produced more than 250,000 BA chairs between 1945 and 1969 and they became familiar objects in many of Britain's public buildings and commercial areas through this period. Combining lightness with elegance, the chair won Race a gold medal at the prestigious Milan triennale exhibition of 1954. 
In 1948 Race designed and manufactured a metal-frame wing chair and set of storage units which were included in the exhibition linked to the international competition for low cost furniture design which was held in New York's Museum of Modern Art. The success of the BA chair was repeated by two more designs that Race produced for the Festival of Britain, a large exhibition located on the south bank of the River Thames in London in 1951. Intended as outdoor seating, both Antelope and Springbok were made out of thin steel rod and presented a delicate, spindly form to their viewers. Their silhouettes conformed perfectly to the need for lightness and modernity that was 'in the air' at that time and they provided a level of visual and technological sophistication which was then more apparent in designs emanating from the USA, Scandinavia, and Italy. Race succeeded in putting British design on the international map in the early 1950s and his two chairs of 1951 were among the festival's lasting icons. Soon they could be found in pub gardens and outdoor public areas across Britain. Their small ball feet, made of cast aluminium and said to have been inspired by molecular structures, were both stylistically evocative and practical as they ensured that the thin steel legs of the chairs did not force their way into the flooring on which they sat. The bent ply seat of Antelope was a result of another spin-off from wartime technological developments. 
In 1953 Race designed the Neptune lounge chair for the P. & O. shipping line. For this design he abandoned his use of metal and used plywood which became much more widely available after the war with the lifting of post-war restrictions upon its use. It was a striking chair made of two identical curved plywood forms which could be folded into each other. 
Race was a director of Ernest Race Ltd (from 1961 Race Furniture Ltd) until 1954, after which date he worked as a freelance designer for the company. During the last ten years of his life he continued to design furniture pieces but never achieved the same level of success as he did in the first decade after the war. Items he designed included the Flamingo chair of 1959 and the Sheppey sofa of 1963. His designs were well received abroad and he showed pieces at the Milan triennales of 1951, 1954, 1957, and 1960, winning a number of gold and silver medals over that time period. In 1953 he was made a royal designer for industry, an award made to important and influential designers by the Royal Society of Arts. Professionally he was one of the small number of highly innovatory British designers who embraced the potential of new materials and the modern idiom in design without reservation, and whose creations made a significant impact in the mass environment and were recognized internationally. This impact was made all the more significant by the fact that he and a partner formed their own manufacturing company to produce Race's designs. He played a key role in the formulation of what came to be called the 'contemporary' style, a softened version of its more austere pre-war predecessor, modernism. The former became extremely popular in Britain in the 1950s, both in the decor of private dwellings and in the interiors of public buildings. With a strong sense of humour, Race remained a quiet, private and hard-working man throughout his career and he died prematurely in London on 22 January 1964 at the relatively young age of forty-nine, survived by his wife. The 1990s saw a revival of interest in Race's early designs and a number of them were put back into production. 


@@@@@


doc= 38556


Wilson, Henry (1864-1934), architect and metalworker, was born on 12 March 1864 at 91 Red Rock Street, West Derby, near Liverpool, the eldest of three surviving children, all sons, of William Henry Wilson, schoolmaster, and his wife, Clara Louisa Broadley. Wilson, who was to become one of the most original and versatile practitioners of the arts and crafts style, studied at Kidderminster School of Art, Westminster School of Art, and the Royal College of Art, before training as an architect in the offices of John Oldrid Scott and John Belcher. His appointment in 1888 as chief assistant to the fervent Gothicist John Dando Sedding encouraged the increasingly idiosyncratic tenor of his work. Sedding, a pivotal figure in the arts and crafts movement, was himself a practising craftsman in metal and embroidery. From Sedding, Henry Wilson absorbed the heady doctrine of architectural supremacy; he later maintained that an architect 'should be the invisible inspiring, ever active force animating all the activities necessary for the production of architecture' ('Architectural Review', 5, 1898-9, 188). Wilson too came to believe that it was the sacred duty of the architect to unite the crafts, conducting a dedicated orchestra of masons, carvers, woodworkers, metalworkers, glaziers, and embroiderers. 
Wilson paid homage to his master in 'A memorial to the late J. D. Sedding', which appeared in the 'British Architect' after Sedding's sudden death in 1891. He then completed Sedding's plans for three London churches: Holy Redeemer, Clerkenwell; St Peter's, Ealing; and, most remarkably, Holy Trinity, Sloane Street, finest of arts and crafts churches and the subject of a poem by John Betjeman. He continued to practise architecture on his own account, designing a majestic free-style tower for St Clement's Church, Bournemouth (1895), and (with T. Phillips Figgis) the Notting Hill Library in Ladbroke Grove, London (1891-4). Wilson was still at the height of his architectural powers in the middle 1890s, as evidenced by Brithdir church in north Wales (1845-7) and his additions to Sedding's St Martin's Church at Marple, Cheshire (1895-6 and 'c'.1909). But he was now gradually moving away from built structures towards architectural metalwork and sculpture, and spent two years in a foundry learning professional techniques. 
Wilson was unique among arts and crafts architects in his zest for the exotic and high-flown. He was a wonderful draughtsman, and his large-scale coloured drawings (many in the RIBA collection) summon up dream interiors, inspired by Byzantine art, extravagant in materials and heavy with symbolism. His sense of drama emerges most successfully in his redecoration of St Bartholomew's Church, Brighton (1898), with its soaring marble baldachin, gold mosaic ceiling, and beaten silver tabernacle door. Wilson also carried out spectacular schemes for the library at Welbeck Abbey (1889-96) and the chapel and monument room at Wynyard Park, co. Durham (1903-6), an Edwardian shrine in richly coloured marbles. His bronze and silver pulpit for Ripon Cathedral (1913) shows Wilson consciously reviving the use of beaten metal as a decorative architectural technique, as described in the biblical account of the building of King Solomon's temple. The ornate vinous symbolism amplifies Christ's statement 'I am the vine.' 
At the same time Wilson was working on a small scale, designing the most flamboyant and inventive British jewellery of its period, originating a full-blown arts and crafts mannerist style for gold and silver brooches, cloak and bolt clasps, necklaces, combs, and tiaras. These sumptuous articles were made either in his London workshop or, from 1909, at the Thatched House, St Mary's Platt, Kent, the rural thatched and whitewashed cottage which he acquired after his marriage on 1 August 1901 to Margaret Ellinor Morse (1869-1931). Wilson's esoteric jewels were often decorated with enamelled panels, modelled figures, and unexpected combinations of, for instance, rock crystals, moonstones, and baroque drop pearls. They draw on Greek mythological and early Christian motifs. There is an impressive collection of his jewellery at the Victoria and Albert Museum; the Goldsmiths' Company, London, also holds some pieces by him. 
Henry Wilson, often known as Harry, was described by Janet Ashbee as looking 'like a seedy bank clerk' (Ashbee journals, May 1899, King's Cam.). His portrait by Sir George Clausen (Art-Workers' Guild; since stolen) gives no impression of his inner fire. Wilson was an inveterate idealist, whose belief in the moral force of handwork dominated his life. As an energetic educationist and teacher, he was associated with W. R. Lethaby both at the Central School of Arts and Crafts and at the Royal College of Art. From 1896 to 1901 he was a quixotic first editor of the 'Architectural Review'. In 1903 his handbook 'Silverwork and Jewellery' was published in a series of technical handbooks edited by Lethaby and written by teachers from the Central School. His treatise 'On Workmanship' (1912) propounded his belief that the moral health of a nation was revealed by the standards of its artefacts. This theme reappeared in his writings and lectures during and immediately after the First World War, which proposed a central role for the crafts in national regeneration. 
For thirty years Henry Wilson was in the inner circle of the arts and crafts movement, becoming master of the Art-Workers' Guild in 1917 and president of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society from 1915 to 1922. In the view of his contemporary C. R. Ashbee he was 'one of the greatest Masters the Guild produced', but 'England wasted him as she wasted Alfred Stevens and Alfred Gilbert' ('Masters of the Art-Workers' Guild', unpublished manuscript, part 3, 55). His combination of stubbornness and rash emotionalism certainly circumscribed his sphere of influence. He was the designer of the 1916 arts and crafts exhibition at the Royal Academy, controversial in its time and now regarded by many design historians as the swansong of the movement. His own professional career was in abeyance too, though his histrionic talents resurged in the design for the monument to Bishop Elphinstone at King's College, Aberdeen ('c'.1910-31) and sculpture for Coventry Council House (1912-1920) where the council chamber was richly decorated inside and outside with carvings based on animal and plant life, Lady Godiva, and other historical figures with associated heraldry, in an ambitious late flowering of Arts and Crafts eclecticism. He was always a superlative modeller, and his great bronze doors for the cathedral of St John the Divine, New York ('c'.1930), represent his final homage to Renaissance metalwork. In 1922, out of tune with the design for industry pressure groups and encroaching modernism, Wilson went to live in Paris. Family life, although impoverished, was happy and creative. The third of Wilson's four children was the violinist Orrea Pernel (who changed her name by deed poll); his youngest daughter, Dione Narona Margaris, became a well-known cookery writer and teacher ['see 'Lucas, Dione, 'under' Lucas, Colin]. He was heartbroken when his wife died in 1931, and moved to Menton, where he died, weakened and suffering from Parkinson's disease, on 7 March 1934. The maker of magnificent monuments had no official grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 38557


Vardon, Thomas (1799-1867), librarian, was the son of Thomas Vardon of Gracechurch Street, London, and his wife, Elizabeth Bryant Tarbutt. His early life is obscure and nothing is known of his education. He married Laura Ann Stapylton Johnson, daughter of the Revd A. Johnson of South Stoke, Somerset, about 1829. In February 1828 Vardon was appointed a clerk in the House of Commons and in June of that year he was appointed to the post of librarian of the house, which he held concurrently with his clerkship until September 1831. 
The house had had a librarian only since 1818, but Vardon began immediately to expand the job into a kind of parliamentary factotum, and into spheres which the more senior officers of the house had left untouched. In this he was aided by the inauguration of a commodious new library, designed by Sir John Soane, in the year of his appointment, and by a vigorous and equally enthusiastic assistant, Thomas Erskine May. After the fire of 1834, expansion continued in a well-planned and convenient temporary library, and, after 1852, in the magnificent suite of four -- soon expanded to six -- fine rooms designed by Charles Barry and A. W. N. Pugin, the centrepiece of public-room provision in the new Palace of Westminster. 
Vardon made himself and his department indispensable to the house. 'There is no subject', he told a select committee in 1835, '... on which I am not called upon to afford instant information' ('Standing committee on the library', evidence, 11-12). These are words which might be expected of a modern computer-equipped reference librarian, but in the 1830s they were singular indeed. They signalled the beginning of the House of Commons library as an institution in which the main resources were the intellect, knowledge, and ability of the staff, rather than the shelves of books -- perhaps the first example in the world of a library of talents rather than of bibliographical sources. Meanwhile, the development of the collection had not been neglected; in fact, Vardon had built up the stock of the library almost from nothing after the fire of 1834. By 1860 it was far wider than the original idea of a library of historical, parliamentary, and constitutional information, and was particularly rich in political, economic, and topographical works. Under Vardon, and often by him, classified sets of parliamentary papers were assembled, and indexing of journals and reports went forward. As he took care to have the new library suite designed as a place of relaxation as well as one of study, it rapidly became the principal social as well as intellectual centre of the house. 
Vardon died at his extensive house (as large as the clerk's) in the Palace of Westminster on 12 April 1867, from heart disease; he was survived by his wife, a son, and two daughters, and left in his will, in a series of trusts, some $80,000. Before Vardon's appointment the House of Commons library could have faded from existence at any time, unnoticed; with his tenure, it became a central pillar of parliamentary life. 


@@@@@


doc= 38558


Monoux, George (b. in or before 1465, d. 1544), merchant and local politician, was born by 1465, probably in London, the youngest of the five sons of Richard Monoux, of the Salters' Company. He was descended from John Monoux, of Stanford, Worcestershire, and the family was probably of Welsh marcher origin. He is first recorded (1485-6) in Bristol, where he exported cloth to Bordeaux, Lisbon, and Spanish ports in return for wine, oil, salt, and sugar. He rose to be mayor (1501) and there married his first wife, Joan, with whom he had three children (who predeceased him). 
At the end of his mayoralty Monoux returned to London and became a freeman of the City (1503) as a member of the Drapers' Company. By 1508 he had remarried, his new wife being Anne, 'nee' Wood, the widow of Robert Wattes, sheriff of London and a fellow draper. From 1510 he lived in Crooked Lane, New Fish Street, not far from Drapers' Hall. He was master of the company in 1508-9 and was re-elected five times between 1516 and 1539. In 1507 he became alderman of Bassishaw ward, which office he held until 1541, and in 1524 became the City's senior alderman. He was sheriff (1509), auditor (1512), and mayor of London (1514), and in 1514 he received a grant of arms. He was appointed one of the commissioners to sell the goods of Scots in London (1513), and he was also a commissioner for collecting five subsidies (1512-24). He petitioned Henry VII over cloth-making irregularities in 1508 and was on deputations seeking remission of new customs rates in 1508-9. In 1512 he lobbied parliament over a new corporation bill, so he had some parliamentary experience when in 1523 he was elected one of the four MPs for the City. He was re-elected mayor the same year, but he declined the mayoralty on grounds of ill health and was fined $1000; the fine was remitted in 1524. 
Monoux's wealth was considerable, and he invested his profits in land. His ledger traces (from 1508) the increase of his estate in London, which included ex-monastic property and well-known taverns, such as the Pope's Head. He acquired manors in ten counties, especially Bedfordshire, Essex, Norfolk, and Yorkshire. In the subsidy valuation of 1523 he was assessed at $1000, and his contribution to the loan of 1535-6 ($3000) was the highest in London. Monoux was a hard-headed and somewhat devious businessman. In 1508 he fell foul of the law banning payments to foreigners in gold coin, but escaped financial penalty. Sir Richard Gresham's plans (1537-8) for a bourse in Lombard Street to rival that in Antwerp were stalled partly because Monoux haggled over the sale of property he owned. It took Henry VIII's intervention, which Gresham said should be 'sharply made, for he ys of no gentyll nature' ('LP Henry VIII'), to browbeat Monoux into acquiescence, though the scheme was temporarily abandoned. 
As a country seat Monoux bought in 1507 the moated mansion Moones in Walthamstow, and he became a local benefactor. He built a causeway and two bridges over the Lea marshes to avoid floods on the journey into London, he provided a feast room (1527) for the proper celebration of parish weddings and holy days, and for St Mary's Church he reconstructed the tower and north aisle and built the Monoux chantry chapel. He died at Moones on 9 February 1544. His altar tomb is gone, but the mural memorial brass of him and his second wife, originally above the tomb, is now (with later inscription) in the north aisle of St Mary's. His heir, George Monoux, was the great-grandson of his eldest brother, Humfrey. In 1527 Monoux had bought land in Walthamstow churchyard on which to build a school and almshouses, and his will left City property worth $50 a year as an endowment to pay the salaries of a schoolmaster and parish clerk, who were to pray for the souls of Monoux and his wives and to teach up to thirty children. The school is today the Sir (a local posthumous courtesy title) George Monoux Sixth Form College, now on another site in Chapel End, Walthamstow. 


@@@@@


doc= 38559


Stone, Sir (John) Benjamin (1838-1914), photographer and politician, was born on 9 February 1838 at Birmingham, the son of Benjamin Stone, a glass manufacturer, and his wife, Rebecca, the daughter of Richard Matthews of Cookley, Worcestershire. Little is known about his parents, although his father's company was in Aston Manor -- a district that did not become part of Birmingham until 1911. After being educated at King Edward's School, New Street, Birmingham, Benjamin Stone (as he was invariably known) moved into his father's business, to which he later succeeded, the firm then being known as Stone, Fawdry, and Stone. He was well respected in his trade and was a juror at a number of important exhibitions in London, Edinburgh, and Paris. On 5 June 1867 he married Jane (died 1914), the daughter of Peter Parker of Lethersdale, Yorkshire. They had four sons and two daughters. Stone was made master of the court of the Glass Sellers' Company in 1882, and he also became a partner in the paper firm of Smith, Stone, and Knight, which had large paper mills in Birmingham. 
Stone's success in business ventures at a comparatively early age allowed him to become active in political and municipal affairs and to follow his deep interests in history, literary study, and, particularly, photography. An ardent Conservative at a time when Birmingham was a Liberal stronghold, he was elected to the town council for the working-class ward of Duddeston in 1869. For a time he was one of only two Conservative councillors in Birmingham. An assiduous member of various committees, he left the council in 1878, but returned to public life four years later, when he was elected to the Aston board of guardians. He also served on Sutton Coldfield council, and in 1886 he was chosen unanimously as the first mayor of the borough. Stone held this office for five years and was then presented with the freedom of the town. In addition he was a justice of the peace for Sutton Coldfield, Warwickshire, and Birmingham. For ten years from 1874 he was president of the Birmingham Conservative Association, and it was thanks largely to him that the party's local organization was kept up. Indeed, he remodelled it on the lines of the successful Liberal Party organization, with a system of ward committees overseen by a central executive. When Lord Randolph Churchill stood for election in Birmingham in 1884, Stone presided at the Conservative meeting which led to a notorious riot in Aston Park, following clashes between the supporters of rival candidates. Along with Lord Randolph, Sir Drummond Wolff, and Colonel Burnaby, Stone was prominent in founding the Primrose League. He was an active philanthropist in Birmingham and was a member of the Bean Club, reputedly the oldest political society in England. 
Following Joseph Chamberlain's acrimonious split with the Liberal Party over home rule the Chamberlainites allied themselves with the Conservatives. In Birmingham this alliance came to dominate municipal and parliamentary elections, and in 1895 Stone (who had been knighted in 1892 on the recommendation of the marquess of Salisbury) was returned unopposed as MP for East Birmingham. He retired on account of ill health in 1910. While in the House of Commons, Sir Benjamin played little part in debate, but he was prominent in the social side of parliament. His camera came to be an introduction to men of all parties, and it was as a photographer that he was best known to the public. Dubbed the Knight of the Camera by 'The Spectator', he had begun collecting photographs in a systematic way from the late 1860s. In the early 1880s he found he could no longer buy the photographs he wanted, and after making a study of the medium he started to take his own. In an interview he later explained: 'my photographic work has been done with the intention of securing records for my scientific investigation, and not merely for the pleasure of a photograph in itself. I look upon photography as being a most valuable aid to education because pictorial illustration is by far the easiest mode and pleasant manner of obtaining instruction. ('Tit-Bits', 16 April 1898)' In 1897 Stone's plan for a national photographic record association, occasioned by Queen Victoria's jubilee, was taken up; between then and 1910, 4478 prints were deposited in the British Museum. The founder of the Photographic Record Association, an organization of photographers, Stone was also the first president of the Birmingham Photographic Society. He had a deep concern for British heritage, and among his photographs were recorded many British customs and festivals, parliament and parliamentarians, Westminster Abbey, and royal palaces. His photographs of the coronations of Edward VII and George V caused him to become known as the royal photographer. Seven years after his death the trustees of his estate presented to Birmingham Reference Library his collection of 22,000 photographs, 600 stereographs, 2500 lantern slides, 17,000 glass negatives, 50 albums of collected prints, and 50 volumes of press cuttings relating to his work. These remain in the care of the city's library and archive departments. This massive collection includes topographical and other photographs relating to Europe, North and South America, India, and Australasia. Stone was widely travelled; a fellow of both the Royal Geographical Society and the Royal Historical Society and a member of the Geological Society, the Linnean Society, and the Society of Arts, he was never without his camera and notebook on his journeys. His notes led him to write a number of books, such as 'A Summer Holiday in Spain' (1873) and 'Children in Norway' (1882). Among other works were a description of his tour of Japan, a fairy tale for children, and a history of Lichfield Cathedral. In 1890 he went as photographer with the Royal Astronomical Society to Brazil; while on this trip he persuaded rebels to postpone their shelling of government positions so that he could photograph them. Sir Benjamin also visited the West Indies, South Africa, Syria, Egypt, and Palestine. 
Stone died at his home, The Grange, in Erdington, Birmingham, on 2 July 1914. His wife was seriously ill and did not know of his death; she died four days later and was buried with him in Sutton Coldfield graveyard on 7 July 1914. 


@@@@@


doc= 38560


Crofts, Freeman Wills (1879-1957), railway engineer and writer of detective stories, was born at 26 Waterloo Road, Dublin, on 1 June 1879, the son of Freeman Wills Crofts, a surgeon-lieutenant in the Army Medical Service, who died before his son's birth, and his wife, Celia Frances Wise. Both parents were of Irish protestant descent from the Cork area. When young Freeman was aged three his mother married Jonathan Harding, Church of Ireland vicar of Gilford, co. Down (1865-1900), and archdeacon of Dromore. Brought up in his stepfather's Ulster vicarage, Crofts attended the Methodist College in Belfast (1891-4), then completed his education at Campbell College in that city. In 1896 he was apprenticed to his uncle, Berkeley Deane Wise, who was then chief engineer of the Belfast and Northern Counties Railway. In 1899 Crofts was appointed assistant engineer constructing the Londonderry and Strabane Railway, and in 1900 he became district engineer of the Coleraine, Belfast and Northern Counties Railway. He became chief assistant engineer of his company, now the LMS Northern Counties Committee, in 1923. 
A keen amateur musician, Crofts was a church organist and choirmaster at Coleraine parish church and later at St Patrick's, Jordanstown. On 12 September 1912 he married Mary Bellas (1876-1964), daughter of John J. C. Canning of Coleraine, a bank manager. There were no children of the marriage. 
In 1919 Crofts suffered a severe illness and, encouraged by his doctor, Adam Mathers, he occupied his time writing a book subsequently published as 'The Cask' (1920). Set in Edwardian London and Paris, this detective story soon became a classic of the genre and 'a milestone in the history of the detective novel' (Binyon, 82). Encouraged by his agent he continued writing detective stories, producing a book nearly every year for the next three decades. His fifth book, 'Inspector French's Greatest Case' (1925), introduced that portly, dour, but methodical and meticulous Scotland Yard detective who was to feature in most of his later books, plays, and short stories. In 1931 a critic wrote that 'The alibi was Crofts's first love and the pivot of his plots... [he] exploited to the full his knowledge of the railways and found in Bradshaw a 'vade mecum'' (Thomson). Julian Symons saw him as of 'the humdrum school' but Raymond Chandler admired him as 'the soundest builder of them all' (Barnes, 270-71). Crofts's carefully constructed alibis for the murderers (often involving railway timetables) could be demolished only by French's careful attention to detail, and such was his reputation for breaking apparently unbreakable alibis that French was included with Sherlock Holmes and Hercule Poirot in Agatha Christie's parody of 'the great detectives', 'Partners in Crime' (1929). The strain of producing an annual novel while following his engineering profession affected Crofts's health, so he resigned his railway career in 1929 and moved to the quiet village of Blackheath, near Guildford, in Surrey, to write full time. 
Crofts was recalled to Ulster in 1930 when the government of Northern Ireland appointed him to inquire into the 'objections lodged against the draft scheme for the drainage of the River Bann and Lough Neagh'. He reported within a month, finding 'nothing which could not be met by compensation or slight modification of detail'. 1930 also saw the publication of 'Sir John Magill's Last Journey', set in Ulster as was the denouement of his ingenious 'Fatal Venture' (1939). Following his move to Surrey, Crofts generally used locations in the home counties, visiting local scenes with notebook and camera to aid authenticity -- the victim of 'The Hog's Back Mystery' (1933) was buried in the cutting of the new main road through that feature just outside Guildford. Several other novels were set near his Blackheath cottage. 
By 1930 Crofts was, with Agatha Christie and Dorothy L. Sayers, an active member of the Detection Club. They funded their Gerrard Street premises, and their formal dinners, by publishing stories with the chapters serially written by the members. Crofts contributed to the club's 'The Floating Admiral' (1931) and 'Double Death' (1939); his account of the 1933 Lakey murder case as 'A New Zealand tragedy' formed a part of the club's non-fiction collection 'The Anatomy of Murder' (1936). He was made a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts in 1939 and in that year he wrote in support of Moral Re-Armament ('Guildford City Outlook', February 1939). 
Crofts continued his annual Inspector French books through the Second World War, his villains often now working for the enemy cause or the settings being wartime England. Most of his books were also published in the United States, occasionally with their titles slightly modified for the American market. Translations appeared in ten languages, including two, 'The Cask' and 'Sir John Magill's Last Journey', into Gaelic and 'Death of a Train' into Esperanto. His short stories in 'Murderers Make Mistakes' (1947) were the twenty-three plays that had originally been broadcast in 1943-5 by the BBC Home Service in 30 minute episodes as 'Chief Inspector French's Cases' while 'Many a Slip' (1955) contained fuller versions of the twenty-one Inspector French stories that had appeared in the 'Evening Standard'. Crofts also wrote one story, 'Young Robin Brand, Detective' (1947), for children and a single religious volume, 'The four gospels in one story, written as a modern biography with difficult passages clarified and explanatory notes' (1949). His more successful books went into numerous reprints, fifteen titles being issued in the 'green' 'Penguin Crime' series (1945-59). His books show a cohesion and continuity as Inspector French frequently refers to his previous cases and some of the police officers reappear. 
In 1953 Crofts and his wife moved to the Sussex coast at Worthing. His final book, 'Anything to Declare?', featuring the now Chief Superintendent French, appeared in 1957. Crofts died of bowel cancer at a nursing home, 2 Farncombe Road, Worthing, Sussex, on 11 April 1957. His popularity with readers of the golden age of English detective fiction is occasionally revived and, in 2000, all thirty-six of his classic works were reprinted in paperback. 


@@@@@


doc= 38564


Bellamy, John (fl. 1773), caterer, is a figure about whom little is known other than through his association with the houses of parliament, where he held the office of deputy housekeeper and, later, housekeeper. He was also a wine merchant in his own right. Bellamy first came to prominence in 1773 when he was asked by a group of MPs to set up a dining room in the precincts of the Palace of Westminster adjacent to the court of requests; and this he did in two small rooms. Before that date there was no culinary provision: parliamentarians had to dine and drink in the numerous eating houses and taverns in New Palace Yard and the Bridgehead. Known as Bellamy's, and famed for its food and drink, the refreshment room was a noted parliamentary institution for sixty years, until it was destroyed in the fire of 1834. Prices were reported to be high at Bellamy's: 5's'. 6died for a full dinner, 2's'. 6died for 'cold meat, bread, beer and cheese'. Claret, then as now a noted parliamentary beverage, was especially expensive at 10's'. a bottle. 
Bellamy and his establishment owe their lasting fame to two sources. First, a saying by William Pitt the younger (1759-1806), whose apocryphal dying words were 'I think I could eat one of Bellamy's veal pies.' The origin is unclear, but is ascribed to Benjamin Disraeli in some accounts. (According to Pitt's nephew, James Stanhope, his final words were, in fact, 'Oh, my country! how I leave my country!' (Ehrman, 3.829).) The second, and better-founded, case for Bellamy's renown is in Charles Dickens's 'Sketches by Boz' (1836) which was based on the author's experience as a parliamentary reporter during the late 1820s and early 1830s. 
Dickens was at pains to point out the importance of 'Bellamy's kitchen' as a meeting place 'common to both Houses'. It was only in the refreshment room that 'Ministerialists and Oppositionists, Whigs and Tories, Radicals, Peers, and Destructives, Strangers from the gallery, and the more favoured strangers from below the bar, are alike at liberty to resort' (Dickens, 158). Its great advantage was that the dining room was within the Palace of Westminster, so that MPs could easily be recalled to vote: as Dickens put it, Bellamy's was the place where many parliamentarians sat out heavy debates, 'solacing themselves with creature comforts' until summoned by the 'whippers-in' when the house was on the point of dividing. 
In its latter years Bellamy's was staffed by two memorable 'Dickensian' characters. The 'steady honest-looking old fellow in black' was Nicholas, the butler. He was 'an unrivalled compounder of salad dressing -- an admirable preparer of soda water and lemon -- a special mixer of cold grog and punch -- and, above all, an unequalled judge of cheese' (Dickens, 158). With his long knowledge of the place, Nicholas would answer 'deferential questions about Sheridan, and Perceval, and Castlereagh, and Heaven knows what beside, with manifest delight'. Although seldom expressing any political opinions, he had 'a great idea of the degeneracy of the times' (ibid., 159). The other denizen of the refreshment room, also dressed in black, was Jane, 'the Hebe of Bellamy's'. Like many waitresses, she expressed a thorough contempt for the great majority of her customers; but was very flirtatious with those she liked. No bad hand at repartee, Jane showered her wit about with 'a degree of liberality and total absence of reserve or constraint' that amazed strangers (ibid., 161). 
It is not known when John Bellamy died, but his association with politics and dining lives on: since 1867 Bellamy's has been the restaurant of the New Zealand parliament, and at Westminster new catering facilities at 1 Parliament Street were named after the former housekeeper in 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 38565


Willingale, Thomas (1798-1870), labourer and radical, was born at Stanford Rivers, Essex, the son of Joseph and Charlotte Willingale. It is doubtful whether he had any education, since at marriage he could not sign his name; he passed most of his life as an obscure bricklayer, woodman, and gardener. He was by patrimony a freeman and therefore elector of the borough of Maldon. By 1807 he was living in Loughton. 
Throughout the early decades of the nineteenth century, the once extensive forest of Essex had been reduced to a rump through enclosures by adjoining landowners, both large and small, and through efforts by the government to dispose of the crown rights in the forest for cash. Starting in December 1864, the Revd John Whitaker Maitland, lord of the manor of Loughton (one of the parishes remaining most afforested), enclosed for his private profit all the woodland in the parish, amounting to no less than 1300 acres, excluding the public by fencing. He then began clearing the trees, preparatory to conveying the land in building plots. 
Willingale, who with other poor men of Loughton lived by pollarding the trees and selling the lopwood for fuel, in pursuance of the ancient rights of the parishioners, objected. On 11 November 1865, by tradition the start of the season, with his sons and a nephew he broke down the fence and lopped as usual, and continued to do so. He was summoned on Maitland's information to Epping court on 8 December 1865: he pleaded the ancient rights, and his case was dismissed by the magistrates. However, on 7 March 1866 magistrates at Waltham Abbey convicted his son Samuel and his nephews Alfred and William of damaging trees. Thomas was not charged on this occasion, probably deliberately. The young men were fined 2's'. 6died with 11's'. costs. They declined to pay, and were imprisoned for a week with hard labour. There is no evidence that Willingale himself was ever imprisoned. 
After the release of his relatives, with the active aid of the Commons Society, Willingale commenced legal action against Maitland, seeking an injunction against the further felling of trees. An interim injunction was duly obtained, but on 12 October 1866 Maitland got from Waltham Abbey magistrates an order ejecting Willingale from his cottage to be effective on 9 November. There was the offer of rehousing, but undoubtedly the idea was to disrupt the exercise of lopping rights on 11 November, on which date these had to start if their exercise was to continue. Willingale was also denied work by many of the local landowners, and found difficulty in securing a new abode in Loughton. Nevertheless, he pursued the lawsuit with total pertinacity, refusing offers of large sums of money to abandon it, and effectively setting one group of local magnates, E. N. and T. F. Buxton, and Andrew Johnston, who supported him, against another, led by Maitland and the other lords of the manors. 
The importance to the conservation movement of Willingale's defiance cannot be overestimated. The four-year stay of execution afforded by the interim injunction allowed the Commons Society to prepare its case, and the corporation of London to be persuaded to start its definitive legal action against the lords of the manors. Willingale's resoluteness may be said to have begun a tradition of militant action against acts deleterious to the environment. Willingale's stand, though doubtless firmly grounded in self-interest and sheer old-fashioned cussedness, was later much embroidered and romanticized, but it was seminal in the open-space movement. 
Willingale married Hetty Higgins on 15 October 1838; they had five children who survived beyond infancy. Willingale died on 9 August 1870 at Loughton, before his lawsuit was adjudicated, and was buried in a pauper's grave in St John's churchyard, Loughton. However, he achieved a certain amount of posthumous fame as a 'village Hampden': a school and a street were named after him, and the town's public hall, built with the compensation money when the lopping rights were eventually ended after dedication of the forest to public enjoyment, was named the Lopping Hall, and a hornbeam plaque was erected to Willingale's memory. His name was well known enough for 'Punch', fifty years after the saving of the forest, to summarize the fight of 1865-82 in the lines: '
One Willingale of Loughton; blessed be his name... 

Willingale a labourer, by lopping of a tree, 

Kept houses off the Forest, for men like you and me. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 38566


Darby, Sir (Henry) Clifford (1909-1992), geographer, was born on 7 February 1909 at 3 Cross Street, Resolfen, a coalmining village in the upper Neath valley, Glamorgan, south Wales, the only child of Evan Darby, a pit mechanic and blacksmith, and his wife, Janet, 'nee' Thomas. His father was largely self-taught, and took education seriously, giving lantern slide lectures to men's clubs and church groups on a variety of topics. 
Clifford travelled daily to Neath county school, 20 miles from his home. He was a bright pupil, and at sixteen he went to St Catharine's College, Cambridge, on a state scholarship. Although his original intention was to read English, he transferred to geography. Three years later he graduated with first-class honours in both parts of the geographical tripos, and was made a scholar of St Catharine's. When just eighteen Darby deputized for Frank Debenham, the professor of geography, in conducting an enquiry into pioneer settlement in Northern and Southern Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Two substantial chapters came out of the work in 1931-2. Back in Cambridge he completed his doctoral dissertation on the role of the fenland as a physical barrier between East Anglia and Mercia and as a place of refuge in times of turmoil. His supervisor was Bernard Manning, fellow and bursar of Jesus College. Manning was a lecturer in geography and an expert in medieval ecclesiastical history, and he probably stimulated the interest in the medieval world and the 'Domesday Book' as a geographical source which dominated Darby's subsequent professional life. At twenty-two he was awarded the first PhD in geography at Cambridge, and was appointed to a university lectureship in the geography department. A year later he became an Ehrman fellow of King's College, and then an official fellow. For such a young man to succeed so brilliantly in Cambridge immediately after the First World War was a measure of his determination, dedication, and unassuming brilliance. Darby completely reworked the fenland material as an outstanding example of the transformation of the landscape, and his work was published in two volumes, 'The Medieval Fenland' and 'The Draining of the Fens' (1940). 
The intellectual problem posed by the early fenland work was one with which Darby wrestled all his professional life: how to combine successfully place and time, geography and history; in other words, how to write a historical geography rather than a geographical history. The quest to understand the practical and methodological nuances of what he frequently called 'the intellectual borderland between history and geography' epitomized his life's work. He took the view that historical geography was the reconstruction of past human geographies and landscapes, and proselytized with a missionary zeal to establish historical geography as a self-conscious and distinctive discipline. 
The opportunity for Darby to put his ideas into practice came with his plan for the volume 'An Historical Geography of England before A. D. 1800' (1936), encouraged by his friend and mentor Sir John Clapham. It was begun when he was only twenty-four, and was an extraordinary accomplishment, both personally and intellectually, going through many reprints. Darby also began a long association with the publisher Philip, editing locational and historical atlases. 'The University Atlas' (1937) went through twenty-two editions in six languages. It was followed in 1938 by a sister publication, 'The Library Atlas', which ran to fifteen editions. About 600,000 copies of the two titles were produced. Many years later, with the help of Harold Fullard of George Philip & Sons, Darby edited a historical atlas to accompany the 'New Cambridge Modern History'. The 'Atlas' appeared as volume 14 in 1970, and was still in print some thirty years later. 
On 26 December 1941, at the church of St Mary, Tenby, Darby married Eva Constance ('b'. 1911/12), daughter of William Thomson, a doctor of medicine. She was a scholar of Girton College, Cambridge, and one of his students. They had two daughters, Jennifer and Sarah. 
Darby's intellectual reputation and record for meticulous and rigorous editing was recognized during the Second World War when he was first commissioned into the intelligence corps, and then, in 1941, became the civilian head of the Admiralty's geographical handbook centre in Cambridge, as editor-in-chief. Each handbook was a sophisticated regional geography (with much historical geography) of the countries concerned, liberally illustrated with maps (many drawn by Gwen Raverat), photographs, and statistical appendices. All the volumes remain excellent sources of information, and examples of synthesis and interpretation. Between 1941 and 1945 thirty volumes were produced in Cambridge by a team of about twenty-five distinguished geographers. As well as carrying out his editorial duties Darby wrote most of volumes 2 and 3 of France; Belgium; the Netherlands; volumes 1 and 2 of Germany; volume 2 of Yugoslavia; and volumes 1 and 3 of Greece. Portions of those on France, Greece, and Yugoslavia were revised after the war as parts of 'a short history' of those countries. For his wartime service he was appointed OBE in 1946. 
In 1945 Darby was appointed to the John Rankin chair at Liverpool University. Four years later he became professor of geography at University College, London (UCL), where he spent his most productive years and which he built into one of the major geography departments in the country. At the same time Darby became fascinated with the United States, its historical geography, and its intellectual life. He made many visits to the USA, and offers of chairs flowed in, including invitations from Berkeley and Harvard, the latter resuscitating the subject after a lapse of forty years. 
Darby was a powerful figure at UCL but declined administrative positions, preferring to devote his time to scholarship, building up the department, and proselytizing for historical geography. He also served on three government bodies. From 1953 to 1977 he was a member of the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (England). His knowledge of the history of the English landscape led to his appointment to the National Parks Commission in 1958, and in 1964 he joined the Water Resources Board. There his knowledge of the human impact on hydrological phenomena gained from his study of the fens, of national parks, and of Wales made him a valuable and active member. 
Darby's foremost scholarly project was the geographical analysis of the 'Domesday Book' (7 vols., 1952-75). In recognition of this sustained scholarly endeavour, in 1968 the British Academy elected him fellow, the first geographer so honoured. The 'Domesday' work overshadowed his other innovative works on novels, agricultural regions, medieval surveys, early censuses on migration, the relationship between history and geography, the problem of geographical description, and the human fashioning of the landscape, which may have more lasting value than the Domesday project. Darby's other major publications were 'A New Historical Geography of England' (1974) and 'The Changing Fenland' (1983). 
Darby was elected president of the Institute of British Geographers (1961), chairman of section E (geography) in the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1963), chairman of the British national committee for geography (1973-8), and vice-president of the British Academy in 1972 and 1973. He received many honorary degrees, the Victoria medal of the Royal Geographical Society (1975), and the Daly medal of the American Geography Society. He was created CBE in 1978 and knight bachelor in 1988. 
On 14 April 1992 Darby died at the Evelyn Hospital, Cambridge, having suffered from bronchopneumonia and Parkinson's disease. His dedication to work was puritanical; he communicated geographical ideas in print and in lectures clearly, succinctly, and unambiguously. He was a towering figure in British geography for sixty years in the mid-twentieth century and was in the first rank of scholars in the country. 


@@@@@


doc= 38567


Brame, Charlotte Mary (1836-1884), novelist and benefactor, was born on 1 November 1836, at Rosary House, 35 Castle Street, Hinckley, Leicestershire, the eldest of the nine children of Benjamin Law (1814-1859), superintendent registrar and clerk to the Poor Law Union, and his wife, Charlotte (1814-1877), sister of Robert Heathcoat. Charlotte Brame's parents were devout Roman Catholics, and at Charlotte's birth they were master and matron of the workhouse. Although well-to-do by most standards, the family never forgot the poor; Charlotte's father was a generous benefactor and she followed his example throughout her life. Her father was also the local correspondent for the 'Leicester Journal', and encouraged his daughter to write; she published her poems in the local press from an early age. Initial fears for Charlotte's health prompted a baptism by a lay person which was regularized a year later, and poor health was to dominate the rest of her life. Early education in Hinckley was followed by convent schools in Bristol and Preston and by a finishing school in Paris. On her return to England, Charlotte secured positions as a governess in Dover, Brighton, and then Leicestershire. It was at this time that she wrote and submitted stories to the Roman Catholic periodical 'The Lamp'. 
Charlotte's character was described at her death as 'one of the brightest, best and most estimable of women, purely noble and charming to a fault. She possessed a cheerful mind, a vivid poetic imagination, was gifted with a wonderful memory and had keen perception and insight into character. She had a glowing passionate love of flowers and had in society a marvellous conversational power and charm. ('Leicester Chronicle', 29 Nov 1884)' On 7 January 1863 Charlotte married Phillip Edward Brame (1839-1886), a London-based jeweller and the son of John Brame, a Baptist minister. He was never an astute businessman, however, and his business fortunes declined along with his health and sanity. He was given to drinking and his behaviour became increasingly erratic, so that Charlotte was impelled to write, in order to support the family. Her stories appeared in popular weekly publications such as 'Bow Bells', the 'London Reader', and the 'Family Herald'. She was incredibly prolific, writing somewhere in the region of 130 novels during her lifetime. Charlotte Brame's fiction was invariably set in English country houses, and her characters were beautiful and wealthy heiresses, eligible bachelors, and aged and wise matriarchs. Against this milieu, she reworked the theme of love in all of its multifarious aspects -- old love, young love, jealousy, suspicion, misalliance, and improvident marriage. High morals such as honour, a sense of duty, and self-sacrifice are lauded as the greatest of virtues. The books also contain strong descriptive passages, some of which are drawn from her associations with Leicestershire. 
The Brame family settled at 1 Albert Street and 42 Delancey Street, Camden Town, London. Charlotte had nine pregnancies, but only four of her children lived to maturity, all of which took a toll on her own already less than robust health. She secured a permanent position on the staff of the 'Family Herald', but business failure forced the family to move to Cheetham, Manchester, where they lived first at 68 York Street and then 47 Elizabeth Street. For health reasons the family then moved to Brighton. The only existing handwriting by Charlotte Brame are three letters in which she describes fears over failing health, worries about family finances, and expressions of loneliness. The family returned to Rosary House, Hinckley, in 1879. Charlotte continued to write, sending manuscripts to the London editors, and, in spite of her domestic concerns, she performed many acts of charity. 
Charlotte Brame's death at Rosary House, on 25 November 1884, was unexpected and painful. Large numbers attended her funeral before interment in Ashby Road cemetery, Hinckley. She died owing money and all her children were taken into guardianship at her death. As a tragic sequel, Phillip Brame committed suicide in May 1886. A commemorative blue plaque was set on her house and a brass memorial plaque was placed in St Peter's Church, Hinckley. 
During her lifetime, Charlotte Brame did not receive the income to which she was entitled because her stories were shamelessly pirated in America, especially in the 'New York Weekly', many appearing under imposed pseudonyms such as Bertha M. Clay, Caroline M. Barton, and Mrs Florence Norton. Her books were extremely popular, and continued to attract a worldwide audience into the twentieth century. Translations were made into Spanish, Polish, and Arabic. Several of the works were dramatized, and two of the Bertha Clay titles were used as the basis for films; 'Wife in Name Only' (1923) starred Tyrone Power. A contemporary contributor to the 'Family Reader', Charles Garvice, reproduced some of Charlotte Brame's works, and during the 1940s and 1950s Wright and Brown reprinted a large number of the titles. The Lythway Press, in the 1960s, also reprinted several of the stories, and other editions have appeared. Her enduring if unobtrusive presence is indicated by a passing reference in Frank McCourt's 'Angela's Ashes' (1996): 'Mam says she wants to join the Library too, but it's a long walk from Laman's house, two miles, and would I mind getting her a book every week, a romance by Charlotte M Brame or any other nice writer.' In her short lifetime, Charlotte Brame was one of the unsung women authors of the nineteenth century. Her literary endeavours, in a male-dominated field, her works of charity, and her personal stamina and resilience, in the face of family tragedy and ill health, represent a triumph in adversity. 


@@@@@


doc= 38568


Thompson, Francis (1808-1895), architect, was born on 25 July 1808 at Woodbridge, Suffolk, the second of the seven children of George Thompson (1777-1862), builder and county surveyor of Suffolk, and his wife, Elizabeth (1786-1856), 'nee' Miles. The Thompsons had been farmers in nearby Bredfield during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, though Francis's grandfather Jacob Thompson (1744-1834), a Quaker, was a builder and his uncle Mark Grayston Thompson ('c'.1785-1852) and his first cousin William Pattison (1805-1878) were local architects. 
Thompson was educated at Woodbridge grammar school, and absorbed an early interest in architecture from seeing his uncle's and father's work. A miniature at the age of twenty-one shows him with reddish hair. A full-length photograph of 1859 by William Notman of Montreal shows him of medium height and lean build, with full wavy hair and goatee beard. A photograph of 1871 by J. W. Thomas of Hastings shows receding hair and a groomed beard and moustache. 
Thompson was married three times. His first marriage was to Anna Maria Watson ('c'.1810-1832) at Woodbridge church on 17 May 1830. Ambition and a spirit for adventure took the pair to Montreal in Canada. Their son Francis Jacob was born in 1831. Anna died the following year during the cholera epidemic which claimed 4000 lives in Montreal. With a flair for hard work and a natural ability in design, Thompson received commissions from new settlers and established merchants for houses, commercial buildings, court facilities, a church, and -- in partnership with John Wells (1789-1864) -- the imposing St Ann's market hall. The building became the Canadian parliament house (1844-9). 
Growing civil unrest between the French majority and the increasing number of British settlers prompted Thompson to return to Britain in 1837. The timing was fortuitous. Railway companies, still in their infancy, were eager to employ architects and engineers to meet new and exciting challenges in design and construction. It was into this field of work that Thompson moved. In February 1839 the North Midland Railway, about to construct a 72 mile line from Derby to Leeds, appointed him their architect. Their engineer was Robert Stephenson (1803-1859), and an acclaimed working relationship was established between the pair. 
At Derby, Francis designed the world's first comprehensive railway settlement, with a magnificent station and three-bay glazed train-shed, locomotive roundhouse and workshop, workers' houses, and a hotel. Late Georgian in character, the hotel, roundhouse, and houses form part of the Derby Station conservation area. The station was enlarged several times and redevelopment, rather than restoration, was carried out during the 1980s. 
Robert Stephenson and Francis Thompson next acted for the Chester and Holyhead Railway (1845-50), and at the Menai Strait produced one of the finest examples of engineering architecture to be found in the nineteenth century. The Britannia Bridge was damaged by fire in 1970, but the elegant masonry escaped damage and now supports steel arches in lieu of wrought-iron tubes. The elegant Italianate station which Thompson built at Chester resembled the one at Derby in layout, but has bay platforms at either end. 
Around 1840 Thompson married again, and following the death of his second wife, Elizabeth (1815-1852), he married Mary Ann Groves (1818-1896) of Wareham, Dorset, on 30 June 1853. Retracing steps taken twenty-three years earlier, he sailed with his new wife for Canada. The Grand Trunk Railway of Canada and the Atlantic and St Lawrence railroad, with a 900 mile route planned to link Portland, Maine, with Montreal, Toronto, and Detroit, appointed Francis their architect from 1853 to 1859. He designed the masonry for the Victoria Bridge in Montreal, the terminus at Portland, Maine (claimed to be the largest station in America when opened in 1855), elegant stone and slate standard-plan stations, and workshops. 
In April 1859 Thompson returned to London and in 1866 he designed a house at Hastings for retirement. Memories of his childhood, however, induced a move back to Bredfield, where he died on 23 April 1895. He was buried two days later in Woodbridge cemetery. Once a well-paid architect, long retirement drained his resources, and he died intestate and impoverished. 


@@@@@


doc= 38572


Campoli, Alfredo (1906-1991), violinist, was born on 20 October 1906 in Rome, the son of Romeo Campoli, an orchestral leader and violin professor at the Accademia di Santa Cecilia, and his wife, Elvira, 'nee' Celi, an opera singer. From the age of four he was taught the violin by his father, who had him listen to recordings of the Italian baritone singer Mattia Battistini in order to acquire a bel canto style of playing. The family moved to London in 1911, and at the age of ten the young prodigy made his debut as a soloist. He then gave recitals, and won several first prizes and two gold medals, one of which was at the London music festival in 1919 for his performance of Mendelssohn's violin concerto. In the same year he gave a brilliant first recital at the Wigmore Hall, and in 1921 a series of six impressive recitals there resulted in his engagement to play for the International Celebrity Concerts. So, at the age of fifteen, he toured the British Isles with the singers Dame Nellie Melba and Dame Clara Butt. He became a very successful concert artist over the next few years. He also spent time in light music, and in 1926 was asked to form a small group to record light classics, of which a serenade by Heykins became a great favourite. Campoli's Salon Orchestra played at the Trocadero Grill Room in 1927 and at the Dorchester Hotel in 1931. This experience proved useful because during the depression of the 1930s, when life was difficult for most classical musicians, Campoli managed to earn a living with his Salon Orchestra, which gained immense popularity through its hundreds of broadcasts of light music, public concerts, and many recordings. The serious side of his career was maintained by giving recitals and performances of concertos throughout the country, and he first appeared at the Henry Wood Promenade Concerts in 1938, when he performed Paganini's concerto no. 1. 
Regarded as an enemy alien when the Second World War broke out in 1939, Campoli was barred from performing in public, but he obtained British naturalization in the same year, disbanded his orchestra, and spent the war years playing in concerts for the troops at home and overseas. At the same time he worked at expanding his classical repertory. In 1942 he married Joy Burbridge, who had been Sir Adrian Boult's secretary. Campoli performed the Brahms violin concerto at a Prom concert in 1944 and the Tchaikovsky concerto the following year. 
After the war Campoli resumed his classical concert career and, despite some initial snobbery by those who regarded him simply as a 'salon' player, he soon gained a reputation for his artistry and fine interpretations and appeared under such conductors as Sir Thomas Beecham, Sir Adrian Boult, Sir Malcolm Sargent, and Sir John Barbirolli. He also played abroad, and in 1950 he toured Australia and New Zealand. He made his American debut in 1953 with the New York Philharmonic at Carnegie Hall, playing Lalo's 'Symphonie espagnole', then toured America and Canada. In Russia in 1956 he performed the Walton concerto, and he became very popular there. At one concert in Leningrad an enthusiastic audience had him play eleven encores. In 1955 he gave the premiere in Moscow of the Bliss concerto, which was dedicated to him. He gave many recitals with the pianist Gerald Moore, and during the 1960s formed a duo with the pianist Valerie Tryon. In 1978 he gave a recital at the Wigmore Hall. 
When he retired at the age of seventy-five his wife said that Campoli put his Dragonetti Stradivarius of 1700 'away and never took it out of the case again' ('Daily Telegraph', 30 March 1991). Unusually, this Stradivarius still had its original peg-holes and neck. Campoli continued to teach at his Highgate home, was an excellent croquet and bridge player, read books on music, bridge, and tennis, and owned more than 2000 records. When younger, he played tennis and table tennis and was south London junior snooker champion. His sense of humour was revealed by Monica Parkhurst: his reason for being known professionally as Campoli was that 'when it was announced 'Alfredo Campoli is now going to play...', he believed people tended to hear 'I'm afraid old Campoli is now going to play...'' ('The Independent', 5 April 1991). 
Campoli was a greatly loved and respected performer whose Italian singing style of playing was coupled with a dazzling technique and a warm, sweet, beautiful tone. He kept all four fingers on the bow (except, of course, for 'sautille'), would not use a shoulder-rest, disliked gymnastics, and practised every day. From his many recordings a number of gems, such as the Bruch, Mendelssohn, and Elgar concertos, have been reissued on CD. He died on 27 March 1991 at Princes Risborough, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 38575


Hall, Marie Pauline (1884-1956), violinist, was born on 8 April 1884 at 15 Victoria Street, Newcastle upon Tyne, the daughter of Edward Felix Handley Hall and his wife, Helen Parsons. She was born into a musical family. Her father was a harpist in the Carl Rosa Opera Orchestra and hoped that she would learn that instrument. He first taught her but she wanted to learn the violin, so from an early age had lessons from a local teacher, Hildegarde Werner, and soon became a very good player. Together with her father, her uncle and brother (violins), and sister (harp) she played in the homes of music lovers in her home town, Malvern, and also in Bristol. Emile Sauret heard her play when she was aged nine, but her parents did not follow up his advice to send her to the Royal Academy of Music in London. She continued her studies locally, and over the next few years was under various well-known teachers. 
Elgar had heard her and gave her some lessons at Malvern in the summer of 1894, and he sent her to A. E. D. F. Wilhelmj in London where she studied under him for three months in 1896, and in 1898 she studied under Max Mossel at the Midland Institute in Birmingham. In 1899 she won a scholarship to the Royal Academy of Music against forty competitors but the poor financial state of her family prevented her from taking it up. However, the music scholar Edmund Fellowes was a great help to her: he took some friends to hear her play at a concert which had been arranged at All Saints Hall and they were so impressed that they began a campaign to raise funds to enable her to receive a good training. In 1900 Johann Kruse gave her free lessons in London. Also she was helped by the wealthy English music patron and amateur composer P. Napier Miles. Then in 1901 she played for Jan Kubelik and he advised her to study under his old teacher Otakar Sevcik at the Prague Conservatory. She went there in September. Sevcik thought her very talented and she made excellent progress. Her professional debut was made at a concert in Prague in 1902 and was an immediate success, as was her performance in Vienna in January 1903. Her studies under Sevcik ended in 1903 and she began touring with great success. 
Edmund Fellowes, when comparing Hall with other violinists in his memoirs, cited tributes from 'The Times' and other papers. One reviewer commented that 'Miss Hall is the only female violinist who has essayed the Paganini Concerto in D in public. This she played with a technical skill so consummate that it seemed as if it were just as easy to play octaves on the violin as on the piano. (Fellowes, 80)' According to another, 'If Kubelik has not been actually out-Kubeliked, he must look to it on pain of being outshone by Miss Marie Hall as a virtuoso, while her musical temperament and equipment are far more sympathetic and responsive than his' (ibid.). It was observed that 'Her technique is flawless, but besides this she has at her command a fund of real musical feeling which she exhibited in Beethoven's 'Kreutzer' Sonata and especially in Bach's Chaconne' (ibid.). In 1903 she played the Tchaikovsky violin concerto and Wieniawski's 'Faust' fantasia under Henry Wood with the Queen's Hall Orchestra: a critic observed that 'This wonderful girl gave a performance of Wieniawski's 'Faust' Fantasia that was notable for brilliant execution, fire, and decision. She was recalled nine times after this exploit amid a scene of enthusiasm rarely witnessed in a concert-room' (ibid.). There was a remarkable occasion on 22 January 1904 at St James's Hall when she performed the Mendelssohn, Beethoven, and Tchaikovsky violin concertos in succession with the Queen's Hall Orchestra under Henry Wood. Marie Hall toured all over the world with enormous success, and made her debut in America on 8 November 1905 with the New York Symphony Orchestra under Walter Damrosch. She was in Australia in 1907 and India in 1913. She appeared with the Queen's Hall Orchestra again on 1 January 1909, when she performed the Tchaikovsky concerto. 
On 27 January 1911 Marie Hall married her manager, Edward Baring. They settled in Cheltenham and had a daughter. After her marriage, although she cut down on her appearances, she also introduced new violin works, including 'The Lark Ascending' by Vaughan Williams (composed for and dedicated to her in 1914), which she premiered in London on 14 June 1921 with the British Symphony Orchestra under Adrian Boult. Other new music she performed was by Rutland Boughton, Gordon Bryan, and Percy Sherwood. Her appearances continued until 1955 with her daughter, Pauline, as accompanist. She played on a 1709 Stradivarius which was named after her. 
Regarded as one of the finest violinists of her time, Marie Hall had a beautiful tone and fine musicianship. Sir Henry Wood wrote that 'In my mind's eye I can still see that frail, delicate girl coming on to the platform and can hear her faultless intonation and pure technique' (Wood, 204). She made many recordings on the HMV and Gramophone and Typewriter labels. These included a shortened version of the Elgar violin concerto in 1916, N. Paganini's 'Moto perpetuo', J. J. Raff's 'Cavatina', Sarasate's 'Jota aragonesa', op. 27, and C. Sinding's romance no. 1, op. 79. She died on 11 November 1956 at the General Hospital, Cheltenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 38577


Jaffa, Max (1911-1991), violinist, was born on 28 December 1911 at 25 Goodge Street, London, the son of Israel Jaffe, an immigrant Russian-Jewish tailor then working as a butcher, and his London-born Russian wife, Millie Makoff (died 1932). On his sixth birthday his father gave him a half-size violin, hoping the boy would later make money from the instrument. He studied for two years under a second-rate teacher, and was about to give up when he was taken to hear Jascha Heifetz's debut, and changed his mind. He then took lessons from Wilhelm Sachse, and at the age of thirteen auditioned for the Guildhall School of Music, where his main teacher was Max Mossel. To supplement his scholarship he played in orchestras at Lyons tea houses and as an accompanist to silent films in cinemas, and formed a trio which played in hotels; later he led the orchestras at the Trocadero and Piccadilly hotels, playing the light classics which were to become his stock-in-trade. He won several college prizes, and in October 1931 he graduated from the Guildhall with the gold medal and principal's prize. 
Still only nineteen, Jaffa was appointed leader of the Scottish Orchestra (later the Scottish Symphony Orchestra) in November 1931, taking leave from the Piccadilly Hotel, but he did not enjoy the experience, and he returned to London in February 1932 to resume his career with the Piccadilly Salon Orchestra, before going freelance and playing at venues including the Cafe de Paris and Ciro's, and for film soundtracks. On 7 October 1934 he married Bessie Joseph ('b'. 1911/12); their daughter, Elizabeth, was born in January 1936, but the couple lived almost separate lives. 
During the Second World War, Jaffa served in the Royal Artillery, then as a pilot in the RAF, and later in the Air Transport Auxiliary. He hardly touched the violin during the war, and after demobilization in November 1945 had practically to relearn it with the help of his last teacher, Sasha Lasserson. He joined the Mantovani Orchestra, at the back desk (though he eventually became its leader), was the violin soloist on its bestseller 'Charmaine' (1951), and made regular broadcasts with the orchestra for the BBC. In 1948 he bought a Pietro Guarnerius violin of 1704, which became his favourite instrument. He also played with the BBC London Studio Players and occasionally stepped in to the Albert Sandler Trio when Sandler was ill. After Sandler's death in 1948, Jaffa took his place (with the cellist Reginald Kilbey and the pianist Jack Byfield), and the Max Jaffa Trio toured the country, making their first television appearance in 1954. From May 1956 they were regulars on 'Music at Ten', where their lack of scores and scripts lent an air of easy informality to the show. They toured widely and played together until Jack Byfield's death in 1976. Also in 1956, Jaffa became soloist and leader of the BBC Palm Court Orchestra for the popular and long-running radio programme 'Grand Hotel'. Jaffa was divorced from his first wife, and on 24 June 1959 he married the singer Jean Grayston 
(real name Jean Sylvia Gluckstein, 'b'. 1925/6)
, whom he had met in 1956. They had three daughters. 
In 1960 Jaffa began his long association with Scarborough: for twenty-seven years he entertained holidaymakers there during a seventeen-week summer season of concerts given by his fifteen-piece Spa Orchestra. Consisting of light classical pieces, often including more substantial works, these concerts were given in the Grand Hall and broadcast by the BBC. Jaffa had a different programme each night for three weeks, and then repeated the concerts. He received the freedom of the borough of Scarborough in 1986, when, after a mix-up, he gave up the summer seasons. But he did not retire, making broadcasts on BBC Radio 2 while leading the Palm Court Orchestra at the Grand Hotel in Brighton, and toured Britain with a programme entitled 'Max Jaffa -- sixty years of music'. During his last performing years he suffered from tinnitus, and he finally retired in 1990. He was appointed OBE in 1982 and was an honorary fellow of the Guildhall School of Music. He published 'How to Play the Violin' (1986) and his autobiography, 'A Life on the Fiddle' (1991), and made several recordings. Of short stature, always immaculately dressed, Jaffa was a friendly man much loved by his public, his colleagues, and his family. He died peacefully at his home, 31 Elm Tree Road, St John's Wood, London, on 30 July 1991; his second wife, Jean, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 38580


Reed, William Henry (1876-1942), violinist and composer, was born on 29 July 1875 at Christ Church Street, Frome, Somerset, the son of Francis John Reed, an Inland Revenue officer, and his wife, Emma Mary Warren. He was educated privately, and studied the violin with Emile Sauret and composition with Ebenezer Prout at the Royal Academy of Music. On 9 April 1902 he married Harriet Eveline ('b'. 1876/7), daughter of Arthur Dreyfus, a broker. Reed joined the Queen's Hall Orchestra, and when the London Symphony Orchestra (LSO) was formed in 1904 he was one of many players who left to join the new orchestra, under its principal conductor Hans Richter. In 1912 he became leader, a position he held until 1935. With Arthur Nikisch as conductor, the LSO was the first British orchestra to visit the United States and Canada. When Reed resigned as leader in 1935 he was invited to become chairman of the LSO board. 
Reed was associated with the Three Choirs festival from 1902, when he first played in the orchestra; in 1910 he became leader of the Festival Orchestra, continuing to lead it until 1938, the last festival before the war. Through the festival he became a close friend of Sir Edward Elgar, and when Elgar was working on his violin concerto, op. 61, in 1910, he called on Reed to help with the arrangement of the passage work, the bowings, and the fingerings, and to play new passages as he wrote them, so that he could get them down exactly as he wished them to be played. In August 1910 Reed was asked by Elgar to play the whole concerto to a group of friends before the Gloucester festival, with the composer at the piano, and when the concerto had its first public performance in November 1910 with Fritz Kreisler as the soloist, and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, Reed played in the orchestra. After the composer's death, Reed published an article, 'Elgar's violin concerto', in 'Music and Letters' (16, 1935). As an indication of his friendship, in 1914 Elgar dedicated 'Sospiri', op. 70, for strings, harp, and organ, to 'W. H. Reed'. Elgar continued to seek Reed's help when writing violin music, and in 1918 Reed helped with the violin sonata, op. 82, and gave its first public performance with Landon Ronald at the Aeolian Hall. As second violin of the British String Quartet he took part in the first performances of Elgar's string quartet, op. 83, and piano quintet, op. 84, in 1919, and he was a member of the string quartet that played at the funeral of Alice, Lady Elgar, on 10 April 1920. Reed also took part in the recording of some of Elgar's works, including the first recordings of 'Falstaff' (op. 68) in 1929, and the 'Nursery Suite', in both of which he played the solo violin part with the LSO. After the BBC commissioned Elgar to write a third symphony in 1932, he worked closely with Reed until his own final illness, when he asked Reed, a few months before his death in 1934, to promise not to let anyone 'tinker' with the unfinished symphony after his death. Despite this, and despite the assurances given by the BBC to Elgar's daughter, who had handed the manuscripts over to the BBC for safe keeping, that none of them would be published in whole or in part, Reed reproduced forty pages of the sketches for the symphony in facsimile, together with a detailed commentary based on his discussions with the composer, in 'Elgar as I Knew Him' (1936). On the basis of these the symphony was reconstructed and completed by Anthony Payne in 1997 to great acclaim. Reed also wrote a biography of Elgar in the 'Master Musicians' series, which was published in 1939. 
Reed was a prolific composer himself, and many of his orchestral works were first performed at the Three Choirs Festival from 1904 onwards, when his orchestral fantasia, 'Scenes from the Ballet', was played at the Gloucester festival. His most popular works were 'Will o' the Wisp' (Gloucester 1913), 'Lincoln Imp' (Hereford 1921), and 'Aesop's Fables' (Hereford 1924), and other works included the scherzo fantastique 'Caliban' (Gloucester 1907), 'Variations for Strings' (Worcester 1911), the rhapsody for viola and orchestra (Hereford 1927), the 'Symphony for Strings' (Gloucester 1934), and the overture 'Merry Andrew' (composed for the cancelled 1939 festival and first performed at Hereford in 1946). Reed taught the violin at the Royal College of Music, where he had many devoted pupils. He also conducted several amateur orchestras, including the Croydon Symphony Orchestra, which he helped to found in 1920 as the Croydon String Players Club, and when the Croydon Philharmonic Society organized an Elgar festival in 1935 Reed performed the violin concerto. 
In 1939 the archbishop of Canterbury conferred on Reed the honorary degree of MusD. Reed died of heart failure on 2 July 1942 at St Joseph's College, Dumfries, while examining candidates for the Associated Board. The strings of the London Symphony Orchestra played at his memorial service in Croydon parish church on 18 July 1942, and his ashes were buried in Worcester Cathedral, near the Elgar memorial window, on 15 October 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 38581


Sammons, Albert Edward (1886-1957), violinist and composer, was born on 23 February 1886 in Fulham, London, the son of Thomas Sammons ('b'. 1863), a street musician, and his wife, Annie Jackson ('b'. 1875). He attended the Edinburgh Road School, Barlby Road, London. Without academic training, his only violin lessons were from his father (an amateur violinist) in childhood, and from two orchestral colleagues early in his career. He played in restaurants and theatres from the age of twelve, and in 1909 was heard playing at the Waldorf Hotel by Thomas Beecham, who offered him a place in the Beecham orchestra. A few months later he became leader, and he subsequently learned the symphonic, opera, and ballet repertory as he went along. In later years the conductor commented that Sammons was the finest leader he ever had. Sammons married Laura Molly Tomkins on 31 October 1907; the marriage ended in divorce in 1920, and on 5 December 1921 he married Olive Hobday. 
Sammons founded the London String Quartet and led it from 1910 to 1919, but it was a performance of Elgar's violin concerto in 1914 that launched his solo career. The composer avowed that no other violinist could match his performances: 'Sammons gets to the heart of it' (private information). In 1915 Sammons began a musical partnership with the Australian pianist William Murdoch which lasted until the latter's death in 1942, and together they made many fine recordings of the classical repertory and of English music. 
Always keen to encourage British composers, Sammons gave first performances of, and recorded, chamber works by Ralph Vaughan Williams, Frank Bridge, John Ireland, Elgar, Delius, Herbert Howells, Granville Bantock, Eugene Goossens, and Edmund Rubbra, and concertos by Delius and George Dyson. Notable performances included the premiere of John Ireland's second sonata in March 1917; and he also took part in the first performance of Elgar's piano quintet in 1919. Delius dedicated his violin concerto to Sammons, who also made the first complete recording of Elgar's violin concerto in 1929, with Sir Henry Wood. 
In 1919 Sammons formed the Chamber Music Players, a group of flexible instrumentation that could perform programmes containing anything from three to seven players. This, together with a sonata repertory with Murdoch and concerto playing, was the basis of a career that lasted until the onset of Parkinson's disease in 1946. Sammons was appointed professor of violin at the Royal College of Music in 1939 and was remembered with affection by the many pupils who entered the musical profession after his careful guidance. At the same time he would joke that he himself had never received a prize for violin playing. He was the composer of a number of light pieces for violin and piano, written mostly during his early career as a cafe musician. They show an instinctive grasp of musical structure in spite of his total lack of tuition in any branch of musical theory. More significantly, he won the Cobbett prize in 1915 with a 'Phantasy' quartet. He also published sets of violin studies. 
Sammons had a modest, friendly, and humorous personality which endeared him to his pupils, and his magnificent tone, astonishing technique, and faultless intonation never ceased to be a wonder to them. Sammons was obliged to give up concert work by 1948 as his illness progressed, and finally gave up teaching in 1954, by which time he could walk only with difficulty. A benefit concert was given in his honour at the Albert Hall in December 1954; he attended it confined to a wheelchair. He was appointed CBE in 1944 and died at Middleton-on-Sea, Sussex, on 24 August 1957; he was cremated in Brighton. 
Sammons's good humour and resilience never left him. While attending a rehearsal of the BBC Symphony Orchestra in his final years, on walking in the break with great difficulty to the canteen with an acquaintance, he held up his left hand, now shaking in the manner characteristic of Parkinson's disease, and said with a smile, 'Look Harry, I've got the best vibrato in the world now' (private information). 
Sammons was one of the finest of English violinists, though his fame was limited by circumstances. He was shy, diffident, and because of a fear of flying always refused offers of work abroad. Nevertheless, his performances and recordings were held in high esteem by violinists the world over. J. Heifetz, F. Kreisler, J. Szigeti, and Mischa Elman were friends and devotees, and younger players as diverse as I. Perlman, P. Zukerman, and Nigel Kennedy have acknowledged their debt to his recorded performances. 


@@@@@


doc= 38582


Wood, Haydn (1882-1959), composer, was born on 25 March 1882 at Slaithwaite in Yorkshire, the son of Clement Wood (1833-1886) and his wife, Sabra Sykes, who died in 1902. He was the youngest of twelve children, four of whom did not survive infancy. He was born into a musical family. His father having been captivated by a performance of Haydn's 'Creation' shortly before his birth, Wood was named after that composer (but the name was pronounced to rhyme with maiden). When he was two his family moved to the Isle of Man, where he lived throughout his childhood. In a supportive family Haydn Wood received violin lessons from his older brother Harry and became a child prodigy. By the age of twelve he was featured playing solos in Slaithwaite and at the island's holiday resort, Douglas. At fifteen he won a scholarship to the Royal College of Music, studying violin with Enrique Fernandez Arbos and composition with Charles Villiers Stanford, whose traditionally minded approach consolidated Wood's own metier, which eventually brought him worldwide recognition as a composer of popular ballads and light classical orchestral music. At the opening of the Royal College of Music Concert Hall in 1901 the solo violinist was the nineteen-year-old Haydn Wood. Present were the great violinists Joseph Joachim and Pablo Sarasate, whose commendation helped decide him to go to Brussels for special training under Cesar Thomson. As solo violinist he embarked on a world tour with soprano Mme Albani, with whom he was associated for eight years. Composition remained a driving force. In 1905 his 'Phantasy' string quartet came second in the competition for the prestigious Cobbett chamber music prize. His piano concerto, first performed in 1909 to very good reviews, received its most prestigious performance in London's Queen's Hall in 1913 under Willem Mengelberg. 
On 23 March 1909 Wood married the popular soprano (Clara) Dorothy Court (1883-1958), daughter of Thomas Court. This led to his writing lyrical romantic ballads, eventually numbering more than 200. His melodic gift and ability perfectly to marry his inspiration to the lyrics he astutely chose brought him enormous success, notably with 'Bird of Love Divine' (1912), 'Love's Garden of Roses' (1914), and 'A Brown Bird Singing' (1922). His most famous song, 'Roses of Picardy', was first set by Herbert Brewer and rejected by the publishing firm Boosey. Fred Weatherly then took his lyrics to Haydn Wood and Chappell published their song in 1916. Perfectly expressing the hope that rose above the anguish engendered by the horrors of the First World War, the song was an immediate hit. Over 3 million records and over 2 million song copies were sold and Wood's fortune was made. 
Music for the stage came in 1915, when Wood contributed material for 'Tina' at the Adelphi. This was followed in 1917 with the musical comedy that he composed, 'Cash on Delivery', staged at the Palace Theatre. He also contributed to 'Dear Love', staged in 1929 at the Palace Theatre, London. He wrote 'Lochinvar' and other major choral works, and several solo pieces for solo violin and other instruments. 
Haydn Wood's numerous orchestral compositions, eagerly welcomed by the many light orchestras and ensembles flourishing in municipalities, theatres, cinemas, spas, and seaside resorts, ranged from unpretentious, tuneful miniatures such as 'An Evening Song' (1923), many incorporated into suites such as 'Paris' (1935), 'Frescoes' (1936), and 'Cities of Romance' (1937), to more extended pieces like 'A May-Day Overture' (1918), and those founded on Manx folk tunes and dances such as the tone poem 'Mannin Veen' (1932) and rhapsodies 'A Manx Rhapsody' (1931) and 'Mylechrane' (1946). His traditional style most effectively expressed itself in more serious symphonic works with his overture 'Apollo' (1935), 'Soliloquy' (1949), 'Philharmonic Variations' for cello and orchestra, and in particular the violin concerto. 
Wood was quiet and unassuming and his lifestyle in later years was increasingly retiring, though he did appear on the rostrum from time to time to conduct his own works. His music's popularity continued to the end of his life, and included a BBC Light Music Festival commission in 1954, 'Gipsy Rhapsody'. His march 'The Horse-Guards, Whitehall' from the suite 'London Landmarks' (1946) was a signature tune for the popular BBC radio programme 'Down your Way' over many years. His tuneful output continued into his seventies, including 'Serenade to Youth' (1953) and the march 'Lutine Ahoy' (1954). Having suffered from heart disease for some time, Wood died peacefully in a London nursing home, The Priory, Roehampton, on 11 March 1959, shortly before his seventy-seventh birthday. He had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 38583


Grant, Isabel Frances (1887-1983), promoter of Scottish Gaelic culture and writer, was born on 21 July 1887 at 34 Melville Street, Edinburgh, the eldest of the six children of Colonel Hugh Gough Grant CB (1845-1922), of the 78th and Seaforth Highlanders, and his wife, Isabel Mackintosh (1864-1960) of Balnespick. Isabel Grant, known familiarly from childhood as Elsie, was brought up in London and in the north of Scotland, particularly at Muchalls in Kincardineshire, details of which she was to recall in later writings. Her parents went to India when she was young, leaving her in London in the care of her grandfather Field Marshal Sir Patrick Grant, governor of Chelsea Hospital and gold stick-in-waiting to Queen Victoria, and with an unmarried aunt, Frances Gough Grant. 
While living in London, Elsie Grant was educated privately with governesses; in the course of her education she frequently visited the British Museum, where she was inspired by the Elgin marbles and Greek and Roman sculpture. Although these were her earliest memories of museums, they were not her most formative ones. A visit to Stockholm and Oslo took her to the pioneering museum projects of Skansen in Sweden's Nordiska Museum and Norway's Sandvig collection at Lillehammer. Here the formal and conventional display of museum collections was combined with open-air collections of buildings and their contents, often moved from dispersed locations and re-erected on the site. The folk museum movement in Europe had grown in the 1870s out of the ideas and inspiration of the Swede Artur Hazelius, whose example had not been followed in Britain but whose work Elsie Grant admired. A visit to the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam in 1912 showed her how the staff of a European national museum studied and presented 'peasant culture', methods particularly exemplified in the costume gallery. 
From these experiences Elsie Grant developed her vision of a museum for the highlands of Scotland which would preserve a fast disappearing material culture and its Gaelic traditions and values. While adopting these examples, she nevertheless maintained that the concept of a folk culture of peasant communities was inappropriate to the Scottish highlands; she argued that the Gaelic way of life should be seen as the survival of an ancient and aristocratic culture rather than of the primitive and unsophisticated. The springboard for her highland folk museum was the Highland Exhibition held in Inverness in 1930, after which some of the 2100 exhibits were retained or acquired for a 'national folk museum'. This initiative failed to develop as envisaged but was carried forward by Elsie Grant personally when she used a legacy to purchase a building in Iona in which her folk museum was established in 1935. The collections soon outgrew this island site and the museum was moved to another property at Kingussie in Inverness-shire, where the museum, named Am Fasgadh ('The Shelter'), opened in 1944. It contained a unique wealth of highland and Hebridean artefacts, including domestic material and furniture, and the tools and implements of crofting and farming, demonstrating the distinctive identity of the material culture of highland history and also the rich variety evident between the regions and localities of a relatively small country. In addition she reconstructed four buildings on the site. The Highland Folk Museum was acquired for the four Scottish universities in 1954, when Elsie Grant decided to retire. 
Elsie Grant was awarded the honorary degree of LLD by the University of Edinburgh in 1948 and the MBE in 1959. She was the author of more than a dozen books and a selection of articles, having developed her scholarly and critical faculties when working as a research assistant to J. M. Keynes during the First World War. This output included: her first and favourite work, 'Everyday Life on an Old Highland Farm, 1769-1782' (1922), which analysed the farm accounts of a highland tacksman, a vilified class whom she persuasively defended; her seminal 'The Social and Economic Development of Scotland before 1603' (1930); and the intriguing 'The Lordship of the Isles' (1935). All are major works which still hold their place on university reading lists. 
Elsie Grant was a tall and commanding figure whose temperament and determination matched the impression of a large physique. When she retired to Edinburgh, her hospitable flat in Heriot Row became a convivial meeting-place for the many Scottish scholars, young and old, invited to her often challenging soirees. She died, unmarried, at her home, Viewpoint, 22 Lennox Row, Edinburgh, on 19 September 1983, and her ashes were interred at Dalarossie, Strath Spey, on 25 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 38584


MacPherson, Mary (1821-1898), poet, was born on 10 March 1821 at Skeabost, Skye, the second youngest child of John Macdonald, crofter, known as Ian Ban Mac Aonghais Oig, and his wife, Flora MacInnes, daughter of Neil MacInnes of Uig, Snizort. Educated at home in domestic skills, she left Skye for Inverness to marry Isaac MacPherson, a shoemaker, on 11 November 1847. He died in 1871 leaving four surviving children. Mary MacPherson was imprisoned on a charge of theft in 1872, and later that year she moved to Glasgow. There she trained as a nurse at the Royal Infirmary gaining a nursing certificate and a diploma in obstetrics. She practised in Greenock and Glasgow until her return to Skye in 1882. 
MacPherson found her poetic voice while serving sentence, expressing in Gaelic verse her protestations of innocence and profound sense of outrage. A frequent member of Highland Society ceilidhs in Glasgow, she met leading advocates of highland land reform, including John Murdoch, editor of 'The Highlander' newspaper, and became well known for her poetry. Her support for Charles Fraser Mackintosh, candidate in the Inverness burghs election of 1874, was declared through her early songs. She later accompanied him during his campaign for election to parliament. A prominent figure during the land league agitation of the 1880s, she recited her Gaelic verses at principal gatherings. Song was a primary vehicle of the dissemination of information to Gaelic speakers without literacy in the language of the printed press. Her poetry, and that of other bards of the land agitation, also provides an essential body of Gaelic evidence relating to the highland land movement. Angus Macbain, the Celtic scholar, believed that her songs contributed to the success of crofter candidates in the 1885-6 elections, and described her as the bard of the movement. Her personal sense of injustice and empathy with the sufferings of her people gave a unique force to her poetry. In 1891 a volume entitled 'Gaelic Songs and Poems, by Mrs Mary Macpherson (Mairi Nighean Ian Bhain)' was published. These were transcribed from her recitation, for although she could read her own poems she could not write them. 
A gregarious woman of great physical stature, MacPherson numbered among her friends the scholar Professor John Blackie. He always wore the plaid she made for him, which was placed upon his coffin. Her design was patented as the 'Blackie tartan', which she sold as rugs or wraps. She was the official bard of the Clan Macdonald Society. 
After a short illness Mary MacPherson died on 7 November 1898 while visiting Portree, Skye. She was buried on 10 November in Chapel Yard burial-ground, Inverness, where Charles Fraser Mackintosh MP erected a monument. A plaque to her memory was unveiled in 1966 at Skeabost, and a film was made of her life by Comataidh Telebhisein Gaidhlig in 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 38585


Allingham, Helen Mary Elizabeth (1848-1926), watercolour painter, was born on 26 September 1848 at Swadlincote, Derbyshire, the eldest of the seven children (three boys and four girls) of Alexander Henry Paterson (1825-1862), medical practitioner and surgeon, and his wife, Mary Chance Herford (1824-1894), daughter of John Herford, a Manchester wine merchant. Both her parents came from staunchly Unitarian families with Unitarian ministers on both sides, although she was not especially observant herself. On her mother's side, Helen Paterson was related to eminent Unitarians such as Joseph Priestley, Elizabeth Gaskell, and Bessie Parkes. She inherited artistic talent from this side of her family too: her grandmother, Sarah Smith Herford, gained limited recognition for her oil painting, and Helen's aunt, Laura Herford, was the first woman to gain admission to the Royal Academy Schools in 1860. 
Within a year of Helen's birth the Paterson family moved to Altrincham, Cheshire, where the Herfords lived. She grew up in an enlightened middle-class family environment and received her early education at the Unitarian School for Girls in Altrincham founded by her grandmother. Of medium height and thin, with fairish hair, she became a rather reserved character, very close to her family and a small circle of friends. Following the death of Helen's father and youngest sister in a diphtheria epidemic in 1862, the family moved to Birmingham to live with her paternal grandmother and aunts. Financial difficulties experienced during these years had a profound effect on her, teaching her the importance of thrift; she became a hard-working and consistent supporter of her family for the rest of her life. From 1862 to 1866 she attended the Government School of Design in Birmingham where she was awarded prizes for her art. In 1866 she enrolled at the Female School of Art in Bloomsbury, prior to entry to the Royal Academy Schools in 1868: nominally she remained a student until 1872 but she rarely attended after 1870 as she became disillusioned with the lack of tuition. Only the academician Frederick Walker encouraged her desire to paint in watercolour. His influence can be seen in her choice of subjects during the 1870s, in which a large figure dominated the picture and landscape is of secondary importance. 
From mid-1868 Helen Paterson also worked as a freelance illustrator for various children's magazines such as 'Once a Week' and 'Little Folks'. In January 1870 this led to a permanent position as illustrator on a new weekly periodical, 'The Graphic', whose visual content was innovative. She was the only woman on the staff. That same year she started exhibiting with two drawings at the Dudley Gallery in Piccadilly. In 1872 she attended evening classes at the Slade School alongside Kate Greenaway, a lifelong friend. Helen illustrated Thomas Hardy's novel 'Far from the Madding Crowd' when it was first serialized in 'Cornhill' magazine in 1872, and Annie Thackeray's novel 'Miss Angel' for the same journal in 1875. Hardy admired her illustrations for his first truly successful novel and later asked her to illustrate 'A Laodicean', an offer that she declined. She exhibited two paintings at the Royal Academy in 1874 entitled 'Wait for me' and 'The Milkmaid'. 
On 22 August 1874 Helen Paterson married the Irish poet William Allingham (1824-1889) at the Unitarian Chapel, Little Portland Place, London. There were three children of the marriage, Gerald Carlyle ('b'. 1875), Eva Margaret ('b'. 1877), and Henry William ('b'. 1882). After her marriage Helen Allingham relinquished her post on 'The Graphic' and from 1874 concentrated on her painting. She moved into circles which included her husband's artistic friends such as Edward Burne-Jones and William Morris and literary figures including Thomas Carlyle and Alfred Lord Tennyson. She illustrated her husband's book of children's poetry 'Rhymes for the Young Folk' (1885) using their children as models for the sketches. In 1875 her painting achieved recognition when she was elected associate of the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours; she was the first woman to be granted full membership in 1890. She exhibited annually at the society from 1875 until 1925. 
Although Allingham painted some seaside scenes in the late 1870s and early 1880s during family holidays in Kent and the Isle of Wight, it was rural life which really inspired her. In 1881 the family moved to Sandhills, near Witley, Surrey, where Birket Foster and Edmund Evans were already living. The surrounding cottages and countryside determined the work for which she is best known. From then on she rejected the use of bodycolour in favour of pure watercolour and followed Walker's lead in painting 'en plein air' for most of the year. She depicted the cottages she saw around her in Sandhills with minute attention to detail such as the mortar round a chimney or moss on roof tiles. Children -- often her own -- appeared in her scenes, as did young women engaged in various gentle rural pursuits or just watching the world go by. During the 1880s her figures became smaller, taking their place in the landscape, while the cottages grew in significance. It was Helen Allingham's ability to paint a romantic view of rural life with exquisite precision that captured the public's imagination. Friendship with her Surrey neighbour Gertrude Jekyll introduced garden scenes into Helen's pictures with the flowers painted in similar detail. Her cottage paintings were so popular that the Fine Art Society invited her to hold her first one-woman exhibition of sixty-six pictures entitled 'Surrey cottages' in 1886 and another six months later. Thereafter she generally exhibited twice a year at the Fine Art Society until 1913, as well as exhibiting elsewhere. 
William Allingham's ill health brought the family back to London -- this time Hampstead -- in 1888 where Helen was left a widow a few months later at the height of her popularity but with little money and three children to support. She continued painting six days a week, travelling around Middlesex and Buckinghamshire and to the west country to paint the cottage scenes the public craved, though she herself was tiring of her subject matter. After 1900 when her popularity began to wane, Allingham searched for new subject matter. In 1901 and 1902 she visited Venice, but the sixty watercolours resulting from these tours have never been as popular as her English cottage scenes. She occasionally painted portraits of children and of her husband's friends including Thomas Carlyle and Alfred Lord Tennyson, but these were usually private commissions. Her paintings were used to illustrate books such as Marcus Huish's 'Happy England' (1903), a description of her life and art; her brother Arthur Paterson's 'Homes of Tennyson' (1905); and Stewart Dick's 'Cottage Homes of England' (1909). She herself published editions of 'William Allingham's Diaries' with Dollie Radford (1907) and 'Letters to William Allingham' with Mrs E. Baumer Williams (1911). 
After the First World War, Helen Allingham's scenes lost favour and were considered old-fashioned and sentimental, though she continued working as hard as ever producing cottage paintings. On 28 September 1926 she died of acute peritonitis while staying with a friend at Valewood House, Haslemere, Surrey, where she had gone to paint. She was cremated at Golders Green on 2 October 1926. A plaque commemorating her life was erected inside Rosslyn Hill Chapel, Hampstead, London. After her death, Allingham's works remained unfashionable until the 1980s. Viewed as overly sentimental and pretty, they were dismissed as the product of a woman artist. Allingham herself had no interest in the feminist movement (and her paintings showed country women enshrined in traditional domesticity), but her style and choice of subjects cannot be attributed entirely to a desire to remain within 'womanly' bounds. Financial considerations were clearly her prime motivation, and when her cottage scenes lost their commercial appeal, she exhibited an ability to explore new subjects. While it may seem strange that a pupil of Frederick Walker and an illustrator for 'The Graphic' was so unaffected by the social realism of fellow artists of the 1870s, her paintings deserve to be assessed on their own merits and recognized as among the best of their genre. In her choice of subject matter, Helen Allingham -- like the Pre-Raphaelites -- harked back to an idyllic past that never really existed. She played an important role in the late nineteenth-century idealization of the English countryside and the growth of a nostalgic movement for the preservation of rural life and crafts. Her cottage scenes remain the most popular, but her finest works are considered to be the few domestic interiors that she painted, often using her own children as models. Many of her paintings can be found in the Hampstead Museum, Burgh House; the Victoria and Albert Museum; and the British Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 38586


D'Arcy, Constance Eleanor Mary Byrne (1857?-1937), writer, was born in Pimlico, London, one of the nine children of Anthony Byrne D'Arcy (1826-1873), corn factor and maltster, and his wife, Sophia Anne (1833-1891), daughter of John Matthews, town clerk of Gravesend, Kent. Her father's family home was Drummartin Castle, near Dublin, and she had a private income from the estate. Educated at a convent in Clapham and abroad, she studied fine art between 1875 and 1877 at the Slade School of Art, London. Relinquishing art, because, it was said, of poor eyesight, she turned to short-story writing. Her early work, some of it under the pseudonym Gilbert H. Page, was published in 'Argosy', 'All the Year Round', 'Blackwood's Magazine', and 'Temple Bar'. 
Greater recognition came when 'Irremediable' appeared in the first issue of the 'Yellow Book'. Ella D'Arcy acted, at least in an unofficial capacity, as an assistant to the quarterly's founder and editor, Henry Harland (1861-1905), and was a frequent guest at his soirees. She had more work published in the 'Yellow Book' than any writer other than Harland himself. Her stories regularly explore bleak lives, brittle and emancipated women, and the misery of marriage to a designing, selfish, or stupid partner, such as Esther in 'Irremediable', who 'evinced all the self-satisfaction of an illiterate mind'. Other stories, including 'The Death Mask' and 'At the Villa Lucienne', are evocations of horror and fear, or, like 'The Web of Maya', of the psychology of the obsessed. A group of stories set in the Channel Islands contrasts peasant superstition with a heartless sophistication among the landed class. Although she was regarded as 'a distinctive voice in fin-de-siecle literature' (Orel, 255), and the 'most astringent writer of her sex in the 'nineties' (Stanford, 63), Ella D'Arcy's output was modest: she was given to polishing and repolishing her work and was regarded by a contemporary, N. Syrett, as the laziest woman she had ever met. Her first collection of short stories, 'Monochromes', was published in John Lane's 'Keynotes series' in 1895. 'Modern Instances' followed in 1898, also the year of publication of her sole novel, 'The Bishop's Dilemma', the tale of a weak priest who has a wishy-washy love affair and takes to drink. 
Quickened interest in the latter part of the twentieth century in the writers and artists of the 1890s has focused in the case of Ella D'Arcy on the French influence on her work (especially that of Maupassant), and on the short story as a vehicle for the expression of cynicism, discontinuity, and isolation. Her realism has also been analysed, with its depiction of a broader cross-section of society including its failures, its willingness to embrace taboo subjects, and its readiness to detail the commonplace. The quality of her descriptions has also been admired, many of them having a visual appeal held to derive from her training as an artist. In her interest in the supernatural and in the folklore of the Channel Islands, Ella D'Arcy has been held to foreshadow the work of Elizabeth Goudge, Sheila Kaye-Smith, John Ferguson, C. Northcote Parkinson, and G. B. Edwards. 
Ella D'Arcy was short in stature, with ginger hair, small greenish eyes, and a large upper lip. Her love of travel and habit of losing touch with her friends for months before turning up unannounced earned her the nickname of Goblin Ella. Frederick Rolfe described her as a 'mouse-mannered piece of sex' (Rolfe, 31), while Constance Smedley, who had failed to persuade her to join a literary coterie, found her 'entirely sincere and unsentimental' (Smedley, 46). She had a zest for life, was amusing and witty, keenly interested in genealogy, sharp and penetrating in her judgements, and with decided views on most subjects. Ella D'Arcy's last years were spent in Paris, where she lived in a single room in the rue Jacob, but she was brought to England in 1937 after a stroke and died in a London hospital on 5 September 1937. She was buried in the Roman Catholic section of the Brookwood cemetery. She is best-known for her short stories, and for her translation into English of Andre Maurois's 'Ariel' (1924), a biography of Shelley. 


@@@@@


doc= 38587


Wilkinson, John Joseph Tate (1769/70-1846), actor and theatre manager, was the first of the five surviving children of Tate Wilkinson (1739-1803), the manager of the York circuit of theatres, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Doughty. Already from 1797 a member of the company, Wilkinson assumed its management on his father's death and, although his active role ended with his bankruptcy in 1814, he remained closely associated with and financially dependent on the (diminishing) circuit until his own death in 1846. 
According to his father's memoirs, 'The Wandering Patentee', Wilkinson had 'a genteel education' and was 'proficient a little in music'. Sometimes he would supplement an evening's bill by dancing a minuet. However he was 'too diffident' to shine on the stage, despite being a favourite with a perennial patron, the countess of Mexborough. He never performed with the regularity of the majority of the company and rarely took a leading role: he customarily played Paris in 'Romeo and Juliet', doubled as Tyrrel and the duke of Norfolk in 'Richard III', and took the role of Cromwell in 'Henry VIII'. But he made the part of the eponymous George Barnwell his own, chose Blusherly in Richard Cumberland's 'The Natural Son' for one of his benefits, and appeared most frequently as Jack O'Connor in O'Keefe's 'Prisoner at Large'. 
In February 1794 Wilkinson married Sarah Maria Reynolds (1771/2-1832), who had first come from Covent Garden to play with the company in November 1790, and who was a permanent member from January 1792 onwards. Both before and after her marriage she performed far more often than Wilkinson himself, her preferred roles including Polly in 'The Beggar's Opera' and Rosetta in 'Love in a Village'. 
Initially John Wilkinson's management was little different from his father's -- the company progressed on the same basis from Hull to York, Leeds, Pontefract, Wakefield, and Doncaster in the course of the year -- but he obtained fewer bespeaks, engaged fewer stars, and began, in an effort to retain audiences, to mount more extravagant spectacles. By 1809 there were reports of his financial difficulties, and Pontefract was dropped from the circuit. At the same time, having been criticized for the condition of his Hull theatre, Wilkinson contracted with the Hull corporation for $1260 to buy land for a new one in Humber Street; he made a down payment of $500 and agreed to pay interest at 5 per cent on the remainder. His new theatre, capable of holding 1700 and designed by Charles Mountain the younger, was financed by subscriptions and opened on 1 May 1810 with Stephen Kemble in James Thomson's 'Tancred and Sigismunda'. But Dorothy Jordan, writing from Wakefield in 1811, complained that Wilkinson did not have the money to pay her. In 1813 the Leeds theatre, in Hunslet Lane, the only one in the circuit to which Wilkinson had the absolute title, was offered unproductively for sale. Later the same year the circuit was advertised, abortively, as to be auctioned as a whole. 
Wilkinson's bankruptcy in 1814 placed the administration of the circuit in the hands of trustees at York and at Hull, where they represented the interests of the shareholders in the new theatre. Wilkinson held the key assets of the royal patents for Hull and York, the freehold of the Leeds theatre, a financial stake in the theatre at Hull, and leases -- for various periods of time and on various conditions -- for the theatres at Doncaster, Wakefield, and York. While the circuit was sub-let to a series of actor-managers, and Doncaster and Wakefield were lost in the 1830s, Wilkinson was able to retire, with his wife, three of his four daughters, and his son, to live a quiet life as an independent gentleman at Acomb, York, drawing an income principally from rents paid by sub-lessees and from the annual, and often lucrative, benefits held on his behalf. Wilkinson died at his home in Front Street, Acomb, on 20 January 1846. 


@@@@@


doc= 38588


Smedley, Joseph (1784-1863), actor and theatre manager, was baptized on 8 February 1784 at Patrick Brompton, Yorkshire, probably the second child of Abraham Smedley, agent to the Dundas family, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Close. His parents had married at Barton St Cuthbert on 25 August 1772, and a daughter, Elizabeth, was baptized at Hornby by Bedale on 20 February 1774. Smedley was destined for the bar but by 1803 he was married and both he and his wife, Melinda, 'nee' Boleyn or Bullen (1783/4-1870), were members of a stock company which, under the management of Thomas Shaftoe Robinson and Robert Henry Franklin, played in a circuit centred on Lincoln. By 1806, when he began an association with the newly built theatre in Burgess Street, Grimsby, that was to last for some thirty-five years, Smedley was himself the manager of a small company which in 1809-10 numbered twelve players, five of whom were women. In many places he utilized 'fit-ups': at Melton Mowbray performances were in auction rooms and at Gainsborough the 'theatre' was the great hall of a fourteenth-century manor house; at Rotherham it was a disused chapel. However, Smedley built theatres himself, at Sleaford (in 1824) and at March, and purchased others, at Southwell in 1814 and at Wakefield in 1836. 
Smedley was a freemason, initiated in 1809 into St Matthew's Lodge, Barton upon Humber, and was a petitioner in 1812 for the formation of Apollo Lodge, Grimsby. Letters from fellow mason the Revd Dr George Oliver, covering a period of forty years, indicate the importance of masonic connections in ensuring Smedley's having both a licence to play and patronage for his performances. The correspondence also dwells on the threats from rival managers, the sub-letting of Grimsby theatre to supplement Smedley's income, the prospects for a winter season at Grimsby based on the number of vessels laid up in the docks, Methodist opposition to theatrical entertainment, the effect on Smedley's business of agricultural depression, and arrangements for Smedley to put on -- anonymously -- plays written by Oliver. 
Smedley was praised for his 'uniform regularity and good conduct' (Lincolnshire County Archives, LLHS 38/9/3/2), and for his firm control over the members of his company. He was 'a tragedian on stage but off it a dandified gentleman, full of self-confidence and importance' (Scruton, 128). His playbills regularly included moralizing comments and his evening's entertainment, the conventional double bill of the period, was described in the 'Wakefield and West Riding Herald' as 'unlikely to disturb the most fastidious puritan' (20 Nov 1835). Financially sound, but never greatly prosperous, he advised others on the money to be made from creating a billiard room under the stage and sub-letting theatre buildings for non-theatrical events. 
Six of Smedley's children -- four daughters and two sons -- joined the company: he had at least two other sons. In the 1830s he concentrated increasingly on the growing towns of the industrial West Riding, including Barnsley, Bradford, Huddersfield, Rotherham, and Wakefield. He rarely engaged stars and had a repertory in which plays by Shakespeare, Sheridan, and Elizabeth Inchbald and adaptations of the novels of Dickens and Scott featured prominently. In 1841 Smedley gave up theatre management and settled in New Sleaford, Lincolnshire, where he set up in business as a printer and bookseller and where, in North Street, he died of typhus on 1 March 1863. 
Between 1806 and 1841, in a period when evangelical opposition had a considerable effect on theatre audiences, Smedley had maintained what was perhaps the most extensive (in terms of both distance and the number of places where his companies performed) of provincial itineraries, having in 1833 the management of theatres in at least eighteen towns in Derbyshire, Cambridgeshire, Leicestershire, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, and Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 38589


Hammond, William John (1797x9-1848), actor and theatre manager, was born in London between 1797 and 1799. A low comedian and singer, he first played on the London stage as Lopez in John Tobin's 'The Honeymoon' in around 1819. In July of that year he was recruited to a newly formed stock company then playing at Walton-on-Thames, and the following September he joined Thomas Trotter's company at the Theatre Royal, Worthing, before going on to John Brunton's company at Brighton. In 1820-21 he alternated between the Haymarket Theatre and Penley's company, which was playing at Worthing, Windsor, and Coventry. After a brief spell at the Olympic, he was engaged by William Macready (father of the tragedian W. C. Macready) as a member of his company at Bristol. Between 1823 and 1826 he played the York circuit under the successive managements of Robert Mansel and Thomas Downe. During these first years of his career on the stage he achieved considerable popularity as Bob Acres in 'The Rivals' and as Tony Lumpkin in 'She Stoops to Conquer'. 
From 1826 to 1829 Hammond and his wife, Jane Matilda, the daughter of Samuel Jerrold and a sister of the playwright Douglas Jerrold, were members of the company playing at the Theatre Royal, Liverpool. In 1829 Hammond entered a partnership to run the Liverpool Pantheon; he reopened it as the Liver Theatre and continued his association with it until 1836. In April 1830 he took over the York circuit, which then included the theatres royal at Hull and York and further theatres at Doncaster, Leeds, and Wakefield. His period of management was brief, but in terms of his reception and the stars he engaged it was second only to that of Tate Wilkinson. Among others, he brought Edmund Kean, Charles Mathews, Frederick Yates, and Madame Vestris to his theatres. None the less he relinquished all but the Doncaster theatre in 1832 when he failed to secure a reduction in his rents. He continued to provide an annual autumn season at Doncaster until 1839, and took on the lease of the Sheffield theatre at $300 a year (exclusive of gas, water, and taxes) from 1833 to 1839. 
Meanwhile, and initially in partnership with his brother-in-law Douglas Jerrold, Hammond became the proprietor of the Strand Theatre, London, which had been opened in 1831. Here, from 25 May 1836, he enjoyed his greatest successes, putting on comedies, farces, and burlesques, including 'The Pickwickians' and 'Sam Weller's Tour', in both of which he created the part of Sam Weller, and burlesques of 'Othello' and 'The Lady of Lyons'. Disaster followed when he took on the management of Drury Lane from October 1839. Despite the patronage of Queen Victoria, who made her first public appearance after her marriage at the theatre, Hammond's management ended at the beginning of March 1840, when he was declared bankrupt with debts of $8000. 
After more than a year in prison, Hammond sought to revive his fortunes by starring with provincial companies, where he was enthusiastically received in his popular old parts. John Coleman observed that 'He had wigs of all kinds and costumes of every description, but he was always Hammond in another wig and another coat' (Coleman, 1.282). In 1842 he held a brief lease for the Liverpool Theatre Royal, and in 1846 he opened another Liverpool theatre as the Theatre Royal Adelphi. Unsuccessful there, he sailed for America in June 1848, but died in New York on 23 August from dysentery. His effects, put up for auction, included the scarlet frock coat he wore as Tony Lumpkin for his debut at Niblo's Theatre, Astor Place, a variety of other costumes, a host of wigs, and the orchestral parts which singers were expected by custom to provide. 


@@@@@


doc= 38590


Rice, Charles (bap. 1820, d. 1880), actor, theatre manager and playwright, was born in Brompton, London, where he was baptized on 6 February 1820, the son of Thomas Rice, a mason, and his wife, Mary. His father is said to have undertaken building work at Buckingham Palace. An inclination towards art led to Charles Rice's being apprenticed to an engraver and to his preparing drawings for publication by the Royal College of Surgeons. However, finding some of his subjects -- especially the head of a murdered woman -- too distressing, he ran away from home and joined a company of players on a circuit in the southern counties. 
Rice's career reflects the major changes in nineteenth-century provincial theatre, from the days when an actor-manager depended on providing an annual season at each of a circuit of theatres to maintain his stock company, to the era of considerable investment in new theatre buildings, open for most of the year, to host touring productions, usually from the London stage. 
As an actor Rice's chief talent was for low comedy, but he was versatile enough to succeed in roles as varied as those of the Artful Dodger, Rip van Winkle, played with 'quaint humour and pathos' ('Bradford Observer', 13 April 1880), and King Lear. He delighted in stage machinery and applied his artistic skills to set design and painting scenery. In 1844 he formed a partnership with John Mosley, which lasted until 1847, to run a west Yorkshire circuit of theatres in Bradford (for which Rice designed a new facade), Huddersfield, and Wakefield. Rice dramatized episodes of local significance for the Bradford theatre, including 'The Gibbet Law of Halifax, or, A Legend of Kirklees Abbey' ('c'.1846). 
In August 1850 Rice's adaptation of 'The Three Musketeers' was performed in Manchester. From 1851 to 1868 he was associated primarily with London theatres, including the Grecian Theatre, where his pantomime 'The Fairy and the Fawn' was put on in 1852, and the Surrey, Britannia, and Strand theatres, as a playwright and actor, but he starred also at Glasgow and at provincial theatres. On 24 December 1856 he married Hoxton-born Harriet (or Harriot) Hart, who, although not herself an actress, shared his love of design and worked with him in management. 
Rice began management on his own account at Oldham, where he took a three-year lease of the Working Men's Hall at $300 a year, opening it with a stock company as the Theatre Royal in August 1865 with his own play 'The Stricken Oak', in which he made use of Professor Pepper's ghost illusion and which had already been put on that same year in Glasgow and York. His first Christmas pantomime at Oldham that year was his own 'Koh-i-noor', which contained 'extraordinary mechanical effects rather surprising to see attempted on this stage' ('Oldham Evening Chronicle', 23 Dec 1865). In 1868 Rice moved to Bradford, where he leased the recently built Theatre Royal, Manningham Lane, and where he remained until his death, from cirrhosis, at his home, 1 Drewton Street, Bradford, on 12 April 1880. For much of the year the Bradford theatre served as a receiving theatre for touring productions, but Rice created an annual in-house pantomime, for which he was widely celebrated. 
In 1873 Rice took over the running of Covent Garden theatre for the Christmas period, putting on his own 'Red Riding Hood and Little Bo-Peep' with a profusion of bad puns, a transformation scene that was a 'triumph of mechanism and art' ('The Times', 27 Dec 1873), and allusions to the new school boards and to the Tichborne claimant. The following year saw his 'Babes in the Wood and the Big Bed of Ware'. 'Cinderella and the Little Glass Slipper' followed in 1875, when he 'shone above his competitors in manufacturing the worst imaginable play upon words' and when the transformation scene included 'all sorts of ladies suspended in all sorts of happily impossible positions from all sorts of fabulous trees and branches of extraneous growth' ('The Times', 28 Dec 1875). 
Rice was spoken of as a 'kindly and genial gentleman' ('Bradford Observer', 13 April 1880), and he had a reputation for generosity in providing benefits for various causes at his theatres. He was a freemason and was a member of the Hope Lodge at Bradford. The Rices had no children, and Mrs Rice continued to manage the theatre until her own death in 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 38592


Emerson, Peter Henry (1856-1936), photographer and writer, was born on 3 May 1856 in Casa Grande, La Palma, Cuba, the first of the three children of Henry Ezekiel Emerson and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Billing Harris. Both parents were of English extraction, his mother directly (she came from Cornwall) and his father through descent. Among his relatives were the Americans Samuel Morse and Ralph Waldo Emerson. Emerson, who was baptized Pedro Enrique, spent his early childhood in Cuba. Following a brief period in the United States (1864-9) the family went to England, where Peter, as he now called himself, was sent to Cranleigh, a public school in Surrey. After a short time at King's College, London, in 1874, he opted for a career in medicine and studied at Clare College, Cambridge (1874-9), where his athletic skills in football and rowing were allied to his interests in science. To the amazement of his contemporaries he won the Leathes prize in theology. His father had a highly successful sugar plantation in Cuba, and Emerson always enjoyed a private income. 
Emerson practised medicine only briefly before turning to notions of art and to playing billiards. Typically, he excelled at both. He was a naturalist and an ornithologist, and his first book, a novel entitled 'Paul Ray at the Hospital' (privately published, 1882), reputedly took him only two weeks to write. He was on honeymoon at the time, but Emerson managed to balance maverick tendencies: eccentricity and idiosyncrasy were combined with a fine sense for art, science, and sport (particularly rowing). He had married Edith Amy ('b'. 1853/4), the daughter of Joseph Ainsworth, a cotton spinner, on 22 June 1881, and the couple had five children: Leonard (1882), Sylvia (1884), Gladys (1885), Zoe (1893), and Ralf (1897). 
Emerson began working in photography in 1882, and his major published works were photographic, both visual and theoretical. Of these, 'Life and Landscape on the Norfolk Broads' (1886) and 'Naturalistic Photography for Students of the Art' (1889) are the most significant -- the former for its evocative pastoral scenes and its depictions of East Anglian life, which epitomized his strong and poetic work, and the latter for its polemical discourse which countered much contemporary thinking. His approach was typified by his attitude to the retouching of photographs, which he described as 'the process by which a good, bad or indifferent photograph is converted into a bad drawing or painting' (Leggat). Among his realist contentions was that the photographer should seek to imitate human vision by blurring the periphery of the image. This brought him into conflict with the eminent photographer Henry Peach Robinson; in the course of an ill-tempered debate, Emerson memorably described Robinson's seminal 'Pictorial Effect in Photography' as 'the quintessence of literary fallacies and art anachronisms' (ibid.). In all, Emerson was the author of twenty-four books and portfolios, some of which ran to several editions. His original work is now held by, among others, the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, Bradford (Royal Photographic Society collection), the Getty Museum in Los Angeles, and the George Eastman House in Rochester, New York. Emerson was also a prolific writer of magazine articles and letters. 
With his scientific background, Emerson initially favoured the platinum process for printmaking. It had an exceptional tonal scale and was archivally as stable as the paper base would allow. It was, however, time-consuming, and he changed to using photogravure, invented by a Czech, Karoly Klics, in the 1850s. This means of reproducing images, which combined photographic techniques with those of etching, was less subtle than platinum but still allowed for a great deal of tonal control by the artist. 
Emerson was a naturalistic photographer at a time when reality had fallen from favour. He eventually decided he had been wrong to claim photographs as 'great works of art' (in 'The Death of Naturalistic Photography', a privately published pamphlet of 1891). Yet he did not abandon photography immediately, and in 1895 he was awarded the Royal Photographic Society's progress medal; later, in the 1920s, he began to issue his own merit awards. As if to accentuate his freedom from conformity, in 1908 he compiled and issued a rule book for billiards. He died of heart trouble on 12 May 1936 at his home, 3 Avenue Road, Falmouth, Cornwall, and was buried in the town. His wife survived him. 
Emerson was a photographic revolutionary who set the tenor for the method of picture making which evolved into pictorialism and later into modernism. He was also a magniloquent writer and a fighter for photography as fine art. That he was so influential can be traced to several causes: first, to his implicit self-belief, which some found insufferable; second, to his iron self-discipline and ability to succeed in everything to which he applied himself; and third, to his recognition of the place which photography held within the broader sphere of visual art and how, too, it related to science. He was a protean person; a mover and shaker -- Victorian in the manner that made fortunes, empires, and discoveries. Born to a life of privilege, he used his inheritance wisely, albeit with flashes of bravura. He preached and practised at the same rate, with no quarter given, which is why some found him difficult. Others found Emerson's lack of capacity for compromise admirable. He had resolve and resolution and was a scholar, an athlete, and an intellectual. 


@@@@@


doc= 38593


Thomson, John (1837-1921), photographer and travel writer, was born on 14 June 1837 at Portland Place, Edinburgh, the third of the four children to survive infancy of William Thomson (1794- 'c'.1870), tobacconist, and his wife, Isabella Newlands (1801-1863). His early education is unknown, but by 1851 he had become an apprenticed optician in Edinburgh, probably with the firm run by James Mackay Bryson on Princes Street. While an apprentice, he attended the Watt Institution and School of Arts during the sessions 1856-7 and 1857-8, gaining the attestation of proficiency in natural philosophy, and in junior mathematics and chemistry. He was awarded the life diploma in 1858, and also gained a Watt Club prize for English. Bryson proposed him for election to the Royal Scottish Society of Arts, although he became a member only for 1861-2. 
For reasons that are not entirely clear Thomson left Edinburgh on 29 April 1862 to join his elder brother William in Singapore. Soon after his arrival he began advertising his services as a photographer, although the following year he and his brother joined forces as makers and repairers of optical and nautical instruments. While in Singapore he began to take serious photographs, mainly cartes-de-visites, although some landscapes have survived. He also used the opportunity to travel widely around the neighbouring territories, especially Penang, and Province Wellesley. In 1865 he decided to travel to Angkor in Cambodia, accounts of which had recently been published by Henri Mouhot. He sailed first to Bangkok, arriving there on 28 September 1865, and with the assistance of H. G. Kennedy, an official at the British consulate, he gained audience with the Siamese royal family, many of whom, including King Mongkut, were the subjects of important portrait photographs. Mongkut granted permission for Thomson and Kennedy to travel to Angkor, for which they set out on 27 January 1866, and where he became the first photographer to document the site. They travelled on to Phnom Penh, returning to Bangkok to leave a set of photographs with King Mongkut. In May 1867 several of Thomson's images were reproduced in the 'Illustrated London News'. By the middle of 1866 he had returned to Britain, where he set about publicizing his travels and photographs, writing articles for the 'British Journal of Photography', and exhibiting and lecturing in Edinburgh, Glasgow, and London. His first major work, 'The Antiquities of Cambodia', was published in Edinburgh in 1867. 
Late in 1867 Thomson returned to the Far East, visiting Vietnam at first, then moving his studio from Singapore to Hong Kong in 1868. He wrote a number of articles, illustrated with his own photographs, for the 'China Magazine', became the official photographer for the duke of Edinburgh's visit in 1869, and published a second book of photographs, 'Views on the North River'. After marrying Isabel Petrie in Hong Kong on 19 November 1868, he began an intensive period of travelling around mainland China, taking a large series of wet-collodion photographs with the intention of returning to Britain and publishing them in book form. Between 1870 and 1872 he undertook four distinct journeys, up the north branch of the Pearl River, up the River Min to the area around Foochow (Fuzhou), to Peking (Beijing), and finally up the great Yangtze (Yangzi) River. The photographs taken on these journeys form one of the most extensive photographic surveys of any region taken in the nineteenth century. The range and depth of his photographic vision mark Thomson out as one of the most important travel photographers. During the early part of this period he was based in Hong Kong, but in 1870 he sold his business as a going concern, leaving part of his stock of collodion negatives behind but taking the best material with him. In Foochow he worked closely with Justus Doolittle, an important American missionary in the area, and in 1871 he travelled to Taiwan, visiting a Scottish medical missionary, the Revd James Laidlaw Maxwell, in whose company he took the earliest extant photographs. In Peking, Thomson again sought out westerners, especially through the British legation, and for a time acted as the correspondent of the 'Illustrated London News'. The British minister, Sir Thomas Wade, gave him the important task of photographing senior Chinese officials including Li Hongzhang, Shen Kew Fen, and Prince Gong himself. Thomson's photographs of China form what he himself intended to be a 'visual encyclopaedia' of the land, its people, customs, industry, and architecture. The surviving body of work embraces most of the principal genres of photography with equal skill. Although Thomson's intention for his photographs was for them to be an impassive documentary record -- truthful in a way that he felt only photography could be -- they none the less betray a viewpoint coloured by his background as a product of Britain's imperial ascendancy. 
In the autumn of 1872 Thomson returned to Britain, reunited himself with his family, who had returned in 1870, and settled in London. He immediately began the task of promoting and disseminating his photography. He contributed a series of illustrated articles on life in China to 'The Graphic' in 1872-3, published privately a magnificent portfolio of carbon prints, 'Foochow and the River Min' (1873), and more importantly a large-scale work, 'Illustrations of China and its People' (1873-4), which was responsible for firmly establishing his reputation as a photographer, traveller, and leading authority on China. A series of well-received books and articles followed, most importantly 'The Straits of Malacca, Indo-China, and China' (1875), a condensed version of his Far Eastern travels, and his edition and translation of Gaston Tissandier's work as 'History and Handbook of Photography' (1876) which, in its second edition (1877), included the last writings of William Henry Fox Talbot. In 1876 he joined forces with the journalist Adolphe Smith on an important monthly publication entitled 'Street Life in London', which pioneered the genre of photojournalism, combining hard-hitting, albeit posed, street photography, with documentary-style prose. His final overseas travelling took place in 1878 to Cyprus, a journey that resulted in the de luxe two-volume publication 'Through Cyprus with the Camera in the Autumn of 1878'. 
Throughout the 1880s Thomson concentrated on building up his commercial portrait studio, which he moved from Buckingham Palace Road to settle eventually in New Bond Street, and which gradually acquired a clientele of the fashionable rich, which increased after he gained the royal warrant on 11 May 1881. Throughout the 1880s and 1890s Thomson was employed on a number of commissions to take portraits of the royal family, both in Scotland and London. He also gained commissions through his associations with the Royal Geographical Society, of which he was made a fellow in 1867, and for whom he became instructor in photography in 1886, tutoring prospective travellers in photography, writing instructive articles in the society's publications, and organizing exhibitions, such as the Sixth International Geographical Congress, for which he acted as secretary. As his reputation grew, lucrative commissions followed, including those to document the art collection of Alfred de Rothschild, and to act as one of the official photographers at the Devonshire House fancy dress ball in 1897. In later life he continued to allow his photographs to be reproduced in a wide variety of publications, most notably children's encyclopaedias, and a number of awards followed, including a gold medal at the Paris International Geographical Exhibition in 1889. In 1890 the explorer Sir Halford Mackinder named a peak of Mount Kilimanjaro Point Thomson in honour of his services to the Royal Geographical Society. Thomson died on 29 September 1921 in London, and was buried on 4 October in Streatham Vale cemetery. His latter years were spent in relative comfort and wealth, divided between the Royal Geographical Society and the Royal Societies Club. He was survived by his wife and six children. Some of Thomson's negatives are held by the library of the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine, London; his photographs appear in the Lacock Abbey collection and the Stephen White collection in the Tokyo-Fuji Art Museum, Tokyo. 


@@@@@


doc= 38594


Bourne, Samuel (1834-1912), photographer, was born at Windy Arbour Farm, Mucklestone, near Market Drayton, Staffordshire, on 30 October 1834, the third son of Thomas Bourne ('b'. 1804), a farmer, and his wife, Harriet 'nee' Dobson ('b'. 1802). He was educated privately by a clergyman at Fairburn, near Pontefract, Yorkshire, and about 1855 moved to Nottingham as an assistant at Moore and Robinson's Bank. 
Bourne took up photography as an amateur about 1853; by the end of the decade he had acquired a reputation for the outstanding quality of his landscape work. In 1862 he abandoned his banking career and in October set sail for India, for what was initially planned as a two-year residence to exploit the growing photographic market in the subcontinent. He arrived at the hill station of Simla in the Punjab in March 1863 and formed a partnership with William Howard; by the end of the year they had been joined by another photographer, Charles Shepherd. With the departure of Howard in 1865, the business assumed its final form as Bourne and Shepherd. Within a few years it had become the most successful photographic business in the subcontinent. 
By a natural division of labour, Shepherd undertook the bulk of the firm's studio work while Bourne took responsibility for topographical and architectural views. From July to October of 1863 Bourne travelled from Simla along the Sutlej valley to Chini and Spiti on the first of three major photographic expeditions. His second journey (March-December 1864) took him to Kashmir, where verdant landscapes inspired some of his finest photographs, while the successfully achieved goal of the third expedition (July-December 1866) was to photograph the source of the Ganges at the base of the Gangotri glacier. The resulting photographs of picturesque and dramatic landscapes -- 'of scenery which has never been photographed before, and amongst the boldest and most striking on the face of the globe' ('British Journal of Photography', 11, 1864, 70) -- formed the basis of the firm's prosperity. Bourne's own accounts of his adventures, published in a series of articles in the 'British Journal of Photography', established his own reputation both as a sensitive interpreter of the Indian landscape and as a determined traveller willing to undergo hardships and danger to obtain the perfect negative. By the end of the 1860s the Bourne and Shepherd catalogue contained upwards of 2000 views, the overwhelming majority photographed by Bourne. The firm's commercial pre-eminence in India was consolidated by the opening of additional branches in Calcutta (1867) and Bombay (1870), while Bourne's photographic tour of southern India in 1869 further broadened the scope of the studio's coverage. 
Bourne visited England in 1867; on 9 May, at the George Street Baptist Church, Nottingham, he married Mary Tolley (1844-1912), the eldest daughter of Abraham Tolley, a silk merchant. His wife accompanied him back to India, where Constance Edith, the first of the couple's five children, was born in 1869. Bourne left India for good in November 1870, but his photographs continued to be marketed for many decades, and Bourne and Shepherd maintained its reputation as the most prestigious photographic studio in the subcontinent up to the Second World War (and, in much attenuated form, still trades in Calcutta under Indian management). This success was not only the product of the technical skills and commercial acumen of its principal photographer but also owed much to Bourne's ability to present a vision of India which coincided with, and reinforced European notions of, a picturesque and exotic East. An impregnable faith in the civilizing power of British rule, allied to strong religious convictions of a Unitarian character, further imbued his work with the pervasive sense of a moral purpose in photography, which 'teaches the mind to see the beauty and power of such scenes as these, and renders it more susceptible of their sweet and elevating impressions' ('British Journal of Photography', 11, 1864, 69). The qualities of these Indian images place him among the finest nineteenth-century landscape photographers. 
Bourne abandoned professional photography on his return to Nottingham (though he continued to practise as an amateur), entering first into partnership with his brother-in-law, James Boraston Tolley, and by 1877 establishing his own successful cotton-doubling business. He died of heart failure at his home, Brightlands, Clumber Road, The Park, Nottingham, on 24 April 1912, and was buried in Nottingham general cemetery on 27 April; his wife survived him by seven months. 


@@@@@


doc= 38595


Macpherson, Robert (1814-1872), photographer and painter, was born in Forfarshire, Scotland, probably on 27 February 1814, and spent most of his professional life in Rome. Little is known of his family background, though it is likely that he was a grandnephew of James Macpherson (1736-1796), author of the fraudulent Ossianic publication, 'Fragments of Ancient Poetry' (1760). The generally accepted view of his early life is that he studied medicine at Edinburgh University (1831-5) and later -- possibly about 1838 -- attended classes at the Royal Scottish Academy of Art. Towards the end of the 1830s he left Scotland for India with the intention of practising as a surgeon; for health reasons, however, he settled in Rome, abandoning his career in medicine to become a painter. 
Only moderately successful as an artist, Macpherson found it necessary to undertake freelance work as a journalist, producing articles for 'The Times', the 'Daily News', and 'The Athenaeum'. He also practised as a dealer in antiquities and was responsible for the discovery of Michelangelo's 'Entombment of Christ', which he retained as a hedge against financial difficulties, eventually selling it in 1868 to the National Gallery in London for $2000. Gregarious and outgoing, he became a central figure in the community of expatriate artists and intellectuals who congregated in Rome in mid-century, with the sculptor James Gibson and the German painter Peter von Cornelius among his personal friends. In appearance he was the quintessential Scotsman abroad, with flaming red hair, large flowing beard, and full highland costume. In 1847 he became a Roman Catholic, and in the following year fell in love with Gerardine (Geddie) Bate (1830/31-1878) ['see 'Macpherson, Gerardine], the niece and protegee of the renowned art historian Anna Jameson, with whom she had travelled to Rome in the company of Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning. Despite her aunt's disapproval, the couple were married on 4 September 1849 in Ealing, Middlesex, Geddie Macpherson converting to Catholicism the following year. 
In 1851 Macpherson began experimenting in photography, which he found to be a more lucrative profession than painting. He quickly established himself as one of the leading interpreters of Roman topography, producing nearly 300 views of the city's architectural treasures, as well as numerous reproductions of paintings and sculptures from the papal collections in the Vatican. He used both the albumen and collodion processes, often combining the two, with glass negatives measuring 30.5 centimetres by 40.5, and exposure times varying from two minutes to several days. He also experimented with photolithography, which he tried, without success, to use commercially. Although his work was produced chiefly for sale to the burgeoning tourist trade, it was also regularly included in major exhibitions in London, Edinburgh, and Glasgow. In 1858 he contributed 120 prints to the exhibition of the Architectural Photographic Association. His earlier experience as a painter proved invaluable in the choice of effective viewpoints, and his interpretations of classical architecture were unsurpassed in their aesthetic power and sophistication. 
Unlike many of his major rivals, such as the Alinari brothers, Macpherson's commercial activities never grew beyond the scale of a small family business, with many of the practical tasks such as printing and mounting often performed by his wife and mother-in-law. His book 'Vatican Sculptures' (1863) was also illustrated with woodcuts by his wife. From about 1865 his career began to falter, and the last years of his life were marked by a steady decline in both his reputation and his health. He died in Rome on 17 November 1872, leaving his wife and their four surviving children, William, Francis, Ada, and Joseph, in a state of acute financial distress. He was buried in the churchyard of San Lorenzo, Rome. 


@@@@@


doc= 38596


Evans, Frederick Henry (1853-1943), bookseller and photographer, was born in Whitechapel, London, on 26 June 1853, the son of John Cleland Evans, a music teacher. He spent his early years as a clerk in the accounts department of a London business. After purchasing a Ross microscope, he bought a camera in 1883 for both photomicroscopic and landscape photography from George Smith, owner of the Sciopticon Company, which made lantern slides from Evans's negatives by the woodburytype process. In 1887 he received the Photographic Society of London's medal of honour for his photomicrographs. His insistence upon fine detail and tonal gradation in photography may have its origin with the lantern slide, a medium which he praised in his later writings. His lifelong engagement with the photography of cathedral architecture was begun on a visit to Salisbury Cathedral. Some of his first photographs of cathedrals were shown at the Photographic Society of London's annual exhibition of 1890, and in the following year he was elected a member of the London and Provincial Photographic Association. 
Evans's love of literature and fine printing made him a constant visitor to a bookshop owned by Edward Jones in Queen Street, Cheapside, London; when he was offered a partnership in the business about 1890, he secured it with a loan from his father. When Jones died suddenly the bookshop was left with Evans. He became interested in portraiture about 1891, and he photographed George Bernard Shaw, Arthur Symons, and (most famously) Aubrey Beardsley, whom he captured in the pose of the Notre Dame gargoyle known as Le Stryge. In 1896 Evans made a series of photographs of Kelmscott Manor, the home of William Morris, for whose lectures on architecture he had provided lantern slides; he assembled a group of these photographs in a memorial portfolio after Morris's death. In 1908-9 he produced a series of landscapes for a memorial edition of the poems of George Meredith. 
Evans's first major exhibition, of 120 cathedral photographs, was held in March 1897 at the Architectural Club in Boston, Massachusetts. He retired from his bookshop in 1898, and on 26 November 1900 married Ada Emily Longhurst, daughter of James Longhurst, a builder; the couple had three children: Barbara, Evan, and Geoffrey. Evans now gave his full attention to the making of fine photographs and writing critical and technical articles on his chosen medium, the platinum print. In 1900 he was elected to the Linked Ring Brotherhood and a one-man show of his photographs was held at the Royal Photographic Society in April. In 1903 his work was featured in Alfred Stieglitz's magazine 'Camera Work' with a portfolio of cathedral photographs. In his best-known photograph, 'A Sea of Steps' (1903), of Wells Cathedral, he subjects the form of spiralling stairs to the flattening effect of the telephoto lens in order to express the difficulty of spiritual ascent. 
In 1905 Evans collaborated with the writer Theodore Andrea Cook on a 'Country Life' magazine commission to photograph the French chateaux for 'Twenty-Five Great Houses of France' (1916). Evans's interest in the expression of symmetry in nature was reinforced by Cook's researches into the vitalism of the spiral form in mathematics, astronomy, botany, and the structure of the spiral staircase as illustrated by Evans in Cook's 'The Curves of Life' (1914). About 1911 he compiled albums of his 'harmonograph' drawings, spiral patterns made by the oscillations of a pair of pendulums set in harmonious ratios. His knowledge of the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg and Jakob Boehme underpinned his sense of physical and spiritual correspondences. In 1911 he produced a series of photographs of the interior of Westminster Abbey in London, many of which were published in 'Country Life' (1911-19). 
In 1919 Evans sold 400 items from his large collection of rare and fine-printed books at Mitchell Kennerley's Anderson Galleries in New York. Between 1912 and 1925 he printed portfolios of platinum reproductions of wood-engravings by William Blake, Hans Holbein, and Edward Calvert, and ink drawings by Beardsley. He was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal Photographic Society in 1928. Frederick Henry Evans died on 24 June 1943 at his home at 32 Rosemont Road, Acton, Middlesex; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 38597


Annan, Thomas (1829/30-1887), photographer, was apparently the fifth of the seven children of John Annan (1792-1869), a farmer, flax spinner, and corn miller, who lived in the parish of Dairsie in Fife, and his wife, Agnes Bell (1791?-1878). He left home in November 1845 to begin an apprenticeship as a lithographic writer and engraver with the 'Fife Herald' in Cupar, which he completed in April 1849. He then took employment in Glasgow with Joseph Swan, who owned a large lithographic print works, producing book illustrations, maps, and bookplates. 
In 1855 Annan set up as a photographer with a medical student called Berwick, in the Woodlands Road in Glasgow. Two years later he established an independent business at 116 Sauchiehall Street. By 1859 he had moved to 202 Hope Street and had his own photographic printing works in Hamilton, and in 1873 he moved studio again, to 153 Sauchiehall Street, which served also as a fine art gallery. On 27 July 1860 he had married Mary Young Craig at North Frederick Street, Glasgow, according to the forms of the United Presbyterian church. They had six children. 
Annan's interest in photography may have been prompted by a friendship between the Annan and Adamson families during the 1840s. John and Robert Adamson had been involved in the early experimental stages of photography in St Andrews, and in 1843 Robert had joined in partnership with David Octavius Hill in Edinburgh. Robert Adamson died in 1848, but Annan took over the Hill and Adamson studio for a year in 1870 and is recorded as meeting Hill at that time. From the mid-1850s photography experienced its first commercial wave. Annan's career briefly followed the pattern of those in other studios, as he worked as a carte-de-visite photographer and produced stereoscopic pictures and scenic views. 
Annan's later work was dominated by an interest in the reproduction of fine art, in which he was encouraged by D. O. Hill and by Joseph Noel Paton. His first important commission was for the art lottery, the Glasgow Art Union, in 1862, when he made three photographs for distribution to the subscribers from work by Paton, J. E. Millais, and James Sant. In 1865 Hill commissioned him to take photographs of his large painting celebrating the founding of the Free Church of Scotland: 'The Signing of the Deed of Demission'. The scale and seriousness of this commission, to produce thousands of prints in three sizes -- the largest in three sections to be half the size of the original, which was nearly 12 feet long -- was met by Annan with admirable skill. He used the newly perfected, 'permanent' carbon process, and his results were deemed 'the very acme of perfection' ('The Disruption of the Church of Scotland: an Historical Picture... Painted by D. O. Hill, R. S. A.', 1866). In the following year he acquired the rights to the carbon process for Scotland. 
In the 1870s Annan's brother Robert joined the firm to cope with the administration, and his sons, John and James Craig Annan, also joined the family business. John Annan specialized in architectural photography and was probably responsible for the firm's engineering photographs, such as the series on the building of the Glasgow harbour and docks taken between 1892 and 1897 and the additional photographs taken for the photogravure edition of 'The Old Closes and Streets of Glasgow' in the 1890s. In 1883 Annan had travelled with his other son, James, to Vienna, where they learned the technique of the other significant 'permanent' process, the photogravure, and bought the rights to its use within Britain. 
At the time of his death, Annan's reputation rested substantially on his reproduction of fine art; an obituary recounted that this work had won him: 'wide and most honourable distinction. Cultured, and with great natural taste for art, he loved the society of artists, and was never so happy as when endeavouring to faithfully translate some masterpiece into monochrome through the medium of his camera. ('British Journal of Photography', 34, 1887, 803)' But his posthumous reputation rests more on the remarkable series of photographs he took in the dark slums of Glasgow, 'The Old Closes and Streets of Glasgow'. These were commissioned by the city authorities to mark the first slum clearances, which were authorized in 1866. Annan's thirty-five photographs, taken between 1868 and 1871, were designed to record the history of the buildings as well as the dreadful living conditions. They have a curious character of optimism, in celebration of a great civic proposal and the liberation offered to the inhabitants. Annan was also involved in recording the impressive municipal improvement of the water supply, which connected Loch Katrine to Glasgow in 1859. 
Annan's portrait work gave the best evidence of, in the words of his son, his 'intense admiration' (J. Craig Annan to Helmut Gernsheim, 21 July 1945, Gernsheim collection, University of Texas, Austin) for D. O. Hill and the work of the Hill and Adamson partnership (Hill's widow gave him their portrait lens in 1870). Annan's most famous portrait was that of David Livingstone, which he took in 1864, when the explorer had returned from Africa and was visiting his family (who lived next door to the Annan home in Hamilton, Lanarkshire). This portrait is unquestionably the best and strongest image extant of the explorer. 
Annan's landscape work is less well known. In the 1850s and 1860s he took a number of fine landscapes in Scotland, which demonstrate a lyrical approach and sensitivity to history and atmosphere. Contemporary criticism spoke of them as 'indicative of deep poetic feeling, and strong appreciation of the beautiful in the artist' ('Photographic News', 6 Jan 1865, 182). Annan's published works include 'Views on the Line of the Loch Katrine Waterworks' (1859), 'Memorials of the Old College of Glasgow' (1871), and 'The Old Closes and Streets of Glasgow' (albumen prints, 1871; carbon prints; 1877, and photogravure, with additional prints probably by John Annan, 1900). His correspondence shows him to be a man of religious and poetic sentiment. 
Annan died by his own hand 'during a period of mental aberration' (d. cert.) that had lasted 'about one month' (ibid.). This took place at his home -- Glenbank, Lenzie, Lanarkshire -- on 14 December 1887, when he was fifty-seven. He was buried at Auld Aisle, Kirkintilloch. An obituary said of him: 'Honourable in feeling, and fastidious in taste, he was utterly intolerant of shams, and of everything below the best... Almost a giant in stature, and with a handsome clear-cut face and a brilliant eye, Mr Annan was altogether a noble type of man... the personification of truth, and the soul of honour. ('British Journal of Photography', 34, 1887, 803)' There are collections of his photographs in the Mitchell Library, Glasgow; the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh; the National Monuments Record for Scotland, also in Edinburgh, and at the Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal. 


@@@@@


doc= 38598


Annan, James Craig (1864-1946), photographer, was born on 8 March 1864, the second of the seven children of Thomas Annan (1829/30-1887), photographer, and his wife, Mary Young Craig, at 15 Burnbank Road, Hamilton, Lanarkshire, in Talbot Cottage, named after William Henry Fox Talbot, the inventor of positive-negative photography. He learned about photography as a boy from his father, and after attending Hamilton Academy until 1877 he joined the family firm. In 1878-9, and probably longer, he studied chemistry at Anderson's College in Glasgow. He travelled to Vienna in 1883 to be taught the process of photogravure by its inventor, Karl Klic; knowledge of this technique was particularly beneficial for his family's business, which specialized in the reproduction of works of art. He made beautiful photogravures about 1890 from the original calotypes taken just under fifty years earlier by his fellow Scots, David Octavius Hill and Robert Adamson: this revived an interest in these early masterpieces of photography. About 1891 Annan decided to follow his own interests as a creative photographer. Springing from the city of Glasgow's artistic stramash, he made fine portraits of the illustrator Jessie M. King ('c'.1906) and the embroiderer Ann Macbeth ('c'.1908), while his photograph of Charles Rennie Mackintosh (1893) has become the icon of that architect and designer. He also photographed Ellen Terry (1898), George Bernard Shaw (1910), and G. K. Chesterton (1912). 
Annan, 'an artist by intuition and a photographer by training' (Touchstone, 34), established a huge reputation by exhibiting, often by invitation, in numerous photographic exhibitions throughout Europe and the United States. His work was widely reproduced, often in such fine journals as 'Die Kunst in der Photographie' of Berlin and 'Camera Notes' and 'Camera Work' of New York. His writing was also in demand: 'Picture-making with the hand-camera' in the 'Amateur Photographer' of 1896 was translated for the 'Bulletin du Photo Club de Paris', and in 1897 extracts appeared in the 'Bulletin de l'Association Belge de Photographie'. In the 'American Annual of Photography for 1897' this same article by Annan formed the basis of 'The hand-camera' by Alfred Stieglitz, with whom Annan was to enjoy a long correspondence. In this influential article Annan presumed that a photographer would 'have some inherent artistic taste... assiduously cultivated by observing... all departments of the fine arts'. He advised that 'the general composition [having been] first selected,... the operator should wait until the figures unconsciously group and pose themselves' ('Picture-making with the hand-camera', 'Amateur Photographer', 23, 1896, 275-7). His recognition of photography's unique ability to seize the instant was diametrically opposed to the approach of Henry Peach Robinson, whose highly regarded 'Bringing Home the May' (1862) was carefully preconceived and painstakingly assembled from nine separate negatives. 
'A connoisseur of transcience' (Jeffrey, 98), Annan produced fresh, forward-looking photographs: 'The Beach at Zandvoort' (1892), for example, catches fisherfolk in an almost abstract, asymmetrical frieze. Throughout his life he recorded movement -- in 1894 the stride of 'The White Friars', in 1913 the swing of the driver's lengthy stick in 'Bullock Cart, Burgos' -- anticipating Henri Cartier-Bresson's 'decisive moment' by about half a century before that phrase was defined. Annan's 'The White House' (1909) is now considered to be 'one of the seminal examples of the instantaneous snapshot wedded by vision to the formal concerns of modern art' (Green, 22). In photogravure, images are transferred from negatives to plates which can be worked, as would an etcher, before printing, a technique which Annan exploited brilliantly. In 'The Etching Printer' (1902), for instance, he softened the background to emphasize William Strang's intense, practised glance at the etching plate balancing so delicately on his fingers. 
A lifelong bachelor, Annan was tall, and had a characteristic bald cranium well depicted in a drawing of 1902 by Strang. He was precise and businesslike and despite his achievements modest, unassuming, and retiring. He died of carcinoma of the stomach at his home, Glenbank House, 1 Beechmount Road, Lenzie, Dunbartonshire, on 5 June 1946 and two days later was buried in the Auld Aisle cemetery at Kirkintilloch. It was not until the late 1970s that interest in his work revived. Yet at the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth, when photography was fighting for recognition as an art in its own right, he was 'universally conceded... to be one of the ablest, the most gifted, most artistic of the really great pictorial photographic leaders of the times' (Keiley, 197). 


@@@@@


doc= 38607


Brett, Dorothy Eugenie (1883-1977), painter, was born on 10 November 1883 at 2 Tilney Street, Mayfair, London, the third of the four children of Reginald Baliol Brett (1852-1930), Liberal MP for Penryn and Falmouth (1880-85), and his wife, Eleanor (Nellie) Frances Weston ('c'.1862-1940), daughter of Sylvain Van de Weyer, Belgian ambassador to the court of St James. Her father succeeded as second Viscount Esher in 1899. His role as unofficial adviser to the royal court dominated her childhood, and she attended dancing classes with Queen Victoria's grandchildren. In 1902 complications from an operation for appendicitis left her battling with increasing deafness, and she was an unsuccessful debutante in 1903. 
Brett attended the Slade School of Fine Art (1910-16), where she became known simply as Brett, developed a close, platonic relationship with Professor Frederick (Nutty) Brown, and won first prize for figure painting in 1914. She became friends with her fellow students Dora Carrington and Mark Gertler, the latter executing a controversial portrait of Brett in 1915 (exh. New English Art Club, 1915). Concentrating on portrait and figure painting, Brett exhibited with the New English Art Club (1914-16) and the Grosvenor Gallery (1921-2), developing the bold, simplified style that makes 'War Widows' (exh. New English Art Club, 1916, no. 297) one of her most successful early compositions. She struggled unsuccessfully, however, to depict the flamboyant hostess Lady Ottoline Morrell (1916-19), for whom she developed one of a series of 'crushes'. Ottoline described Brett as 'a slim, pretty young woman, looking much younger than she really was. She had a Joe Chamberlain nose, a peach-like complexion, rather a rabbit mouth and no chin' ('Ottoline at Garsington', 52). Ottoline put Brett up at her Garsington home (1916-19) and provided her with a studio ('the Monastery', later shared with Mark Gertler). Here she formed friendships with the writer Katherine Mansfield and her husband, the critic John Middleton Murry (whose lover she briefly became 'c'.1922), and the novelist Aldous Huxley, who portrayed her as Jenny Mullion in 'Crome Yellow' (1921) and Beatrice Gilray in 'Point Counter Point' (1928). 
Introduced to the writer D. H. Lawrence and his German wife, Frieda, in 1915, Brett moved with them to Taos, New Mexico, in 1924 (naturalized 1938), becoming devoted to Lawrence, and living near Frieda and the hostess Mabel Dodge Luhan (and often quarrelling with them) after Lawrence's death. In a letter of 12 December 1915 to Lady Ottoline Morrell, Lawrence described Brett as 'one of the 'sisters' of this life' ('Selected Letters', 111) and fictionalized her as Hilda Blessington in 'The Boy in the Bush' (1924), Dollie Urquhart in 'The Princess' ('St Mawr', 1925), and Miss James in 'The Last Laugh', written in 1925 and published in 'The Woman who Rode Away' (1928). Brett's portrait of Lawrence (1925) is in the National Portrait Gallery, London, and her memoir of their relationship, 'Lawrence and Brett: a Friendship', was published in 1933. 
In Taos, Brett produced her most successful works, large canvases based on the life and ceremonies of the Pueblo Indians, which, alongside her friendship with Lawrence, brought her fame in her last years, but despite a small family legacy she was always impecunious. Retrospectives of work were held at the American British Gallery, New York (1950), and the Taos Gallery of Contemporary Art (1980). Two of her Taos paintings are in the Tate collection; other examples of her work are in the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center, University of Texas at Austin, and the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut. Brett was admitted to hospital in Taos suffering from lung congestion shortly before her ninety-fourth birthday. She died there on 27 August 1977, and her ashes were later scattered on the Red Rocks below Mount Lobo in Taos. 


@@@@@


doc= 38608


Herbert, Lady Mary (1686-1775), speculator and mining entrepreneur, was the eldest of the six children born to William Herbert, second marquess of Powis (1657x61-1745), and his wife, Mary ('b'. after 1664, died 1724), elder daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas Preston, baronet, of Furness, Lancashire. At the revolution of 1688 she went into exile with her mother. Her father, a leading Jacobite, eventually joined them in Flanders, where Mary was educated at the English Benedictine convent at Ghent. Her father succeeded to the titular (Jacobite) dukedom of Powis in 1696. As a young woman, Mary became the companion of her paternal aunt Anne, Lady Carrington, the widow of Francis, second Viscount Carrington. After 1715 they travelled between Paris and London, carrying messages from the earl of Mar to English Jacobites. In 1718, when the match between James Stuart and Clementina Sobieska was in jeopardy, Lord Panmure proposed Lady Mary, probably at her own suggestion, as a possible alternative bride for the Pretender. 
Soon after the launch of the Louisiana, or Mississippi, Company by John Law in 1717 Lady Mary became a leading speculator and reputed millionaire. Her wealth and status as the daughter of a duke attracted some eminent suitors, including Philippe de Bourbon, chevalier de Vendome and grand prior of France, and the duc d'Albret, but she rejected their overtures. She had by now linked her fortunes with those of the gambler and speculator Joseph Gage, younger son of Joseph Gage (1652-1700), of Firle, Sussex, and (from about 1682) of Shirburn Castle, Oxfordshire. In 1719-20 Gage and Herbert played the stock and money markets with spectacular results, banking on a continuing rise in the value of Mississippi shares, and relying on the infallibility of Law's 'system'. By the spring of 1720 Lady Mary's equity stake amounted to some 6.5 million livres, and she had drawn her father, her two brothers, and Lady Carrington into her web as co-guarantors of massive loans drawn on the Irish banker Richard Cantillon, in Paris, and on Samuel Edwin, in London. When Law's paper empire collapsed in May 1720, the whole Herbert family was involved in her ruin, with total debts estimated at $170,000. To recoup their losses, Gage and the Herberts sued Cantillon for usury, and Mary's two brothers sued her for deceit and fraud. Gage went into hiding, and Lady Mary and Lady Carrington were briefly confined in a debtors' prison in Paris. The Herberts' properties were mortgaged, and their lucrative lead mines at Llangynog were handed over to trustees. 
In 1726 Lady Mary relaunched herself as a mining entrepreneur, exploiting her family's reputation for mining to seek a concession to reopen and work disused silver and copper mines in Andalusia. In 1727 she signed a contract with the Espanola Company in Madrid whereby she undertook to drain and work the silver mine at Guadalcanal, in the province of Seville. She and Lady Carrington moved to Seville that year, accompanied by Gage, who acted as works manager. The mine was successfully drained by September 1732, but the Espanola Company reneged on the contract and prolonged litigation ensued while Gage prospected elsewhere. In 1732 Gage and Herbert were satirized in Alexander Pope's 'Epistle to Bathurst' (lines 129-34) as avaricious gold-diggers. Pope incorrectly located their mining operations in Asturias. On the basis of services rendered, Gage made several attempts to obtain Lady Mary's hand in marriage, but she eluded him by procrastination. 
In 1740 Lady Mary's litigation reached a successful conclusion, and she was granted the rights for thirty years to the five mines of Guadalcanal, Cazalla, Galaroza, Rio Tinto (potentially the most valuable), and Aracena. In 1743 she returned to Paris in order to raise capital for their exploitation, but her credit was now exhausted -- as were the Herberts' resources. Though mining proceeded spasmodically in her absence, little progress was made, and she finally forfeited the concession in 1767. 
Lady Mary's later years were devoted to further speculation, intrigue, and matchmaking. At his death in 1748 her brother, the third marquess of Powis, bequeathed his estate to his distant cousin Henry Arthur, Lord Herbert of Cherbury, a protestant and a whig. To secure the succession in perpetuity, Lord Herbert (created earl of Powis in 1748) was eager to arrange a marriage with Barbara Herbert, the third marquess's only child, and Lady Mary offered her services in delivering the young heiress to her fate. In return she was to receive an annuity, but the earl reneged on their unwritten agreement. She sued him for breach of promise, and obtained a generous settlement from the House of Lords in 1766. 
In 1750 Lady Mary had accepted the prince de Conti's offer of an apartment in the Hotel de Boisbodron, Temple, Paris, where she spent her declining years -- an object of curiosity to visitors, such as Horace Walpole, who were acquainted with her legend. False reports of her clandestine marriage to Joseph Gage were still current at her death, which occurred at the Hotel de Boisbodron in September 1775. She was buried in Paris. Joseph Gage predeceased her in 1766. 


@@@@@


doc= 38611


Smith, Elizabeth (1797-1885), diarist, was born on 7 May 1797 at 5 Charlotte Square, Edinburgh, the eldest of five children of Sir John Peter Grant (1774-1848), laird of Rothiemurchus, advocate, MP, and judge, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Edmund Ironside, rector of Houghton-le-Spring. 
Elizabeth Grant's childhood was spent mostly on the family estate of Rothiemurchus, Strathspey, and in London. She was educated by governesses and tutors and entered Edinburgh society in 1814. In 1820 the family returned to Rothiemurchus following the decline of her father's career and fortunes. From about 1826 Elizabeth wrote articles to supplement family finances. Her first article, entitled 'An Old Story', she submitted to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' under a fictitious name. It was not accepted, but appeared later in 'Fraser's Magazine for Town and Country'. Having earned $3 for this first article she wrote other stories for 'Fraser's' and for 'The Inspector: a Weekly Dramatic Paper'. In 1825 she and her sister Mary earned a total of $40 from their stories for 'The Inspector', some of which received favourable criticism in 'The Times', but which Elizabeth later recalled as 'a bundle of rubbish' ('Memoirs', ed. Tod, 196). However, it is for her memoirs of these early years, written later in life, for which she is remembered as The Highland Lady. 
In 1827 the family moved to Bombay following Sir John Grant's appointment as a puisne judge. In India Elizabeth Grant met Colonel Henry Smith, of Baltiboys, an officer in the 5th Bombay cavalry. They were married in Bombay in 1829. The Smiths returned to Ireland in April 1830 to live on Colonel Smith's estate in co. Wicklow. Elizabeth took an active part in the management and improvement of the impoverished estate and wrote articles for 'Chambers's Journal' to supplement estate income. She combined this with raising a family of three children: Jane ('b'. 1830), Anne ('b'. 1832), and John ('b'. 1838). Between 1845 and 1854 she wrote the recollections of her life, concentrating on her years in Scotland and providing a unique portrait of the social life of the highlands. Written initially as a private memoir for her family, the first public edition of 'Memoirs of a Highland Lady' was published in 1898, edited and abridged by her niece, Lady Strachey. This first edition was reprinted four times in one year and a second edition followed in 1911, reprinted in 1928. A third edition appeared in 1950, but the first complete and authentic edition did not appear until 1988. 'The Irish Journals of Elizabeth Smith, 1840-1850', published in 1980, was a selection from journals she kept during her married life in Ireland from 1840 to 1885. A more complete edition, 'The Highland Lady in Ireland', was published in 1991, and includes details of the great famine of the late 1840s. In 1996 was published 'A Highland Lady in France: Elizabeth Grant of Rothiemurchus, 1843-1845', which covered the time she spent in France during the early 1840s among British emigre society. 
Elizabeth Smith's memoirs and diaries represent an invaluable social and historical document. Her vivid accounts of life in Scotland, England, India, Ireland, and France provide an important insight into a period of dramatic social and economic change. She recorded the figures and lifestyle of the first half of the nineteenth century across the social strata, with observations of both public figures and the working people. Her writings are particularly useful as a rare example of a female account of highland and Irish life. She died on 16 November 1885 at Baltiboys, Blessington, co. Wicklow. 


@@@@@


doc= 38612


York, Aaron of (d. 1268), financier and administrator, was the son of Josce of Lincoln. Although born in Lincoln, probably before 1190, Aaron seems to have been living in York in 1210, when he was assessed for the so-called Bristol tallage. He must, therefore, have been among the early immigrants who re-established a Jewish community at York in the wake of the massacre of 1190. By 1221 his father and brothers Benedict and Samuel had also moved to York, where Aaron had become one of the leading moneylenders in the city. Working often in partnership with other lenders, Aaron lent large sums to important people, especially in the north, where he also enjoyed profitable relationships with a number of monastic houses. At York he presided over a family consortium that included Leo and Samuel l'Eveske, the father and brother of his wife, Hannah; his nephews Josce le Jovene and Isaac; and his brothers Benedict and Samuel. During the 1220s this consortium emerged as the largest supplier of credit to the rapidly expanding economy of Yorkshire. Aaron himself seems to have done a particularly brisk business in lending to Yorkshire monastic houses, who were expanding both the size of their sheep flocks and the extent of their agricultural property during this decade. By the 1230s Aaron's business connections reached into almost every shire in England. In February 1236 Henry III appointed him to sit at the Jewish exchequer, and in December of that year he became archpresbyter, the royally appointed administrative head of the English Jewish community. From this position he was able to further extend his business empire, and to increase his lending around the court. At a time of increasing royal taxation, however, his position also made him an object of hostility, both at court and in the Jewish community. In 1243 the king dismissed him from the archpresbyterate in favour of Elias l'Eveske. No grounds for his dismissal from office are known. 
In 1241 Aaron's estate was valued for purposes of taxation at $40,000. Toward the Jewish tallage of 20,000 marks of that year, he paid 6000 marks ($4000). No other thirteenth-century English Jew approached this level of wealth. Between 1241 and 1255, however, royal taxation and other exactions consumed his entire fortune. Aaron told the chronicler Matthew Paris that between 1243 and 1250 he paid the king 30,000 marks, and a further 200 gold marks to the queen. The figures are credible. Despite his losses he remained, nevertheless, the dominant financial figure in the English Jewish community throughout the 1240s, and made further substantial payments to the crown in the early 1250s. By 1255, however, his business had collapsed. Unable to keep up with his tallage payments, his collectable bonds were transferred to the crown, further undermining his financial situation. He, his wife, and his children were several times imprisoned during these years, sometimes for his own debts, on other occasions because Aaron was acting as surety for the debts of the entire Jewish community. King Henry also imposed a variety of personal indignities upon him, most famously in 1251 when he ordered that Aaron's prize black palfrey be confiscated, without compensation, as a gift for Robert Passelewe (died 1252). Charges of falsifying charters also began to be brought against Aaron, prompting further payments to the crown to avoid prosecution. Although Aaron was still able to pay part of his tallage assessment for spring 1255, when a second tallage of $1000 was imposed upon the English Jewish community in November, he was unable to pay his assessment of $100, and was exempted from the tax on grounds of poverty. 
After 1255 references to Aaron of York become scarce. His nephew Isaac continued to act as his attorney as Aaron liquidated the remnants of his financial empire. In 1265 Aaron's wife, Hannah, inherited some property from her brother Samuel, but the family continued to sell assets. In 1266 Aaron sold his remaining property in London to Rabbi Elijah Menahem (died 1284). Aaron died in 1268, before 30 August, leaving property in Oxford, Northampton, and York to his heirs. But this too was liquidated in the following decade. In 1280 Hannah and her younger son, Elias, sold their share of the family property on Coney Street in York. Samuel, Aaron's elder son, moved to London, and in 1281 he too sold his Coney Street property. No further references to Hannah, Samuel, or Elias are known. Aaron and Hannah also had a daughter, Auntera, whose first husband was her cousin Isaac, the son of Josce le Jovene. Her second husband, Lumbard, was hanged for coinage offences in 1279 or 1280. 


@@@@@


doc= 38613


Embleton, Richard (c.1273-1333), merchant and mayor of Newcastle, is believed to have come from Embleton near Dunstanburgh, a barony given to Edmund, earl of Lancaster, after its forfeiture by Simon de Montfort. His parents are unknown, but he may have been related to the Richard of Sweethope who in 1296 had the highest assessment in the liberty of Embleton, where he was one of the assessors. By 1296 Embleton was in business in Newcastle, where he was assessed in the parish of St Nicholas, listed next to Sampson Cutiller, the wealthiest merchant in the town, for whom, with Sampson's wife, Agnes, Embleton endowed two chantries in 1332. This suggests a family relationship, probably matrimonial. Embleton married three times: first, before 1305, Alice, and second Isabel (their surnames are unknown); his third wife, who survived him, was Christian, daughter of John (I), Lord Mowbray. 
Embleton appears in the Newcastle customs accounts for 1295-7 as shipping wool, wool-fells, and hides; and in the detailed customs of 1308 he is the leading shipper of wool. Entries in the royal wardrobe books show him supplying Edward II with stores, including grains, malt, and wine (1311/12), and oxen and sheep (1312/13). He was still shipping wool in 1325. In December 1330 he was granted a personal freedom from all tolls throughout the realm, in consideration of his losses during the wars with Scotland, while in October 1332 he was granted a safe conduct for two years to buy wine in Gascony. 
In 1301 Embleton was one of the four town bailiffs, who served under the mayor, and he represented Newcastle in the convention of burgesses held at York in 1303. Many times mayor between 1306 and 1333, often for several years in succession, he was also one of Newcastle's representatives in parliament in 1311, 1314, 1324, 1325, 1328 (twice), and 1332. In 1314 and 1315 he was ordered to supervise the sheriff of Northumberland in garrisoning Newcastle Castle. He was responsible for maintaining order in Northumberland in 1317, following the plot to seize the cardinal legates on embassy to secure peace between England and Scotland (and the subsequent insurrection led by Gilbert Middleton), and was authorized to receive into the king's peace such rebels as submitted. In 1322, immediately before the final rebellion of Thomas, earl of Lancaster, Embleton was made joint custodian of the town of Newcastle with the mayor, and, after the earl's defeat, was made keeper of the lands of the earl and his followers within Northumberland, with responsibility for their management. This included the garrisoning of Dunstanburgh Castle with forty men-at-arms and forty hobelars. In June 1323 he was granted for his services interim possession of two parts of the manor of Silksworth in co. Durham, forfeited by Robert Holland, subsequently confirmed with the remaining third in March 1324. At the same time he was appointed, with Ralph Neville of Raby, a keeper of the truce with Scotland. His responsibilities in maintaining the king's peace in Northumberland and Durham were renewed in June 1324, and widened to include reconciling men who had joined the Scots and rebels through poverty and now wished to return to their first allegiance. In June 1333 he brought eleven men-at-arms and twenty-one hobelars from Newcastle to serve Edward III at Berwick against the Scots. He was then ordered back to Newcastle on royal business, but later returned with seventeen men-at-arms and thirty hobelars and other armed men, and was killed at the battle of Halidon Hill outside Berwick on 19 July 1333. 
By then Embleton held the manor of Silksworth in co. Durham and lands throughout Northumberland, from Jesmond by Newcastle to Newton on the Moor, Embleton, and Mindrum, some of them acquired by purchase. He was commemorated in the chantries which in 1332 he was licensed to found at St Nicholas's, Newcastle, and at Embleton, to be served by two priests each. He used two seals. One was an antique gem. The other showed a sleeping lion with the motto 'Ci dort le [lio]n fort'. Embleton was unusual in the frequency and lengths of his tenures of office as mayor of Newcastle, and also in the use which successive kings made of his services to supervise the maintenance of law and order in Northumberland and Durham. This strongly suggests his origins were in a landowning family of administrators, a conclusion supported by his final marriage alliance with Christian Mowbray. Although his failure to produce a male heir frustrated any hopes of founding a local dynasty, the thirds of his estate which passed to daughters formed an important element in the capital of later merchant grandees of Newcastle -- Bertram Anderson ('c'.1520-1570), Richard Hodgson ('c'.1516-1585), and, through Sir Reginald Carnaby, William Cavendish, first earl of Ogle and duke of Newcastle (1593-1676). 


@@@@@


doc= 38616


Gomme, Alice Bertha, Lady Gomme (1853-1938), folklorist, was born on 4 January 1853 at 5 South Molton Street, in the registration district of St George, Hanover Square, London, the daughter of Charles Antony Thomas Merck, a master tailor, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Tilley. Save for a sister we know nothing of her life until, on 31 March 1875 at twenty-two, she married (George) Laurence Gomme (1853-1916), then a young administrator in the Metropolitan Board of Works. 
Although seen as an enthusiastic and prolific writer on folklore, Alice Gomme's reputation was until recent times not fully recognized. For example, her approach to and the reliability of her sources tended to be regarded as suspect (Opie and Opie, vi) and -- as often at that time -- she was seen as playing a subordinate role to that of her better-known husband (who was knighted in 1911), with whom she often worked in partnership (Dorson, 'British Folklorists', 279). 
Recent commentators, however (Simpson and Roud, and Boyes), provide convincing evidence for Alice Gomme's scholarship. Her most notable work is 'The Traditional Games of England, Scotland and Ireland' (2 vols., 1894 and 1898, reprinted 1964 and in 1984 with an introduction by Damian Webb), which includes tunes, singing rhymes, and methods of playing. The work contains descriptions of some 800 children's games current in the second half of the nineteenth century, with comparisons of variants, collected by seventy-six correspondents from 112 locations. She herself was an active collector of games and 'was the first scholar to define children's games as a separate genre of folklore'. The book 'discusses... texts, history, cultural significance and formal structures [of games]... and develops a comprehensive system for their classification' (Boyes, 'Musical Traditions', 1). It was an impressive work to publish, especially at a time when she was a busy mother (she gave birth to seven sons between 1876 and 1891) and active in folklore fields generally. 
In 1878 at twenty-five Gomme became a founder member of the Folklore Society and for sixty years was active in its affairs; she was on its council from 1912 until her death. From at least 1883 she regularly contributed to 'Folklore' and other journals and newspapers, writing on diverse matters: 'Conception by means of a glance', 'A Berwickshire kirn dolly', 'Boer folk medicine and some parallels', and 'The character of Beelzebub' ('Folklore', 1890, 1901, 1902, and 1929). 
In 1894 Gomme published 'Children's Singing Games'. Work on this had brought her into contact with Cecil Sharp, and the two developed a close working relationship which led to an expanded work under the same title in five volumes published between 1909 and 1912. For legal reasons, however, it appeared under Sharp's name only; they remained good friends until Sharp's death in 1924 (Boyes, 'Folklore', 204). She was active in the Folk-Song Society and was a founder member of the English Folk Dance Society. 
Gomme's interest in folk cookery and in children's games came together at the conversazione, held in October 1891, which was intended as a diversion from the serious business of the first International Folklore Congress then taking place in London. She was secretary of the conversazione organizing committee and, though pregnant, 'devised, researched and organised' the occasion. The programme, far from being a diversion, was the first comprehensive display of folklore in Britain. It 'involved a substantial exhibition, showing the history of scholarship in folklore... portraits of scholars, illustrations and examples of material culture ranging from items of regional cookery to funeral garlands' (Boyes, 'Folklore', 205). There were recitations of folk-tales, a performance of a traditional folk play, and a programme of traditional songs and dances still in use, performed by pupils from Barnes School 'under the supervision of Mrs. Gomme' (conversazione programme). The refreshments were examples of folk cookery. Forty years later, when Florence White founded the English Folk Cookery Association, Gomme's pioneering efforts in this field were recognized in her election as its first president ('Morning Post', 4 March 1931). 
Gomme, who was an active suffragist, revealed in her work an interest in the position of women in society. She early recognized the value of playing games in childhood and taught games to schoolchildren ('Daily Mail', 10 Jan 1903). Ever busy as lecturer as well as writer, she was for some time president of the London Shakespeare League, and was an enthusiast for Elizabethan stage methods of production. She was a friend and supporter of Lilian Baylis. Two of her sons were killed in the First World War, one of whom, Austin, was a promising architect highly regarded by his master, C. R. Ashbee. Her third son, Arthur Allan Gomme, was librarian to the Patent Office and himself president of the Folklore Society (1951-3) and her fifth, Arnold Wycombe Gomme (1886-1959), was a noted classicist. Photographs show her as of medium height and slender build, her hair tied in a bun. She appears conventionally dressed, and one of her grandsons remembers her in her eighties as a grand figure. After her husband's early death in 1916 she lived in a hotel at 21-2 Montague Street, Bloomsbury, London, and also at the family home in Long Crendon, Buckinghamshire. She died on 5 January 1938, at 11 Porchester Terrace, Paddington, London, of pneumonia and heart failure and on 8 January was cremated, as her husband had been, at Golders Green crematorium, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 38617


Hogarth, Janet Elizabeth (1865-1954), writer and encyclopaedia editor, was born on 27 November 1865 at Barton upon Humber, Lincolnshire, the second daughter and fifth child of the Revd George Hogarth (1827-1902), rector of Barton, and his wife, Jane Elizabeth (1834-1921), daughter of John Uppleby of Scarborough. One of fourteen children, of whom nine survived into adulthood, she was largely educated at home with her sisters by a series of governesses before attending Grantham Ladies' College. Despite both parents' fears that a university education would foster religious doubt as well as rendering her unfit for 'home life', she was permitted to attend the recently founded Lady Margaret Hall at Oxford from 1885 to 1888. She gained first-class honours in philosophy (but could not graduate because Oxford degrees were not yet open to women). Although the Oxford of the 1880s was unreceptive to women, Janet Hogarth evidently regarded her time as a student as one of personal and intellectual expansion. She formed several lasting friendships, notably with Gertrude Bell, and proved herself an outstanding student. In 'An Oxford Portrait Gallery' (1931) she affectionately recalls this period of her life, as well as the Oxford experiences of her older brother David Hogarth, and of the editor of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', Hugh Chisholm. 
Few employment possibilities were open for women with her educational qualifications, and after coming down from Oxford, Hogarth was able to obtain only a part-time teaching position at Cheltenham Ladies' College. She moved to London in 1891 and the following year found a clerical post with the royal commission on labour. In 1894 she became the first superintendent of women clerks at the Bank of England, a position she held until 1905. Throughout this period she wrote numerous articles and reviews for literary periodicals and acted as reader and sub-editor for William Leonard Courtney, formerly her Oxford tutor, at the 'Fortnightly Review'. She described this period of her life as one of living 'in a backwater' (Courtney, 167), and wrote that, for women, clerical work, 'was a soul-destroying avocation, from which any woman, let alone a woman of higher education, might well pray to be delivered' (ibid., 139). In 1906 she took a position as chief librarian at the Times Book Club, which soon became a vortex of disputes about book pricing and controversies about censorship. There she encountered the American businessman Horace Hooper, who had recently acquired the rights to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. At the end of 1909 she agreed to join the editorial staff of the landmark eleventh edition of the 'Britannica'. Hogarth's task was to organize the work's immense index, and to supervise a large group of women indexers and sub-editors; she was also responsible for updating or rewriting some 700 of the shorter biographies, while acting as chief confidante to the editor-in-chief, Chisholm. 
In July 1911 she married W. L. Courtney and continued to work at the 'Britannica' until the First World War, when she was employed at the Ministry of Munitions as an adviser on staff welfare, for which she was appointed an Officer of the British Empire (OBE) in the first honours list for the new order, announced in August 1917. After the passing of the 'Sex Disqualification (Removal) Act' of 1919, she was among the first women to be made a justice of the peace, and was sworn in for the county of London in September 1920. She returned to work on the twelfth edition of the 'Britannica' from 1920 to 1922 and made a promotional tour of the United States with Chisholm. In her sixties, and in the years after her husband's death in 1928, she wrote several volumes of memoirs which give considerable insight into the experiences of educated women of the period. She died in a nursing home in London on 24 September 1954, and was cremated. 
As a young woman under the influence of Mrs Humphry Ward and her fellow student, Gertrude Bell, and wishing to dissociate herself from militant suffragists, Hogarth took an anti-suffrage position and even served on the executive of the Women's National Anti-Suffrage League. Like many others, she later reversed her position, claiming that she was particularly affronted, after her marriage, by the social and legal assumption that one who had been 'for years a self-respecting and tax-paying citizen, at once becomes incapable of paying her own taxes'. It was this, she asserted, that served to 'finally topple me off the fence into the suffragist camp' (Courtney, 250). 


@@@@@


doc= 38618


Lugard, Dame Flora Louise, Lady Lugard (1852-1929), journalist and author, was born on 19 December 1852 at 2 Dundas Terrace, Woolwich, the fourth of fourteen children of Captain George Shaw (1822-1892) of the Royal Artillery and Marie Adrienne Josephine, 'nee' Desfontaines (1826-1871), of Mauritius. She had nine sisters, the first and last dying in infancy, and four brothers. Her paternal grandfather was Sir Frederick Shaw, third baronet (1799-1876), of Bushy Park, Dublin, and a member of parliament from 1830 to 1848, regarded as the leader of the Irish Conservatives. Her paternal grandmother, Thomasine Emily, was the sixth daughter of the Hon. George Jocelyn, and granddaughter of Robert, first earl of Roden. Although the children of George and Marie Shaw were baptized in their mother's Roman Catholic faith, they were brought up in the Anglo-Irish protestant tradition of their father. As a young woman Flora Shaw had a crisis of faith during her mother's fatal illness; later she explored different religious traditions and found spiritual renewal in the beauty of nature. Identifying her heritage as Irish and French, she became fluent in French on visits to relatives in France. She closely followed the politics of Ireland, initially approving Gladstone's moves for home rule, but soon opposing; in 1914 she actively supported Ulster resistance to home rule. 
Flora Shaw, who became the first woman on the permanent staff of 'The Times' and its colonial editor from 1893 to 1900, had no formal schooling, but read widely in the library of the Royal Military Academy in Woolwich. When she was seventeen John Ruskin, then Slade professor at Oxford, became her mentor and introduced her to the ageing Thomas Carlyle. She left home at the age of twenty, after the remarriage of her father, to visit relatives in France and Ireland, and, in the role of housekeeper-governess, to stay with the family of Colonel Brackenbury (a cousin by marriage) at Aldershot and then at Waltham Abbey. Encouraged by Ruskin, she wrote her first children's book, 'Castle Blair' (1877), set in contemporary Ireland, which gained wide acclaim and was reprinted in numerous editions. This was followed by two novels serialized in 'Aunt Judy's Magazine', 'Hector' (1880-81) and 'Phyllis Browne' (1882-3), the former published as a book in 1881, and then by 'A Sea Change' (1885). All four books were published in the United States as well, but she never again attained her initial success. After the failure of her novel for adults, 'Colonel Cheswick's Campaign' (1886), she gave up writing fiction. 
In 1883 a rented room in Little Parkhurst, a cottage in the Surrey woods near Abinger, became Flora Shaw's retreat from London and eventually -- remodelled with an adjoining cottage -- her lifetime home. Like many unmarried women of her social class, she undertook charity work in the slums of London's East End, where she became convinced that Britain's poverty could be solved only by emigration to its colonies. Required to earn her living, she took up journalism at the suggestion of her Surrey neighbour George Meredith. He introduced her to the editor of the 'Pall Mall Gazette', W. T. Stead. On Gibraltar, accompanying elderly family friends in the winter of 1886-7, Shaw interviewed the political prisoner Zobehr Pasha, who claimed he could have saved General Gordon's life had the British government granted Gordon's request for Zobehr to join him in Khartoum. In her article, featured on the front page of the 'Pall Mall Gazette' on 28 June 1887, she pointedly questioned British justice. Within six weeks Zobehr was released and on his way back to Cairo. Shaw's apprenticeship under Stead, who conducted numerous newspaper campaigns to rouse public opinion, led her to view journalism as a form of politics. 
In Egypt during the winter of 1888-9 Shaw became correspondent for both the 'Pall Mall Gazette' and the 'Manchester Guardian'. With frequent briefings from Sir Evelyn Baring, consul-general advising the khedive, she reported on progress under the British occupation. Back in London she continued freelance journalism. She began her long association with Cecil Rhodes, whose visionary ideas on the expansion of self-governing colonies within the empire she found compelling. Her opportunity to write for 'The Times' came in the spring of 1890 when C. F. Moberly Bell, its correspondent in Egypt, who had been impressed with her abilities, was recalled to London as assistant manager. He told her, 'If you were a man you would be Colonial Editor of 'The Times' tomorrow' (Bell, 92). She began writing articles and, in November, initiated a fortnightly column, 'The colonies', which was to continue throughout the decade. Charles Mills, the London agent for Cape Colony, described her as 'an exceedingly clever, fascinating lady who has thoroughly studied and mastered South African politics' and recalled how Joubert, whom she interviewed, 'was delighted with her, and could not believe that a Lady could know so much, and ask such searching and pertinent questions' (letter to J. X. Merriman, 14 Aug 1890; 'Selections', 2.8). 
In order to recover from severe influenza in early 1892, Shaw sailed to South Africa. Here she went down diamond and goldmines, investigated labour conditions, and assessed prospects for agriculture. Her 'Letters' so impressed the management of 'The Times' that she was asked to report from Australia and New Zealand. After circling the globe, she returned to London in July 1893 to gain a permanent position as colonial editor at an annual salary of $800, higher than other women journalists of her day. Macmillan published her 'Letters from South Africa' and 'Letters from Queensland' in 1893. With an assured income, she set up a household with three younger unmarried sisters at 130 Cambridge Street, London. She was generous in helping her family, particularly with funds for her nephews' schooling. 
During the 1890s, when imperial rivalry among European powers reached its highest pitch, Flora Shaw wrote over 500 articles, leaders, and columns for 'The Times' promoting British imperial interests. Later she assessed her achievements: 'To have helped to rouse the British public to a sense of Imperial responsibility and an ideal of Imperial greatness, to have had a good share in saving Australia from bankruptcy, to have prevented the Dutch from taking South Africa, to have kept the French within bounds in West Africa, to have directed a flow of capital and immigration to Canada, to have got the Pacific cable joining Canada and Australia made, are all matters that I am proud and glad to have had my part in. (Shaw to Sir Frederick Lugard, 13 Nov 1904, Lugard MSS)' She coined the name Nigeria on 8 January 1897 in an article in 'The Times' about the west African territories under the jurisdiction of the Royal Niger Company. The first woman to speak at the Royal Colonial Institute, she talked on 'the Australian outlook' and colonial expansion in 1894, and on the Klondike in 1899. She also spoke at the Scottish Geographical Society and the Royal Society of Arts. Her younger contemporary Mary Kingsley described her as 'a fine, handsome, bright, upstanding young woman, as clever as they make them, capable of any immense amount of work, as hard as nails and talking like a 'Times' leader all the time. She is imbued with the modern form of public imperialism. It is her religion. (Kingsley to John Holt, 20 Feb 1899, Holt MSS)' The extent of Shaw's involvement in imperial politics became dramatically exposed in 1897 when on 25 May and 2 July she was called before a select committee of the House of Commons inquiring into Jameson's military raid into the Transvaal. She had to explain incriminating telegrams discovered between her and Rhodes, which raised suspicions that she had been the link in a collusion between Rhodes and the colonial secretary, Joseph Chamberlain. She deftly parried questions, protecting the reputation of 'The Times' and the colonial secretary. When gold was discovered in the Klondike she travelled for five months in 1898 to the Canadian far north and roused political controversy by exposing official corruption in the Yukon. During the dark days of the South African War in February 1900 she wrote four patriotic articles asserting Britain's sovereignty over the Dutch republics in South Africa, which were republished in several European languages as a propaganda pamphlet subsidized by the government. Exhausted by a decade of intense work, she resigned from 'The Times' on 1 September 1900. 
Flora Shaw had deep romantic attachments -- with Colonel Charles Brackenbury during the years before his death in 1890 and, in the late 1890s, with Sir George Goldie, founder of the Royal Niger Company; but there is no evidence that these relationships went beyond Victorian propriety. On 11 June 1902, in Madeira, at the age of forty-nine, she married Sir Frederick John Dealtry Lugard (later Baron Lugard) (1858-1945), then high commissioner of Northern Nigeria, and later governor of Hong Kong (1907-12) and governor-general of Nigeria (1912-19). Ill health in Nigeria caused Lady Lugard to return to England, where she wholeheartedly supported her husband's career through her political and social networks and by praising his administration in Northern Nigeria in her book 'A Tropical Dependency' (1905). She accompanied him to Hong Kong and, despite illness, helped gain financial support for founding the University of Hong Kong, and travelled extensively in Japan and China. Her work for Belgian refugees during the First World War led to her creation as a DBE in 1916. A full partner in her marriage, she regarded both to be serving the imperial cause. She died after chronic illness at her home, Little Parkhurst, on 25 January 1929 and was cremated at Woking on 30 January. She was considered 'a crusader and an intriguer' by historians of 'The Times', who stated, 'By her powerful mind and compelling personality she directly influenced policies and statesmen and did much to restore the somewhat battered image of 'The Times' bequeathed by the episode of the Pigott forgeries' (Woods and Bishop, 158). 


@@@@@


doc= 38619


Welby, Victoria Alexandrina Maria Louisa, Lady Welby (1837-1912), philosopher, was born in England on 27 April 1837, the last of three children of Charles James Stuart-Wortley (1802-1844), and his wife, Lady Emmeline Charlotte Elizabeth Stuart-Wortley, nee Manners (1806-1855), poet and traveller. James Archibald Stuart-Wortley (1776-1845) was her grandfather. She had little formal education aside from some private tuition, and from 1848 to 1855 she travelled widely with her mother in the United States, Canada, Mexico, Spain, Morocco, Turkey, Palestine, Syria and many other countries. In 1852 she published her travel diary. After her mother's death she lived with a succession of relatives before being taken in by her godmother, the duchess of Kent, mother of Queen Victoria. In 1861 she was appointed maid of honour to Queen Victoria; she spent almost two years at the royal court before her marriage at St George's Church, Hanover Square, London, on 4 July 1863, to William Earle Welby (1829-1898), military official, MP, and high sheriff, who with his father's death in 1875 became fourth baronet and assumed the additional surname Gregory. Consequently Victoria Welby's surname became Welby-Gregory. Alternatively to a series of pseudonyms or recourse to anonymity, she mainly published under her full name until the end of the 1880s, under the name of Hon. Lady Welby from 1890 to 1892, and as Victoria Welby from 1893 onwards, although she continued signing all official and business documents with her full name. 
Welby's children were Victor Albert William (1864-1876), Charles Glynne Earle Welby (1865-1938), assistant under-secretary of state at the War Office and MP, and Emmeline Mary Elizabeth 
(Nina; 1867-1955)
, painter, sculptor, and writer, who wrote Welby's biography and edited her correspondence in two volumes, under her married name, Mrs H. Cust. During the first years of her marriage, Victoria Welby founded the Royal School of Art Needlework. 
Not at all attracted to life at court, after her marriage Welby retreated to Denton Manor, Grantham, where she soon began her research, with her husband's full support. Initially her interest was directed towards theological questions and in 1881 she published 'Links and Clues', which expressed her sympathy at that time with evangelical movements. It was unorthodox and unsuccessful and its poor reception caused her to reflect on the inadequacies of religious discourse, which was, she came to believe, cast in outmoded linguistic forms. She was drawn into an examination of language and meaning, and found a pervasive linguistic confusion which stemmed from a misconception of language as a system of fixed meanings, and which could be resolved only by the recognition that language must grow and change as human experience changes. She also made a serious study of science, believing that important scientific discoveries supplied the new experiences by which religious discourse could be transformed into something more meaningful. 
Central to Welby's philosophy was her analysis of meaning into three components: sense -- 'the organic response to environment' (Hardwick, xxii); meaning -- the specific sense which a word is intended to convey; and significance -- which encompasses 'the far-reaching consequence, implication, ultimate result or outcome of some event or experience' (ibid.). This triadic relationship relates closely to that established by Charles Sanders Peirce between immediate interpretant, dynamical interpretant, and final interpretant (ibid., pp. 109-11). Peirce read her 1903 book 'What is Meaning?' and reviewed it for 'The Nation' alongside Bertrand Russell's 'Principles of Mathematics', to which he compared it in importance. A flourishing correspondence developed between Welby and Peirce, which was crucial to the development of his thought. She has been regarded as the 'founding mother' of semiotics and her continuing importance is illustrated by the publication in the 1980s and 1990s of editions of her work and volumes of commentary on her thought. She contributed significantly to modern theories of signs, meaning, and interpretation, and introduced, in 1894, the neologism 'significs' to denote the science of meaning. Significs examined the interrelationship between signs, sense -- in all its signifying implications -- and values. 
Besides numerous articles in newspapers, magazines, and scientific journals (notably 'The Spectator', 'The Expositor', the 'Fortnightly Review', the 'Open Court', 'Nature', 'Mind', 'The Monist', the 'Hibbert Journal', and the 'Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods') Welby published a long list of privately printed essays, parables, aphorisms, and pamphlets on a large range of subjects in numerous spheres: science, mathematics, anthropology, philosophy, education, and social issues. 
As her research progressed, Welby increasingly promoted the study of significs, channelling the great breadth and variety of her interests into a significal perspective. Shortly after the publication of two fundamental essays -- 'Meaning and metaphor' in 1893 and 'Sense, meaning and interpretation' in 1896 -- the Welby prize for the best essay on significs was announced in the journal 'Mind' in 1896 and awarded to Ferdinand Tonnies in 1898 for his essay 'Philosophical terminology' (1899-1900). Important moments of official recognition for significs are represented by the publication of the entries 'Translation' (Welby, 1902), 'Significs' (co-authored with J. M. Baldwin and G. F. Stout, 1902), and 'Sensal' (with G. F. Stout, 1902) in the 'Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology in Three Volumes' (1901-5). However, the official recognition Welby had so tenaciously hoped for came only after approximately thirty years of 'hard labour', with the publication of the entry 'Significs' in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' in 1911. The signific movement in the Netherlands, which developed in two phases from 1917 to 1926 and from 1937 to 1956, originated from Welby's significs through the mediation of the Dutch psychiatrist, poet, and social reformer Frederik van Eeden (1860-1932). 
From 1863 until her death in 1912 Welby was a friend and source of inspiration to leading personalities from the world of science and literature. She wrote regularly to over 450 correspondents from diverse countries including Great Britain, the United States of America, France, Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands. It was largely through such correspondence that she developed her theories. She began writing to politicians, representatives of the church, aristocrats, and intellectuals as early as 1870 and created an epistolary network which expanded rapidly from 1880 onwards, both locally and internationally. She used this network for her own enlightenment, as a sounding board for her own ideas, and as a means of circulating her own ideas and those of others. Thanks also to her social position and court appointment as maid of honour to Queen Victoria, she counted friends and acquaintances among the aristocracy and government officials. Because of her interest in religious and theological questions she corresponded with leading churchmen of her day and subsequently with eminent scientists, philosophers, and educationists, whom she welcomed into her home where they met to discuss their ideas. Her correspondents included Michel Breal, Bertrand Russell, C. K. Ogden, Herbert Spencer, Thomas Huxley Benjamin Jowett, F. H. Bradley, Henry Sidgwick, H. G. Wells, and William James. None the less, in spite of general awareness of the importance and originality of Welby's work, she did not for many years receive the recognition she hoped for, at least not publicly. In an attempt to avoid flattery, she either published anonymously or signed her work with pseudonyms, various combinations of initials, or simply as Victoria Welby. The only honour she valued was 'that of being treated by workers as a serious worker' (Hardwick, 13). Though she had no institutional affiliations, she was a member of the Aristotelian and Anthropological societies and was one of the original promoters of the Sociological Society between 1903 and 1904. 
Welby was an open-minded female intellectual in the Victorian era despite -- or, perhaps, thanks to -- her complete lack of a formal education, which led her to search for the conditions which made her theoretical work possible. She highlighted the importance of her extensive travels as a child with her mother, which often took place in dramatic circumstances and ended with her mother's tragic death in the Syrian desert, leaving Victoria all alone until help came from Beirut. In a letter of 22 December 1903 to Peirce, who fully recognized her genius (as testified by their correspondence), Welby suggested that her unconventional childhood 'accounts in some degree for my seeing things in a somewhat independent way. But the absence of any systematic mental training must be allowed for of course in any estimate of work done. I only allude to the unusual conditions of my childhood in order partly to account for my way of looking at and putting things: and my very point is that any value in it is impersonal. It suggests an ignored heritage, an unexplored mine. This I have tried to indicate in 'What is meaning?'. (Hardwick, 13-14)' Welby's scientific remains are now mainly deposited in two archives: the Welby collection in the York University archives (Downsview, Ontario, Canada) and the Lady Welby Library in the University of London Library. The latter includes approximately 1000 volumes from Victoria Welby's personal library and twenty-five pamphlet boxes containing pamphlets, reprints and newspaper cuttings, religious tracts, sermons, and published lectures by various authors. Four boxes without numbers contain duplicates of most of Welby's own publications. The main part of her scientific and literary production is to be found at the York archives. Half of the collection consists of Welby's as yet mostly unpublished correspondence covering the years 1861-1912. A large part of the remainder comprises notes, extracts, and commentaries on a variety of subjects -- biology, education, ethics, eugenics, imagery, language and significance, logic and significance, matter and motion, numbers theory, philosophy and significance, significs, and time. There are also speeches, lessons, sermons by other authors, numerous unpublished essays and a collection of poems by Welby, diagrams and photographs, translations, proofs, copies of some of her publications, and newspaper cuttings. 
Suffering from partial aphasia and paralysis of the right hand owing to bad blood circulation caused by flu caught at the end of January 1912, Welby died on 29 March 1912 at Duneaves, Mount Park, Harrow, and was buried in Grantham, Lincolnshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 38620


Weston, Jessie Laidlay (1850-1928), Arthurian scholar, was born on 28 December 1850 in New Park, Clapham, Surrey, the eldest of the three daughters of William Weston (died 1887), tea broker and member of the Salters' Company, and his second wife, Sarah Burton (died 1856). Following his second wife's death when his daughters were still young children, William Weston married Clara King with whom he had five children. Jessie Weston's early education was at a school in Brighton, the family's home town. Later she studied music in Germany at the Hildesheim conservatory, a setting which inspired her long narrative poem 'The Rose Tree of Hildesheim' and provided the title for her first collection of verse (1896). She also took classes at the Crystal Palace School of Art in London. However, the most important intellectual influence of her youth was Gaston Paris, the French medieval scholar with whom she studied in Paris. 
Despite having spent much of the initial forty years of her life being engaged in increasingly serious scholarship, Jessie Weston wrote nothing for publication until after her father's death in 1887. Her first book, a verse translation of Wolfram von Eschenbach's 'Parzival', was published in 1894 when she was forty-three. Like many of her contemporaries she had become an ardent Wagner enthusiast, having first encountered his music as a student in Hildesheim. Bayreuth was developing into a gathering-place, not only for Wagnerites but for medievalists from all over Europe. Weston was attracted to Wagner's music mainly because of his use of medieval heroic narratives. After having attended a performance of 'Parsifal' at the 1892 Bayreuth festival with the publisher Alfred Nutt, she deplored the fact that the English public knew so little of the sources on which Wagner's operas were based. With Nutt's encouragement she embarked on a 2400-line annotated verse translation of 'Parzival' which she dedicated to the memory of Wagner, 'whose genius has given fresh life to the creation of medieval romance' (Hyman, 509). This work opened the way to further retelling of stories from Wagner and to a collaboration with Nutt which lasted until his death by accidental drowning in 1910. 
In the years before he began collaborating with Jessie Weston, Nutt had already been working as an independent scholar. He had been one of the founder members of the Folk-Lore Society in 1878 and became publisher of the society's journal, 'Folk-Lore', in 1890. European scholars had tended to regard the twelfth-century French poet Chretien de Troyes as the originator of Arthurian romance, but the comparative method involved in the study of folklore was leading Nutt to become interested in the Celtic origins of Arthurian material. Jessie Weston's studies of Arthurian texts led her to side with Nutt and other Celticists against the continental or inventionist school which saw Arthurian romance as deriving from the 'inventive genius' of Chretien de Troyes. While Weston took issue with the German scholars of the inventionist school, she also diverged from Celticists such as Nutt who argued that the grail legends sprang from Irish sources. She argued for their Welsh provenance and postulated that they originated with a Welsh story-teller, Bleheris, cited by Giraldus Cambrensis, and who predated Chretien. Her early publications also attempted to reconfigure the existing hierarchy of Arthurian heroes. Her first publication in Nutt's 'Grimm Library' series in 1897, 'The Legend of Sir Gawain', attempts to re-establish Gawain rather than Perceval as the pre-eminent Arthurian hero and to restore his reputation from the damage done by Sir Thomas Malory's treatment which had been reiterated to English nineteenth-century readers by Tennyson in his 'Idylls of the King'. 
Weston's participation in the controversies about the origins of Arthurian texts led her to a preoccupation with the significance of the grail legends. The interpretation of the grail as the central object of Christian ritual was irreconcilable with the argument that the legends surrounding it predated Christianity. Like many of her generation she was influenced by Sir James Frazer's 'The Golden Bough' (1890), which explored the recurrence of themes of sacrifice, death, and rebirth throughout different religious practices and beliefs and traced these themes to ancient rituals. In her most popular work on the subject, 'From Ritual to Romance' (1920), she expresses her indebtedness to Frazer for 'the initial inspiration' which set her 'on the road to the Grail castle' (p. vii), appropriately acknowledging the extent of Frazer's influence. However, the notion of Arthur as the personification of a vegetation god had surfaced as early as 1842 in the German scholar Karl Simrock's book 'Parzival und Titurel'. Weston first began to formulate her own theory in a paper, 'The grail and the rites of Adonis', which she had delivered to the Folk-Lore Society in 1906 and published the following year in 'Folk-Lore'. 
Weston's views increasingly led her into disputes with A. E. Waite, especially after the publication of 'The Legend of Sir Perceval' in 1906 which emphasized her view of the grail story as deriving from pre-Christian Celtic ritual. Waite, an acknowledged authority on the cabbala, the tarot, and other forms of esoteric knowledge who had broken away both from theosophy and from the order of the Golden Dawn to form his own group based on Christian mysticism, ardently supported the view that the grail legends were Christian in origin. Waite also saw Galahad as the most significant hero of grail literature, whereas Weston believed that grail stories focusing on Galahad were very late developments in grail literature when the grail stories had been 'finally remodelled on the lines of Christian mysticism' (J. L. Weston, 'The quest of the Holy Grail', 'The Quest', 1, 1910, 526). Waite's intemperate and personal attacks on her became increasingly vehement after her death. 
Weston's belief that the grail legends represented the written survival of ancient ritual which had later passed into occult practices -- 'the confused record of a ritual, once popular, later surviving under conditions of strict secrecy' ('Ritual', 1920, 4) -- found its most widely read expression in 'From Ritual to Romance'. By 1920 other scholars such as Jane Harrison and Gilbert Murray, who had also been influenced by Frazer, had played a role in generating public interest in an anthropological approach to comparative religion, and English-speaking readers were also still fascinated with Arthurian lore through the many Victorian popularizations; an audience was ready for the book. While 'From Ritual to Romance' can be seen as Weston's final word on grail legends, it differs from her other works in its lack of scholarly apparatus and its odd references to an unnamed informant who was supposedly an initiate of occult rituals. Despite these inconsistencies, it was widely known and influential, particularly after T. S. Eliot, in his notes to 'The Waste Land' (1922), acknowledged his debt to her explication of grail legends and the role of the Fisher King. 
Weston's belief that German Arthurian scholars were seriously mistaken became more confirmed as her career developed. By 1901 she felt able to declare in her book on Lancelot that German scholars were 'radically unsound' and that her reading of their work had shaken her 'belief in the soundness and reliability of foreign criticism of the Arthurian cycle' (Hyman, 511). This rejection of German scholarship reflected a trend which was occurring in many other scholarly fields where previously unassailable German authority was now being challenged or dismissed. During the First World War her critique of German intellectuals took on political significance when she produced a pamphlet to combat what she saw as the 'undue value' placed on German research findings and charging that German literature could make little claim to cultural uniqueness because so much of it derived from French models. Another pamphlet, 'Germany's Crime Against France' (1915), more explicitly polemical, denounced German war atrocities. 
For much of her life as an active scholar Weston lived in a fashionable district of Paris, travelling frequently to England to keep up her contacts with British folkloric circles and with such groups as the Quest Society. As did many intellectual and professional women of the period, she maintained a membership at the Lyceum, a club which she had helped found in 1904. In the last years of her life she began to find Paris less congenial and in 1923 returned to England to take up residence in a London flat at 85 Biddulph Mansions, Elgin Avenue, Maida Vale. 
Despite failing health, Weston's enthusiasm for controversy remained undimmed in her final years. She wrote an article for publication in 'The Quest' attacking the 'Church Times' and deploring the way in which she saw the Church of England tending towards an alliance with Catholicism. The more Christocentric approach, with a focus on 'the great Drama of the Passion' which cast Jews as the villain and a neglect of the 'Old Testment', inevitably led, she warned, to a chronic antisemitism. The editors of 'The Quest' did not apparently agree or else found her attack on Anglo-Catholicism too controversial and the article remained unpublished. 
Jessie Weston's career is a remarkable one for more than her appetite for controversy. Less than ten years after the publication of her first book she had succeeded in establishing herself as an authoritative translator and interpreter of medieval texts and was soon recognized as the leading English Arthurian scholar. Despite the fact that she published nothing until she was over forty, she was the author of more than twenty books and numerous articles as well as a volume of verse and one of short stories set in the medieval period. The standard reference works of her time, the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' and the 'Cambridge Medieval History', commissioned her to write articles on Arthurian material, thus lending weight to her sometimes disputatious views. Formal institutional recognition was bestowed somewhat more slowly. In 1920 the British Academy awarded her the Rose Mary Crawshay prize of $100 -- a sum which she invested in cataract surgery. In 1923 the University of Wales awarded her the honorary degree of doctor of letters. At the awarding ceremony Mary Williams, a professor of French literature whose own work had been influenced by Weston, described her mentor's research as being 'prosecuted with that patience, zeal and love of the truth which are characteristic of the great scholar' (Grayson, 43). Weston died, unmarried, on 29 September 1928 at Warrington Lodge, Warrington Crescent, Maida Vale, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 38621


Zimmern, Alice Louisa Theodora (1855-1939), educationist and suffragist, was born on 22 September 1855 at Postern Street, Nottingham, the youngest of three daughters of Hermann Theodor Zimmern, a German Jewish immigrant with scholarly interests who was in business as a lace merchant, and his wife, Antonia Marie Therese Regina, 'nee' Leo. Helen Zimmern was her elder sister and they collaborated in compiling two volumes of translations (1880, 1884) from the works of European novelists designed to interest English readers in the cultures of continental Europe. Alfred Eckhard Zimmern, the authority on international relations, was her cousin. Alice was educated at a private school, then at Bedford College, London, before being admitted to Girton College, Cambridge, in 1881. Like other Girton students of the time, Zimmern found her years at university offered an incomparable opportunity for intellectual expansion and freedom. With Janet Case she organized a society to produce classical drama which resulted, most notably, in the 1883 college production of 'Elektra', 'breaking down', as Virginia Woolf noted, 'the tradition that only men acted in the Greek play' ('The Times', 13 Jan 1934). 
After leaving Girton in 1885, having gained honours in both parts of the Cambridge classical tripos, Zimmern held teaching posts in classics and English at girls' schools between 1886 and 1894. She was an assistant mistress at Tunbridge Wells high school from 1888 to 1891. For school use she produced an edition of the 'Meditations of Marcus Aurelius' (1887) and a translation, entitled 'The Home Life of the Ancient Greeks' (1893), from Hugo Bluemner's German, which she later followed with children's books on ancient Greece and Rome (1895, 1906). In 1893, with four other women educators, she was awarded a Gilchrist travelling scholarship which required her to study educational methods in the United States with particular reference to the training of girls. Her 'Methods of Education in America' (1894) reflects Zimmern's interest in a less rigid system of education. She was particularly impressed with the way in which American children were more articulate in discussion and how the American methods of teaching literature inspired 'a real living love for our own English classics' which was almost unknown in English schools because of the overemphasis on exams. At the same time she deplored the low quality of American students' written work, the inanity of many of their textbooks, and the ludicrously 'over-patriotic' way of teaching American history. 
In 1894 Zimmern resigned her school position, though she continued to teach classics to private pupils to supplement her small private income. In the years that followed she contributed numerous articles to journals such as 'Forum' and the 'Leisure Hour', comparing different education systems she observed in her travels, and, increasingly, reflecting on the education of women. In 'Women's Suffrage in Many Lands' (1909), written to coincide with the Fourth Congress of the International Women's Suffrage Alliance, Zimmern finds a number of historical precedents for women's entitlement to the franchise and makes the argument that granting women the vote would be, in some cases, merely reinstating a previously held right. More importantly she shows, through a wide range of examples from different countries, that there is an 'intimate... connexion between enfranchisement and the just treatment of women'. While most of the arguments she presents are moderate and pragmatic, she readily acknowledges the militant tactics of British suffragettes as effective in making women's suffrage 'the question of the day'. 
Both Zimmern's 'The Renaissance of Girls' Education' (1898) and 'Women's Suffrage in Many Lands' made a major contribution to contemporary debates about the education and political rights of women. In numerous articles she also offered insight into the material conditions which defined the quality of women's lives. 'Ladies' clubs in London', published in 'Forum' (1896), and 'Ladies' dwellings', which appeared in the 'Contemporary Review' (1900), show all too clearly that the opportunity offered by Girton to young women 'to carry on their studies in congenial and stimulating surroundings, unhampered by cares of earning and unhindered by conflicting duties' ('The Renaissance of Girls' Education', 104-5) was one which would never be replicated in later life. 
Zimmern's ability to travel widely was increasingly limited by arthritis in the last decades of her life, though she continued to entertain many international visitors with feminist and pacifist interests in her Hampstead flat. Her last publication, a translation of Take Ionescu's work, was 'The Origins of the War' (1917), published by the Council for the Study of International Relations. Alice Zimmern, who was unmarried, died at her home, 45 Clevedon Mansions, Highgate Road, London, on 22 March 1939, and was buried on 25 March at Kentish Town parish church. She was representative of a distinguished generation of Girtonians who made important contributions to the women's movement. 


@@@@@


doc= 38623


Olivier, Laurence Kerr, Baron Olivier (1907-1989), actor and director, was born at 26 Wathen Road, Dorking, Surrey, on 22 May 1907, the younger son and youngest of the three children of the Revd Gerard Kerr Olivier (1869-1939) and his first wife, Agnes Louise, 'nee' Crookenden (1871-1920). His father, a High Anglican, was then serving as assistant priest at St Martin's, Dorking. He was noted for his vocal resonance, athletic prowess, histrionic pulpit manner, and single-minded devotion to his calling. He was also something of a domestic tyrant. Olivier's mother, who came from a family of teachers, was more conspicuous for her intuitive intelligence and emotional sympathy. Out of the melding of these two genetic strains was to come a great actor who succeeded in a wider range of parts than any of his contemporaries, proved the natural successor to Garrick, Kean, Macready, and Irving, established a national theatre through his exemplary leadership, and made Shakespeare available to a mass audience through the cinema. 
'I believe that I was born to be an actor', Olivier once said (Findlater, 206), and his talent certainly manifested itself early. At ten, while attending the West End choir school at All Saints, Margaret Street, London, he appeared in a production of 'Julius Caesar'; it was seen by Irving's former theatrical partner, Ellen Terry, who noted in her diary: 'The small boy who played Brutus is already a great actor' (Holden, 20). Five years later, while a student at St Edward's School, Oxford, he played Kate in 'The Taming of the Shrew' (1922) in a school production invited to the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in Stratford upon Avon. W. A. Darlington wrote in the 'Daily Telegraph' that 'The boy who took the part of Kate made a fine, bold, black-eyed hussy badly in need of taming. I cannot remember seeing any actress in the part who looked it better' (ibid., 25). 
Despite this early proclamation of his talent the young Olivier imagined he might be forced to follow his father into the church or his elder brother into life as an Indian rubber planter. Instead, his father told him he was going on the stage; and in 1924 he spent a year training under Elsie Fogerty at the Central School of Speech and Drama, situated in the labyrinthine interior of the Royal Albert Hall. Peggy Ashcroft, a contemporary, recalled him as 'rather uncouth in that his sleeves were too short and his hair stood on end but he was intensely lively and great fun' (Billington, 19). That hectic youthful vitality was spotted by Sir Barry Jackson, who engaged Olivier for two seasons at the Birmingham repertory theatre from 1926 to 1928. This became Olivier's university, enabling him to play a wide variety of lead roles, including Tony Lumpkin, Uncle Vanya, and Parolles in 'All's Well that Ends Well', and leading to a lifelong friendship with his fellow actor Ralph Richardson that was to have a decisive effect on the British theatre. Olivier also benefited from Jackson's policy of establishing London outlets for Birmingham productions. At the Royal Court, Olivier played the hero in Tennyson's archaic verse-drama, 'Harold' (1926), and a flannel-suited Malcolm in 'Macbeth' (1928), which engendered a belief in Shakespearian realism. And it was at the Royalty, while playing in John Drinkwater's 'Bird in Hand' in 1928, that he met a rising young actress, Jill Esmond Moore Jack stage name Jill Esmond, daughter of the actor and playwright Harry Esmond Jack (Henry Vernon Esmond). They married on 25 July 1930. 
Olivier's early years were marked by an impatient hunger for fame, one endorsed by his dashing good looks, fashionable Ronald Colman moustache, and matinee idol presence. But his poor judgement was revealed when he foolishly forsook R. C. Sheriff's 'Journey's End' (1928), in which he scored a great success as the war weary commander in a single Sunday night performance, in order to play the foreign legion hero in P. C. Wren's 'Beau Geste' (1929). The former turned into a commercial hit: the latter proved a spectacular flop. There followed a period of short runs in bad choices -- no fewer than seven plays in 1929 -- from which he was rescued only by Noel Coward, who cast him as the priggish Victor Prynne in 'Private Lives' in 1930. Olivier detested the part but later acknowledged the huge personal influence of Coward, who cured his tendency to giggle on stage, opened his mind to great literature, and 'gave me a sense of balance, right and wrong' (Holden, 63). Coward did not, however, cure Olivier of his insatiable star hunger. During the Broadway run of 'Private Lives' (1931), Olivier was spotted by a talent scout and whisked off to Hollywood. Despite Coward's finger-wagging warnings ('you've got no artistic integrity, that's your trouble'; Holden, 165), Olivier headed west, accompanied by his young wife, with reckless enthusiasm. 
That enthusiasm was quickly dampened by the American studio system, which led to Olivier being cast in forgettable roles in forgotten pictures such as 'Friends and Lovers' (1931) and 'The Yellow Passport' (1931). After returning to London disenchanted he was once again seduced by Hollywood in 1933 with what sounded like an irresistible offer: starring opposite Greta Garbo in 'Queen Christina' as the lovestruck Spanish envoy. Two weeks into shooting, however, Olivier was fired and replaced by John Gilbert. The official studio line was that Olivier was 'not tall enough': the reality was that he was petrified by his dauntingly unresponsive Swedish co-star. However humiliating at the time, the episode at least saved Olivier from the enervating prospect of a long-term studio contract. It also enabled him first to return to the Broadway stage, playing a submissive homosexual in 'The Green Bay Tree' (1933), directed by the ferociously demonic Jed Harris (later a model both for Disney's Big Bad Wolf and Olivier's Richard III), and then to resume his matinee idol career in London. One particular performance in George S. Kaufman and Edna Ferber's thinly veiled satire on the Barrymore family, 'Theatre Royal' (1934), required an 8 foot leap over a balcony that enthralled West End audiences and set the standard for the bravura athleticism that defined Olivier's style throughout his career. 
After ten years as an actor Olivier's early promise remained unfulfilled. He had won some admiring notices and had been marked out as a potentially distinguished romantic actor. But he had also appeared in a string of commercial flops, had flirted unrewardingly with Hollywood, and had largely avoided the classics. His career seemed directionless and his marriage was increasingly unhappy. If anyone redefined his erratic professional life it was John Gielgud, who by the mid-1930s was already an established Shakespearian master. The two men, though polar opposites in temperament, became twin pillars of the British stage. They first worked together in 1934 when Olivier played Bothwell ('more Hollywood than Holyrood', said one critic) in Gielgud's production of Gordon Daviot's 'Queen of Scots' at the New Theatre: a production that led to the forging of important lifelong friendships with George Devine and Glen Byam Shaw. When Gielgud staged 'Romeo and Juliet' at the New Theatre in 1935 he audaciously invited Olivier to join him in alternating the roles of Romeo and Mercutio (though Robert Donat had been his first choice), with Peggy Ashcroft as their Juliet. 
For Olivier, who opened as Romeo, it was his first major classical role in London, and at first it seemed to have disastrously misfired. Olivier's naturalistic approach to the verse so shocked traditionalist critics that he immediately offered to resign the role; the offer was rejected and during the run Olivier's treatment of Romeo as an impetuous adolescent who, in J. C. Trewin's words, 'entered straight from the high Renaissance' (O'Connor, 'Olivier', 32), won increasingly vocal admirers. When Olivier took over as Mercutio he was widely praised for his athleticism, fire, and swagger. There was little doubt that Gielgud had the superior vocal technique. But Olivier brought to British classical acting a 'muscularity' -- in Tyrone Guthrie's phrase -- that had long been missing. Olivier and Gielgud never acted together again on stage. But from now on they were regarded as amicable rivals. It was Olivier himself who, in a 1967 television interview, best summed up the vital difference between them: 'I've always thought that we were reverses of the same coin: the top half John, all spirituality, all beauty, all abstract things and myself as all earth, blood, humanity; if you like, the baser part of that humanity without the beauty. (Holden, 94)' Whatever their temperamental differences, Gielgud helped transform Olivier from romantic matinee idol and modest movie star to major classical actor. Olivier's Romeo, in spite of critical hostility, also became an important calling card: not least in cinema. It led Elizabeth Bergner to insist that he play Orlando to her Rosalind in a film of 'As You Like It' (1936) that earned him glowing notices. Alexander Korda also engaged him in summer 1936 to play the lead in a costume romance, 'Fire over England' (1937), opposite the darkly beautiful Vivien Leigh. Their off-screen relationship prospered in spite of the birth of the Oliviers' son in August that year. 
Impressed by Olivier's athletically romantic stage presence, Tyrone Guthrie invited him to join the Old Vic, initially to play a full-text 'Hamlet' (1937). It was a crucial moment. At this stage of his rejuvenated career Olivier could have become a West End actor-manager (having in 1936 made his first venture into producing, in tandem with Ralph Richardson, with a J. B. Priestley play, 'Bees on the Boat-Deck') or a highly paid film actor. Instead, his youthful fame worship now tempered by a growing shrewdness, he plumped for a classical season at the Old Vic for $20 a week boosted by movie work whenever time allowed. 

'Hamlet' opened the season in 1937 and once again Olivier left the critics hopelessly divided, sometimes within the same review. The influential James Agate of the 'Sunday Times' flatly asserted: 'Mr Olivier does not speak poetry badly. He does not speak it at all.' At the same time Agate wrote of his 'pulsating vitality and excitement' (Agate, 273). That excitement was evidenced by a famous leap, after the play scene, from the perched up throne to the mimic stage below, and thence down to the footlights: a typical piece of Olivier bravura almost designed to highlight the difference between himself and the nobly lyric but more physically inhibited Gielgud. Again in stark contrast to Gielgud, who rarely stooped to impersonation, Olivier followed Hamlet with an elaborately disguised Toby Belch and then a cool, calculating Henry V. At first Olivier resisted Shakespeare's king because of the play's apparent glorification of war and what he saw as the monarch's scoutmaster ethos. It was Ralph Richardson who persuaded him that Henry V was 'the exaltation of scoutmasters' (Holden, 122). Eventually Olivier inhabited the character with such panache that Charles Laughton came backstage one night to pose the question why he was so good and to give him the exact answer: 'because', said Laughton, 'you are England' (ibid., 123). 
No one claimed that Olivier was the embodiment of Scotland in a heavily stylized Michel Saint-Denis production of 'Macbeth' (1937). But his intuitive intelligence and quest for psychological realism were demonstrated by the way he and his director, Tyrone Guthrie, turned to Freud's biographer, Ernest Jones, for help in explaining the character of Iago when they came to present 'Othello' (1938). Unfortunately they failed to communicate to Ralph Richardson, the Othello, their excited discovery that the ensign had a subconscious homosexual love for the Moor and the production misfired. It was Olivier's Coriolanus, at the end of the 1938 Old Vic season, that marked a turning point and proved his greatest classical success so far. 'Of a stature to come within the line of the great tradition' wrote Alan Dent (Findlater, 215). 'A pillar of fire on a plinth of marble', enthused J. C. Trewin (O'Connor, 'Olivier', 35). Olivier found in the proudly martial Roman a perfect vehicle for his vocal incisiveness, savage irony, and physical heroism; it helped that he did a spectacular death fall in which, characteristically, he threw himself down a staircase in a somersault and came to a dead halt just short of the footlights. 
At the very point, however, when Olivier was being hailed as a great classical actor -- worthy to be mentioned in the same breath as Macready or Irving -- he disappeared from the London stage, not to be seen again for six years. Partly this was because of the Second World War. But it was also because Olivier became increasingly preoccupied by film. Although suspicious of Hollywood after the fiasco over 'Queen Christina', Olivier was persuaded to return there in 1938 to play Heathcliff in William Wyler's film of 'Wuthering Heights' (1939). The process of making the film was well-documented agony: Wyler was a directorial tyrant, Olivier was snobbish about cinema and was coldly hostile to his co-star, Merle Oberon, since he longed for Vivien Leigh, with whom he was engaged in a passionate affair, to play Cathy. But the film was a turning point for Olivier in his movie career: the carapace of theatricality that surrounded his earlier screen performances was replaced by a palpable reality. Sam Goldwyn, the film's producer, threatened to fire Olivier on the grounds that his Heathcliff was ugly and dirty. But the mud and dirt to which Goldwyn objected was part of the attentive physicality of Olivier's performance: it was visible, as Roger Lewis points out, in 'the way he pats the dogs or saddles the horses or frowns into the sunshine when he's lying down in the heather or the way he stands before the fireplace staring into the coals' (Lewis, 26). Thanks to Wyler's remorseless tuition and his own willingness to learn Olivier became a first-rate screen actor. He quickly applied the lessons he had learned on 'Wuthering Heights': his Maxim de Winter in Hitchcock's film of 'Rebecca' (1940) and his Darcy in 'Pride and Prejudice' (1940) both suggest hidden fires lurking underneath an outward grace and civility. 
In 1940 Olivier's first marriage was dissolved and on 30 August he was finally married to Vivien Leigh -- Vivian Mary Holman (1913-1967), daughter of Ernest Richard Hartley, exchange broker, and former wife of Herbert Leigh Holman, barrister -- after a long, semi-public, and faintly scandalous liaison. But, marooned in Hollywood since the outbreak of war, Olivier grew increasingly guilty and fretful at his isolation from the war effort. In California he conquered his fear of flying by taking lessons to prepare himself for active service as a pilot. As a contribution to the war effort, and at the direct suggestion of Winston Churchill, the newly married Oliviers also made a film, 'Lady Hamilton' (1941), intended as a morale-boosting effort to show Britain's historic role as the scourge of megalomaniac warmongers. The film achieved its purpose, though it nearly fell foul of the American censor, who protested vigorously about its apparent endorsement of the adulterous liaison of Nelson and Lady Hamilton. 
Finally back in England in 1941 Olivier pulled strings to join the Fleet Air Arm and, to his delight, joined his old friend Ralph Richardson at a naval air station near Winchester. But his swashbuckling heroics on stage and screen were not matched by similar gifts as a pilot: on one occasion, in making an emergency landing, he managed to wreck three stationary aircraft at the base at Worthy Down. Olivier, at the age of thirty-four, realized his chances of seeing active service were limited. It was a relief to all concerned when the Ministry of Information, again at Winston Churchill's suggestion, approached him with the idea of filming 'Henry V' as a contribution to the war effort. Initially Olivier's role was that of co-producer and leading actor, but when William Wyler and Carol Reed turned down the chance to direct the film Olivier took over behind the cameras as well. 
Although Olivier removed much of the ambiguity from Shakespeare's complex drama of kingship -- excising Henry's threats of genocide to the citizens of Harfleur -- the film emerged as infinitely more than a piece of patriotic propaganda. Olivier showed genuine directorial flair in his framing device, whereby the action starts with a crane shot over a model of Shakespeare's London and eventually moves from the Globe Theatre into the fields of France. The battle scenes -- including a famous moment when English arrows are heard whistling through the air -- were also brilliantly filmed. Olivier's own performance was a beautifully poised characterization, balancing a rueful kingly reflectiveness with spine-tingling clarion cries as Henry exhorted his troops on the eve of battle. Released in Britain in 1944 and in America two years later -- where it won Olivier a special Academy award -- the film not only transcended its immediate propagandist purpose, it proved, to a generation of doubters, that Shakespeare was essentially filmable and could command a popular audience. 
While Olivier was completing 'Henry V' at Denham Studios, he was persuaded by Ralph Richardson to join himself and a former BBC drama producer, John Burrell, as part of a triumvirate to run the Old Vic company. Since the bombing of its Waterloo Road base in 1941 the Old Vic had been kept alive by Tyrone Guthrie, who turned it, with great success, into an itinerant provincial company. Now the intention was to give it a London base at the New Theatre and to create an ambitious classical repertory: to make it, in all but name, an embryonic national theatre. With his highly competitive actor's instinct Olivier was not overjoyed at his initial allocation of roles. He loathed the part of the gallant Ruritanian soldier, Sergius, in Shaw's 'Arms and the Man', and when the production opened on tour in Manchester in 1944 he was so dispirited he felt tempted to go back to the navy. But, 'en route' from the theatre back to the Midland Hotel after the second performance, Tyrone Guthrie responded to Olivier's fierce denunciation of the character by saying, 'Well, of course, if you can't love him, you'll never be any good in him, will you' (Holden, 188). According to Olivier the scales fell from his eyes and Guthrie's shrewd, well-timed observation 'changed the course of my actor's thinking for the rest of my life' (Olivier, 110). 
Olivier's versatility and technique were, at this stage of his career, beyond question. But his ability to love a character, to enter totally into his being and to achieve the transubstantiation that is the hallmark of great acting, was conclusively proved by his triumph as Richard III in the third play of the Old Vic London season in 1944. In building the character Olivier used various elements, including the voice of Henry Irving and the malign temperament of the New York director Jed Harris. But the finished article was entirely his own and confirmation of his interpretative originality. In place of downright transpontine villainy Olivier offered a spellbinding mixture of the inner strategist and the outward hypocrite. 'Here indeed', wrote J. C. Trewin after the first night on 13 September, 'we have the double Gloucester, thinker and doer, mind and mask... no other player in recent memory has made us so conscious of the usurper's intellect, made so plausible every move on the board from the great opening challenge to the last despair and death. (Holden, 191)' Irony was the quality seized on by the young Kenneth Tynan: 'I remember the deep concern, as of a bustling spinster, with which Olivier grips his brother George and says, with sardonic, effeminate intentness 'We are not safe, Clarence, we are 'not' safe'; while, even as he speaks, the plot is laid which will kill the man. (Tynan, 35)' Olivier's triumph as Richard III was absolute: so much so that it became his most frequently imitated performance and one whose supremacy went unchallenged until Antony Sher played the role forty years later. But if it was Richard III that fully released Olivier's dark genius it may be because the character's blend of outward bonhomie and inner demonism accorded more closely than even he realized with his own, strangely driven private nature. 
The Old Vic seasons at the New from 1944 to 1946 quickly became the stuff of theatrical legend. They showed the potential of a permanent classical company. They influenced a whole generation of young theatregoers, including a teenage Peter Hall. And they showed Olivier's infinite versatility. In the two parts of Shakespeare's 'Henry IV' (1945) he moved from a ginger wigged, stammering, fiercely virile Hotspur to a shrill, spinsterly, scarecrow-like Justice Shallow. In one tumultuous evening he also played Sophocles' Oedipus and Mr Puff in Sheridan's 'The Critic' (1945). In the former, Olivier, avoiding the marble chill associated with Greek tragedy, achieved a bloodshot realism climaxing in a cry of echoing anguish and terror. It says a lot about the retentive memory of the great actor that it was based on the tormented sound made by an ermine when its tongue is trapped by salt scattered upon hard snow. But although the instant transition to Mr Puff, hoisted into the flies on a painted cloud and clinging desperately to the curtain as it came down, was virtuosic, it did Sheridan few favours and seemed designed mainly to exhibit Olivier's showmanship. 
Olivier, as the Old Vic seasons proved, held all the court cards as an actor: an incisive voice that could eat like acid into metal, an electrifying physicality, an interpretative originality, and a restless curiosity about humanity that gave everything he did an emotional reality. If there were any lingering doubts they concerned his capacity for tragic grandeur, and they resurfaced when he played King Lear in 1946. Some observers thought it a great performance. Tynan, however, felt 'it merely introduced us to a few wholly unexpected facets of the private life of Mr Justice Shallow' (Tynan, 59). Agate, while applauding its pathos and stillness, astutely observed: 'I have the conviction that Olivier is a comedian by instinct and a tragedian by art' (Findlater, 236). 
In 1947 Olivier was knighted 'for services to stage and films'. He was, and throughout the twentieth century remained, the youngest actor ever to have been so honoured, though it says much about his innate competitiveness that he deeply resented Ralph Richardson's prior elevation. But, although Olivier was by now the acknowledged leader of his profession, his film 'Hamlet' (1948) was an oddly inert affair. Half the text was cut, including two of Hamlet's greatest soliloquies. The camera endlessly tracked up and down the corridors of Roger Furse's Elsinore. And, despite a prodigiously athletic leap from a 15 foot high platform in order to kill Claudius, Olivier's own performance lacked the fiery energy he had displayed at the Old Vic ten years previously. Even though it was the least interesting of Olivier's screen Shakespeares, the film was a popular commercial success and won four Hollywood Oscars, including those for best film and best actor. 
Olivier's fortunes were in the ascendant. And if there was surprise that at the height of his fame he should decide to lead the Old Vic company on a ten-month tour of Australia and New Zealand in 1948 there were good reasons for the move. Olivier and Richardson had been approached by the prospective National Theatre Board with a scheme to incorporate the Old Vic into the finished building: for Olivier an international tour would be a means of forging a wholly new company with a national identity. Cultural diplomacy also played its part: the British Council felt that a display of excellence would be a means of softening antipodean anti-imperialistic sentiment. For Olivier himself there were also private motives for undertaking the trip: his total absorption in his career had put strains on his marriage to the increasingly manic-depressive Vivien and he felt that the tour, in which she was to play three leading roles, would reignite their passion and confirm her theatrical status. The irony is that, although the tour achieved its diplomatic aims and increased the Oliviers' world fame, it led to the unravelling of their marriage and saw the dissolution of the Old Vic partnership. 
The three plays chosen were 'Richard III', Thornton Wilder's 'The Skin of our Teeth', and Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal', in which the Oliviers played Sir Peter and Lady Teazle. The schedule, with Olivier appearing in all three plays and directing two of them, was incredibly gruelling. On top of that he was expected to fulfil a quasi-ambassadorial role: he was asked to inspect troops, take salutes, and even, on one occasion, make a speech on monarchy and empire to an audience of 3000 in Melbourne town hall. On one level the tour was a triumphant success: 179 performances were given to more than 300,000 people, a sizeable profit accrued, and any residual anti-British sentiment was overcome by the Oliviers' joint glamour. But the tour also marked a watershed in Olivier's professional and personal fortunes. Physically he sustained a severe cartilage injury which led to his playing the final performances of Richard III on morphine. That, however, was a minor problem compared to the realization that his marriage, as Vivien carried on an open liaison with a member of the company, was little more than a hollow ritual sustained for the benefit of an adoring public. 
The biggest blow, however, came half-way through the tour when Olivier received a letter from Lord Esher, the chairman of the Old Vic, announcing that the board of governors planned to dispense with the services of Olivier, Richardson, and John Burrell as directors at the end of their five-year contracts. The move, already prophesied by Richardson, was partly a result of the politicking over a planned national theatre. Some also saw the hand of Tyrone Guthrie in the sacking: he had been critical of recent Old Vic policy and saw Olivier and Richardson as absentee landlords who wanted 'to have their cake and eat it' (Holden, 239). Whatever the motives the timing was cruel and the manner brutal. Far from advancing the cause of the national theatre, it delayed it by many years. With Olivier and Richardson at the helm the Old Vic might have become the basis for a national company; instead the sacking of both actors ensured they returned to the private sector and the pursuit of their individual careers. 
Although Olivier returned to do a final season with the Old Vic in 1949, adding his own production of Anouilh's 'Antigone' to 'Richard III' and 'The School for Scandal', the antipodean tour marked a decisive moment in his career. The veteran actor Harcourt Williams noted: 'Larry had lost the basic need that propels every actor. He was leaning more and more towards directing and producing because he no longer had the drive for attention... his attitude to life was almost world-weary' (Holden, 246). Increasingly, in fact, he became an impresario, taking a four-year lease on the St James's Theatre in 1949 where he staged plays by Christopher Fry and Dennis Cannan as well as starring, with Vivien Leigh, in a Festival of Britain pairing of Shaw's 'Caesar and Cleopatra' and Shakespeare's 'Antony and Cleopatra' (1951). He also played to the hilt the role of country squire at Notley Abbey, the twelfth-century, 22-room Buckinghamshire manor house that he had bought in 1945. Apparently accepting that his marriage was something of a sham he turned a benevolently blind eye on Vivien's affair with Peter Finch, a young actor whom Olivier had talent-spotted in Australia and whose British career he actively promoted. 
If Olivier's theatrical career lost much of its dynamism in the early 1950s, he made one film that contains one of his finest, most underrated screen performances: as the doomed George Hurstwood in William Wyler's 'Carrie' (1952). Once a rich restaurateur, Hurstwood sacrifices his marriage for a grand passion and ends up destitute, tubercular, and desperately craving a handout from the lover who has abandoned him. It was a total reversal of Olivier's previously heroic screen presence. But, as always, he invested the character with a microscopically accurate realism: he counted the banknotes and handled the keys in the precise manner of a midwestern restaurant owner. In the final scenes, when he begged Jennifer Jones's Carrie for money for a night's lodging, Olivier also touched rare emotional depths: his voice thick with illness, his eyes closed in exhaustion, he gave the lie to the familiar canard that he was an exclusively technical actor. The film was a commercial failure. But William Wyler accurately described it as 'the truest and best portrayal on film of an American by an Englishman' (Holden, 261). 
If 'Carrie' was a flop 'd'estime', the film of 'The Beggar's Opera' (1952), in which Olivier played Macheath, was an unmitigated disaster. Olivier's lightweight baritone was judged inadequate. There were on-set disagreements with the director, Peter Brook, and the film opened to derisive reviews. Olivier's reputation was also scarcely enhanced by his appearance, opposite Vivien Leigh, in Terence Rattigan's 'The Sleeping Prince' (1953). He was not only accused of wasting his talent on commercial froth, the play renewed critical speculation, which first surfaced during the season of dual Cleopatras at the St James's, that he was increasingly scaling down his own heroic individualism to accommodate the porcelain prettiness of his co-star. Trapped inside a public showbiz marriage Olivier seemed more concerned with propping up his wife's career and ensuring her mental stability than with scaling the lonely, classical peaks. 
It was with some relief that Olivier turned in the winter of 1954 to the filming of 'Richard III' (1955). In some ways, it was the hardest of his three Shakespearian films to accomplish: the original text is dynastically complex and studded with references to past events and unseen characters. But Alan Dent's adaptation clarified it admirably for a cinema audience, and Olivier brilliantly used the camera as a co-conspirator, confiding to it -- and to the audience -- his plans to achieve the throne by giving murder the cloak of constitutional legality. What particularly emerges on screen is Olivier's sly, feminine roguishness; his performance has the twinkling malevolence of a maiden aunt with disturbing psychopathic tendencies. With Ralph Richardson as a Buckingham wittily described by Paul Dehn as 'a Mr Baldwin who has read Machiavelli' (Dehn, 76) and John Gielgud as an exquisitely lyrical Clarence, the film also had a star power impossible to achieve at the Old Vic. 
After his return from the antipodes Olivier's own career had seemed to be subordinated to the fabled showbiz construct of 'the Oliviers'. A major turning point, however, came in 1955 with Olivier's return -- for the first time since his schoolboy Katharine -- to the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in Stratford upon Avon, then, under the directorship of Anthony Quayle and Glen Byam Shaw, enjoying an artistic prosperity that completely eclipsed the dowdy Old Vic. Olivier's chosen roles for the season were Malvolio, Macbeth, and Titus Andronicus. But, while Vivien Leigh played opposite him in all the productions, there was no sense of Olivier diminishing his blowtorch ebullience to accommodate his wife. After a modest start with Malvolio, played as a bumptious arriviste with severe vowel problems, Olivier enjoyed a total triumph as Macbeth: a role that, in the annals of British theatre, had traditionally defeated even the greatest actors. Olivier convincingly reconciled the soldier, the poet, and the hero-villain. Above all he invested the character with a brooding inwardness in the early scenes as if he had been living with bloody thoughts for a long time past. But there was also a savage comic irony -- not least in the scene with the two murderers -- and at the end a heart wrenching despair. When Macbeth lists the consolations of age that he has forever sacrificed, Olivier's voice soared on ''troops' of friends' as if summoning up an eternal, echoing loneliness. 
Even more remarkably, Olivier's conquest of Macbeth was followed by his total reclamation of Titus Andronicus as a tragic hero in Peter Brook's starkly ritualistic production. Elizabethan grand guignol was transformed into great art, and Olivier discovered in Titus premonitions of Lear. His cry of 'I am the sea' was accompanied by a sound like waves beating on a distant shore; the on-stage severance of his hand transcended stage trickery through his long withheld howl of pain; and when he leant against a pillar to ask 'When will this fearful slumber have an end?' he became the epitome of antique pathos. Whatever accusations critics made against Olivier in the course of his long career he eventually rebutted. To Agate's claim that he was an instinctive comedian rather than a tragedian or to Tynan's assertion that he was an essentially active player incapable of great suffering, his Stratford Macbeth and Titus provided a definitive riposte. 
Olivier's reassertion of his classical supremacy, endorsed by the release of the cinematic 'Richard III', still left him with a gnawing dissatisfaction. His private life, with Peter Finch moving into Notley Abbey to form a 'menage a trois', was an unholy mess. His mooted film of 'Macbeth' was capsized by the death in 1956 of its putative producer, Alexander Korda. And Olivier's experience of directing Marilyn Monroe in 'The Prince and the Showgirl' (1957), though it generated prurient showbiz headlines, was a protracted nightmare. By his own admission Olivier was 'going mad, desperately searching for something suddenly fresh and thrillingly exciting' (Holden, 315), when a second courtesy visit to the Royal Court to see 'Look Back in Anger', which he cordially detested, led to an encounter with its author, John Osborne. However much he disliked Osborne's first play Olivier was shrewd enough to see that the theatrical power centre was gradually shifting from Shaftesbury Avenue to Sloane Square, and cannily enquired if Osborne's new play might have a role for him. It was a defining moment both for Olivier in his professional and private life and for the future of British theatre. While Gielgud, Richardson, and Guinness had all rejected the chance to appear in 'Waiting for Godot', Olivier actively embraced the new. The result was a breathtaking performance in 'The Entertainer', which finally opened at the Royal Court in 1957. Not only did Olivier capture the surface detail of Osborne's third-rate, broken-down music-hall comedian, Archie Rice -- the cheap grey suit, the fake bonhomie, the leering innuendo, the bent-wristed camp were all exactly observed -- but beyond that Olivier conveyed the total desolation of a man aware of his own essential hollowness and atrophied emotions. It was a world away from Macbeth, and yet Olivier invested the role with a similar arc of despair leading to the ultimate revelation of the character's terminal solitude. 
Olivier's performance in 'The Entertainer' reanimated his career and marked a symbolic union between the theatrical establishment and the radical pioneers: here was the embodiment of theatrical glamour appearing in a play that treated the music-hall as a metaphor for a decaying, post-Suez Britain. The play also introduced Olivier to a young actress, Joan Plowright, who played his daughter in the production's West End transfer and who, after the protracted breakup of his marriage to Vivien Leigh (they were divorced in December 1960), was eventually to become his third wife. 
Olivier's renewed zest for work, and eagerness to ally himself with a new generation, was confirmed by his towering 1959 Stratford upon Avon performance as Coriolanus under the direction of the 28-year-old Peter Hall. In his return to a role he had first played at the Old Vic in 1938 Olivier emphasized the character's emotional immaturity, loathing of civilian humbug, and smouldering irony. But, as Laurence Kitchin noted, it was Olivier's 'interpretative intelligence' (Kitchin, 136) that stood out. It was symbolized not just by his sulky pride in the presence of public acclamation or by his spoilt-boy behaviour with his mother, but by the spontaneous joy that greeted any mention of the Volscian leader, Aufidius: a clear indication of the underlying sexuality of martial conflict. Yet there was a bruising virility and fierce athleticism to his performance, culminating in a death fall that led to his being suspended by his ankles from a 12 foot promontory: an athleticism all the more astonishing when set against the fact that he was regularly commuting from Stratford to Morecambe to film 'The Entertainer'. 
Olivier's appetite for the new led him back to the Royal Court in 1960 to play Berenger, the insignificant little man who stays defiantly human when everyone else turns into a rhino, in Ionesco's absurdist parable 'Rhinoceros'. This was a play that hardly stretched his talents and it led to a bitter quarrel with the play's director, Orson Welles, whose role Olivier summarily usurped in the final stages of rehearsal. But although he busily shuttled between London and Broadway, where he played first the title role and then Henry II in Anouilh's 'Becket' (1960-61), and although he finally achieved domestic happiness and stability with his marriage to Joan Ann Plowright ('b'. 1929) -- the daughter of William Ernest Plowright, a Lincolnshire newspaper editor, and former wife of Roger Gage -- on 17 March 1961, his public career still lacked a visible destination. 
The focus Olivier desperately needed came almost by accident. A Sussex optician, Leslie Evershed-Martin, had chanced to watch a television programme by Tyrone Guthrie hymning the virtues of the open stage at Stratford, Ontario: ironically a theatrical form that Guthrie had discovered during an improvised indoor restaging of the Olivier 'Hamlet' at Elsinore in 1937. Evershed-Martin decided that the town of Chichester had parallels with the Canadian Stratford and could sustain a similar theatre. Via Guthrie he was put in touch with Olivier and offered him the directorship of the brand new, still unfinished hexagonal theatre. Everything conspired to make Olivier accept: his paternalistic love of companies, his relish for the new, and the fact that he and his wife had decided to settle in nearby Brighton. 
Accepting a modest salary of $3000 Olivier threw himself into the Chichester enterprise wholeheartedly, and, after a shaky start with two obscure period plays, the opening season in 1962 sprang to life with his own near definitive production of 'Uncle Vanya'. It was a reminder of Olivier's underestimated gifts as a director; everything about the production, from the distant sound of barking dogs to the intrusive peals of thunder, was perfectly orchestrated. It also proved that the open sided Chichester stage was perfectly suited to proscenium arch naturalistic drama. Above all, it was a company achievement dominated by luminous performances from Michael Redgrave as a shrill, pigeon-toed, self-deceiving Vanya, from Olivier himself as a visionary Astrov maimed by self-knowledge, and from Joan Plowright as a defiant, unbearably moving Sonya. 'Vanya' performances in that first Chichester season acquired such intensity that backstage they were dubbed 'holy nights'. 
Just as Chichester was preparing to open, plans for a national theatre were coming to a head. As far back as 1957 Olivier had been sounded out about the directorship by Lord Chandos (formerly Oliver Lyttelton), chairman of the various groups working towards establishment of a national theatre. Given that the National seemed a distant prospect, Olivier was wary. But in 1961 the Labour-led London county council forced the government's hand and the Conservative chancellor, Selwyn Lloyd, announced the release of $1 million towards the creation of a national theatre: initially an umbrella organization intended to incorporate the Old Vic, Stratford, and the Sadler's Wells opera and ballet companies. Stratford's eventual withdrawal led to the removal of Sadler's Wells from the equation and confirmed the idea of a national theatre as a separate entity. In July 1962 Selwyn Lloyd gave the green light to the revised scheme: the Old Vic would become the temporary home of the National Theatre Company pending the construction of a theatre on the south bank of the Thames. Lord Chandos became the first chairman of the National Theatre Board. Olivier was formally asked to become the theatre's founder-director and had no hesitation in accepting. It was the fulfilment of a lifelong dream and one that would capitalize on his gifts as actor, director, producer, company leader, and rallier of the troops. He could even use Chichester as a means of building a new company. 
Olivier's shrewdest move in setting up the National Theatre was to invite two of the brightest young directors from the Royal Court, John Dexter and William Gaskill, to join him as associates. He also cannily acceded to Kenneth Tynan's wish to become literary manager, thereby capitalizing on his vast theatrical knowledge while neutralizing him as a critic. His most ungenerous decisions were his failure to recruit Richardson and Gielgud, and his miscasting, and eventually sacking, of Michael Redgrave, seemingly unaware of his disabling illness. But the absence of the older stars paved the way for the emergence of new ones; and under Olivier's tutelage Maggie Smith, Robert Stephens, Colin Blakely, Derek Jacobi, and Anthony Hopkins all developed into major classical performers. In its early years the new National Theatre Company seemed equally adept at all styles: period classics such as 'The Recruiting Officer' and 'Trelawny of the Wells', established warhorses such as 'Hobson's Choice' and 'Hay Fever', and even new plays such as 'The Royal Hunt of the Sun' and, famously, 'Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead'. 
Olivier himself also led the company from the front. His Astrov, repeated from Chichester, was followed by Captain Brazen in 'The Recruiting Officer' (1963), an exact study in controlled flamboyance, and a magisterial and still controversial Othello (1964). With his rolling, loose-limbed gait, his oscillating hips, his rotating palms, Olivier conveyed the vanity, pride, and self-dramatizing narcissism of an Othello who was natural prey to Iago's wiles. His voice, deepened by an octave through rigorous training, also matched the character's mellifluous rhetoric. And his disintegration, under Iago's poison, was truly awesome, leading, as he tore a crucifix from his neck, to an atavistic obeisance to the barbaric gods. But while Harold Hobson spoke for the majority in acclaiming 'the power, passion, verisimilitude and pathos of Sir Laurence's performance' (Holden, 379), doubting voices were raised. Jonathan Miller, while admiring Olivier's bravura and energy, was stolidly unimpressed. The critic of 'The Times' argued that the downgrading of Iago seriously impoverished the play, in that 'Othello needs an adversary, not an accomplice' (Elsom, 142). 
Olivier's finest performance in the National Theatre's early years was as Captain Edgar, locked in a love and death struggle with his wife, in Strindberg's 'The Dance of Death' (1967). As Richard Findlater wrote, he looked and sounded magnificently right: 'close-cropped Prussian head, hooded stony eyes, aggressively jutting jaw, a choleric red face which went purple in his fits and seemed to blanch when he was on the point of doing something particularly nasty' (Findlater, 232). Beyond that, Olivier combined monstrosity and humour in a way that seemed quintessentially Strindbergian and was especially brilliant in the mimetic passages: executing the Boyars' dance with a brutal grace or stamping on his wife's photograph and shooting at her piano with Dionysiac fury. It took Olivier's interpretative zest to remind audiences that Strindberg was not a morbid misogynist but a blackly comic writer. 
Under Olivier's leadership the National Theatre enjoyed several years of unstinted glory: there may not have been any discernible house style, as at the rival Royal Shakespeare Company, but there was an ability to adapt to the demands of a particular play. Without creating an inflexible ensemble on European lines, Olivier also succeeded in building up a fiercely loyal company which he led with bulldog tenacity. But after four golden years the National began to seem a troubled organization in the late 1960s. Olivier himself suffered a series of debilitating illnesses, starting with cancer of the prostate. His two directorial associates, Dexter and Gaskill, who had given the company much of its early impetus, decided to leave. There was also a furious public row in 1968 over the National Theatre Board's refusal to sanction a production of Rolf Hochhuth's 'Soldiers': a play which debated the blanket bombing of Dresden and parenthetically branded Churchill a war criminal. The play was enthusiastically championed by Kenneth Tynan and equally firmly rejected by Lord Chandos, who had been a member of Churchill's wartime cabinet. Olivier found himself caught in the middle: he believed strongly in the idea of directorial independence and valued Tynan's literary knowledge but was not, in the end, prepared to resign over a play whose arguments about Churchill were and remained unproven. What was surprising, to an outsider, was Chandos's privately expressed contempt for Olivier's judgement and his belief that he was being manipulated not just by Tynan but by his wife, Joan Plowright, whom Chandos described as 'a Red' (personal knowledge). 
By the late 1960s Olivier was suffering increasingly from stage fright, world weariness, and an increasing number of side-effects from his cancer treatment. But he returned to the stage in 1970 as Shylock in Jonathan Miller's production of 'The Merchant of Venice': a performance that, when stripped of the Hebraic accoutrements Olivier had originally planned, poignantly revealed the contradictions in Shylock's character. The contradictions in Olivier's own character were exposed by his ambivalent acceptance of a life peerage (as Baron Olivier, of Brighton) in the same year. The establishment side of him recognized that it was the first ennoblement of an actor in the history of his profession and, as such, must be dutifully accepted: the subversive, pub entertainer side of him was frightened it would cut him off from his colleagues. On the day of his elevation he dispatched a circular to the National Theatre staff suggesting that the first person to address him as 'Your Lordship' would be fired on the spot. 
Inevitably there was a twilit quality to Olivier's final years at the National, but one illuminated by periodic bursts of theatrical lightning. One struck in December 1971 at a time when the National, having opened a second front at the New Theatre and come up with a string of duds, was under severe pressure. Olivier's James Tyrone in Michael Blakemore's production of 'Long Day's Journey into Night' was both an individual triumph and a symbol of the National's renewed confidence. What was startling was Olivier's ability to play an ageing, miserly, cantankerous American matinee idol who, totally unlike himself, had put commercial safety before artistic adventure. Olivier's genius was to suggest that inside this New England ham lurked an unrealized talent. When he sweetly crooned 'We are such stuff as dreams are made on', he both evoked a vanished acting style and made the audience believe for a moment that Tyrone might once have been an American Kean. For a genuinely great actor to play a nearly great one was a technical feat of extraordinary skill. 
Even as Olivier was enjoying a success that would herald a period of renewed energy at the National Theatre, plans were under way to appoint his successor. Informal approaches to Peter Hall had been made by Sir Max Rayne, the National's new chairman, as early as the summer of 1971. Hall was sworn to secrecy, and when Olivier indicated to Rayne in February 1972 that he wished gradually to phase himself out he had no knowledge of the backroom negotiations. Only on 24 March was he formally told of the board's decision that he was to be replaced by Peter Hall. For the second time in his life he felt a deep sense of betrayal by a board, but on this occasion the wounds never healed and to his dying day he was aggrieved at the failure to consult him over his eventual successor. At one stage he wanted an actor -- Joan Plowright, Richard Burton, or Richard Attenborough -- to take over the reins: at other times, he plumped for Michael Blakemore. 
Although Olivier made life difficult for Peter Hall -- who finally succeeded him in November 1973 with the intention of leading the company into the new building on the south bank -- and prevaricated about the date of his departure, he was still treated with a dismal lack of dignity and respect by the National Theatre Board. It says much about his appetite for the unconventional that his final appearance at the National -- or indeed on any stage -- was in December 1973 as a tough Glaswegian Trotskyite in Trevor Griffiths's 'The Party'. Olivier phrased his climactic twenty-minute speech with a musical command of tempi, and with a vivid ability to clarify the complex argument through the use of his bunched and muscular hands. It was a granite hard performance, possibly imbued with something of Olivier's own growing detestation of unearned authority. 
Freed from the shackles of running the National Theatre, Olivier devoted himself in the last fifteen years of his life to capitalizing on his fame and earning a tidy fortune for the benefit of his wife and their three children. He earned $1 million making a Polaroid commercial for American television. He made cameo appearances in a number of often undistinguished films. His best performance, by far, was as a sadistic Nazi dentist in John Schlesinger's 'Marathon Man' (1976), for which he was nominated, in the Oscars, as best supporting actor. 
It was in television, a medium he initially despised, that Olivier made his greatest impact in his later years. In the 1970s he co-produced (with Derek Granger) and starred in two series of adaptations for Granada of well-known stage plays. It gave him the chance to repeat his brilliant performance as the fetishistic, hat-thieving grandfather in 'Saturday, Sunday, Monday' and to essay roles, such as Tennessee Williams's Big Daddy, that he had never played on stage. Most surprising of all was his performance as the muscular homosexual Harry Kane, in Pinter's 'The Collection' (1976): listening to Olivier's callous description of his working-class lover, Bill, as a 'slum-slug' and watching his brutal finesse one could only dream of the many other Pinter roles he might have played. It was also for Granada that Olivier played the dying, guilt-haunted patriarch Lord Marchmain in 'Brideshead Revisited' (1981), and for whom in 1983 he played a final, valedictory King Lear. Given an endless series of illnesses that would have destroyed a lesser man, the vocal thunder was inevitably missing but Lear's irascibility and suffering were sharply etched and in the confrontation with Gloucester on Dover cliffs Olivier achieved a lucid pathos that echoed his former glories. 
Olivier was awarded an honorary Oscar in 1979, and was appointed OM in 1981. He held honorary degrees from Tufts, Massachusetts (1946), Oxford (1957), Edinburgh (1964), London (1968), Manchester (1968), and Sussex (1978). He continued working until three years before his death of renal failure at his home at The Malthouse, Horsebridge Green, near Steyning, Sussex, on 11 July 1989. He was survived by his wife, their three children, and the son of his first marriage. 
Olivier crammed numerous careers into a single lifetime: classical actor, Hollywood star, theatrical and television producer, West End impresario, National Theatre director. His 'Confessions of an Actor' (1982) gives the strong impression of a man driven by an overpowering sense of private guilt inherited from his religious upbringing and fuelled by his single-minded career worship, marital failures, and professional jealousies. But what stood out, both in public interviews and in personal encounters, was his magpie memory and insatiable curiosity. It was typical of Olivier that, in the National Theatre 'Othello', a sly, ironic aside to the duke of Venice about the 'Anthropophagi' -- implying a complicity of knowledge -- was based on an encounter twenty-five years previously with a pseudo-intellectual who, in talking about stimulants, quickly changed the word to 'stimuli'. Olivier's career was studded with examples of gestures, intonations, even pieces of theatrical business retrieved at will from the vast storehouse of his memory. But there was in Olivier a prodigious fascination with humanity at large. His omnivorous actor's observation was akin to that of a great novelist or poet. 
Partly because of the lack of discrimination in his later choice of film it became fashionable to downgrade Olivier and to suggest, especially in comparison with Gielgud and Richardson, that he lacked some essential inner richness. But that was to overlook the protean nature of his achievements. Only a man of Olivier's iron determination, political skill, and instinctive leadership could have translated the National Theatre from a platonic idea into a living reality. It took a similar mixture of tenacity, energy, and endurance to make no fewer than three Shakespeare films that proved, against all the intellectual odds, that it was possible to transfer the greatest poetic drama to the screen. 
For all Olivier's multiple achievements, it is as an actor that he will live longest in the collective memory. 'He is greatest', wrote G. H. Lewes, 'who is greatest in the highest reaches of his art.' No other actor before Olivier conquered so many of the commanding theatrical heights: not just Macbeth, Hamlet, Lear, and Othello, but Titus, Coriolanus, Henry V, Hotspur, Romeo, Shylock, Sophocles' Oedipus, Ibsen's Halvard Solness, Chekhov's Astrov, Strindberg's Captain Edgar. Olivier was no less adept in comedy, whether as Tony Cavendish in 'Theatre Royal', Sheridan's Mr Puff and Sir Peter Teazle, Congreve's Tattle in 'Love for Love', or Farquhar's Captain Brazen in 'The Recruiting Officer'. Even if there were occasional failures in modern drama -- such as his performance as a devious midlands insurance agent in David Turner's 'Semi-Detached' (1962) -- they were made up for by the complex richness of his Archie Rice in 'The Entertainer'. 
Conscious of his status as a national icon Olivier would have thought it entirely fitting that, after his death, his vast professional and personal archive should be acquired by the British Library with the help of a grant from the Heritage Lottery Fund. But, although the establishment side of Olivier relished honours and acclaim, he saw himself primarily as a practical man of the theatre. And, if he elevated the art of acting in the twentieth century, it was principally by the overwhelming force of his example. Like Garrick, Kean, and Irving before him, he lent glamour and excitement to acting so that, in any theatre in the world, an Olivier night raised the level of expectation and sent spectators out into the darkness a little more aware of themselves and having experienced a transcendent touch of ecstasy. That, in the end, was the true measure of his greatness. 


@@@@@


doc= 38624


Dimond, William (c.1784-1837?), playwright, the eldest surviving son of William Wyatt Dimond (c.1750-1812), actor and theatrical manager, and his wife, Matilda Martha, 'nee' Baker (died 1823), was born at Bath, where Dimond senior managed the Theatre Royal jointly with the theatre at Bristol. He was educated by the Revd Dr Morgan; the title-page of 'Adrian and Orrila' (1807) describes him as 'of the Honourable Society of the Inner Temple'. But he had already entered on a literary career by contributing Della Cruscan poems to the 'Morning Herald' under the signature Castalio. 'Petrarchal Sonnets, and Miscellaneous Poems' was published in 1800 by subscription and dedicated to the duchess of York; the volume was criticized for its immature extravagances of diction. In the following year, however, Dimond had a comic opera, 'The Sea-Side Story', produced as a benefit piece, with some success. In all he wrote about thirty pieces for the stage, including operas, musical entertainments, and melodramas. Despite his rejection of 'scenic shew' in the prologue to 'The Sea-Side Story', his dramas evinced a strong tendency towards the striking tableau, the exotic setting, and the picturesque pose; his adaptation of Byron's 'Bride of Abydos' (1819) offers a series of frenzied encounters and explosive scenic effects. The 'British Critic' found 'Adrian and Orrila' interesting, but criticized the dialogue for being 'generally too florid, bordering frequently upon affectation, and occasionally... not far removed from nonsense' ('British Critic', 29, 431-2). Six years later the same journal, reviewing Dimond's patriotic extravaganza 'The Royal Oak' (1811), commented: 'We have often met with Mr. Dimond, and have always found something to praise and something to censure in him. It will never be better. The talents he received from nature have wanted the cultivation of good taste; and the offences against propriety which wild genius commits, will never be corrected by ill-judging audiences. (ibid., 41, 302-3)' Hazlitt found in Dimond's plays 'so strong a family likeness that, from having seen any one of them, we may form a tolerable correct idea of the rest... The author does not profess to provide a public entertainment at his own entire expense, and from his own proper funds, but contracts with the manager to get up a striking and impressive exhibition in conjunction with the scene-painter, the scene-shifter, the musical composer, the orchestra, the chorusses on the stage, and the 'lungs' of the actors! ('Complete Works', 5.366)' In a late play, however ('Stage Struck', 1835), Dimond burlesques melodramatic styles of acting. 
Dimond's father died in 1812, leaving him a joint share of the estate. He took over the management of the Bath and Bristol theatres. In 1817 he was living in what was his father's house in Norfolk Crescent, Bath. He relinquished control of the Bath theatre in 1823, according to Alfred Bunn, who added that since that time, Dimond had been 'in many jails (in Horsemonger Lane, under the name of James Bryant,) and tried in many courts, (he was tried at Croydon assizes under the name of 'William Driver',) under many names, for heinous crimes -- out of all of which he escaped by more miracles; his deeds at Bath, the early and great scene of his profligacy, would fit a volume in the narration. (Bunn, 10-11)' Bunn was not, however, a disinterested witness, having been hoaxed by Dimond in 1834 by some forged letters purportedly from Mrs Mardyn, a lover of Byron, volunteering to come and perform Byron's work as he had taught her in Bunn's production. Bunn announced the coup, 'Mrs Mardyn' pulled out at the last minute, and Bunn investigated to find that Dimond (writing from Paris) had been the author of the letters. Bunn reports that Dimond died in Paris in late 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 38625


Fox, Joseph (1775-1816), dental surgeon and philanthropist, the only son of Joseph Fox (1733-1795), dentist, and his wife, Mary ('b'. 1751, died before 1795), daughter of the Revd John Rogers, a Baptist minister of Long Lane, Southwark, was born in Crooked Lane, Lombard Street, London, on 7 November 1775. Nothing is known of his early education except that he attended a school in Tooting kept by a Mr W. Lord, and was presumably trained in dentistry by his father. In 1795-6 he was dresser to Henry Cline, the surgeon, having studied at Guy's Hospital since at least 1794, the year he was elected to its Physical Society (to which he gave a dissertation on the teeth on 3 October 1795). In 1796 he obtained the membership of the Company of Surgeons by examination, and when the company was reorganized under a new name in 1800 he consequently became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons. Fox practised at several addresses in London, mainly in Lombard Street with his cousin, John Fox, and his brother-in-law, Richard Downing. In 1808 he married Ann (1777-1813), daughter of Joseph and Mary Gibbs. They had a daughter and a son. 
In the spring of 1799 Fox began a course of lectures on the teeth to students at Guy's, and he continued as a lecturer there until his death. This was certainly the first series of lectures specifically on dentistry to be given in Britain, and probably in the world. On them he based his two books, 'The Natural History of the Human Teeth' (1803) and 'The History and Treatment of the Diseases of the Teeth' (1806), which were the first important dental works in English to have illustrations of operative dental procedures and of pathological dental conditions. Fox was also the first to give specific instructions for the correction of irregularities of the teeth. There were three English editions of his works, two American editions, and a French translation by Lemaire. These works were the first true textbooks on dentistry for students and practitioners, and for the next fifty years they were the most quoted ones in the English-speaking world. 
Fox became a supporter of Edward Jenner after attending a meeting of the Physical Society in October 1798 at which vaccination was discussed, four months after the publication of Jenner's 'Inquiry into the Cause and Effects of the Variolae vaccinae'. When the Royal Jennerian Society was established to further vaccination in January 1803, Fox became a vice-president and the first secretary, allowing part of his house to be used as a 'vaccinium' by the society. In gratitude for his services he was presented with a silver medal in June 1803. 
Fox also belonged to the Askesian Society, where he met influential men of science including the chemist William Allen, whose diary is the chief contemporary source for Fox's life and who became Fox's greatest friend and an associate in his philanthropical activities. Fox became a member of the Royal Institution on 10 March 1800 but never lectured there, though he presented a copy of his 'Natural History' to the library. 
Although Fox's lectures and dental practice continued until his early death, his final years were dominated by his work for the organized education of poor children; indeed the burden of travel, correspondence, and committee work for this was probably a major cause of his death. In November 1807 Fox attended a lecture by Joseph Lancaster on the latter's method of providing education on Christian but non-denominational principles for large numbers of children, with the senior pupils teaching the younger. Fox immediately appreciated the simplicity and efficiency of this scheme, which became the Royal Lancasterian Society. With William Allen and William Corston, a straw-hat manufacturer with an interest in industrial schools, Fox saved the society from bankruptcy in 1808 when Lancaster owed over $6000; Fox provided $2000 immediately and drew bills upon Corston for the remainder. Lancaster agreed to the appointment of trustees, and Fox became the first secretary and Allen the first treasurer. In 1814, when Lancaster again owed over $8000, the committee took over the institution, changing its name to the British and Foreign School Society. The society developed schools both in Britain and abroad. In a debate in the House of Commons on 21 May 1816 Lord Brougham paid tribute to Fox for his salvation of the Lancasterian system of education. 
In 1814 Fox became associated with Robert Owen, mill owner and socialist educationist, who wished to extend the educational and social experiments at his New Lanark Mills against the wishes of his partners. The necessary capital to buy the mills was provided by Fox (who contributed $10,000) and others, on condition that the children should receive non-denominational religious teaching. 
Fox was a friend of Josiah Wedgwood II (1769-1843), and a series of letters to him in the autograph of Fox written between 1813 and 1816 is preserved in Keele University. These contain important information about the manufacture by Fox of porcelain artificial teeth, using materials supplied by Wedgwood. They reveal Fox's deep religious convictions and details of his workload, travels, and health, as well as his relations with Lancaster and Owen. 
Towards the end of his life Fox suffered a series of 'spasmodic attacks'. He died suddenly from a 'rupture of the gall bladder' on 11 April 1816 at his home, 27 Argyle Street, London, and was buried on 18 April in the family vault of the Baptist meeting-house, Long Lane, Southwark. 


@@@@@


doc= 38626


Hales, Sir Robert (d. 1381), administrator and prior of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem in England, may have come from a Lincolnshire or Norfolk family. He probably began his career at Rhodes, where he had become preceptor of Sanford and Slebech before August 1358, when he was allowed to leave the convent. Having returned to England, he acted as attorney for the prior of England, John Paveley, in July 1362, but in October 1365 was one of the 100 knights of St John who took part in the crusade of Pierre I of Cyprus which captured Alexandria. By February 1366 he was an associate of the master, Raimond Berenger, and perhaps also preceptor of Upleden, while in April 1367, Pope Urban V granted him full absolution in the case of his death. He was back in England no later than November 1370, and when Paveley died in 1371, he was nominated as his successor. As prior of England, Hales was summoned to parliament in 1372 and 1373, and between 1375 and 1380, while in June 1373 he was called to the king's service against the French, though the expedition did not materialize. 
In June 1374 a serious dispute arose when the master, Robert Juilly, appointed the Scot Robert Mercer to be administrator of the Scottish properties of the order. The appointment was confirmed by Pope Gregory XI in January 1375, but by then Hales, who claimed authority over the Scottish preceptory, had caused Edward III to put a stop on the order's moneys from England that were destined to finance the return of the master to Rhodes and an expedition against the Turks. Although in February 1375 Gregory warned that anyone claiming to have rights in Scotland would be forced to bow to justice, pope and master soon gave in. On 15 October 1375 Juilly and the convent of Rhodes revoked the grant of the Scottish preceptory to Robert Mercer, and reserved the provision of this preceptory to the English prior, while the pope nominated a foreign administrator to take over the Scottish properties of the order for the time being. In December Gregory asked King Edward to lift the arrest on the order's moneys and to allow the English contingent of an expedition planned for 1377, consisting of thirty-eight brethren and thirty-eight serjeants, to leave the country. However, only a few went, and Hales, who also stayed in England, was made admiral of the fleet from the Thames to the west in November 1376, and again in August 1377. In November 1377 Hales went to sea with a fleet led by Thomas of Woodstock, earl of Buckingham, and others. Having endured storms and many other difficulties, they returned without success. 
Nevertheless, Hales became increasingly important in English politics. In November 1378 he was appointed to the third of the continual councils which administered the country in the name of the young Richard II; the fact that he was subsequently paid for 238 days' attendance shows that he was among its more active members. In September 1380 he was a member of a commission, headed by John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, to deal with breaches of the truce with Scotland. Presumably it was such services that lay behind his appointment, on 1 February 1381, to be treasurer of England. The fact that he himself then lent the government 1000 marks did nothing to relieve Hales of the stigma of association with the third poll tax in four years, even though it had been granted in the previous November, before he took up office. The collection of this extremely unpopular tax led directly to the peasants' revolt, of which Hales was to be one of the principal victims. On 10 June 1381 Temple Cressing and other hospitaller properties in Essex were burnt down, while on 13 June the priory in Clerkenwell was sacked and destroyed, as was its manor at Highbury, which Hales himself had restored and beautified. Like the king and the chancellor, the aged Archbishop Sudbury, Hales fled for safety to the Tower of London. But when Richard went out to meet the peasants at Mile End on 14 June (on his way there he received a complaint against Hales from a London goldsmith, Hugh Farringdon), a company of the rebels was able to enter the Tower. They found Sudbury and Hales in the chapel of St John in the White Tower, dragged them out, and beheaded them on Tower Hill. The fate of Hales's body is unknown. The leaders of the peasants' revolt were killed or executed, but many others were pardoned, and it is not known who was responsible for the death of Hales. In spite of his violent end, in historiography and political poetry he was acclaimed as a most energetic and doughty knight. 


@@@@@


doc= 38627


Campbell, Reginald John (1867-1956), Congregational minister and Church of England clergyman, was born on 29 August 1867 at 2 Norfolk Villas, Jamaica Level, Bermondsey, London, the second of four sons and one daughter of John Campbell, a United Methodist Free Church minister, and his wife, Mary Johnstone. His parents were of Ulster Presbyterian stock. He was registered at birth as John Wesley Campbell, which name also appears on his first marriage certificate, but he matriculated as Reginald John Campbell, the names by which he was commonly known. 
Educated privately in Ulster (where he spent some of his childhood), at grammar school, and University College in Nottingham, he matriculated as a commoner at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1892 after some years as a schoolteacher. He took a second class in modern history in 1895 and proceeded MA in 1902. He was made an honorary DD in 1919. He married first, in 1889, Mary Elizabeth (1861-1924), daughter of James Slack of Nottingham; and second, in 1927, Ethel Gertrude Smith (1885-1943). 
Already confirmed as an Anglican, and moving in Anglo-Catholic circles, it was assumed that Campbell would take holy orders in the Church of England. However, in a period of crisis, he rejected Anglo-Catholic assumptions and unexpectedly, under the influence of A. M. Fairbairn, principal of Mansfield College, became minister of the Congregationalist Union Street Chapel, Brighton. The congregation rallied strongly under his leadership, though it was as much Anglican as nonconformist in composition. It was during these years that he embarked upon a wide range of reading in theology, philosophy, and spirituality. His nonconformity was eclectic. He had a considerable pulpit presence but was not given to histrionics. His delicate features, crowned by an early shock of snow-white hair, expressed spiritual refinement and insight but also revealed physical vulnerability. He was already no stranger to nervous breakdown. Publication of volumes of sermons brought him a wider audience, and prominent Liberal politicians beat a path to his dinner table. His political Liberalism at this time, however, did not altogether banish his early exposure to strong Ulster sentiment. A visit to Cape Town in 1900, for the sake of his health, resulted in his catching both enteric and imperial fever: God had given to the British certain powers which other races had not. 
Campbell's reputation spread, and in May 1903 he took up duties as minister of the City Temple -- 'the cathedral of nonconformity' -- in London. On his opening Sunday the total congregations, morning and evening, came to 7000 people. He was expected to preach twice on Sundays and at a popular Thursday lunchtime service. The sermons, which addressed both issues of the day and doctrinal questions, were instantly published and attracted much attention both in Britain and in the United States. Concerning the contemporary educational controversy, Campbell declared that he was unwilling to pay 'the parson's rate'. Some of his leading nonconformist colleagues, even so, felt that he was too gentle with the Church of England, although a particular assault which Campbell made on sacerdotalism accorded with Lloyd George's view of sound doctrine. The fact was that Campbell found it difficult to reconcile the conflicting strands in his upbringing and environment. He lived perpetually on edge. 
The New Theology controversy which erupted in 1907 accentuated these tensions. Originating in a press interview Campbell gave to the 'Daily Mail', the term reflected, in his words, an attitude and a spirit rather than a creed. At great speed, Campbell wrote a book, 'The New Theology' (1907), which produced further controversy and public fame. Groups of disciples sprang to his defence, and organized a national movement to spread his ideas throughout the country. Traditional exposition of the fall or of the blood-atonement, Campbell suggested, was not only misleading but unethical. There is ample testimony to the interest the book aroused. Orthodox theologians, however, suggested that it revealed that Campbell had never been trained in theology. According to the 'British Weekly', A. M. Fairbairn described the book as 'a farrago of nonsense' (4 April 1907), and James Denney wrote scornfully in private about 'half-educated sophists who write New Theologies' (Denney, 85). Campbell was apparently even subject to death threats. Undeterred, he took up the 'social gospel', put himself at the disposal of the Independent Labour Party, and produced a volume entitled 'Christianity and the Social Order' (1907). Campbell was elected to the executive of the Fabian Society in 1908 and shared platforms with Keir Hardie. He supported votes for women and divorce. The conflicting demands on his time and energy, however, created tensions which Campbell found increasingly difficult to handle. Suffering from ill health, he gradually withdrew from public commitments. There were suspicions that he was meditating a return to the Church of England. On his own account, he was influenced by criticism of the New Theology by the Anglican Charles Gore. 
Campbell's support for the war in 1914 was politically important. He paid a short visit to the western front. Lloyd George made his first public statement on the war in the City Temple. Campbell's stance upset Liberals and socialists of pacifist inclination. In 1915 he stopped the publication of his book on the New Theology and shortly afterwards resigned from the City Temple. In the same year, he was ordained in the Church of England and joined the staff of Birmingham Cathedral. In 1916 he published an autobiography which conveyed the message that his decision had been logical since he had never been a thoroughbred English nonconformist. It was a blow to dissent to lose a man many regarded as the most dynamic figure in its ranks. Even so, he claimed to be only exchanging a more perfect for a less perfect churchmanship. 
Campbell's Anglican career thereafter was far less exposed to public scrutiny. It transpired that as vicar of Christ Church, Westminster, Campbell could not continue in the kind of ministry he had exercised as a nonconformist. Years from 1924 until 1930 back in Brighton at Trinity Chapel were more successful. He was appointed to a residential canonry at Chichester in 1930, a post he held until 1936. For the next decade he remained at Chichester as chancellor, where he reviewed books regularly in the religious press and wrote devotional and biographical studies, an activity continued in retirement after 1946. In 1947, in a private letter, Campbell wrote that no man could have done more to have avoided publicity than he had done for a generation. Before 1914, on the other hand, he had received it, perhaps courted it, in ample measure. He died at his home, Heatherdene, at Fairwarp, near Uckfield, Sussex, on 1 March 1956. 


@@@@@


doc= 38628


Burleigh, Bennet Gordon (c.1840-1914), journalist and soldier, was born in Glasgow. Little is known about his early life: in his later years he concealed his age, and his father has been variously described as a timber merchant and as a master mechanic. At the time of the Civil War, Burleigh went to the United States and served with the Confederates. By his own account he was involved in daring adventures -- being captured, twice sentenced to death, and twice escaping -- and was promoted captain. He worked as a journalist in the United States and, from about 1878, in England. Reporting the Bradlaugh affair, he once gained admittance to the lobby of the House of Commons by disguising himself as a gas fitter. 
In 1882 Burleigh was employed by the British news agency Central News as a war correspondent in Egypt. He successfully reported the campaign there, achieving a notable scoop on the capture of Cairo. He was then hired for the 'Daily Telegraph' by its managing editor, John Merry Le Sage. This was the turning point of Burleigh's career: he worked for the 'Telegraph', reporting over twenty campaigns, until he belatedly retired in 1913. In the 1880s and early 1890s, before it was overtaken by the 'Daily Mail', the 'Telegraph' had the largest daily-paper circulation, and its profits enabled it to provide Burleigh with the resources which made possible his further success as a war correspondent. 
In 1884 in the Sudan, Burleigh reported Major-General Graham's Suakin campaign. In February he reported the battle of al-Teb and scooped his rivals. At the battle of Tamai, in March, the Hadendowa broke one of the British squares. Burleigh fought and helped rally the troops. His admirers later claimed he should, if eligible, have been awarded the Victoria Cross. In his reporting he criticized faulty British weapons. Later that year and in 1885 he reported the Gordon relief expedition. He fought at Abu Klea and Gubat, was wounded, mentioned in dispatches, and lost his kit in the Nile. In February 1885 he achieved an outstanding scoop by his report on the safe withdrawal of the desert column: the 'Telegraph' published a special Sunday edition. In his reporting he again criticized faulty weapons and ammunition. This contributed to public concern and questions in parliament, followed by an official inquiry and the introduction of improved weapons. Following the precedent set by W. H. Russell and Archibald Forbes, he compiled books -- six in all -- from his war correspondence, starting with 'Desert Warfare' (1884) on the eastern Sudan campaign. 
Like other war correspondents Burleigh also reported manoeuvres and other military events, and cultivated his military acquaintance. He was married -- his wife, Bertha, was a sculptor -- with five sons and three daughters. They lived in Brixton and later at 4 Victoria Road, Clapham, both areas favoured by journalists, and he was a member of the Savage Club. Despite working for a Conservative paper he was a self-declared advanced radical and socialist. He stood in Lanarkshire and Glasgow constituencies -- in 1885 as Liberal-Labour candidate, in 1886 as Liberal Unionist, and in 1892 for the Scottish Parliamentary Labour Party, always unsuccessfully. 
In the 1890s Burleigh reported the French invasion of Madagascar, the 1896 Asante expedition, the Spanish Riff war in Morocco, and the Graeco-Turkish War. In 1896 he published 'Two Campaigns: Madagascar and Ashantee'. In 1898, a veteran and doyen of correspondents, he reported the Sudan War. Again he was successful and, when one of the 'Times' correspondents was wounded and the other killed, 'The Times' used Burleigh's 'Telegraph' report on the battle of Omdurman. In the controversy over the killing of Mahdist wounded and the treatment of the Mahdi's corpse, he defended Kitchener. He again criticized the War Office, and faults of weapons, ammunition, and equipment. Despite the controls and censorship he managed to outstrip his rivals and win the 'Telegraph' more scoops. He evaded Kitchener's attempted news embargo on the Fashoda affair, reporting it from leaked information. In 1898 he published 'Sirdar and Khalifa', and in 1899 'Khartoum Campaign, 1898'. 
At the height of his reputation Burleigh reported the 1899 South African crisis and the opening Natal battles of the South African War. When Sir George White withdrew into Ladysmith and the siege was imminent the other correspondents decided to remain there. Burleigh, knowing he could report more elsewhere, left. He reported Sir Redvers Buller's campaign until after the failure at Vaal Krantz in February 1900, then Roberts's offensive and later the guerrilla war. In his reporting he included -- insofar as the censor permitted or could be evaded -- criticism of the War Office, and British generalship, tactics, and 'materiel'. He emphasized the horror of Spion Kop and demanded an inquiry into the disaster. In 1900 he published 'Natal Campaign'. At the end of the war he achieved another scoop, reporting by an apparently innocent cable the agreement on peace terms. 
Burleigh next reported the war in Somaliland against Muhammad bin Abdullah, the 'Mad Mullah'. In 1904 he reported the Russo-Japanese War, resenting the Japanese restrictions and censorship, and praising their military qualities. He demanded military training, as in Japan, in British state-aided schools. From this war correspondence he compiled 'Empire of the East' (1905). He reported the Balkans, where his pro-Serbian sympathies offended the Austrian authorities. In 1909 he was seriously ill and thereafter, old and weakened, he lacked his former energy and aplomb. He reported the 1911 Tripoli campaign with the Italian forces, and the 1912 Balkan war with the Bulgarian forces -- his last campaign. He died at the Bell Hotel, Bexhill, Sussex, on 17 June 1914. 
Burleigh was a big, heavy man -- brown-haired, blue-eyed, walrus-moustached, and with a loud and strident voice. Until his 1909 illness he was physically strong, with a tough constitution and exceptional endurance. He was aggressive, argumentative, and opinionated, 'as if his judgement was authoritative' (Bullard, 230), and alternated boisterous bonhomie and morose disagreeableness. He had the qualities then conducive to success as a war correspondent: he was brave -- repeatedly risking death -- enterprising, competitive, cunning, unscrupulous, and deceitful. Apparently on occasion he faked reports. Self-publicizing, he was not modest in describing his own adventures and achievements. He wrote vividly and acceptably -- though owing much to Edwin Arnold's editing of his copy -- identifying with the British troops and the imperial cause. He enjoyed war and war reporting, and, as his 'Daily Telegraph' obituary stated, 'embraced the career with the ardour of a lover'. He was proud he was a professional correspondent and defended his profession against criticism, and asserted 'the clear right of the British public under our free institutions to have news dealing with the progress of their arms rapidly transmitted home' (Burleigh, 'Khartoum', 65-6). 
Burleigh was a controversial figure. Those who liked and praised him included Sir Evelyn Wood and the special artists Melton Prior and Frederic Villiers. He was not popular with his colleagues and was disliked and criticized by his rivals on other papers, 'largely because he was fiercely, and sometimes in their view, unscrupulously competitive' (Burnham, 66). Rivals who disliked and criticized him included the Liberal journalists Ernest N. Bennett and Henry W. Nevinson. According to Lord Burnham (65) he was 'possibly the greatest of all war correspondents'. In fact his achievements were inferior to those of W. H. Russell or Archibald Forbes, and neither in methods nor copy was he essentially original. Nevertheless he was outstandingly successful in his profession, and one of the leading war correspondents of the era. He was one of the last of the Victorian school of picturesque, adventurous war correspondents. 


@@@@@


doc= 38629


Pocock, (Henry) Roger Ashwell (1865-1941), adventurer and writer, was born on 9 November 1865 at 4 Belle Vue, Tenby, Pembrokeshire, the son of Captain Charles Ashwell Botelar Pocock (1829-1899), naval officer and later Anglican deacon, and his wife, Sarah Margaret (died 'c'.1887), fifth daughter of Captain James Agnes Stevens RN. She was proud of her seafaring family which included Captain Sir Christopher Cole (1770-1837). Lena Margaret Pocock, known as Lena Ashwell, Lady Simson (1872-1957), actress and theatre manager, was Roger Pocock's sister, and Nicholas Pocock (1740-1821), marine painter, was his great-uncle. 
Roger Pocock's father had distinguished himself when a mate in the Second Anglo-Burmese War (1852-3) but he had to retire from the Royal Navy because of his eyesight. For reasons of economy the family moved frequently until about 1872 Charles Pocock became captain of the 'Wellesley', a training ship for boys 'unconvicted of crime', at the mouth of the Tyne. About 1880 his health broke down, and he emigrated with his family to Canada, where he was ordained an Anglican deacon; he moved to Switzerland after his wife's death about 1887 and then to London. 
Roger Pocock's boyhood was spent partly on the 'Wellesley'. He attended Ludlow grammar school, where he was bullied; he later wrote: 'I survived, but with broken nerve, a coward' (R. Pocock, 'A Frontiersman', 1). As 'the penniless son of a half-pay captain' (ibid., 2) -- his father left just $305 on his death in 1899 -- the professions were closed to him. He worked as a clerk at the Submarine Telegraph Company, London, but, aged fifteen, was dismissed as 'useless'. He went with his family to Canada, where he attended agricultural college, worked as a life assurance clerk, then had various jobs -- according to his autobiography survey assistant, hotel 'boots', railway navvy, salesman -- and was destitute, at Port Arthur, Thunder Bay, and elsewhere. In November 1884 he enlisted at Winnipeg in the North-West Mounted Police, and in 1885 he served against the north-west uprising in Manitoba. His feet were frostbitten and right toes amputated, so in 1886 he was honourably discharged with a pension. He travelled in the Canadian wilds and worked as an Anglican missionary among the Gaetkshians in the Skeena Valley, British Columbia. Contrary to his autobiography, he was not invited to train for holy orders, as the church authorities were concerned that his interest in Indian women was more than pastoral. He left British Columbia in 1889, and again travelled and had a succession of jobs, mostly in Canada and the United States. He was back in London before the 1897 jubilee. 
In January 1898 Pocock organized from his London rooms an expedition to the Klondike at the time of the gold rush, and advertised in 'The Times' for participants. The expedition started from Ashcroft, British Columbia, and on 10 June 1898 was at the Mud River, when Sir Arthur Curtis, third baronet, of Gatcombe, offended by Pocock, left camp and disappeared. Searches failed to find him and he was subsequently presumed dead (allegedly his wife was involved with another man and he may have tried to stage a disappearance and start a new life, but got lost and died). Pocock, ill, returned to England. Rumour spread, and there were suggestions in the press that he had murdered Curtis for his money. This long tainted Pocock's reputation, though available evidence suggests that he probably was not guilty. He went back to writing books and 'sold a lot of rotten ideas for a lot of rotten money' (R. Pocock, 'A Frontiersman', 226). Determined to 'make a record in horsemanship' (ibid.) or die in the attempt, from June 1899 to January 1900 he rode 3600 miles from Canada to Mexico, meeting various outlaws. 
In 1901, during the South African War, Pocock went by tramp steamer to South Africa, landing at Durban in December. He enlisted in an irregular unit which in his autobiography he called Sutler's scouts (in fact, Butler's scouts), and which he described as disreputable and rascally, 'the complete cynosure of every unsoldierly quality' (R. Pocock, 'A Frontiersman', 294), and served until it was paid off in December 1901. In January 1902 he joined the national scouts (Boers fighting on the British side) and served warily as a corporal, surviving enteric fever and a 'death trap' military hospital, until the end of the war. He returned to London, and in 1904 visited Greenland. Later in that year he reported on Russia for the 'Illustrated Mail', a weekly companion paper to the 'Daily Mail'. He also obtained photographs of Russian warships and plans of the Libau naval base. This led to a positive relationship between him and Prince Louis of Battenberg, then director of naval intelligence. 
In December 1904, through a letter to leading newspapers, Pocock initiated the Legion of Frontiersmen, his greatest achievement. One of the varied responses to the South African War, the perceived German threat, and other anxieties about the British and imperial future, the legion was formally established in 1905 and was granted a grudging and limited form of official recognition by the war secretary, Lord Haldane, in February 1906. It was a patriotic, imperialist, apolitical, volunteer, part-time, armed, uniformed auxiliary force in Britain, the dominions, and elsewhere, 'a civilian, self-supporting, and self-governing Association... for the service of the State [of] men of good character, who have been trained in wild countries, at sea or in war... for home defence and... imperial defence' (R. Pocock, 'Pocket-Book', v), and, in the words of Pocock's 1904 letter, 'a unit for field intelligence in peace and war' (G. A. Pocock, 4). Its executive council was composed largely of establishment 'grandees' -- the fifth earl of Lonsdale was president, and Pocock commissioner. He used his press contacts to gain favourable publicity. Supporters included Lord Meath and Conservative MPs, and members included H. A. Gwynne, Edgar Wallace, William Le Queux, and various colonial frontiersmen, suburban would-be frontiersmen, swashbucklers, and retired officers. By 1908 there were reportedly about 3500 members. The cost of uniform and equipment precluded working-class members. The uniform was a variant of the garb -- already redolent of adventure -- worn on the turbulent frontiers of white settlement from Texas to Rhodesia: stetson, neckerchief, loose shirt, breeches, boots, gunbelt, and revolver (anyone, even a child, could then legally buy and own a revolver and ammunition). The legion trained for war and also, apparently much influenced by Le Queux, hunted for German spies. Pocock and others in the legion intelligence branch, 'the Legion invisible' (R. Pocock, 'Chorus', 50), were convinced of the German spy threat and gathered information on alleged German airship construction and other activities in Britain, passing it to naval and military intelligence. 
However, Pocock himself was controversial. He was not wealthy, he lacked social and military status, and to some he seemed of dubious character. The majority of the legion council -- with Sir William Serjeant, barrister and volunteer officer, prominent among them -- came to consider him unsuitable and wanted to exclude him, and they were backed by the more establishment and military members. Reportedly the War Office and some leading legion members considered him a German spy. The 'range men' tended to support him. He believed the legion had been infiltrated by German spies who were conspiring to remove him, and he struggled to retain office. In 1908 he was replaced as chief executive officer by Major Patrick William Forbes, the 'conqueror of Rhodesia', and in July 1909, at an acrimonious general meeting, he was expelled from the legion. No secession followed, even close friends remaining, and the legion prospered, reportedly reaching 17,500 men in August 1914, despite War Office distrust and some press criticism. H. G. Wells, for example, alleged that they were equipped not for possible war in Europe but for Arizona in 1890. 
Pocock apparently influenced Baden-Powell in the formation of the Boy Scouts. In 'Scouting for Boys' Baden-Powell recommended Pocock's 'Frontiersman's Pocket-Book', and in 1908 Pocock contributed to the first issue of 'The Scout'. Also in 1908 he helped to make a short cowboy film, 'A Texas Elopement', by the Thames at Shepperton. In 1913 he rode through the Rockies with Randle William Cecil, a grandson of the third marquess of Salisbury. 
In the First World War the Legion of Frontiersmen formed in Britain the 25th Royal Fusiliers (Frontiersmen) and in Canada the 210th (Frontiersmen) battalion and fought with great distinction. Pocock was not with them. In 1914 he was eager to serve but over age, physically impaired, and short-sighted, and he was repeatedly rejected by army units. He finally managed to enlist, was promoted corporal, and served as orderly-room clerk. Through a legion contact he was appointed quartermaster-sergeant, then lieutenant (later acting captain), in Warwickshire Territorial Royal Horse Artillery batteries training in England. In 1917 he commanded the 178th labour company in Flanders; he later described his seven months at the Ypres salient as 'the greatest adventure in a varied life' (R. Pocock, 'Chorus', 177). He wrote for a bureau of press propaganda, and in 1918 served as an RAF administrative officer until the end of the war. 
After the war, now calling himself Captain Pocock, he again mixed travel, journalism, and book-writing. He sailed on fishing vessels, failed in a business to manufacture fishskin leather, and went as cook on the 1921 Oxford University Spitsbergen expedition. With other legion men he sailed in 1923 on the steam yacht 'Frontiersman' to support a planned world flight. There was insufficient financial backing and the vessel was impounded and sold in California. He stayed on there, proud to be made a member of the Adventurers' Club of Los Angeles. He worked as an actor and in partnership with a very small independent producer in Hollywood, 'that moral slum' (R. Pocock, 'Chorus', 293). He returned to England and co-operated with his sister Lena in writing plays. In 1928 he was admitted a pensioner at the Charterhouse, London. Back in the legion and honoured as its founder, in 1935 he made a world tour of Frontiersmen units. 
From the 1880s to the 1930s Pocock published books including novels and non-fiction. He edited the legion's 'Frontiersman's Pocket-Book' (1909), 'a brief summary of the art of pioneering and empire-building' (R. Pocock, 'Pocket-Book', vii). His loathing for aspects of 'civilization' was expressed in his jeremiad 'Rottenness: a Study of America and England' (1896), which especially condemned American corruption, crime, and brutality. His two books of autobiography, 'A Frontiersman' (1903) and 'Chorus to Adventurers' (1931), were not entirely accurate. Nor was his 'Who's Who' entry, which claimed he had been a missionary in New Caledonia. Romantic, and arguably a romancer, he portrayed his 'life as a lone-wolf adventurer' (R. Pocock, 'Chorus', 2). 'Chorus to Adventurers' has been considered 'the product of an over-heated imagination' (private information, A. J. A. Morris). His sisters believed him gullible, and he wrote that he was 'a fool in practical affairs' (R. Pocock, 'Chorus', 37) and that he and others in the legion counter-espionage 'groped in the dark, discovering mares' nests' (ibid., 50). However, the later allegation that 'Pocock inhabited a Walter Mitty world... full of 'Boy's Own Paper' villains and heroes' (Andrew, 78) is arguably exaggerated. Pocock died, unmarried, of bronchopneumonia and chronic bronchitis on 12 November 1941 at Valetta Nursing Home, Weston-super-Mare, Somerset. The Legion of Frontiersmen still continues, but a mere shadow of its strength in its imperial heyday. 


@@@@@


doc= 38630


Paley, Richard (bap. 1746, d. 1808), industrialist and entrepreneur, was born in Langcliffe, Giggleswick, and baptized on 10 August 1746 at Giggleswick parish church in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the second of the four children of George Paley (1721-1765), a freeholder, of Langcliffe Scar Farm, and his wife, Mary Lawson. The Paley family can be traced in Langcliffe for the two previous centuries. William Paley, the theologian, was Richard's cousin, and his uncle William (died 1799) the incumbent of Giggleswick and sometime master of Giggleswick School. Nothing is known of his education or of an apprenticeship. He was already established as a soap-boiler in Leeds when the 'Leeds Intelligencer' of 25 June 1771 announced his marriage on 15 June at Otley to Mary Preston of Merebeck Hall, Giggleswick, 'an agreeable lady with a fortune of $1000'. In April 1775 the daughter of the squire of Langcliffe Hall, his 'cousin' Mrs Margaret Cookson ('nee' Dawson), provided him with further economic support by a forty-year lease of domestic and industrial buildings in open wharfside ground at Kirk Ing, next to the parish church of Leeds, part of the extensive Cookson estate. In February 1776 these, improved and valued for fire insurance at $1700, were the basis of a mortgage from his elder brother Thomas, who remained a source of further loans by mortgages throughout Richard's lifetime. From October 1777 Middleton colliery began to supply coal for Paley's malthouse and soap works on this site. 
The Paleys' first child, Mary, was born on 3 September 1772, when they were still living in Meadow Lane, Hunslet, but from October 1776 Paley began to attend as a juror at the manor court of Leeds Kirkgate. Nine other children were born between 1777 and 1788 at a house at Kirk Ing, 'next the Old Church Yard', though five died in infancy. From November 1778 Paley owned seats in a new gallery at the church. 
In November 1780 Paley made his first purchases of land alongside the Aire Navigation at Knostrop (Knowesthorp), east of Leeds, where he later transferred the soap works and his own residence to new premises which he named Gibraltar. Even more significant for his future activities as a property developer was a contract of October 1786 to pay $255 for Coneyshaws, a close of 3 acres adjoining the York turnpike at Marsh Lane, on the eastern fringe of the town. There, and in other fields nearby, Paley became the town's largest landlord of working-class houses. By 1803 he owned 275 houses, generally back-to-backs of two storeys with separate cellar dwellings beneath, arranged in terraces with courtyards behind. 
'Mr Paley and Mr Dade [a raff merchant of Otley] purchased the above Estates with the sole View of parcelling them out in Building Lots', began a note (W. Yorks. AS, Leeds, DB 233) prepared after Dade's death early in May 1803 and Paley's bankruptcy on 21 May. At that time 56 of the 67 acres acquired by the partners between 1787 and 1803 still remained in lots unsold; a measure of their over-optimism was the twenty years that the assignees in bankruptcy then took to market these lots. 
Paley's bankruptcy was not due solely to failed building speculation. His mortgages, of $8170, from banks in Malton, Huddersfield, and Pontefract had been obtained on the security of other property ventures in Leeds and beyond. He had brought cotton spinning to Leeds by building two cotton mills at Bank Top as early as 1790, that is, before the flax mill of John Marshall and the woollen mill of Benjamin Gott. One mill was intended for letting, and in the other the partnership of Holdforth, Wilkinson, Paley & Co. installed steam engines for spinning cotton. In 1795 James Watt jun. was sent to spy on these for infringement of patent, and under duress a 36 hp Soho-made engine machine was ordered the following year (but seems not to have been delivered). In November 1798 Paley contracted to build a flax mill in Marsh Lane, Leeds, to be tenanted by G. and J. Wright, and another, complete with steam engine, in 1801; nearby he built premises for the ironsmith Cawood, another for the whitesmith Farmery, and a nail works for Liddle & Co. In 1793 he became landlord of a water-powered frizzing mill at Mill Garth and nearby, at Lady Bridge, the workshops that became Brumfitt's carpet factory. He also built smaller premises to be leased, including cloth-dressing shops, and at Skinner Lane he built a fine pair of three-storey bay-fronted houses, with workshops behind, as residences for cloth merchants still dependent on handicraftsmen. In addition he built riverside warehouses to rent to corn merchants and others. 
Paley became a partner in enterprises further afield: in ironworks at Fall Ings, Wakefield (1787-92); in the cotton mill of King, Turner, Varden, Paley & Co. at Mytholmroyd, near Halifax (by 1790); in the new Bowling ironworks at Bradford (1787), in which he had a quarter share; in three cotton mills at Colne, Lancashire (1797); and in a potash works at Bristol, which supplied the Paley soap works. He also made overtures for a soap works at Oban in Scotland and the supply of kelp from there to Leeds. 
Paley was elected a member of the closed tory Leeds corporation on 29 September 1789; he was a shareholder in the new private subscription library from 1770 and in the Leeds waterworks, and a subscriber to the Leeds General Infirmary from 1785. His name frequently appeared in the press at the head of charity subscription lists for Kirkgate ward, where in November 1803, six months after his bankruptcy, he subscribed 10 guineas for the relief of the poor. In the currency shortage of small coins in 1791 he placed orders with Boulton and Watt for copper coins bearing his name to be put into circulation in Leeds, and in March 1797 he publicly guaranteed his acceptance of Bank of England notes. He more than once took over property as claimant against local bankrupts indebted to him in the course of trade or to whom he had lent money on mortgage. 
After his bankruptcy Paley resigned from the borough council, leaving no other record until his death at Knostrop, 'from inflamation', on 24 November 1808; he was buried on the 26th in St Peter's churchyard, Leeds. He was intestate, the Gibraltar works being already in trust for his eldest son, George (1779-1828). At first the trustees expected to raise $50,000 as well as a dividend of 20's'. in the pound for all creditors, but the first dividend of 1804 was only 2's'. in the pound. A further small dividend was paid in 1809, with an additional contribution from his nephew John Green Paley. A settlement was made with Dade's heir in March 1807. The original trustees in bankruptcy were stormily replaced in December 1814, and intermittent land sales continued until 1823. 
No street or mill perpetuated Paley's name in the town where he had built its first textile mills, although, until they disappeared under railway sidings, Paley's Galleries in Marsh Lane were a reminder that he also pioneered a style of high-density, low-cost housing that, together with the mill smoke, gave the town a classic east end. His bankruptcy showed an aspect of entrepreneurial fortunes that were as characteristic of the industrial revolution as its successes. 


@@@@@


doc= 38631


Hoskins, William George (1908-1992), historian of the English landscape, was born on 22 May 1908 in Exeter, the eldest of four sons of William George Hoskins (1873-1955), baker, and his wife, Alice Beatrice (1879-1966), daughter of John Dymond of Silverton, Devon. He was born at his grandparents' house, 54 St David's Hill. His parents lived in Little Silver. His grandfather, William George Hoskins (1835-1904) was also an Exeter baker. At three years of age he first attended Hoopern Street infants' school, next the Episcopal infants' school, and from 1915 the Episcopal Boys' School. In the summer of 1918 he won a scholarship to Hele's School, Exeter. He entered the University College of Exeter in 1925, and completed the BSc (Econ) degree in 1927, aged nineteen years. He immediately began research for the MSc (Econ), completing in 1929 a thesis, 'The rise and decline of the serge industry in the south-west of England'. 
Hoskins taught for one year at Exeter, and moved in 1930 for another year to Bradford Technical College, teaching economics and commercial subjects for the BComm degree. Stronger but latent interests were already evident in his attendance at lectures by Arthur Raistrick on local archaeology. In 1931 he was appointed assistant lecturer in economics in the department of geography and commerce at Leicester University College, but later gave his opinion of economics as distasteful, arid, and wrongheaded. More congenial from the beginning was his voluntary teaching of evening students at Vaughan Working Men's College, which had become an extramural department of the University College; here he gave courses on the antiquities and archaeology of Leicestershire, and took students to museums and into the country on fieldwork. These interests were much stimulated by a flourishing archaeological society in Leicestershire, and a rich collection of books on local history, bestowed on the college library by Thomas Hatton. 
Hoskins's post was impermanent and insecure, and to improve his prospects elsewhere he completed in 1937 a PhD thesis (as a London University external student) entitled 'The ownership and occupation of land in Devonshire, 1650-1800'. By 1938 he was responsible for most of the teaching for the BSc (Econ) and BComm degrees, and by 1941 was single-handed in the department. But the college could not secure his deferment from military service and the department closed. In July 1941 he was called to work as a statistician with the Central Price Regulation Committee of the Board of Trade in London, and so remained until 1945. He detested London, but spent his leisure in libraries, the Public Record Office, and bookshops, gathering local material on Devon and Leicestershire, and publishing articles which exploited in a fresh way local documents such as wills, probate inventories, and poll tax and subsidy lists. One essay on the deserted villages of Leicestershire coincided with a similar investigation in Warwickshire by Maurice Beresford and the two scholars thereby opened up the possibilities of landscape history in a direction which excited immediate attention, and had wide repercussions thereafter for history and archaeology. Hoskins's work on probate inventories also revealed their value in elucidating local farming specialities and the layout of domestic buildings; so he launched agricultural history and the study of vernacular architecture on new and broader paths with far-reaching consequences. 
After the war Hoskins debated a different career, in the civil service, in local government, or in educational administration, but the planned expansion of university education, and the urgings of R. H. Tawney, persuaded him to accept an invitation to return to Leicester in January 1946. Jack Simmons was appointed to head the department of history in 1947, and since he was also a Devon man with a strong interest in landscape and buildings, as well as being a specialist in colonial history and railways, the two formed a strong alliance in promoting local history. Further powerful support came from the principal of the college, F. L. Attenborough, originally an Anglo-Saxon historian, who was a fine photographer, and who accompanied Hoskins on many of his exploratory journeys through the midland countryside. Attenborough proposed the setting up of a department of English local history to allow Hoskins freedom for his research; it was established in 1948. This move was a milestone in claiming for local history a respectable place in academic studies, though that place was not generally conceded until decades later, when the published results of many local studies were seen to revise, even overturn, many old historical platitudes. 
Publications for the Festival of Britain in 1951 brought an invitation to Hoskins to write two books in a series, 'About Britain', for which he wrote 'Chilterns to Black Country' (1951) and 'East Midlands and the Peak' (1951), thereby venturing into less familiar territory. He had already in 1946 published 'Heritage of Leicestershire' and through a correspondence initiated by a reader who happened to be lecturing at the Leicester School of Architecture, struck up a warm, admiring friendship with Hope Bagenal, architect, and expert on building acoustics, who had a philosophy that saw 'the essence of civilisation' in common things. He exhorted Hoskins to be more meditative and leisurely in his judgements, curbing his inclination to be 'impatient and swift'. Something of that influence is defined in Hoskins's dedication of his comprehensive survey of Devon to 'Hope Bagenal, Poet and Topographer'. 
Bagenal's architectural expertise and questionings sharpened Hoskins's attention and skills when inspecting buildings, and expanded his thinking generally on the connections between economic development and phases of building activity. He published in 1953 a seminal article, 'The rebuilding of rural England, 1570-1640', which galvanized research on its bold proposition, and, although the claim for a fundamental 'rebuilding' of rural England in that period has been refined and modified since then, the essay stands as another challenging and path-breaking guide into new historical territory. 
Hoskins's letters between 1947 and 1951 glitter with zest for new projects in local history, some of which foundered, some of which flourished. Out of all this emerged his history of 'Devon' (1954), for which he visited all 450 parishes in the county, travelling by bus, train or on foot, positively relishing the 'feast of solitude'. He never learned to drive a car, though he used one later, driven by his wife. The Victoria county history of Leicestershire was restarted through his efforts and he became for a while the editor, though his attempt to restart the Victoria county history of Devon failed, as did the plan to found a record society for Leicestershire. 
Hoskins remained the single member of his college department until an enquiry by the Clapham committee into the future of economic and social history resulted in money being allocated to promote research, and through G. D. H. Cole's prodding he was encouraged to apply for a grant to his department. Knowing the relatively unexploited richness of Lincolnshire archives, he applied this money to set up a research fellowship for the study of Lincolnshire agrarian history, to which Joan Thirsk was appointed in 1951. But before she took up the post, Hoskins's growing reputation in the academic world had resulted in an invitation to take up the readership in economic history at Oxford University. He accepted, and although in the event the Oxford history syllabus had no room to accommodate local history, he gained wider renown for his radio broadcasts and his membership (with Dudley Stamp) of the royal commission on common land (1955-8), and graduate students who were inspired by his teaching and chose research subjects under his influence congregated around him. The access to libraries and time for research were Oxford privileges which enabled Hoskins to write many articles and books between 1951 and 1965. One of these was 'The Midland Peasant' (1957), a work of high scholarship and an influential model of an academic village history. It traced economic and social changes in the Leicestershire village of Wigston Magna, from the Anglo-Saxon period until 1900, when Wigston supported far more people, but 'a whole culture, a qualitative civilisation, had perished to bring about this quantitative triumph' (W. G. Hoskins, 'The Midland Peasant', 1957, 282). More conspicuously successful with the general reader was 'The Making of the English Landscape' (1955), offering a historical account and explanation for the man-made features of the English countryside. Readers learned how to ask questions and search for answers about familiar local scenes; to many it opened new worlds. 
Work in the civil service had emboldened a quiet, reserved person into one who wrote more rapidly, and revealed some strong prejudices against trends in the modern world. Hoskins's writing became lively, colourful, sometimes poetic, and always friendly towards the common reader. His lecturing style similarly inspired the imagination of his hearers, and still warmer responses came from those who heard his radio talks for the BBC after he had moved to Oxfordshire, and in the 1970s when he gave two series of television programmes, showing sites of historic significance while standing out in all weathers, rubicund, benign, usually smiling, though he was once ankle deep in river water. 
Hoskins's unease at Oxford mounted in the 1960s; he saw it as a privileged place; he was not offered a college fellowship but was a guest only at All Souls College. In 1965 he returned to Leicester University as Hatton professor of English history, devised a one-year MA course in local history, but resigned in 1968 'in despair' ('WW'), unwilling to submit to administrative burdens that impeded research. He lived until his death in Devon, first in Exeter, then Stoke Canon, and finally in Cullompton. 
Hoskins married on 4 February 1933 Frances Ethel Jackson of Leicester, always known as Jane; they had a son, William Dommett (1935-1987) and daughter Susan Mary ('b'. 1944). Jane was patient and self-effacing, and catered for Hoskins's growing indulgence in good food and wine; she enabled him, on his own admission, 'to live and work in Victorian comfort' (dedication to the 'Shell Guide to Leicestershire', 1970). Hoskins had moved from Oxfordshire to Exeter in 1955 and in 1963, in alliance with the new Civic Society, of which he was a founder member, he battled against a redevelopment of its Guildhall area. Incautious criticisms of the city's planning committee resulted in a libel suit which he settled out of court, to his cost. He was an acknowledged authority on historic buildings, gave much advice to Devon county council, and saved many threatened buildings from destruction. 
Hoskins was elected fellow of the British Academy in 1969, was appointed CBE in 1971 'for his services to local history', and received in his honour a Festschrift in 1974, which gives a full bibliography of his writings; in this year too he was awarded an honorary DLitt by Exeter University. He enjoyed an active, contented retirement for some years, but from 1979 minor strokes changed his personality, leaving him irascible and often melancholy. His interest in local history ceased and he turned to reading the classics of English literature and books on modern politics that provoked his familiar humorous grin, and witty and wickedly acerbic comments. He died of pneumonia at the Old Vicarage Nursing Home at Cullompton, Devon, on 11 January 1992. For reasons unknown to his family, he asked for his ashes to be scattered at Brampford Speke, and his wish was carried out, on 5 February 1992; George Gissing had described it as 'the most perfect village I ever saw'. His wife died three months later on 14 April 1992. 
Hoskins was no international traveller, preferring to explore England, loving Devon, and best of all Exeter; he often cited Horace's lines in relation to Exeter -- 'it is that corner of the world above all which has a smile for me'. But his studies ranged widely within England, and by capturing a wide audience through his attractive writing, and by deepening public understanding of its historic landscapes, he contributed immeasurably to current knowledge and concern to conserve the environment. 


@@@@@


doc= 38633


Hamilton, (Mary) Cicely (1872-1952), writer and campaigner for women's rights, was born on 15 June 1872 at 15 Sussex Gardens, Paddington, London, the eldest of four children of an Irish mother, Maude Mary, 'nee' Piers, and an Anglo-Scottish father, Denzil Hammill. Cicely Hammill was educated privately at St Leonard's boarding-school in Malvern and at Bad Homburg, a small spa town in Germany. She worked as a student teacher in the midlands and then as an actress touring the country for some ten years, changing her name to Hamilton when she first went on the stage. 
Hamilton joined the suffragettes of the Pankhursts' Women's Social and Political Union and wrote the words anonymously for the WSPU anthem, 'The March of the Women'. She also worked for Charlotte Despard's Women's Freedom League and edited their paper, 'The Vote'. Hamilton became a popular and effective public speaker for the women's suffrage campaign. The 'Common Cause' of 13 April 1911 wrote that she 'dramatised for us the revolt of the idealistic woman against compulsory self-sacrifice. Her wit and her beauty and her beautiful dress all contributed to the impression that a woman is a thing of great value' (p. 5). 
As well as suffrage, the great passion of Hamilton's early years was the theatre, where she experienced prejudice against women actors and playwrights at first hand. Her first stage play, 'Diana of Dobson's' (1908), was produced at the Kingsway Theatre by one of London's first actress-managers, the suffragette Lena Ashwell. The heroine, Diana, is a shop assistant who wagers that a wealthy suitor who proposes to her is incapable of earning his own living for six months. In the same year Hamilton founded the Women Writers' Suffrage League with the writer Bessie Hatton, and the Actresses' Franchise League with the actress Elizabeth Robins. 'How the Vote was Won' (1909), a one-act comedy, was co-authored with her close friend Christabel Marshall who wrote under the name of Christopher St John. The play is a modern version of 'Lysistrata' set at the time of a women's general strike and ridicules the notion of coverture whereby English law assumed a woman to come under the protection of her nearest male relative. The drawing-room of Horace Cole, a clerk of modest means, is invaded by a series of distant, and hitherto economically self-sufficient, female relatives, each intent on persuading Horace to support her. 
Hamilton's strongly-held convictions about women and economics were developed in her treatise 'Marriage as a Trade' (1909), a robustly forthright, witty, and uncompromising outburst of indignation against the Edwardian family and the tyranny of marriage which women were often compelled to enter because it was the only trade for which they had received any training. In 1910 Hamilton was invited by the actress Edy Craig to write 'A Pageant of Great Women'. The pageant, enthusiastically performed by women in London and in venues across the country, demonstrated the capacity to exercise leadership and featured fifty-two great women including Joan of Arc. Some parts were played by very well-known actresses including Ellen Terry. The other plays Hamilton published were 'Jack and Jill and a Friend' (1911); 'The Cutting Knot' (1911), which was turned into a novel as 'A Matter of Money' (1916); a nativity play, 'The Child in Flanders', performed in 1917 and published later; 'The Brave and the Fair' (1920); 'The Old Adam', also performed as 'The Human Factor' (1926); and a play for children, 'The Beggar Prince' (1936). 

'Just to Get Married' (1911) was her first novel, and explored the duplicitous behaviour of women desperate to get married. The heroine Georgina Vicary who has consented to a marriage of convenience comes to admire her suitor and marries for love. 'Just to Get Married' was turned into a play. During the First World War Hamilton served with the Scottish women's ambulance unit and as an administrator in a military hospital outside Paris and from 1917 to 1919 she was a member of a repertory company organized by her friend Lena Ashwell which provided wartime entertainment for the troops. 'Senlis' (1916) is a tribute to a small town which had been treated with great brutality by the Germans. Hamilton's experiences of the war made her disillusioned with the idea that human progress was inevitable, and she came to dislike what she termed as 'the herd instinct' and became impatient with some of the more liberal ideals of her youth. 'William: an Englishman' (1919) won the Femina Vie Heureuse prize. William, an idealistic socialist, and Griselda, an altruistic young suffragette, find themselves accidentally caught up in the outbreak of the First World War during their honeymoon in the Ardennes. When Griselda is brutally raped and murdered William comes to see his earlier beliefs as naive in the extreme and is converted to wholehearted support of the war effort. 'Theodore Savage' (1922) is a curious dystopian novel which is set at the end of civilization and again illustrates the human potential for destructive behaviour. 
Hamilton's commitment to equality did not waver. In 1919 she became press officer for the International Suffrage Conference in Geneva. She supported herself as a journalist writing for newspapers including the 'Yorkshire Post' and the 'Manchester Guardian', served on the editorial committee of 'The Englishwoman', and became a director of Lady Rhondda's feminist journal 'Time and Tide', through which she met Winifred Holtby. She also became a close friend of Lilian Baylis with whom she wrote a history of the Old Vic (1926). In the 1920s she was an early and active member of the Six Point Group which campaigned for the rights of children, widows, and unmarried mothers, equal guardianship, and equal pay in teaching and the civil service. She was also an impassioned advocate of birth control and a supporter of abortion law reform. 
In 1931 Hamilton published 'Full Stop', an extraordinary novel which contained only one character and was concerned with the spiritual crisis of a politician who knows that he is nearing his death. Throughout the 1930s Hamilton travelled widely and published a series of commentaries on her impressions of Austria, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Russia, and Sweden, and nearer to home, England and Scotland. Her autobiography, 'Life Errant' (1935), was critical of her belief in the perfectibility of human beings in her early career although not of her commitment to feminism or of her decision to remain a spinster. She was awarded a civil-list pension for services to literature in 1938. 'Lament for Democracy' (1940), published at a moment when the Second World War fared badly for the allies, was pessimistic about the fragility of democracy when faced with the threat of totalitarianism. Hamilton worked as the editor of the press bulletin of the British League for European Freedom from 1945 to 1952. She died from heart failure, after a long illness, on 5 December 1952 at her home, 44 Glebe Place, Chelsea, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 38634


Clouston, Sir Thomas Smith (1840-1915), asylum physician, was born on 22 April 1840 at Nisthouse, Orkney, the youngest of the four sons of Robert Clouston, an Orkney laird, and Janet Smith of Stromness. He was educated at West End Academy in Aberdeen, studied medicine at Edinburgh University, and graduated MD in 1861, receiving a gold medal for his thesis on the nervous system of the lobster. He worked initially as an assistant physician with Dr David Skae at the Royal Edinburgh Asylum, before his appointment as medical superintendent of the Cumberland and Westmorland Asylum in Carlisle in 1863. He became LRCP (Edin.) in 1860 and was elected a fellow in 1873. On 27 April 1864 he married Harriet Segur Williamson ('b'. 1834/5), a widow, the daughter of Reuben Storer of New Haven, Connecticut; they had two sons and a daughter. One son, Joseph Storer Clouston, became a humorous writer. 
The ten years at Carlisle were formative for Clouston, and he spent his time learning the practicalities of asylum management and writing a steady stream of articles for medical journals. In 1870 he was awarded the Fothergillian gold medal for his paper on the use of medication in the treatment of insanity. In 1872 he became co-editor with Henry Maudsley of the 'Journal of Mental Science'. The following year he was appointed superintendent of the Royal Edinburgh Asylum, and he remained in this post until 1908. Clouston embarked on a bold rebuilding programme designed to improve patient care. His most ambitious scheme achieved fruition in 1894 with the opening of Craighouse, a large Gothic mansion catering for upper-class patients. Clouston saw insanity as representing a loss of self-control, and held that it was the role of the asylum, in the form of a strict and ordered regime, to help patients regain mastery over their unruly behaviour. 
In 1879 Edinburgh University appointed Clouston as its first lecturer in mental disease, a post which contemporaries judged he occupied with ability and flair. Clouston was also a prolific author, producing a wide range of material for medical journals, textbooks, asylum reports, pamphlets, and newspapers. He wrote two clinical books, 'Clinical Lectures on Mental Diseases' (1883) and 'The Neuroses of Development' (1891), and four popular works: 'The Hygiene of Mind' (1906), 'Unsoundness of Mind' (1911), 'Before I Wed' (1913), and 'Morals and Brain' (1914). His numerous clinical papers appeared regularly in all the leading British journals and also, to a lesser extent, in the American and European ones. His work embraced every major nineteenth-century psychiatric concern, including alcoholism, general paralysis, asylum management, and medico-legal matters. Many of his peers felt that Clouston's most significant contribution to psychiatry was his description of the 'insanity of adolescence', which he defined as an inherited developmental disease arising in early adult life and often leading to mental deterioration in later years. Clouston's concept was later overshadowed by Kraepelin's delineation of 'dementia praecox', a condition subsequently renamed schizophrenia. 
From his initial empirical studies Clouston increasingly moved to consider the wider implications of mental disease for society. He used his annual asylum reports, which were widely reported in the national press, to speak directly to the population. Greatly influenced by the prevailing climate of scientific naturalism, he outlined the 'laws' of human existence, and in his later books he fused religious and scientific precepts to exhort the public to healthy living. Clouston took a prominent part in the establishment of a council of public morals in Scotland and was interested in eugenics and marriage. His book 'Before I Wed' was said to contain 'sound and practical advice of a much needed character' ('The Lancet', 937). In 1910 he gave evidence on behalf of the British Medical Association before the royal commission on divorce and matrimonial causes. However, although recognized by his peers as a highly efficient asylum manager who had transformed the psychiatric care at Morningside, by the end of his tenure it was also recognized that a less regimented approach was now more appropriate for the needs of the patients. Likewise his writings, which provided a bold and populist synthesis of the leading currents of Victorian thought, are today largely unread and are viewed by historians as representing little more than the conventional codes of morality expressed in the language of 'science'. 
Clouston was elected president of the section of psychology of the British Medical Association in 1886 and 1898, president of the Medico-Psychological Association of Great Britain in 1888, Morison lecturer of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh in 1890, and president of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh between 1902 and 1904. He was awarded an LLD degree from the University of Aberdeen in 1907, made a freeman of the burgh of Kirkwall, Orkney, in 1908, and elected a corresponding member of the Societe de Psychiatrie de Paris in 1911. In the same year he was awarded an LLD degree from the University of Edinburgh and also received a knighthood. 
A thin, wiry, bearded man, Clouston was described by contemporaries as an energetic, driven clinician who expected high standards from both himself and others. His pastimes were shooting, fishing, and golf. He died suddenly from a stroke on 19 April 1915 at his home at 26 Heriot Row in Edinburgh. A funeral service was held on 22 April at St Cuthbert's Church, Edinburgh, after which his body was interred at Dean cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 38635


Savage, Sir George Henry (1842-1921), psychiatrist, was born at 65 Edward Street, Brighton, Sussex, on 12 November 1842, the son of William Dawson Savage, a chemist and druggist at Balham and then Brighton, and his wife, Elizabeth Wallace. Educated at private schools in Brighton and then at Brighton College, Savage attended chemistry classes and was apprenticed locally to a firm of doctors; he subsequently matriculated from London University with honours in botany. For the next two years he was a pupil at Sussex County Hospital, and studied medicine from 1861 at Guy's Hospital, London, where he won the treasurer's gold medal. He qualified MRCS in 1864, LRCP and MB (London) in 1865, and MD in 1867. After being appointed resident house surgeon at Guy's in 1865 he moved to general practice, working for four years as medical officer for a lead mining company at Nenthead, Alston, in Cumberland, often being required to ride 20 miles a day visiting his patients. It was here that he met his first wife, Margaret, daughter of Jacob Walton, of Alston Moor, who died of a pulmonary embolism little more than a year after their marriage on 9 September 1868; they had one child. Savage was appointed assistant medical officer to Bethlem Royal Hospital in 1872 under Rhys Williams. Succeeding to the post of physician superintendent in 1879, Savage served in that capacity until 1888, when he retired to take up private practice and was made a governor of the hospital. He took the MRCP in 1878, and was elected FRCP in 1885. 
Savage's shift towards private practice was discernible by the 1880s, as he sought to reach a more popular market with his writings and began to be a frequent absentee from Bethlem, something that aroused criticism from his colleague J. C. Bucknill. As a private practitioner, Savage was not only one of the most fashionable but one of the first, among a number of leading Victorian specialists in mental diseases, to seek success outside the asylum and to develop a practice based on the consulting room. Savage also became consulting physician to several private asylums, including The Priory, Roehampton, and Chiswick House. As a private consultant he was also frequently consulted by the Home Office in difficult mental cases. Savage was additionally a lecturer on mental diseases at Guy's Hospital for thirty years. His straightforward, authoritative teaching at Bethlem and Guy's attracted students from all over the world. He was in demand too as a postgraduate teacher, especially for the London University MD degree, serving as an examiner in mental pathology. Throughout his career Savage was a supporter of medical education for women, providing both financial and moral backing. However, in his writings he supported the commonly held belief in the danger of over educating females of frailer nerves. 
Savage also served for over twenty years as consulting physician to the Royal Institution for the Mentally Deficient, Earlswood, and was on its board of management. He was elected president of the Medico-Psychological Association (MPA) in 1886, giving a presidential address on insanity's relationship to bodily and functional disorders. He was an original member of the Neurological Society and was elected president in 1897, when he spoke on heredity and neurosis. 
Savage jointly (with Daniel Hack Tuke and Thomas Clouston) edited the 'Journal of Mental Science' from 1878 to 1894. He was a prolific writer, publishing over a hundred articles in this and other medical journals, capitalizing on the clinical material provided by his extensive hospital experience. While at Bethlem he had joined Klein's physiology classes and made the most of the hospital's rather limited pathological opportunities, making a number of contributions to the Neurological Society and to its journal, 'Brain'. Despite devoting much attention to the central nervous system, Savage was essentially a clinician, and his contributions to psychiatry were supplemental rather than seminal. His publications covered a wide range of subjects, from catalepsy, epilepsy, puerperal insanity, the neuroses, and general paralysis of the insane, to the pathology of insanity and restraint. Early articles (1879 and 1881) on the administration of chloral and hyoscyamine are of note for their criticisms of excessive chemical restraint. Savage used sedation sparingly and mostly for violent and dangerous cases, although for deterrent as well as quietening purposes. Savage's relatively large scale use of mechanical restraint at Bethlem, on the other hand, aroused considerable controversy in the press and within the profession, drawing particular criticism from J. C. Bucknill. Savage's association with the pro-restraint lobby seems to have been one of the reasons that his relations became strained with Henry Maudsley too -- not a single article by Maudsley appeared in the 'Journal of Mental Science' during Savage and Tuke's joint editorship. Savage also appears to have been quite positively disposed to the benefits of sexual surgery for insanity, giving early support to such surgery on a few cases at Bethlem, and later being one of a number of psychiatrists sympathetic towards sterilization for the mentally 'unfit'. 
In 1907 Savage gave the Lumleian lectures before the Royal College of Physicians, entitled 'The increase of insanity', on which Savage offered a traditional perspective, convinced that the increase was real and directly related to the progress of civilization. While he accepted that the transmission of insanity might lead to the extinction of the race, his preventive and eugenic concerns with controls over reproduction and immigration did not prevent him from being critical of alarmist contemporary theories. In 1909 he lectured at the college on experimental psychology and hypnotism as the Harveian orator for that year. His lecture offered a slightly more hopeful assessment of the likely benefits and medical uses of psychological observations and hypnotism than those given by many of his professional contemporaries. 
Savage also published on forensic psychiatry, becoming known as an expert witness in insanity pleas, and extending his public profile by expounding on the Jack the Ripper case. His status as an authority on a variety of medico-psychological matters is underlined by the fact that he wrote twenty of the articles in Daniel Hack Tuke's 'Dictionary of Psychological Medicine' (1892) and six in T. C. Allbutt's 'System of Medicine' (1896-9). His publications also included a number of influential papers on the association of insanity with marriage, which showed that he was not prepared to go as far as some of his more eugenically minded colleagues in advocating state regulation of espousal and fertility. Savage's major single authored work was a textbook entitled 'Insanity and Allied Neuroses' (1884), which was praised as being an accessible, standard reference book for students and junior practitioners, but was also criticized for its neglect of pathology; it went into a fourth revised edition in 1893 and was further enlarged in 1907. Savage moved further than most of his colleagues towards recognizing that general paralysis was the result of structural changes in the nervous system associated with syphilis. He also emphasized the influence of individuals' environment in determining their mental state, often seeing insanity as being as much to do with maladjustment to changing social and environmental factors as with organic disease and constitutional predisposition. 
Savage was knighted in 1912, and in the same year was elected first president of the newly formed psychiatric section of the Royal Society of Medicine. He also took an active role in the management of the After-Care Association, acting as its treasurer until his death. He remained relatively active well into the twilight of his life, continuing to publish and deliver papers. During the First World War he served as a consultant to Knutsford's hospitals for officers and spoke before the MPA on wartime mental disabilities. 
Savage's most famous private patient was the novelist Virginia Woolf, about whose mental problems he was intermittently consulted between 1904 and 1913, having long been both friend and physician to her family. Historical and literary scholarship on his treatment of Woolf has tended to pronounce negatively, censuring his espousal of a strict rest-cure regime as inappropriate and profoundly out of sympathy with Woolf's needs as a woman and a writer. Woolf was hostile from the outset to Savage's prescription and her family also gradually lost faith in his advice, the final straw being her attempted suicide at the very moment the family was explaining to Savage why they had called in a second opinion. Woolf exacted her revenge through her portrayal of him in her novel 'Mrs Dalloway', Savage serving as one of the models for the sinister and domineering society nerve specialist, Sir William Bradshaw. Yet despite Woolf's (and others') characterization of Savage as tyrannical and shortsighted, his prescriptions of rest, a ban on reading and writing, isolation from friends, simple regimen, confinement in a nursing home or in natural surroundings away from the city, and holidaying in the country and at the coast, were relatively mild and conventional fare for mentally and physically ill patients in late Victorian times. 
Savage enjoyed a breadth of non-medical interests. He was an enthusiastic alpine climber, making a record ascent of the Matterhorn and being a member and one-time vice-president of the Alpine Club. He was also a keen cyclist, golfer, fisherman, gardener, and fencer, as well as an avid mineralogist and botanist, devoting much of his spare time to gathering and cataloguing a considerable collection of rock and flora samples. Well-connected socially, Savage took pains to become a prominent member of numerous gentlemen's social and recreational clubs and associations, from the Sunday Tramps, to the Organon Club and the Casual Club. Savage had also joined and (for a time) presided over the Old Union Masonic Lodge, but abandoned masonry on his second marriage, on 3 May 1882, to Adelaide Mary Sutton ('b'. 1856/7), daughter of Henry Gawen Sutton, physician. Savage was seen by contemporaries as a candid, humorous, sociable, clubbable, vigorous bodied man; he was a great supporter of the physical and psychical virtues of exercise and sport. Suffering from progressive deafness and bodily debility later in life, he died after 'an attack of hemiplegia' on 5 July 1921, at his home, 26 Devonshire Place, London. He was cremated and his ashes were interred at Sevenoaks. His second wife had died in the early 1900s. He left a son, Harold Savage, who was a medical practitioner in the Malay States, and a daughter, Mrs Droeser. 


@@@@@


doc= 38636


Sully, James (1842-1923), philosopher and psychologist, was born on 3 March 1842 at Salmon Parade, Bridgwater, Somerset, the eldest son of the eight children of James Wood Sully, a liberal Baptist merchant and shipowner, and his wife, Eliza Fender. In 1859, having attended various dame-schools in Bridgwater and also Taunton School, Sully was baptized and joined the family business. Planning to become a Baptist minister he studied at Regent's Park College in London from 1863 to 1866. However, his religious feelings ebbed and instead of taking holy orders he went to Gottingen, in Germany, to study under Lotze for an MA of the University of London; he was awarded the gold medal in 1868. Alexander Bain, who examined Sully, recommended him to John Morley as an assistant; in 1871, after a brief period as a classical tutor at the Baptist college in Pontypool, Sully became Morley's assistant at the 'Fortnightly Review' and tutor to his stepson. Contributing philosophical and psychological essays to the 'Fortnightly Review', the 'Contemporary Review', the 'Saturday Review', the 'Westminster Review', the 'Cornhill Magazine', and to the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (including an article entitled 'Evolution', written with Thomas Huxley), Sully gained an entree to 'the innermost circle of men of letters' (Sully, 135). Membership of the Savile Club also helped him to make literary and scientific acquaintances. 
In the winter of 1871-2 Sully studied physiology in Berlin with Helmholtz and Dubois-Reymond. Sully's first book, 'Sensation and Intuition' (1874), was compiled from his psychological articles. Between 1871 and 1901 he published about fifty articles on music, illusions, childhood, laughter, and German culture in general interest periodicals; most of these were subsequently elaborated in books, including 'Pessimism' (1877), 'Illusions' for the 'International Scientific Series' (1881), 'Studies of Childhood' (1895), and 'An Essay on Laughter' (1902). He contributed regularly to the journal 'Mind'. 
On 2 June 1870, at Pontypool, Sully married Mary ('b'. 1851/2), daughter of Thomas Lewis, grocer and draper; they had two children. Having left Pontypool the Sullys lived at Compton, not far from the Morleys, then in St John's Wood, near the Huxleys and Richard Garnett. In 1878 they settled in Hampstead; there Sully, who had suffered a nervous breakdown and bouts of insomnia in the previous five years, found refuge from the London noise, to which he devoted an article in the 'Fortnightly Review' (1878) in a vain attempt to overcome his affliction through writing about it. 
Until 1879 the Sully household relied mainly on an allowance from his father. After his father's bankruptcy, however, Sully, whose three applications for university chairs in philosophy proved unsuccessful, had to increase his journalistic output and to take on examining in philosophy for Cambridge University and Victoria University, Manchester, in addition to examining in logic and psychology for the University of London, which he began in 1878. He also started lecturing on the theory of education at the College of Preceptors and at the Maria Grey Training College. Having thus found a keen audience for his psychological researches he published three textbooks, which became set texts in British and American universities. Among the first systematic expositions of psychology in the English language his 'Outlines of Psychology' (1884; new edn, 1892), 'The Teacher's Handbook of Psychology' (1886; 5th edn, rewritten, 1909), and 'The Human Mind' (1892) had a profound influence on the genre of the psychology textbook. In 1892 Sully was elected to the Grote chair of the philosophy of mind and logic at University College, London. In 1897 he was secretary to the organizing committee of the psychology laboratory but showed little interest in experimental work once the laboratory was established. W. H. R. Rivers came down from Cambridge to hold laboratory classes. Sully believed that experimental work was of limited relevance to the investigation of mental evolution and genetic psychology, on which he focused during the later years of his career. 
Central to Sully's research was the study of children, which was facilitated by his involvement in the British Child Study Association, a federation of local child study societies comprising mainly teachers and parents, who keenly shared observations with Sully. Sully became 'the most influential figure in the Association, shaping its ideas and often presiding over its day-to-day business' (Wooldridge, 37). He held various offices in the London Child Study Society during the 1890s. Alongside teacher training, child study provided him with a context for defining the role of the professional psychologist in relation to amateur practitioners of the science, and for elaborating his views on the scientific method as a component of humanistic education. Sully's 'Studies of Childhood' appeared in 1895. His writings on children drew on a wide range of sources and paid particular attention to children's early language and their games and fantasies (Wooldridge, 39). 
Having retired from his chair in 1903 Sully, who was a keen traveller, spent much time touring the continent. He scaled down his writing activity, publishing only travel sketches and memoirs, including autobiography (1918), after his retirement. He died at 6 Montague Road, Richmond, Surrey, on 1 November 1923. 
According to Adrian Wooldridge, Sully's 'distinctive approach to children ensured that the [British Child Study] Association was something more than just a branch of the American child study movement, while his position in the academic world provided an invaluable link between a movement of interested amateurs and the emerging profession of psychology' (Wooldridge, 37). 


@@@@@


doc= 38637


Sinnett, Alfred Percy (1840-1921), journalist and theosophist, was born on 18 January 1840, the son of Edward W. Percy Sinnett (died 1845), journalist, and his wife, Jane, a historian and translator. Educated at London University School, Sinnett joined his father's profession in 1859 by becoming assistant sub-editor of the 'Globe'. After holding positions on other London papers, he was named editor of the 'Hong Kong Daily Press' in 1865. Back in London three years later, he became leader writer on the 'Standard'. In 1870 he married Patience, daughter of Richard Edensor of Shaw Wood, Derbyshire; she became his partner in occult inquiries. 
The Sinnetts left England in 1872, when he was appointed editor of the 'Pioneer of India', an Anglo-Indian daily. In India, they fell under the influence of Helena Petrovna Blavatsky who, having arrived there in 1879, recognized the Sinnetts as promising potential converts to her new religion of theosophy (the couple had previous experience of spiritualist seances and practices). Blavatsky favoured Sinnett with letters allegedly dispatched to him by her own superhuman Mahatmas. Drawing on these 'Mahatma letters', he published 'The Occult World' (1881) and 'Esoteric Buddhism' (1883) to disseminate Blavatsky's divine wisdom; both works attracted considerable attention in the English-speaking world and went through numerous editions. 
In 1883 the Sinnetts returned permanently to London, where they rose so rapidly in theosophical circles that, the following year, the 'Pall Mall Gazette' described Sinnett as 'the chief theosophist of the London branch of true believers' (26 April 1884). When Blavatsky moved to London in 1887, she inevitably eclipsed his leadership, and, until her death in 1891, the two led rival theosophical lodges, with competing claims to monopolize theosophical truth. Sinnett challenged, for example, Blavatsky's condemnation of the spiritualist belief in communications from the deceased; he was particularly anxious to embrace that possibility after his wife's death in 1908. By then Sinnett had become vice-president of the international Theosophical Society, and until his death he tirelessly promoted his version of occult knowledge, publishing some twenty books and articles on various aspects of spirit development. Condemning western science for its materialism, he sought to revitalize it with the esoteric knowledge of the East. If Sinnett finally recognized that his 'Mahatma letters' were Blavatsky's handiwork, he still believed in cosmic forces that scientists could never quantify. From 1904 to 1907 he published a monthly periodical -- 'Broad Views' -- to challenge 'conventional habits of thought', as the title-page proclaimed. He died on 26 June 1921 at his home, 47 Ladbroke Grove, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 38638


Elmy, Elizabeth Clarke Wolstenholme (1833-1918), campaigner for women's rights, was born on 30 November 1833, in the Manchester area, daughter of Joseph Wolstenholme, a Methodist minister, and his first wife, Elizabeth Clarke, the daughter of a cotton spinner; Elizabeth died shortly after her daughter's birth. Doubly orphaned by the age of fourteen, Elizabeth Wolstenholme then enjoyed her only two years of formal education, at the Moravian School, Fulneck, near Leeds. After a period of further self-education, she took over a private girls' school at Boothstown, near Worsley, of which she became headmistress. Her philosophy of education was set out in her contribution to Josephine Butler's collection of essays 'Woman's Work and Woman's Culture' (1869). It was an enlightened one for its time, especially in emphasizing the need to prepare girls for economic independence. 
In 1865 Elizabeth Wolstenholme joined the Kensington Society as a corresponding member. This women's debating group had grown out of the Langham Place circle, a socially disparate group of women's rights advocates that had gathered around the Unitarian radicals Barbara Leigh Smith and Bessie Rayner Parkes in the late 1850s. Reform of the laws governing marriage, improved educational provision for girls, and an expansion of economic opportunities for women were among the chief concerns of this circle. 
So began a lifetime career campaigning for women's rights. Sylvia Pankhurst recalled Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy in her later years as a 'tiny Jenny-wren of a woman, with bright, bird-like eyes, and a little face, child-like in its merriment and its pathos, which even in extreme old age retained the winning graces of youth' (Pankhurst, 31). Another suffragist colleague, Dora Montefiore, claimed: 'The work of Mrs Elmy has never been sufficiently recognised, because she was frowned upon by the official suffragists, though she had quite the most able mind and memory of any nineteenth-century woman' (Montefiore, 113). More conventional colleagues were alienated by Elizabeth Wolstenholme's ultra-radical views, notably on marriage. She expected from others, especially the well-to-do, the same unstinting dedication that she herself gave to the women's movement. She was always antagonistic to party-political loyalties where these impinged on campaigns for women's rights. There was, too, a certain prickliness, springing largely from her relative poverty and consequent dependence on positions financed by other, more wealthy, leaders of the movement. Altogether, those more cautious, pragmatic, and conformist, or less generous-spirited and courageous than herself, sometimes found her a difficult colleague with whom to work. 
For the larger part of her career Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy concentrated her efforts on behalf of women's rights in her own region. In the early 1860s, for example, she established the Manchester Board of Schoolmistresses to advance educational provision for women and provide collegial support among women teachers. She was also active in the North of England Council for the Promotion of the Education of Women, which grew out of this and similar bodies. She was among those who successfully pressed for the establishment of the Cambridge higher examinations for women, and for the programme of advanced lectures for women that eventually led to the foundation of Newnham College, Cambridge. In 1866 she gave evidence concerning existing provision for female education to the schools inquiry commission, among the first four women whose opinion was sought by a royal commission. 
In the mid-1860s advanced women's rights activists also began to pursue the enfranchisement of women. A new 'Reform Act' was anticipated, and John Stuart Mill offered support for women's suffrage during his successful election campaign for the seat of Westminster in 1865. Her attendance at one of his election meetings was among Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy's fondest memories in old age. Once elected, Mill undertook to pursue the question of women's suffrage in parliament, on the condition that a petition was raised in support of this demand. To this end, Elizabeth Wolstenholme established a women's suffrage committee in Manchester with the support of local radical Liberals, including Ursula and Jacob Bright and a young lawyer, Richard Pankhurst. Similar committees were established in London and in major provincial centres, leading within a few years to the formation of a permanent national network of women's suffrage societies. 
In 1867 Elizabeth Wolstenholme moved out of Manchester and established a new school at Moody Hall, Congleton, in Cheshire. She also relinquished the honorary secretaryship of the Manchester Society for Women's Suffrage to Lydia Becker, whom she had recruited to its founding committee. Now she pursued a number of other reforms that reflected her radical approach to women's emancipation. The first of these reforms was pursued by the Married Women's Property Committee (MWPC), of which she became honorary secretary after it was formed in Manchester in 1867, a cause closely linked to that of women's suffrage. Eligibility for the parliamentary franchise still rested on the ownership of property of a certain value or above. Most married women were deprived of the ability to hold property by the common law doctrine of coverture, which subsumed their legal personality under that of their husbands. Hence married women were effectively, though not expressly, excluded from any formulation of the suffrage demand in terms of sexual equality. The goal of the MWPC was to enable married women to retain their property and put an end to coverture, thus also advancing the eligibility of married women to the vote once equal rights were secured. It met with only limited success in the passage of the 'Married Women's Property Act' of 1870. Married women's rights over property, especially in the form of earnings, were extended, but the bill had been so comprehensively amended as it went through parliament as to leave intact the doctrine of coverture. 
At the conference of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science in Bristol in 1869 Elizabeth Wolstenholme first learnt of the passage, over the previous few years, of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts'. This legislation aimed to control the extent of venereal disease among the armed forces. It provided for the enforced medical supervision of all women deemed prostitutes by the police in designated military and naval towns. Those women who refused to comply with the acts might receive a prison sentence with hard labour. Elizabeth Wolstenholme contacted her old friend Josephine Butler, a matron of impeccable reputation and some standing in philanthropic work among prostitutes, and urged on her the need to resist the continuance of such legislation. The formation of the Ladies National Association for Repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts followed consultation with others of the more intrepid among women's rights activists. Its campaigns resulted in the suspension of these acts in 1884, and their repeal in 1886. 
In 1871 Elizabeth Wolstenholme joined with Josephine Butler and other reformers in forming the Committee for Amending the Law in Points Injurious to Women. Its goals were more extensive than either women's suffrage or married women's property rights, and encompassed any aspect of legislation that treated women unequally with men. The same concerns and leadership were evident in the subsequent formation of the Vigilance Association for the Defence of Personal Rights. In 1872 Elizabeth Wolstenholme gave up her school and moved to London to become the paid secretary of this new organization, an appointment that recognized her now extensive knowledge of parliamentary procedure and her skills as a lobbyist. 
By the mid-1870s Elizabeth Wolstenholme, like other radical Liberals, was increasingly at odds with the leadership of the suffrage movement, in which Lydia Becker had moved to the fore. In the changed parliamentary context that followed the election of a Conservative government, Lydia Becker and other pragmatists, such as Millicent Garrett Fawcett, were prepared to narrow the programme of the women's movement. They advocated limiting the suffrage demand to single and widowed women, and sought the suspension of the campaign for still further reform of the 'Married Women's Property Acts'. Most of the radicals in the northern leadership of the women's movement rejected such a restriction of their original goals. 
Elizabeth Wolstenholme's private life now became a matter for further discord. Some years earlier she had joined the secularist movement. Freethinkers found much to criticize in the existing institution of marriage, and Elizabeth Wolstenholme was by now well-versed in the legal disabilities of married women. So, with some deliberation, she entered a free union with one of her former neighbours in Congleton, Ben Elmy (1838-1906), a teacher turned silk crape manufacturer and sometime vice-president of the National Secular Society. Though there appears to have been some kind of informal wedding ceremony, probably early in 1874, theirs was a marriage not recognized under English law. When, some months later, Elizabeth Wolstenholme's pregnancy became evident the couple were urged, in the interests of the women's movement, to formalize their union. They did so on 12 October 1874, a few months before the birth of their son. 
When Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy sought to return to public life in the autumn of 1875, she met with opposition from some among the leadership of the women's movement, notably Lydia Becker and Millicent Garrett Fawcett. With the support of Josephine Butler and Ursula Bright she resisted exclusion from the offices to which she sought reappointment, but with only limited success. She did not return to the secretaryship of the Vigilance Association, but her work for the Married Women's Property Committee, of which her wealthy friend Ursula Bright was treasurer, appears to have continued anonymously prior to her gradual reacceptance into public life in the early 1880s. The eventual passage of the 1882 'Married Women's Property Act' has often been credited almost entirely to the campaigning of these two women. Once again, however, the original bill was so amended as to leave the doctrine of coverture in place. But it so extended the capacity of married women to hold property that in the years that followed they became increasingly eligible for local government franchises and offices. 
For the next two decades Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy concentrated on securing civil equality for wives. Her views are set out in numerous contributions to the 'Personal Rights Journal' in the 1880s and the 'Westminster Review' in the 1890s (where she wrote under her pseudonym, Ignota). She is said virtually single-handedly to have secured the passage of the 1886 'Infant Custody Act', whereby women's custodial rights over their children were extended. Thereafter, she returned to the campaign for women's suffrage, but concentrated on defending and advancing the claims of married women to inclusion in the demand, a question that had by this stage split the national leadership. To such ends she helped form two successive splinter organizations, again largely with the support of northern radicals such as Richard and Emmeline Pankhurst. 
The Women's Franchise League was formed in 1889, with Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy appointed its paid secretary. The league promoted a formulation of the suffrage demand that included married women, alongside reform of the divorce and other laws that left women unequal rights in marriage. Within a year, however, internal tensions led Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy to resign her post. In 1892 she formed the Women's Emancipation Union (WEU). The programme of this body was similar to that of the league, but put particular emphasis on the injustices arising from coverture, including the legality of marital rape. It also promoted the greater participation of women in local government, an area where women were receiving steadily growing voting rights and expanding eligibility for office. Some of Ben Elmy's writings on sex education, under the pseudonym Ellis Ethelmer, were also published under its auspices. 
The enfranchisement of married women under the 'Municipal Corporations Act' of 1894 eased the way for the reunification of the suffrage movement. The National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS) was formed in 1897, under the leadership of Millicent Garrett Fawcett, out of the largest of the pre-existing suffrage societies. The league and the WEU were gradually wound down in the years that followed. 
Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy was never at ease with the national leadership of the suffrage movement, however, after the bitter controversy that had surrounded her marriage. She remained, also, a northern radical, suspicious of metropolitan ways and influences. For the next few years, she worked most closely with the North of England Society of the NUWSS, becoming an enthusiastic supporter of the campaign it waged, at the turn of the century, among the women textile workers of the region. She was also among the earliest supporters of the new 'militant' society formed by Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst in 1903, the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), eventually joining its national committee. She soon also joined the Independent Labour Party, with which the WSPU still had close links and which published her pamphlet 'Women's Franchise: the Need of the Hour' (1907). In her seventy-fifth year she walked at the head of the main procession to Hyde Park, where one of the WSPU's most impressive popular demonstrations was staged in 1908. By now, though, she found regular travel between London and her home increasingly taxing, and gradually her public life became largely limited to letters to the press. 
The financial plight of Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy was a cause for increasing concern among her friends in the 1890s, after the failure of Ben Elmy's silk mill. A 'grateful fund' was established to acknowledge her services to women, and provided her with a small annuity in the years that followed. She died at 231 Upper Brook Street, Chorlton upon Medlock, on 12 March 1918, shortly after the enactment of women's suffrage, but before she herself could cast a parliamentary vote. 


@@@@@


doc= 38639


Gladstone, Helen (1849-1925), educationist, was born in London on 28 August 1849, the sixth of the eight children of William Ewart Gladstone (1809-1898), who was four times British prime minister, and his wife, Catherine (1812-1900), daughter of Sir Stephen Glynne, bt, of Hawarden, Flintshire, and his wife, Mary. An elder sister having died in childhood, Helen was the youngest of three girls in the lively crowd of seven children growing up at Hawarden Castle -- their number often doubled and more by an influx of their favourite cousins, the Lytteltons of Hagley in Worcestershire. On a generally crowded canvas Helen's childhood is all but invisible, and it is not until 1873, when her eldest sister left home on marriage, that she seems to emerge as an individual. As one of the cousins then noted, there was now scope for 'the two unmarried'. Mary effectively freed her mother for charitable work by running the household; Helen was involved with the village schools and no doubt would have gone on like that had not her more dynamic sister faced her, after a visit to Cambridge, with the surprising proposition that she should study at Newnham Hall (soon to become a women's college). Fired by those pioneers of women's education Henry Sidgwick and his wife Nora, Mary was eager to persuade her father that Helen should try it for a year. Helen was compliant but apprehensive. She had a keen desire to study but her schoolroom days were remote and had been governess-led, at home. She doubted if she could master political economy, felt ashamed that her memory was bad, and worried lest Newnhamites should be given to over-free discussion of the Christian faith. Still, in 1877 she went to Newnham: the oldest (at twenty-eight) of its twenty-five students, and probably the most diffident. 
Being in this 'pie of girls', as she wrote, seemed queer at first but Helen came to enjoy it. She did not wish to go in for the tripos but passed the higher local examination with distinction in political economy. In 1880 she became secretary to Nora Sidgwick (then vice-principal) and succeeded her two years later, proud of having this part to play in moulding the life of the new community. No one cherished the highlights of the college's early years more: whether the day that Philippa Fawcett was placed above the senior wrangler, the visit of Mr and Mrs Gladstone to Newnham to plant a tree there in 1887, or the university's solemn tribute on the death of Miss Clough, its first principal. It seemed a hopeful time for women. When Helen asked her father in 1896 to add his signature to a memorial that women should be allowed to take degrees, she could not have guessed it would be fifty years before the university made this concession. 
In July 1886 Helen was invited to become first principal of the new Royal Holloway College. This immediately exposed a question of the relative claims of work and home which had been implicit since she went to Newnham but gained new immediacy from the fact that her sister Mary had recently married and could not be assumed to stay at Hawarden for ever; also that it would have been out of the question to combine Royal Holloway with 'home duties'. Though she canvassed opinions widely Helen seems to have been clear from the start that to take the post would be morally wrong. The moment of truth came ten years later, in 1896, when she resigned from Newnham to look after her parents (by then well in their eighties). It was a wrench to leave the work she loved for duties which she had never performed as well as Mary, or in a way that pleased her mother. Her father died in 1898 and Mrs Gladstone in 1900. For several years afterwards Helen was warden of the Women's University Settlement in Southwark. In 1910 she left London for Hawarden, where she lived at Sundial until her death there on 19 August 1925, happily near to her extended family but still in touch with Newnham, whose students recalled her open-hearted interest as well as her habit of overdoing the anecdotes of Mr Gladstone. She was buried in Hawarden church. 


@@@@@


doc= 38640


Creighton, Louise Hume (1850-1936), social activist and writer of popular history and biography, was born on 7 July 1850 at Peak Hill Lodge, Sydenham, on the outskirts of London, tenth child of Robert William von Glehn (1801-1885) and Agnes Duncan ('c'.1813-1881). Louise's godmother was Elisa Hume, daughter of radical MP Joseph Hume (1777-1855). Robert von Glehn, of German and Scottish ancestry, was born in Reval, Estonia. He emigrated to England as a young man and established an import-export business in London, soon afterwards marrying Agnes Duncan, the Scottish stepdaughter of a successful London merchant. Louise grew up in a reasonably prosperous but careful middle-class family, liberal in religion and in politics. Her early life was shaped by strict but caring parents, strong-willed brothers and sisters, and a German governess. Educated at home, although she took classes at the Crystal Palace, she entered and passed with honours the first London University higher examination for women. However, she was always to regret having missed formal schooling, and was to become a keen promoter of women's education. 
Louise von Glehn grew up in a lively, cultivated, and cosmopolitan atmosphere. There were always visitors at Peak Hill Lodge, the house was full of music, and the family went to concerts and to study the sculpture casts at Crystal Palace. She herself had no musical talent, although she was to develop a certain facility in sketching and watercolour. John Ruskin (1819-1900) was her prophet. Louise claimed that the strongest intellectual influence in her girlhood was her friendship with the historian J. R. Green (1837-1883), who often visited her home and who advised her on reading. Family life was loving but intense: all its members seem to have been critical of one another, over-sensitive, and prone to take themselves rather too seriously. Louise felt that this had reinforced her own self-consciousness, yet as an adult she was equally exacting in her expectations of people. 
On a visit to Oxford in February 1871 she met Mandell Creighton (1843-1901), a fellow of Merton College, who had admired her boldness in wearing a yellow scarf to one of Ruskin's lectures. They were engaged the following month, and were married on 8 January 1872 at St Bartholomew's, Sydenham. They were an extremely happy and close couple, always sharing interests and commitments. Their first home was in St Giles', Oxford, a new rented villa which they named Middlemarch after George Eliot's novel. This they took much pride in decorating and furnishing, with a yellow drawing-room and blue china setting off the white Persian cat. A painting of her done shortly after her marriage by her friend Bertha Johnson shows a serious, handsome woman, with deep-set dark eyes and strong eyebrows, standing in a Pre-Raphaelite garden. She was enchanted by Oxford, and she and her husband had a busy and stimulating social life. Nearly every afternoon they went for a walk together. Meanwhile she began to read -- principally history -- in the Bodleian Library, sharing a desk with William Stubbs (1825-1901), who leaned over to joke with her or to ask her the meaning of a German word. She took over the translation of a volume of Ranke's history of England which Mandell had undertaken with four other tutors. (It none the less still appeared under his name.) He also encouraged her to write a series of historical primers. She became involved in religious work, volunteering as an Anglican district visitor in one of the poorest areas of the city, and was among the founders of a women's committee which encouraged tutors to offer history and literature courses for women. During this period she and Mandell began the custom of taking their holidays in Italy, which they both loved. At Oxford the first two of their seven children were born, Beatrice in 1872 and Lucia in 1874. 
In 1875 they moved to Embleton in Northumberland, a Merton College living to which Mandell Creighton had been appointed. Although at first this seemed a social exile, Louise came to see the ten years which they spent there as a major turning point in their lives. They both came to parochial work for the first time, and threw themselves into visiting. Louise started a mothers' meeting and a branch of the Girls' Friendly Society, of which she was elected first diocesan president. She gained much experience of dealing with people and of speaking in public, although she never felt enthusiastic about the Girls' Friendly Society either there or elsewhere. She became interested in Ellice Hopkins's writings, and gave some talks on purity. Four more children were born during this period (Cuthbert in 1876, Walter in 1878, Mary in 1880, and Oswin in 1883), and Louise taught them herself, reading up on modern educational theory. At the same time she established herself as an accomplished writer, producing historical biographies, a very successful 'Child's First History of England' and other historical stories for children, and a novel, 'The Bloom off the Peach', which she published under the pseudonym Lois Hume. 
In 1884 the Creighton family moved to Cambridge, where Mandell took up the Dixie chair of ecclesiastical history. He was appointed a canon of Worcester in the following year. During the Cambridge years (1884-91) Louise emerged as a national figure. Besides her literary and social work, she became caught up in the movement against female suffrage. She helped Mrs Humphry Ward (1851-1920) to organize signatures for a petition against female suffrage which was published in the 'Nineteenth Century' in 1889. Her opposition, she claimed, rested on the belief that there were benefits from having a large body of intelligent and influential opinion outside party politics; she said that she changed her mind when she realized how involved in party politics women were even without the vote, so that it would be better for them to have full responsibility. She publicly announced her change of position in 1906. At Cambridge Louise Creighton also began her long association with the National Union of Women Workers (NUWW), a non-political organization of middle-class women dedicated to improving the lives of working women. She served as its first president in the 1880s and held a number of executive posts thereafter. Her last child, Gemma, was born in 1887. 
In 1891 Mandell Creighton was appointed bishop of Peterborough, and in 1897 was promoted to the see of London. It fell to Louise to run the episcopal households and to provide an ever-increasing range of hospitality. She missed the close daily companionship with Mandell, which was no longer possible, but developed her own independent interests and kept up her writing. As well as continuing her work for the NUWW and the Mothers' Union, she addressed women's sessions at church congresses. In London she revitalized the Women's Diocesan Association and initiated the Girls' Diocesan Association, of which her daughter Beatrice was the first president. She maintained her interest in rescue work, and was on the London Council for the Promotion of Morality from its inception. 
Louise Creighton was only fifty when her husband died (on 14 January 1901). She was granted a grace-and-favour apartment at Hampton Court, and lived there until 1927. Within months of Mandell's death she embarked on her greatest literary achievement, the two-volume 'Life and Letters of Mandell Creighton' (1904), which received justified acclaim. She also collected and edited nine volumes of his speeches, sermons, lectures, and essays. Of the twenty-four books which she wrote or edited during her life, thirteen were written during her years as a widow. They included biographies, a monograph on missions, lectures on household economy delivered at the London School of Economics, and lectures on the theory of the state given in 1916. She served on two royal commissions -- the London University commission (1909) and the venereal disease commission (1913) -- and also on the joint committee of insurance commissioners (1912). In 1908 she chaired the women's meetings at the Pan-Anglican Congress. She became increasingly involved in the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and worked hard to get the work of women and men amalgamated. She participated in the Edinburgh World Missionary Conference in 1910. During the First World War she supported the National Mission of Repentance and Hope, and the Life and Liberty Movement, which urged increased self-government and reform of the Church of England. With the passage of the 'Church of England Assembly (Powers) Act' (1919), which created the first national assembly, Louise became a charter member from 1920 to 1930. By then she was recognized as a moderate voice in the women's movement. 
Louise Creighton moved to Oxford in the late 1920s, where she served on the governing board of Lady Margaret Hall. After a period of declining health, she died on 15 April 1936 at 5 South Parks Road, Oxford. Her ashes were buried in her husband's grave in St Paul's Cathedral. As a wife, Louise had been highly protective and supportive of her husband and his career. She exhibited an extraordinary devotion to him, for in her eyes he could say nothing dull, do nothing wrong. As a mother, she loved her children, but found it difficult to express tenderness towards them. She was to wonder whether she had praised them too little; certainly none of them matched up intellectually to her expectations. As an author, she wrote effectively for a wide public, biography proving her most successful genre. As a social activist, she showed consummate skills in organization. In this context her reputation for being alarming, which she herself related to her social awkwardness, could be turned to good effect. She continued to promote women's primary role within the family, seeing church work as an extension of this; she saw women as having a distinctive and influential contribution to make. She increasingly came to feel that more responsibility and freedom should be given to women in church affairs; only then would the most intelligent women be drawn to this sort of work. In her later life she pondered the question of the priesthood of women. She recognized that her opposition to it was rooted in instinct and prejudice, and she could find no logical reason against it. 


@@@@@


doc= 38642


Kitson, Alfred (1855-1934), spiritualist, was born at Gawthorpe, Ossett, near Dewsbury, Yorkshire, on 15 February 1855, the son of John Kitson and his wife, Esther (Betty), 'nee' Butterfield. His father was a coalminer and his mother a mill worker. The family lived in poverty, owing to his father's poor health and consequent irregular employment. Alfred was the eldest of six children and before the age of nine he decided to seek employment down the pit, in order to help bring money into the family. A sensitive and artistic child, he was a hard worker and physically strong, remaining in employment as a miner for much of his working life. 
John Kitson was a preacher at the local Primitive Methodist Chapel and in 1867 investigated rumours of 'spirit rappings' in the neighbourhood. Initially sceptical he was converted to spiritualism and became a medium. He also found himself cured of his ill health and thus able to work again; the family finances benefited as a consequence. Alfred, already fascinated by the claims of spiritualism, and troubled by the primitive teaching about hellfire, took to attending seances with his father. As local interest in spiritualism grew a meeting room was rented. This was visited, in 1871, by James Burns, the editor of the spiritualist journal, 'Medium and Daybreak', and James Peebles, a well-known medium. The visitors told John Kitson to take care of his eldest son, as he was to do great work for the cause of spiritualism. Alfred showed no sign of developing mediumistic talents, so the prophecy was 'deemed a failure' (Kitson, 27). 
In 1871 spiritualists in Sowerby Bridge opened a lyceum, or Sunday school for children, which Alfred Kitson visited. This was the third lyceum in England, following Nottingham (1866) and Keighley (1870). These were modelled on the American lyceums introduced in New York by Andrew Jackson Davis in 1863 and described in the 'Medium and Daybreak'. Lyceums enabled spiritualists to give their children a religious education that fitted their own philosophy, rather than sending them to church Sunday schools, where they would be exposed to 'false' teaching. The Gawthorpe spiritualists were keen to start a lyceum of their own and Alfred made use of a copy of the American lyceum guide to help them. This contained a variety of poems for recitation, called 'Gold and Silver Chains', and callisthenic exercises. 
Kitson had received only intermittent education in childhood, and became an autodidact. Knowing that he was to instruct children in matters of faith and philosophy, he devoured books on religion, as well as botany, geology, physiology, and astronomy. He also learned to play the double bass, and joined a band with his father and brother (both violinists), which brought in extra funds. On 22 December 1877 at St Thomas's, Batley, he married Mary Fothergill Wainwright (1857-1933), a weaver, daughter of Frank Wainwright, pattern maker. She was a devoted wife and supporter of his spiritualist endeavours. The couple had five children: four sons died in infancy or childhood, but their youngest child, Mary Ellen (Nellie) (1890-1929), became an active supporter of Alfred's lyceum work. 
Kitson and his wife settled at Bromley Road, Hanging Heaton, between Batley and Dewsbury. Money was scarce in the household, though in 1879 Kitson became a check weighman, a responsible position in the mine that meant he negotiated with managers on behalf of the workers. His successes in this led him to be appointed as delegate to the Yorkshire miners' union. 
Kitson quickly became aware that the American lyceum guide was inadequate for teaching, and supplemented it with his own hymns, recitations, and teachings. Wanting to rouse spiritualists to the cause of their children's education, in 1883 he decided to send summaries of his weekly sessions to the 'Medium and Daybreak'. The newspaper was sympathetic to the cause and inserted the reports, along with Kitson's comments about the superiority of lyceums over Sunday schools. By 1886 there were enough lyceums up and running to necessitate a conference, during which the pressing need for a guide or manual became clear. The lyceum workers (mostly, like Kitson, working men) lacked capital. James Burns, a potential source of funds, was unsympathetic, but in the same year Kitson was invited to open and address the lyceum at Newcastle upon Tyne and met Harry A. Kersey. 
Kersey had the funds to print a manual. He had also been inspired by Emma Hardinge Britten, a well-known spiritualist writer and advocate, who had seen them on her travels around America. She had already composed a sixteen-page pamphlet to aid English lyceums; Kitson encouraged Kersey to expand this pamphlet into a manual, amplified by his own material. The manual was a success. A note in Kitson's personal papers reveals that by 1893 the manual was into its fourth edition and had sold over 5600 copies. Its publication, though, had the disappointing effect of snubbing James Burns, who, for some years made attacks on Kitson in his newspaper. 
Kitson corresponded and compared notes with his American counterparts, notably Andrew Jackson Davis and Emma Tuttle. A hymn book, or 'Songster', was published in 1888 and in 1889 Kitson published a book, written in his spare time and funded by the lyceums, called 'Spiritualism for the Young' (reissued in 1894 as 'Outlines of Spiritualism', and later as 'Outlines of Spiritualism for the Young'). He drew up the constitution of the Lyceum Union, founded in 1888 by the lyceum conference. In 1890 the 'Spiritualists' Lyceum Magazine' was first produced, which enabled better communications between lyceums. This became the 'Lyceum Banner' and Kitson (with reluctance) took on the editorship. In 1901 he was elected permanent (or general) secretary of the Lyceum Union. 
In poor health, Kitson stepped down as general secretary of the union in 1919. A testimonial of $405 was raised in order to keep his services as an adviser, along with a salary of $1 10's'. per week. He continued to maintain his interest in the lyceums until his death at 10 Hanover Square, Boothroyd Lane, Dewsbury, on 16 January 1934. The 'Lyceum Banner' recalled 'Dad' Kitson as the 'Father of the British Spiritualist Lyceum Movement': a man of indefatigable spirit, a self-taught teacher and born organizer, who by his life's mission encouraged the movement to take seriously the mental and spiritual development of children. 


@@@@@


doc= 38643


Gissing, Algernon Fred (1860-1937), novelist, was born on 25 November 1860 at 55 Westgate, Wakefield, Yorkshire, the third son of Thomas Waller Gissing (1829-1870), a pharmaceutical chemist, and Margaret (1832-1913), the daughter of William Bedford, a solicitor's managing clerk. There Gissing attended Back Lane School; then, following his father's death in 1870, he became a boarder at Lindow Grove School, Alderley Edge, Cheshire, together with his brothers William Gissing and George Robert Gissing (1857-1903). After receiving his LLB from London University in 1882 Algernon Gissing set up as a solicitor in his native town, playing a modest part in local cultural affairs. Clients failing to present themselves, he boldly opted for literature a few years later, living on a small legacy from a paternal great-aunt. On 8 September 1887 he married Catherine (1859-1937), daughter of James Bennett Baseley, an outfitter with Wakefield connections, and they settled in Broadway, Worcestershire. For fifty years they lived in rural areas of the midlands and the north, invariably used as settings in his fiction. Although he published thirty books, none brought him in more than a mere pittance; nor did his half-hearted attempts at securing some other remunerative employment ever succeed. To the end of his life he eked out his meagre earnings by borrowing from his relatives and friends money which he rarely repaid. The birth of five children increased his difficulties, and his son Alwin in old age equated his father's clinging to unsuccessful novel-writing with a curse on the family. Five times between 1904 and 1918 he received grants from the Royal Literary Fund. Penury and seclusion were unpropitious to a badly needed renewal of inspiration. 
Besides Gissing's booklets on Broadway (1904) and Ludlow (1905), and 'The Footpath Way in Gloucestershire' (1924), his published work consists of twenty-five novels, ten of them in multi-volume form, and two collections of short stories. Very few went into a second edition. He ceased writing fiction just before the First World War, but his undying interest in country life led him to contribute a series of 'New rural rides' to the 'Cornhill Magazine' in the 1920s. While no book of his roused critical enthusiasm, his artistic conscientiousness was acknowledged, and his true feeling for nature, as reflected in his descriptions of north-country scenery, duly praised. So were his rustics, occasionally likened to Thomas Hardy's. His experimentation with Meredithian complexity, notably in 'A Masquerader' (1892), met with little favour, however, and his style was criticized for its affectation and grammatical oddities. The weaknesses of his plots and sometimes unconvincing characterization were found trying by many reviewers as well as by his brother George, with whose superior novelistic achievements his stories constantly invited comparison. By common consent his better work is to be found in 'A Moorland Idyl' (1891), 'The Scholar of Bygate' (1897), and 'A Secret of the North Sea' (1900). After a pathetic twenty-five-year struggle he acknowledged himself beaten as a novelist, as repeated assurance that one was above the average was no passport to posterity. Algernon Gissing died of heart disease at Bloxham, near Banbury, Oxfordshire, on 5 February 1937, his invalid wife surviving him by barely three months. He was buried in the Bloxham cemetery on 9 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 38645


Dowie, Menie Muriel (1866-1945), writer and traveller, was born at 7 Dingle Hill, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, on 15 July 1866, the fourth of the five children of James Muir Dowie, corn merchant, and his wife, Annie, daughter of Robert Chambers (1802-1871), author of 'Vestiges of Creation' and founder of Chambers's 'Dictionary'. Registered as Mary Muir Dowie and baptized Mary Muriel Dowie, she acquired the familiar name Menie even before birth and used it all her life. About 1869 the Dowie family moved to Whetstones, West Kirkby, Deeside. Dowie was educated first at home, then -- from eight to eleven -- at a private school in Liverpool, after which she was sent abroad to complete her education first at Queen Olga's School in Stuttgart, then at the protestant seminary in Bordeaux. On her return to England the family took a house (The Golland) near Loch Leven, before moving for three years to a remote 'shooting' in Kinross-shire where, under her father's instruction, Dowie became a proficient fisher and huntswoman. She continued her studies for a time through private tuition and St George's correspondence classes in Edinburgh, but her formal education ended at fourteen. An early ambition to be a surgeon had to be relinquished (the profession was still closed to women) and at eighteen she left home to train as an actress and dramatic reciter in London, where she made the acquaintance of Mrs Kendall. She enjoyed modest success on the stage in Scarborough in the late 1880s. 
While still in her teens Dowie began publishing regular articles, short stories and occasional poetry in newspapers and magazines. Most were unsigned, some appeared under her initials or under pseudonyms -- among them, Princess Top-Storey, Judith Vermont, and M. Nugent. In spring 1890 she travelled to Austrian Poland to begin a six-month tour of the Carpathian mountains, journeying on horseback with only a peasant guide and eschewing petticoats in favour of a detachable skirt worn over knickerbockers and leggings. She ate the vegetarian diet of the peasant families with whom she stayed, smoked cigarettes, bathed in the streams, and spent her twenty-third birthday sharpening her revolver skills in case she encountered a wild bear. On her return to England she acquired immediate celebrity as a 'woman adventurer' and the book of her adventures, 'A Girl in the Karpathians', appeared on 7 May 1891. It went through five British and four American editions within the year and for the rest of her writing career she was known to the popular press as the 'Girl in the Karpathians'. 
In mid-1891 Dowie was appointed London correspondent to a syndicate of newspapers in the north of England. She began to involve herself in labour politics, speaking in support of the shop assistants' 'Weekly Half-Holiday Bill' and advocating rational dress and exercise for women. On 28 August she married the journalist and travel writer Henry Norman (1858-1939). Over the next eight years they travelled extensively around Europe, Asia, and north Africa. On their return from Egypt and Sudan in 1892 Dowie toured the north of England, lecturing on their travels. A serious bout of malaria put paid to her new political involvements, but she remained a favourite with the society columnists, who were fascinated by her extravagantly stylish dress sense -- most memorably, a leopard- (some reports said tiger-) skin dress in which she appeared at the first-night performance of 'Hypathia'. Dowie edited a collection of essays entitled 'Women Adventurers' (1893), reviewed regularly until 1898 for Norman's paper, the 'Daily Chronicle', and wrote its weekly column 'A woman's view' during most of 1896. 

'Gallia', Dowie's first novel, appeared in 1895. The 'sheer audacity' (in one early reviewer's phrase) of its treatment of sex caused a sensation, making her one of the most prominent of the New Woman novelists. She contributed short stories to the 'Yellow Book' and 'Chambers's Journal' in the mid-1890s, collected with other work in 'Some Whims of Fate' (1896), and made the acquaintance of many of the leading figures in the English 'decadence' movement. Dowie published two further novels, 'The Crook of the Bough' (1898) and 'Love and his Mask' (1901). 
In November 1896 the Normans purchased Kitcombe Farm, near Winchester. Her only child, Henry Nigel St Valery Norman, was born on 21 May 1897. Early in 1901, however, Norman discovered that his wife had been having an affair with his close friend, the mountain-climber and millionaire Edward Arthur FitzGerald (1871-1931). In February 1902 Norman filed for divorce on the grounds of her adultery. A decree nisi was awarded at the start of 1903, with custody of their child awarded to him, and full details of the case were published in 'The Times' on 30 January. Dowie was forbidden access to her son and did not see him again until he was fifteen. Her literary career appears to have ended abruptly at this point. She married FitzGerald on 13 August 1903 and spent most of the next decade abroad with him. 
About 1918 the FitzGeralds purchased Marsden Manor, near Cirencester. There Dowie established herself as a highly successful breeder of cattle, polo ponies, and sheep. In 1929 she separated from FitzGerald. A sizeable part his fortune was lost in the Wall Street crash, and at his death in January 1931 much of the remainder was found to have been squandered or, allegedly, embezzled by a secretary. The Marsden estate was sold, and from 1931 to 1941 Dowie lived principally at Shepherd's Crown, near Winchester, though she continued to travel extensively. In 1941 she emigrated to America, partly on health grounds (she suffered badly from asthma) and partly because she believed Britain was going to lose the war. She died at Tucson, Arizona, on 25 March 1945. Her ashes were returned to England and scattered in Clifferdine Wood, near Marsden Manor. 
Besides being one of the sources for Mrs Jardine in Rosamond Lehmann's 'The Ballad and the Source', Dowie is the model for Lil in Ethel Heddle's novel 'Three Girls in a Flat' (1896) and is thought by some scholars to have influenced Hardy's portrayal of Sue Bridehead in 'Jude the Obscure' (1895). Her reputation now seems secure as a leading New Woman writer of the 1890s, but her views on sexual politics were in many respects less radical than they appeared to her contemporaries. 'The dangerous experiment' of writing in 'an ironic sense', she said in an interview in 1901, had caused her novels to be misinterpreted as advocating sexual revolution, when they were 'studies, as faithful as I could make them, of women who made rather a grotesque mess of trying to rearrange life'. 


@@@@@


doc= 38648


Dunne, Mary Chavelita (1859-1945), writer, was born on 14 December 1859 in Melbourne, Australia, the eldest of the six children of Captain John Joseph Dunne (1837-1910) and Isobel George (1833-1875). Her father was descended from a noble Irish family, and her mother was Welsh. Her family moved to Dublin when Dunne was eleven years old. Known as 'Chav', she was close to her father. He had a weakness for gambling, and could not hold down a job: the family was always in debt. Dunne was raised as a Roman Catholic, but became disenchanted by the religious hypocrisy of the Irish priesthood. On her mother's death in 1875 she was sent to school in Germany. She returned to Ireland two years later to look after her brothers and sisters, but in 1884 left for America to find work. Conditions were very hard, and the dreams and real-life stories of the working women she met in boarding houses in New York and London later provided material for many of her fictional characters. 
In London in 1887 Mary Dunne became companion to Mrs Whyte-Melville, the wife of Henry Peter Higginson. She began an affair with Higginson and they eloped to Slottnaes Park, Langesund, Norway, where they lived until Higginson's death in 1889. He left her an income of $220 a year, nearly all of which she spent on supporting her family. She learned Norwegian and read many of the new writers, such as Ibsen, Strindberg, and Bjornsen, who greatly influenced her own brand of realism. In 1890 she met and fell in love with Knut Pedersen, who became known as the writer Knut Hamsun (1859-1952). He gave her the confidence to write subjectively about the female experience, writing that later earned her much critical praise and controversy. She translated his novel 'Sult' as 'Hunger' (1899). 
In England in 1891 Mary Dunne met Egerton Tertius Clairmonte (died 1901) and, attracted by his adventurous nature, she married him, although he was practically a stranger to her. Originally from Nova Scotia, he had been a gold prospector and an agent for a diamond mine in South Africa. Similar in many ways to her father, he was also hopeless with money. The couple rented a cottage in Millstreet, co. Cork, but she complained to her father that she was starting to vegetate. They returned in 1893 to London, where she wrote six stories in ten days. 'Keynotes' (1893), which she dedicated to Pedersen, was an instant hit, selling over 6000 copies. It was her first and biggest success, written under the name of George Egerton, as a compliment, she said, to her mother and her husband. She was primarily a short-story writer and her realistic style and pessimistic tone lent themselves brilliantly to the form. In many ways she anticipated the modern short story. Only a woman, she wrote, could explore 'the 'terra incognita' of herself, as she knew herself to be, not as man liked to imagine her -- in a word to give herself away, as man had given himself in his writings' (Egerton, 57). Although her work was associated with 'new woman' fiction, she was embarrassed by the connection and was opposed to the women's suffrage movement. Her one novel, 'The Wheel of God', was published in 1898. 
As George Egerton, Mary Clairmonte wrote four more volumes of short stories: 'Discords' (1894); 'Symphonies' (1896); 'Fantasias' (1897); and 'Flies in Amber' (1905). Her stories also appeared in the aesthetic literary periodical 'The Yellow Book'. She had one son, George Clairmonte, born in 1895, who was killed in the First World War. Two years after George's birth her marriage to Clairmonte ended when she discovered he had made a young girl pregnant, but true to her reputation for unconventionality, she offered the girl money and some of George's outgrown clothes for the baby. She applied for divorce in 1900, and Egerton Clairmonte died less than one year later. She travelled to Norway, where she fell in love with a man fifteen years her junior; her collected love letters to him were published as 'Rosa Amorosa' in 1901. He rejected her, but within four months of her return to England she accepted a proposal from Reginald Golding Bright (1874?-1941), also fifteen years younger than her, and they were married on 11 July 1901. He was a dull conversationalist, but was ambitious, reliable, and kind. He later became famous as a drama critic and as a theatrical agent for writers such as George Bernard Shaw. 
Mary Golding Bright was considered 'very attractive' (May, 129) and a 'brilliant talker', 'small and fragile' with 'strikingly large and luminous eyes' ('The Times', 13 Aug 1945). She had many admirers, though her wit could often be caustic and she did not enjoy small talk. She suffered from hypochondria, complaining of pains and minor illnesses throughout her life. By the turn of the century her best writing years were already behind her. The public's taste for 'new woman' fiction, which examined gender roles and issues of sexuality, declined after the trial of Oscar Wilde in 1895, and her audience disappeared. The popular demand for short stories also fell, and, with no further novels after 1898, she attempted to write plays, without much success. 
Reginald Golding Bright died in 1941. His business had been hit by the closure of the West End theatres at the beginning of the Second World War and Mary Golding Bright was left with very little money. She sold her furniture and books and moved into a boarding house and then a hotel in Bayswater. After suffering what may have been a mild stroke she moved into a nursing home in Crawley, Sussex, and died there on 12 August 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 38649


Morrison, Arthur George (1863-1945), writer and novelist, was born at 14 John Street, Poplar, in the East End of London, on 1 November 1863, one of the three children of George Richard Morrison (died 1871), an engine fitter in the docks, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Cooper. These details about his birth conflict with the biographical details that Morrison himself later supplied -- he maintained that he had been born in Kent, the son of a 'professional man', and had been educated at private schools. These details are only the first of the false trails that Morrison laid for future scholars, in a largely successful attempt to conceal the extent of his working-class origins from his contemporaries. 
Little is known about Morrison's childhood or education, but he probably spent most of his adolescence in the East End; in 1879 he worked as an office boy at the architect's department of the London school board, where he earned 7's'. a week. A year later his mother took over a haberdasher's shop in Grundy Street, and it was at about this time that Morrison began submitting comic verse to the magazine 'Cycling'. He became involved in boxing and cycling, and contributed to various cycling journals. His first serious journalism, however, was published in 'The Globe' in 1885. A year later, at twenty-three, he was working as a clerk to the Beaumont Trustees, a charitable trust that administered the People's Palace, in Mile End, in the East End of London. The People's Palace was designed as an educational and cultural centre for the community, and consisted of the Queen's Hall, a library, a swimming bath, a gymnasium, and a winter garden as well as schools. Lectures and exhibitions were held at the palace, in addition to concerts and recitals. Morrison became sub-editor of the house paper, the 'Palace Journal', and reprinted in it pieces that he had already published as Cockney Corners in 'The People'. It was Morrison's work with the People's Palace that later allowed him to describe his previous employment as 'the secretary of an old Charity Trust' or a 'civil servant', 'both of which terms are half-truths calculated to add social respectability to the post he actually held' (Keating, 'Biographical study', 11). And yet this post was also useful in defending the realism of Morrison's depiction of the East End in his novels, as it meant that he could disguise his personal and autobiographical connections to the slums; he could subsume them by references to his professional connection. 
Morrison left the People's Palace at the end of September 1890, and joined the editorial staff of the evening 'Globe'. He also freelanced, and in 1891 published his first book, 'The Shadows around Us', a collection of supernatural tales originally printed in 'The People'. More significantly, however, in October 1891 he contributed a story called 'A Street' to 'Macmillan's'. Its conciseness and distinct lack of sentimentality in its portrayal of the East End were praised, and its positive reception encouraged Morrison over the next year to submit fourteen tales in a similar vein to his friend W. E. Henley, editor of the 'National Observer'. On 22 August 1892 Morrison married Eliza Adelaide (Elizabeth) Thatcher (1864/5-1956) at Forest Gate; they lived at Chingford, and then at Salcombe House, Loughton, Essex. In 1893 they had a son, Guy (died 1921). A year later Morrison collected and reprinted the East End tales, and published them as 'Tales of Mean Streets' (1894), dedicated to Henley, their first publisher. While the volume was a success, running into several editions, and prompting a great deal of discussion about new developments in English realism, many of the reviews focused on the violence of one tale in particular, 'Lizerunt', and there was a backlash. The book was removed from Clerkenwell Library by local authorities, and W. H. Smith temporarily refused to supply it to circulating libraries. 
Although angry at the negative characterization of the collection based on only one of its tales, Morrison went on to write next the novel for which he is most famous: 'A Child of the Jago' (1896), the violence of which led to similar critical charges. Not content to base his work solely on his own experience of the East End, Morrison did a significant amount of research in the parish of the Revd A. Osborne Jay, vicar of Holy Trinity, Shoreditch, and author of 'Life in Darkest London' (1891) and 'The Social Problem: its Possible Solution' (1893). Jay had written to Morrison after reading 'Tales of Mean Streets', praising it but pointing out that monotony and attempted respectability were certainly not features of his own parish, which demonstrated problems more akin to those of the alcoholism, domestic violence, and crime portrayed in 'Lizerunt'. The impact of his visit to Jay's parish led Morrison to a determination to write a novel in which 'I should tell the story of a boy who, but for his environment, would have become a good citizen' (Keating, 'Biographical study', 23). The novel is a powerful evocation of life in an east London slum, with extreme violence, crime, riots, and an absolute sense of the impossibility of escape for its inhabitants. The novel is indebted to 'Oliver Twist', and yet represents a darker vision of themes and characters presented in that novel -- Dicky Perrott, the 'child of the Jago', is not rescued by providence or by the discovery of providentially rich relatives; he instead is a 'Jago rat', unredeemed and dying at the end of the book, with his last breath adhering to the Jago code, and refusing to 'nark' on the boy who has killed him. In this vision of the slum, death represents the only ''nother way out -- better' for this anti-Oliver of the late nineteenth century (Morrison, 'A Child of the Jago', ed. Miles, 173). 
The book came in for a great deal of criticism, much of it focusing on the naturalistic handling of violence and slum life. 'A Child of the Jago' became a document in the debate over the nature and merits of late Victorian realism, and one of the most vehement criticisms was found in H. D. Traill's article in the 'Fortnightly Review' (67, 1897, 63-73), in which he both doubted the veracity of Morrison's observations and took issue with his method of presentation. Morrison felt it necessary to answer the charges of such an eminent critic personally, and his reply was to form the preface to the third edition of 'A Child of the Jago', in which Morrison maintained the right of the author to present scenes of ugliness and, indeed, stated that such a right was also a duty: 'If the community have left horrible places and horrible lives before his eyes, then the fault is the community's; and to picture these places and these lives becomes not merely his privilege, but his duty' (Morrison, 'A Child of the Jago', ed. Miles, 5). 
Morrison went on to write another novel set in the East End, 'To London Town' (1899), but this had neither the critical nor the popular success of his previous two East End fictions. He also produced a detective novel, 'The Dorrington Deed-Box' (1897), which complemented his earlier works of detective fiction written in the Conan Doyle vein, which had featured a detective called Martin Hewitt who 'shrewdly solved many crimes in a manner that would have done credit to the Great Detective himself' ('Martin Hewitt: Investigator', new edn, 1971, dust-jacket). A historical novel, 'Cunning Murrell' (1900), dealing with witchcraft in mid-nineteenth-century Essex, was skilfully written, and 'The Hole in the Wall' (1902), another East End novel, but this time set in the 1860s and 1870s, represents some of his finest writing. Four more collections of stories followed: 'The Red Triangle' (1903), 'The Green Eye of Goona' (1904), 'Divers Vanities' (1905), and 'Green Ginger' (1909). 
By 1913 Morrison had retired from writing fiction and journalism, and settled down in a house at High Beach, Essex, to devote time to his amateur passion: collecting and studying Chinese and Japanese works of art. He had begun his collection as early as 1890, and in 1902 published a series of articles on the subject in the 'Monthly Review'. The culmination of his work in this area was his two-volume 'The Painters of Japan' (1911), largely illustrated from his own collection. Two years later Sir Watkin Gwynne purchased the bulk of his Chinese and Japanese prints, and presented them to the British Museum, where they were the subject of a catalogue and placed on public exhibition in 1914. 
During the First World War, Morrison's son, Guy, served in the army, and Morrison himself served in the Essex special constabulary; in this capacity he had the distinction of phoning in the news of the first Zeppelin raid on London. After the war the Morrisons moved to Cavendish Square, London, where in 1921 Guy died of malaria that he had contracted while on active duty. Almost as little is known of Morrison's later life as is known of his early life. In 1924 he was made a member of the Royal Society of Literature, and in 1930 he moved to High Barn, Amersham Road, Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire, where he lived quietly until his death fifteen years later. He was a freemason and a member of the Japanese Art Association. Arthur Morrison died at High Barn on 4 December 1945, a wealthy but little-known figure. After his death his wife, acting on his instructions, sold his library and burnt all his papers apart from the manuscript of 'A Child of the Jago', which he had presented to the Bethnal Green Library in 1936. A collection of 140 Japanese paintings and woodcuts and a collection of tea ceremony porcelain was bequeathed to the British Museum. 
At the time of his death Morrison had slipped into relative literary obscurity: as J. Bell wrote, Morrison 'was one of those contemporary bestsellers who could be found on every Edwardian bookshelf, but who vanished in the Great War and were unknown to the new and changed generation which followed' (Miles, xxvi). V. S. Pritchett, however, wrote an enthusiastic article, 'An East End novelist', in the 'New Statesman' in 1944 which inspired a slight revival of interest in his work, and 'A Child of the Jago' has attracted a great deal of late twentieth- and early twenty-first-century critical and popular attention, as its uncompromising view of late nineteenth-century slum life continues to strike a chord. An opera by Shirley Thompson, based on the novel, was staged at the Royal Festival Hall, London, in 1997. 


@@@@@


doc= 38650


Ball, (Walter William) Rouse (1850-1925), educationist and historian, was born at 81 New Bond Street, London, on 14 August 1850, the only son of Walter Frederick Ball, oilman, and his wife, Mary Anne Rouse. He went to University College School and then University College, London, where he gained the degree of MA and won a gold medal for mathematics. In 1870 Ball went up to Trinity College, Cambridge. He graduated BA in 1874, as second wrangler and first Smith's prizeman. He was elected a fellow of his college in 1875, and proceeded MA in 1877. In 1876 he was called to the bar (Inner Temple) and practised briefly as an equity draftsman and conveyancer. At the invitation of Trinity College he returned to Cambridge as a lecturer (from 1878) and tutor (from 1880) in mathematics, positions he occupied until 1905. He was, from 1891, also director of mathematical studies. On 1 September 1885 he married Alice Mary (1851/2-1919), daughter of William Snowdon Gaid. 
From 1878, for the rest of his life, Ball devoted his principal energies and attention to Trinity College, its students, finances, boat club, and history. In addition to his teaching duties he gave particular attention to the university chess club (representing Cambridge in early matches against Oxford graduates), to the Trinity College boat club (of which he wrote a detailed history), and to the history of the college (of which he wrote several general and specialized histories). He also represented the university on the Cambridge borough council. 
Ball wrote several histories and monographs about the history of mathematics. He also wrote the comprehensive 'Mathematical Recreations' (2nd edn, 1892) which had reached its 13th edition by 1987 and which is probably the work for which he will be generally remembered. It deals with mathematical puzzles and problems, such as cryptanalysis, map colouring, and the calculation of the position of shuffled playing cards, as well as other imaginative mathematical problems associated with magic tricks. Ball's other popular mathematical publications relate to such diverse subjects as Chinese tangrams, indigenous Japanese mathematics, string figures, the mathematics of Pythagoras, early calculus, magic squares, mazes, and chess board problems, as well as scholarly articles on cubic curves and the number theories of Marin Mersenne. 
In 1893 Ball wrote a seminal 'Essay on Newton's 'Principia'' in which, following a suggestion in 1838 by Stephen Peter Rigaud, he was probably the first person to set forth a detailed plan explaining the need for a variorum edition of the work, which he hoped to carry forward himself. In fact, this would have been a massive undertaking even for a man of Ball's energy and abilities and it was a task ultimately completed only well into the twentieth century by teams of scholars (led by I. Bernard Cohen, Herbert W. Turnbull, and Derek T. Whiteside in their respective scholarly editions of the Newton papers). Nevertheless, Ball's plan was a notable exception in an age disinclined towards such projects and did lead to him reprinting what was, in his day, the fullest text of the correspondence between Newton and Robert Hooke and between Newton and Edmond Halley. 
Ball was popular with his students and he spared no effort to extend them hospitality (even building a billiard room and squash racket court in his house for their use) and kept in touch with many of them for the rest of his life. He was equally close to his colleagues at Trinity College and counted among his close friends J. J. Thomson, the discoverer of the electron and fellow boat club enthusiast. 
Ball died at his home, Elmside, 49 Grange Road, in Cambridge, on 4 April 1925. He was commemorated in Cambridge by a Rouse Ball lectureship in mathematics (established three years before his death), which has been awarded over the years to Albert Einstein (1932), Wolfgang Pauli (1949), and Paul Dirac (1969), among others. Since 1925 there have also been at Cambridge a Rouse Ball professorship of English law and a Rouse Ball professorship of mathematics, both endowed under the generous terms of Ball's will. 
Rouse Ball made no significant original contribution to mathematics but his long and effective teaching career, his numerous and often reprinted mathematical works for a broad reading public, together with his total devotion to Trinity College, combine to provide strong evidence of a generous, energetic, and inquisitive man who gave his own utmost to his science and to friends and colleagues. 


@@@@@


doc= 38651


Dudeney, Henry Ernest (1857-1930), compiler of mathematical puzzles, was born in Mayfield, Sussex, on 10 April 1857, the third child and second son in the family of three sons and seven daughters of Gilbert Dudeney (1825-1877), a schoolmaster in a Methodist school at Mayfield, and his wife, Lucy Ann, 'nee' Rich (1831/2-1882). Gilbert Dudeney's uncle, John Dudeney (1782-1852), began his working life as a shepherd, but taught himself mathematics and became a printer and schoolmaster. In 1860 Dudeney's parents moved to Burnham-on-Sea, Somerset, where they ran a school; they subsequently kept a school at North Curry, near Taunton, where Dudeney was a pupil. By the age of eight he had become interested in magic tricks, conjuring, and puzzles, and devised puzzles for the amusement of his brothers and sisters. He won five shillings from a boys' paper for a puzzle submitted to them when aged nine. He taught himself mathematics, showing a particular interest in geometry. 
After his father's death Dudeney's mother ran a school in Harlington, Middlesex, where Dudeney lived while working as a ship broker's clerk. He found the work dull, and in his spare time wrote short stories and articles for periodicals, including 'Tit-Bits', and joined the Authors' Club (at the suggestion of Arthur Conan Doyle). There he met an aspiring young author, Alice Louisa Whiffin (1864-1945), whom he married on 3 November 1884. They lived in rooms in Bedford Row, Gray's Inn, London, where their first child, Phyllis Mary, was born in September 1887, but died in infancy. Although the child's birth certificate described Henry as a 'journalist', he was not supporting himself completely with writing until about four years later; in 1891 he was employed as a secretary to a civil engineer. A second child, Margery Janet, was born in May 1890. After living for two years at Billingshurst, Sussex, they moved in 1897 to Littlewick Meadow, Horsell, Surrey. 
By 1895 Dudeney was earning his living entirely from supplying puzzles to a large number of magazines and periodicals, and was the first person to support himself completely in this way. He produced puzzles and articles for 'Blighty', 'The Captain', 'Cassell's Magazine', 'Girls' Realm', and two more prestigious periodicals, the 'Daily Mail' and the 'Weekly Dispatch', where he wrote under the pseudonym Sphinx. His puzzle column 'Perplexities' appeared regularly for twenty years in 'The Strand', whose proprietor, George Newnes, became a friend. 
Dudeney's interest in chess led to a collaboration with Sam Loyd in America. Loyd had a regular chess column in the 'New York Times' for the American Chess Association. On one occasion a prize was offered for any solution in fewer than fifty-three moves. Loyd was confident that his fifty-three-move solution could not be bettered, but Dudeney produced a fifty-move solution which won the prize. They agreed to exchange puzzle ideas, but this turned into a one-sided affair because Loyd's mathematical knowledge was limited and he never acknowledged his source of material. A particular example which caused Dudeney great anger involved a dissection puzzle in which a piece of wood shaped like a mitre was to be cut into five pieces which could be reassembled as a square. Loyd changed the dimensions of the mitre when passing the puzzle off as his own in the New York press, thus unwittingly rendering it impossible to solve because he had not understood the geometry involved. The partnership was dissolved in acrimony. 
Dudeney's most famous dissection puzzle required a triangle to be converted to a square by cutting it into four pieces. The beauty of his solution was that the four pieces could be hinged to fold in one direction into the square and in the other into the triangle. He demonstrated this to the Royal Society on 17 May 1905. 
While continuing his massive output of new puzzles, which earned him the title of 'the Puzzle King', Dudeney began arranging his previously published puzzles into volumes. His first book, 'The Canterbury Puzzles' (1907), based around a group of pilgrims setting puzzles for each other, was followed by 'Amusements in Mathematics' (1917), which was frequently reprinted and remained in print in the early twenty-first century. He also devised word puzzles and put together a selection of these in 'The World's Best Word Puzzles' (1925), including variations on the crossword, a recent import from the USA. Another collection, 'Modern Puzzles', appeared in 1926. Some of his most notable puzzles were discussed by the mathematician Rouse Ball in 'Mathematical Recreations and Essays' (1922). He maintained an interest in the theory of numbers and achieved various prodigious feats of calculation. 
In 1911 the Dudeneys' marriage foundered as a result of Alice Dudeney's relationship with the artist David Paul Hardy. Littlewick Meadow was sold, and Alice -- who was by then a successful novelist -- and their daughter moved to Angmering, while Dudeney moved to London. A reconciliation took place and in 1921 they purchased Castle Precincts House, Lewes, where they settled. Dudeney's health began to deteriorate in 1929 but he still continued his puzzle columns without a break. Brought up a Methodist, he was drawn to high Anglicanism, and became a church organist. He was described as 'tall and handsome, with brown hair and brown eyes, a slightly aquiline nose, and, in his later years, a grey moustache and short chin whiskers' (Gardner, ix). He died at Castle Precincts House, Lewes, on 24 April 1930, and was buried in Lewes cemetery. Alice Dudeney contributed a foreword to a collection of his 'Puzzles and Curious Problems' (1931), revised by James Travers, headmaster of Peterborough College, Harrow. Later the American puzzlist Martin Gardner edited the contents of Dudeney's 'Modern Puzzles' and 'Puzzles and Curious Problems' as '536 Puzzles and Curious Problems' (1967). 


@@@@@


doc= 38652


Lewis, Angelo John (1839-1919), journalist and writer on magic, was born on 23 July 1839 at Crescent Place, St Pancras, London, the son of John Lewis, a coal merchant, and his wife, Victorie Josephine, 'nee' Calkin. He was educated at North London Collegiate School and Wadham College, Oxford, where he took a BA and an MA. He then went on to study law, and in 1861 was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn, where he practised until 1876. He married Mary Ann Avery, the daughter of Joseph Avery, of Stollarks Crescent, St Pancras, on 12 May 1864 at St Mark's Church in the same parish; they had one daughter, Maud. 
During his undergraduate years at Oxford, Lewis became interested in magic and witnessed the performances of the famous magician John Henry Anderson, the 'Great Wizard of the North'. Although he did little to develop this interest while at Oxford, his enthusiasm revived during the 1860s, apparently after seeing the 'very clever performance of a street conjurer' (Reynolds, vi). He then began to collect books and apparatus relating to magic and gave amateur performances. In 1876, the year in which he retired from the law, he published 'Modern Magic' under the 'nom de plume' of Professor Hoffmann. The book became a 'cause celebre' since it revealed closely guarded secrets of the conjuror's profession that had been handed down for generations, usually by word of mouth. In his introductory chapter, Lewis stated that 'there is a vast difference between telling how a trick is done and teaching how to do it' (p. vii), a comment which challenged previous approaches to teaching magic, excepting, of course, those techniques revealed by Jean Eugene Robert-Houdin's 'Comment on devient sorcier: les secrets de la prestidigitation' (1878?), a volume which Professor Hoffmann went on to translate and publish in 1878. 'Modern Magic' sparked further controversy for more general reasons relating to the precarious foundation upon which conjuring rested. 'The Athenaeum' was moved to 'wonder whether this... sleight-of-hand is only valuable to conjurers and pickpockets!' (13 Oct 1877, 465). Regardless of the criticism, Professor Hoffmann wrote on 14 July 1877 to his uncle that 'the book has had the good fortune to be rather a hit'. In its first edition it sold 2000 copies, at the price of 7's'. 6died, 'in a little over six weeks' (Stott, 136). Raymond Toole Stott observed that Hoffmann's influence was such that 'the quantity and quality of trick and illusion has been most marked and conjurers have risen quickly in the estimation of the thinking portion of the public' (Stott, 13). 
Using his real name, Lewis also wrote fiction for various journals, including 'Belgravia' (1884-5), 'Temple Bar' (1884), 'Leisure Hour' (1884), 'London Society' (1885-6), the 'Cornhill Magazine' (1886-7), 'Living Age' (1893), and the 'Saturday Review', where he was on the staff from about 1855 to 1866. Under his pseudonym he went on to write nearly forty articles and volumes on matters relating to magic, as well as his other hobbies, card games and chess. They included 'More Magic' (1890), 'Puzzles Old and New' (1894), 'Indian conjuring explained' (in 'Chambers's Journal', 1901), 'Later Magic' (1904), 'Hoyle's Games Modernized' (1907), and 'Tricks with Handkerchiefs' (1911). 
In 1903 Lewis moved from London to St Leonards, and then in 1915 to Bexhill, in order to live in semi-retirement. For reasons allegedly relating to financial necessity, he sold his magic library and apparatus for $25. Despite his physical decline, which led eventually to the loss of his eyesight, he wrote 'Latest Magic' (1919), reportedly at Robert-Houdin's urging. On 23 December, in the year of this book's publication, Lewis died at the age of eighty at his home, Manningford, Upper Bolebrooke Road, Bexhill. The funeral service and cremation were held at Golders Green, Middlesex, on 29 December 1919, and his ashes were interred at Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 38654


Robertson, Allan (1815-1859), golfer and golfball maker, was born on 11 September 1815 at St Andrews, Fife, son of David Robertson, a weaver and golfball maker, and his wife, Anne Bell. He was the third generation of feather ball ('featherie') makers in St Andrews. After his father died in 1836, he took charge of the business, operating from the family home overlooking the golf links in Golf Place, St Andrews. On 16 May 1837 he married Helen Elliot. After her death on 2 September 1843, he married Jane Kyles in June 1844 in Edinburgh. 
By 1840 the popular Allan, as he was simply known, was indisputably the best golfer in St Andrews. He was of short and stocky build and used lightweight clubs and balls with a long smooth elegant swing which described a perfect circle. His play was steady and brilliant in all aspects, with the ability to fade or draw the ball at will to suit the prevailing conditions and hazards. Always a wily character, he didn't hesitate to use these skills to confuse his opponents into making errors of judgement. He was in great demand as a caddie, teacher, and partner to the gentlemen golfers of the Union club and the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews (the R & A). Success on the links was reflected in the sale of his featheries, which increased from 1021 in 1840 to 1392 in 1841 and 2456 in 1844. He was shrewd and canny at golf and in business too, where his golf balls were always priced slightly lower than his rivals'. 
There was no open golf championship in Robertson's lifetime, so reputations were established by match play challenges for large sums of money supplied by the rich gentry. During the 1840s his principal rival in these matches was William Dunn, a ball and club maker from Musselburgh, against whom he remained undefeated in singles matches, including a marathon one, in July 1843, of twenty rounds at St Andrews played over ten consecutive days, excluding the sabbath. He also reigned supreme in stroke play when in September 1848 at Leven he beat his main rivals Tom Morris and William Dunn. By June 1853 the 'Fifeshire Journal' acclaimed him as 'the real legitimate and indisputable King of Clubs'. 
When the revolutionary new gutta-percha (guttie) ball appeared about 1848, Robertson thought it would threaten his feather ball making business. Therefore, both he and his employee Tom Morris initially vowed not to use them. Later, after a dispute over Morris's use of the guttie, Morris left to start his own business as a guttie ball and club maker. Robertson soon realized his mistake and began making and using successfully the cheaper and superior gutties. He adapted his game to suit the characteristics of the new ball and is credited with being one of the first to develop the accurate pitch shot to the green using an iron-headed cleek instead of the wooden baffing spoon. 
Robertson valued his unbeaten reputation and was selective in his opponents for the challenge matches. After turning down a $100 challenge match against Tom Morris, he partnered him in 1849 when they beat the Dunn twins, James and William, over three courses for the huge sum of $400. Thereafter, he avoided the big money singles matches but continued to partner Tom Morris with such success that they were unbeaten in challenge matches thereafter. 
Although Morris and the Dunn twins took posts as 'keeper of the green' at Prestwick and Blackheath respectively, Robertson remained faithful to St Andrews, making gutties and acting as the unofficial and unpaid professional to the R & A. He refused $100 challenge matches against the new young golf star William Park of Musselburgh before they met in a famous foursomes match at St Andrews when each had an amateur partner. Robertson won but only after squaring the match by holing an incredible pitch shot off the road at the seventeenth, the Road Hole. That dramatic stroke typified and reinforced his reputation for keeping cool and producing his best shots in a crisis, especially around the greens. 
Robertson did not forget his artisan roots as he donated many prizes to the emerging golf clubs in Fife and was regularly on the links encouraging juvenile and student golfers in St Andrews. In celebration of his election as captain of the St Andrews golf club in 1853, his brother David in Sydney, Australia, sent two gold nuggets as prizes for a members' competition. David, who emigrated in 1848, was the first to introduce golf to Goulburn, Sydney, although it took another forty years or so before the first golf clubs were formed there. 
As the leading player of the time, Robertson was frequently consulted on the layout of new courses. In 1845, along with Alexander Pirie, keeper of the green at St Andrews, he laid out the new nine-hole course at Monifieth for the newly formed Panmure Golf Club. He also supervised alterations to the Carnoustie course about 1850. His most important work was carried out at St Andrews in the winter of 1856-7, when the links management committee of the R & A, whose convener was the renowned St Andrews reformer Sir Hugh Lyon Playfair, was authorized to spend $25 'in placing the putting greens in better order under the superintendence of Allan Robertson'. The improvements which they made to the course included the introduction of eighteen separate holes with their unique double greens. 
Robertson retained his unbeaten reputation in challenge matches for large stakes until his death, but some Prestwick members claimed that Tom Morris was the superior player because he had beaten Allan in the occasional eighteen-hole friendly match. Perhaps the true answer came after two such matches in September 1858, when each claimed a victory by one hole. However, Allan was Tom's superior in stroke play, as proved that same month when his record 79, albeit in match play, was the first ever score under 80 at St Andrews. It confirmed his status as the greatest player of his time and with hindsight this great ambassador of golf could be described as 'the first great professional golfer'. He died from jaundice on 1 September 1859, aged forty-three, at his home, Golf Place, St Andrews, Fife. The R & A paid tribute in their minutes (18 September 1859) to 'his unrivalled skill... his unvarying civility with all classes of golfer,... his integrity and happy temper'. He left an estate valued at a mere $93 1's'. 9died, which prompted the Union club to open a subscription list for his widow, Jane. After the R & A opened a further public subscription in 1869, an obelisk in his memory was erected in the cathedral churchyard of St Andrews, where he was buried. In 1889, while raising funds for Robertson's widow, the R & A produced his final epitaph: 'a golfer who was never equalled in his life and has never been surpassed since his death' (ibid., 2 Sept 1889). 


@@@@@


doc= 38656


Hilton, Harold Horsfall (1869-1942), golfer and journalist, was born on 14 January 1869 at West Kirby, Cheshire, the son of Benjamin Holden Hilton, manager of the Crown Assurance Company, and his wife, Eliza Eleanor Pugh. As a child Harold was good at most sports but rapidly excelled at golf. Educated at Norfolk county school, Elmham, he did not go on to university and was for a while employed by his father. He concentrated, though, on his golf, and had the great good fortune to learn the game on one of the finest and most demanding courses in the world, the links of the Royal Liverpool Golf Club, Hoylake. At that time the Royal Liverpool club could have challenged any national side anywhere with reasonable confidence, with the great John Ball and any number of distinguished champions among the members. But Hilton himself probably owed most to Willie More, a former Hoylake member, subsequently a professional, who taught him the value of a serious, scientific approach to both the golf swing and the game as a whole. 
Hilton remained a top amateur golfer for almost a quarter of a century, from the early 1890s to the First World War. Only three amateurs have won the open championship and Hilton did it twice -- in 1892 at Muirfield, the first championship to be played over seventy-two holes, and five years later on his home links at Hoylake. He lost three amateur championship finals in the 1890s, but at last carried off the title at Royal St George's in 1900, when he convincingly beat James Robb by eight and seven. He repeated this feat the following year, this time by defeating John Low by the much narrower margin of one hole. Hilton also won the Irish open amateur championship in three consecutive years from 1900, as well as the Irish open in the first two of those years. In 1911, perhaps his greatest year, Hilton's putt to tie for the open championship shaved the hole, but he went on to complete what was then a unique double of victories in the amateur championship and in the United States amateur championship. At Prestwick, Hilton defeated E. A. Lassen comfortably, four and three, but in the American championship at Apawasis, north of New York, he defeated his opponent Fred Herreshoff only at the thirty-seventh hole, having been at one time six up with fifteen to play. Hilton remains the only British golfer ever to win the United States amateur championship. He won his fourth and final amateur championship in 1913 at St Andrews. 
Only 5 feet 7 inches, Hilton used an unusually short-shafted putter to compensate for his height, but he was well built, with an energetic swing that often caused him to lose the cap that he habitually wore. His long game, with fairway woods and punched irons, was the strongest feature of his game, but he was a shotmaker with most clubs. Not only could he hit the ball a long way in a straight line but he could also fade and draw the ball when necessary, an unusual skill for an amateur player. Hilton was an inveterate smoker, who could consume fifty cigarettes during a round of golf. 
A prolific writer on outdoor sports, particularly on golf but also extensively on cricket and tennis, Hilton became in 1911 the first editor of 'Golf Monthly', a post he held until 1914. He also edited 'Golf Illustrated' after the death of Garden Smith in 1913. As well as 'My Golfing Reminiscences' (published in 1907, when his fortunes as a player were at a low ebb), he edited with Garden Smith 'The Royal and Ancient Game of Golf' (1912) and contributed instructional and historical chapters to a number of golfing books, including Horace Hutchinson's 'The Book of Golf and Golfers' (1899) and George Beldam's 'Great Golfers: their Methods at a Glance' (1904). He played a significant role in establishing the Professional Golfers' Association when a conversation with J. H. Taylor at a sporting function early in 1901 prompted a leading article in 'Golf Illustrated' on 'The professional's lot' that appealed for better treatment of their professional by golf clubs. The ensuing correspondence signalled to Taylor that his fellow professionals wanted him to take the lead in building an organization to protect their interests. Hilton used the journals to air his views on golfing issues, and, in the opinion of Bernard Darwin, was the most interesting and stimulating talker of golfing 'shop' that ever lived, with a truly encyclopaedic knowledge of the game. In 1902 Hilton joined the debate on the new rubber-cored Haskell ball versus the traditional one made from gutta-percha, suggesting that only the shorter drivers would gain much yardage from the Haskell, and that putting was more difficult because it would not run uniformly. The average club golfer did not care: the Haskell ball may have been twice as expensive as the 'gutty'; they may have been harder to control on the greens; but, as Hilton put it in the 'Golf Illustrated' on 4 July 1902, 'no power on earth, except perhaps the police, will deter men from using a ball that will add to the length of their drive'. In 1904 a discussion arose about whether the open championship should include an element of match play: Hilton noted tellingly that those who wished to change the format of the championship were those who had never won it. 
Hilton represented the gentlemen in a match against the players in 1894, an event which was dominated by the professionals and despite his own triumphs in the open championship, he believed that professionals would generally be better golfers than the leading amateurs. Writing in 1909, Hilton considered that economic dependence upon success on the links meant that the professional had constantly 'to think everything out, particularly in relation to his own game. He knows his own game, its strengths and its weaknesses, and had invariably some antidote for his shortcomings'. Essentially the professional puts in more practice than the amateur, who is 'content to obtain as much amusement and pleasure as he can out of the game and leave the hard labour alone' (Lewis, 37). This was not the case with Hilton himself, whose constant practice and experimentation enabled him to make shots with any club. His weakness was an occasional unwillingness to play the simple stroke, and instead to invent a shot for the challenge of the situation. An extrovert, Hilton loved playing before large crowds. In October 1910 he played a seventy-two hole match, arranged by the 'Ladies' Field', against the nineteen-year-old Cecil Leitch, subsequently a ladies' champion, whose victory (two and one) against her older, male opponent was much publicized in the context of the campaign for women's suffrage. 
Hilton was for a time secretary of the West Lancashire and the Ashford Manor golf clubs. His later years were not easy, and he died on 5 May 1942 at his home, Bethlehem Westcote, near Kingham, Stow on the Wold, Gloucestershire, of cardiac failure and paralysis agitans, survived by his widow, Frances Cooper Hilton. 


@@@@@


doc= 38657


Aird, Ian (1905-1962), surgeon, was born on 4 July 1905 at Belgrave Terrace, Corstorphine, Edinburgh, the first of two sons of William Aird ('b'. 1872), master tailor, and his wife, Jean Elizabeth Ogle (formerly Binnie). Both parents were lowland Scots, the father's forebears from Maybole and the mother's from Carstairs. Aird attended George Watson's College, Edinburgh, from 1914 to 1923. His reputation was bookish -- he took Russian as an extra subject. At Edinburgh University he read medicine and graduated MB ChB in 1928. Apart from a continental tour most of his postgraduate training continued in Edinburgh under David Wilkie, Henry Wade, Norman Dott, and James Graham. He became FRCS (Edinburgh) in 1932. In 1934 the Medical Research Council awarded him a Rockefeller scholarship to Washington University (St Louis) with Evarts Graham, and he also spent a month at the Mayo Clinic. During his absence he was appointed assistant surgeon at the Royal Edinburgh Hospital for Sick Children. He took the degree of ChM (with high commendation) in 1936 and in December that year married (Beatrice) Margaret Cowes (1907-1992), of Kinghorn, Fife; there was a daughter, Heather, and a son, Ian Alisdair. 
As a Territorial Force volunteer Aird was mobilized in October 1939; he was eventually to command the first mobile surgical unit in the western desert and was twice mentioned in dispatches, once after he had apparently confronted General Erwin Rommel in the surgeon's operating tent during a brief period of captivity. After an attack of renal colic in 1943 he was repatriated with the rank of lieutenant-colonel and returned to civilian surgery in Edinburgh, where he was assistant to Professor James Learmonth and assistant director of the Wilkie Research Laboratory. In 1946 he succeeded Grey Turner as professor of surgery in London University at the British Postgraduate Medical School at Hammersmith, taking over a department of surgery which was not well provided with accommodation or equipment. 
In the ensuing fifteen years Aird devoted himself to creating a research and clinical organization which came to possess international renown. Prominent among the themes he supported and supervised were: the development of heart-lung bypass and cardiac surgery; renal transplantation; and the early identification of the association of blood groups with a number of diseases. In the United Kingdom the clinical applications of the advances in the first two areas were somewhat slow because of a 'non-surgical' attitude among some of his medical colleagues, but eventually, with the zeal of his associates in the UK, Europe, and North America, both flourished in the late 1950s and after Aird's death. In the public mind Aird was linked with the separation of conjoint twins, which confirmed him as a surgical planner of high ability (though not with outstanding surgical performance unless the problem interested him) but also led to confrontations with the British popular press. He was much admired as a teacher and his single-author, unillustrated work, 'A Companion in Surgical Studies' (1949; 2nd edn, 1953) -- a development of lecture notes for a successful tutorial course in Edinburgh -- became well-nigh essential for surgical trainees. It is arguable that the force of his personality and the undoubted clarity of writing in the 'Companion' helped to set the post-war syllabus for the fellowship examinations of the British colleges of surgeons. He was also a pioneer of the use of film and closed-circuit television in surgical education. 
Aird's contemporaries remember him as one with 'almost a foghorn voice, which combined with his short stature produced a commanding presence'; as 'having a good debating mind and [someone] who never liked to be defeated in argument'; as 'an inspiring leader, ruthlessly honest and without circumlocution'; as of 'consummate loyalty to his trainees'; as 'a scintillating teacher with incredible off-the-cuff ideas and shafts of wisdom'; and as having 'a combination of external bonhomie and inner turmoil' (private information). His obvious pleasure in the company of others (on his own terms) made him an internationally popular figure and, coupled with his linguistic ability in both the Romance languages and Russian, he was much in demand for lecturing and visiting, to which he tirelessly responded. In addition to his exceptional knowledge of his profession, he was a gifted pianist and kept a concert grand in his flat at the hospital. 
In 1953 Aird was elected to the council of the Royal College of Surgeons, London (FRCS 'ad eundem', 1946), which he served until his death. He was particularly valued for his advice on surgical education. In 1957, at the time of his appointment as an honorary fellow of the American College of Surgeons together with John Bruce, he and Bruce were responsible with J. William Hinton for founding the James IV Association, a charitable foundation to finance international travel for young surgeons. Aird became its first president. In 1962 he received the Liston Victoria jubilee prize of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. A project to which he devoted much effort -- ahead of his time -- was an attempt to form international surgical teams for disaster relief from the staff of academic departments. 
The incessant peripatetic activity and self-demanding lifestyle probably affected Aird's mental and physical health. He much enjoyed entertaining others and had a fondness for Scotch whisky, but the latter did not seem to affect his intellectual or surgical ability. It came as a surprise to his professional acquaintances, therefore, when on 17 September 1962 he committed suicide by barbiturate poisoning at his flat in the Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London. His note to the coroner expressed disappointment in the reception of his department's achievements by his peers and by grant-giving bodies, and commented on personal depression and intellectual decline; both, however, were scarcely apparent to others. Aird was cremated at Mortlake crematorium and his ashes were scattered there; a memorial service was held in the church of St Columba in London. He is remembered at the Royal Postgraduate Medical School (later a division of Imperial College school of medicine) by an annual lecture. 


@@@@@


doc= 38658


Illingworth, Sir Charles Frederick William (1899-1991), surgeon, was born on 8 May 1899 at 33 West View, Halifax, Yorkshire, the only child of John Illingworth, an iron and steel merchant, and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Boys. He attended the Heath grammar school, Halifax, until 1915, when he joined the Sea Scouts, taking part in coastguard duties on the Yorkshire coast. Subsequent work in a munitions factory and then as a farm labourer provided more rigorous training and experience, and promoted his physical fitness. In 1916 he began medical studies at the University of Edinburgh. Although completion of his first year entitled him to exemption from military service, he chose to enlist in the Officers' Training Corps and volunteered for the Royal Flying Corps: after training at Farnborough and Oxford, he was based near Amiens, flying Sopwith Camels on sorties over the battle lines. In August 1918 he made a forced landing over enemy lines and was imprisoned in Bavaria, until the imminent end of the war was intimated by a letter from his father, reporting the homecoming of his (non-existent) brother. Illingworth made his way home, arriving on Christmas day. The spirited determination with which he met the challenges of these early experiences was maintained throughout his subsequent career, in which his outstanding achievements were particularly remarkable for a man of small stature and outwardly retiring disposition. However, his devotion to high standards in all his activities, and his insistence on the same qualities in the work of his associates, constituted an inspiring (albeit daunting) example to students and professional colleagues alike. 
Illingworth began his delayed medical studies at Edinburgh University, graduating MB ChB in 1922. He gained valuable experience during six months' work at the Royal Infirmary as house surgeon to Sir Edward Stiles, who was famed for his surgical skill. 
Following his term as a house physician, at Derbyshire Royal Infirmary, Illingworth returned to Edinburgh, becoming clinical tutor to Sir David Wilkie, a specialist in abdominal surgery. In this post he acquired experience in gastroenterology, a subject in which he retained a practical interest throughout his career. On 12 April 1928 he married Eleanor Mary Bennett (1901/2-1971); they had four sons. 
Illingworth's pre-eminence in the practice and teaching of surgery was based on strict adherence to certain principles of technique, which demanded scrupulous attention to economy of manipulation. Accordingly, the conduct of his own surgical operations was deft, rapid, and decisive. His success and reputation were further enhanced by the warm sympathy that he showed in the care of his patients. A model of punctiliousness, he would not tolerate any slackness among his staff. 
In 1939 Illingworth was appointed to the regius chair of surgery in Glasgow. Strongly encouraged by the principal, Sir Hector Hetherington, he embarked on major initiatives, in staff appointments and in the establishment of collaborative work, both within the medical school and in association with other departments. These developments were especially admirable in view of the dispersed nature of the various sections of the medical school. Under Illingworth's leadership, the Glasgow school achieved worldwide renown for excellence in the practice and teaching of medicine and surgery, and also in research (which Illingworth did not pursue personally but strongly encouraged). The work of the school entailed substantial collaboration with other departments. Illingworth recognized that such working relationships were to become essential adjuncts to medicine and surgery. 
The end of the war made possible major rebuilding, allowing the establishment of a modern surgical research unit, contiguous with the wards, and having first-class facilities. These improvements, together with Illingworth's personal distinction, attracted numerous visiting specialists, including many from the USA. Glasgow also provided professors of surgery for numerous universities in the UK and overseas. 
Illingworth was a prolific author. Among his most important and best-selling works were 'A Textbook of Surgical Pathology' (twelve editions, 1932-79) and the 'Short Textbook of Surgery' (nine editions, 1938-72). His monograph, 'The Story of William Hunter' (1967), celebrated the eighteenth-century surgeon noted for his great benefactions to Glasgow University. 
Notwithstanding his eminence and high honours, including CBE (1946), knighthood (1961), and appointment as honorary surgeon to the queen (1961-5), Sir Charles retained a characteristic modesty and an inveterate dislike of pretentiousness. As a patient himself, undergoing open-heart surgery at the age of eighty-two, he elected for a bed in a general ward. Dismissive of convalescence, he quickly resumed his leisure pursuit of hill-walking. 
Retirement in 1964 gave Sir Charles the opportunity for further enterprises. He appreciated the need to provide for new techniques which were essential for modern medical practice and cognate research. Accordingly, in order to secure additional resources for funding work in the relevant disciplines, Sir Charles persuaded a group of ten distinguished associates and patrons to establish, in 1967, a foundation for the support of research in Scotland in medical and related fields. The name, Tenovus-Scotland, was derived from the similarly sponsored, but more specialized, Tenovus Institute for Cancer Research in Cardiff. Sir Charles's committee ensured that Tenovus-Scotland would be sufficiently endowed to continue its independent support of an increasing variety of projects. Sadly, the founder did not survive long enough to participate in the dinner celebrating the thirtieth anniversary of Tenovus-Scotland. 
With indefatigable determination and industry, when approaching ninety, Sir Charles resumed authorship, publishing 'There is a History in All Men's Lives' (1988), an informal autobiographical memoir, in which his own matchless achievements are given scant attention. He assigned the profits from its sale to Tenovus-Scotland. Charles Illingworth died at 234 Crow Road, Glasgow, on 23 February 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 38659


Edward, prince of Wales (1474x6-1484), was the first-born and probably only son of Richard, duke of Gloucester (the future Richard III), and his wife, Anne Neville (1456-1485). While the place of his birth is recorded by John Rous (died 1492), its date is not. Although the latter is usually attributed to 1474, the Tewkesbury chronicle records the birth of an unnamed son at Middleham in 1476. While this might be a reference to a second son, also born at Middleham, who died at birth, it might be a reference to the birth of Edward himself. There is, indeed, no reliable firsthand authority for an earlier birth date. Edward's nurse, Isabel Burgh, was later rewarded by Richard with a generous annuity from the revenues of Middleham. In February 1478 Edward was created earl of Salisbury. 
Nothing more is known of Edward until the momentous summer of 1483 when his father became king. He spent most of that summer at Middleham. A schedule of the receiver of the lordship's expenses, settled on 25 September, reveals visits to Coverham, Fountains, and Jervaulx abbeys, Tadcaster, Wetherby, and 'Kyppes' (probably Kippax), the purchase of a primer for him, and the payment of a fool for his entertainment. It would appear that he set off on 22 August to meet his father at Pontefract, travelling via York and riding in a chariot with two guards 'rynning on fote by side' (Horrox and Hammond, 2.25). 
The child Edward was made nominal lieutenant of Ireland on 19 July, but more significantly was created prince of Wales on 24 August. It would seem that his father's decision to invest him at York on 8 September was made late, for only on 31 August, at the end of his progress to the north, did the king send to London for the regalia and robes for the occasion. The ceremony began with a solemn mass performed in York Minster, not by Archbishop Thomas Rotherham (died 1500) but by Bishop William Dudley of Durham (died 1483), after which the king, queen, and prince processed, crowned, through the streets of York to the archbishop's palace, where the king invested his son. After his investiture it seems that Edward returned to Middleham or to another of the king's Yorkshire castles. He was formally declared heir apparent to the throne in parliament in February 1484. More unusually, and a reflection of his father's sense of insecurity, the lords and principal members of the royal household were also called together in the palace of Westminster to swear an oath of allegiance to the prince, in the event of the king's demise. 
But this precaution was in vain, for by the end of March 1484 the prince was dead. The news reached his father and mother at Nottingham, where, the author of the Crowland continuation wrote, 'you might have seen [them] almost out of their minds for a long time when faced with sudden grief' (Pronay and Cox, 171). The elaborate but badly worn alabaster effigy of a young man, in civilian dress, in the north chapel of St Helen's Church, Sheriff Hutton, might be his tomb. However, it has also been argued, from the heraldic detail recorded in the seventeenth century by Roger Dodsworth, that the effigy is more likely to represent a son of Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury (died 1460). Moreover Rous records a report that he had been buried at Middleham. Edward's place of burial, like his date of birth, is uncertain. Apart from a conventional encomium in the charter of creation as prince of Wales, praising his noble character and singular gifts, nothing is known of his character. It is likely that, after his investiture, Richard III intended to establish the prince's household as the focus of the royal administration of the north, just as Edward IV had deployed the household of his heir for the same purpose in Wales. In July 1484, at the end of an extended visit to Yorkshire, the king formally established the first council of the north, styled the king's household, which appears to have been a continuation of the prince's household without the prince. 


@@@@@


doc= 38666


Corlett, John (1841-1915), sporting journalist, was born at Winthorpe, Nottinghamshire, on 8 April 1841, the son of Sergeant-Major John Corlett of the 6th dragoon guards and his wife, Eleanor. According to his entry in 'Who Was Who' he was educated by his father. At the age of sixteen he entered the wholesale grocery firm of Joseph Travers & Son in the City of London and by the time he was twenty-one he had reached the headship of a department. He was already a horse-racing enthusiast and he began sending articles to the growing number of papers specializing in sport. These included the well established 'Bell's Life', which by the middle of the 1860s had been joined by 'The Field', 'The Sportsman', the 'Sporting Life', and the 'Sporting Times'; it was with the last of these that Corlett became inextricably linked. 
Corlett's big chance came in 1867, when he was given a job on 'The Sportsman'. From then until 1874 he wrote under the 'noms de plume' of Vigilant and The Wizard. His style was direct and vigorous but he was a master of the subject of horse-racing and this was what attracted readers. He was one of the earliest and most successful of the relatively new profession of sporting journalists who contributed to the growth of modern sport as an integral part of the popular culture of the British. 
The 'Sporting Times' first appeared on 11 February 1865 as a weekly chronicle of racing, literature, and the theatre. Horse-racing was the hobby of its owner, Dr Joseph Henry Shorthouse (died 1883), and Corlett bought it in 1874 for $50. Its circulation at that time was probably in three figures but Corlett's energy and leadership gradually pushed it up to 20,000. He achieved this by promoting accuracy and good fellowship but also by affecting a flippant and bacchanalian outlook. The staff were presented as terrible dogs whose weekly copy was wrung out of them at the last minute over huge Fleet Street lunches. Racing authority, plain patriotism of the 'if you see a foreigner heave half a brick at him' type, and a humour which has not travelled well down the racecourse of history attracted a readership of young and not so young men from club, mess, and smoking room. The paper became known as the 'Pink 'un' probably as the result of an economy measure which led to its appearance on pink paper from April 1876. It was the 'Sporting Times' which published the mock obituary notice for English cricket after the England team's defeat by the Australians at the Oval in August 1882, thus setting off the train of events which led to the legend of the Ashes. Corlett eventually sold the paper in 1912. 
Corlett was a Conservative who lived mostly in rural Surrey and Kent, looking and living the part of a local squire and JP. He called Gladstone the 'grand old humbug'. He was not greatly attracted to new ideas, did not like the gramophone, and refused to use the telephone in his Fleet Street office. He was happily married on 12 December 1868 to Mary, daughter of Charles Stebbing of Newmarket, and was devastated by her death in 1909. One son was killed in the South African War and a second was wounded in France in 1915. Corlett died of heart failure at his home, Park House, Walmer, Kent, on 23 June 1915. He was buried next to his wife at East Sutton, near Sutton Valence. 


@@@@@


doc= 38667


Binstead, Arthur Morris (1861-1914), journalist and author, was born on 6 January 1861 at 106 Great Titchfield Street, Marylebone, London, the son of Arthur William Binstead, manager of the Continental Gallery in Bond Street, and his wife, Mary Ann Morriss. Educated at various private schools in London, but primarily at Dr Templeman's school in Mount Street, Grosvenor Square, Binstead's first job was in a counting-house, which he left to join Joe Capp, a 'rough diamond' who ran a sporting press agency. During his time there he was introduced to the seamier side of racing, as he mixed with bookies' runners, tipsters, and 'the boys' who made their living from fleecing those innocents foolish enough to cross their path. 
In 1884 Binstead joined the 'Pink 'Un' (the 'Sporting Times'), whose eccentric staff included the Dwarf of Blood (Colonel Newnham-Davis), the Stalled Ox (Jimmy Davis), and the irrepressible Shifter (Willie Goldberg). The 'Pink 'Un' was famous for its uninhibited comment on racehorse owners, welshing bookmakers, theatrical productions, and any other topic of the moment. Binstead, whose nickname Pitcher came from his skill at 'pitching the tale', made his mark by drawing on a wider field. Accounts of fights in the Pelican Club or the measures taken by his 'Pink 'Un' colleagues to evade bailiffs were interspersed with the adventures of costermongers in the East End. 
A tall, well-built man with a grave and courteous manner, Binstead had the gift of making friends at every level of society and took a pride in drawing his stories from life. The characters on the disreputable fringes of racing furnished him with inexhaustible material. His readers learned how to enter a racecourse without paying and the need for caution in casual acquaintanceships made in West End bars. The anecdotes of his barber in Covent Garden (Funny Fred) appeared regularly in the 'Pink 'Un', as did the experiences of Captain Flash, the leader of a race-gang. The word 'prison' in one of Binstead's articles nearly led to an action for slander by the gallant captain, but this was settled out of court with damages of two whiskies, a ham sandwich, a cigar, and 5's'. in cash. And the slanderer would have kept his 5's'. had he won the toss! 
Binstead married Laura ('b'. 1864/5), daughter of Henry Hirschfield, at the Central United Synagogue in Great Portland Street, London, on 22 December 1886; they had a daughter, Dora, and a son. Binstead wrote for the 'Pink 'Un' for some twenty-eight years and it became understood that he would succeed the proprietor, John Corlett, when the latter retired. He never forgave Corlett for selling the paper to West de Wend Fenton in 1912 and left immediately with several others to start a rival paper, 'Town Topics'. 
Binstead's two books of reminiscences, 'A Pink 'Un and a Pelican' (1898; written with Ernest Wells) and 'Pitcher in Paradise' (1903), were admired by such stylists as E. V. Lucas and P. G. Wodehouse and remain among the best and most amusing records of bohemian London at the end of the nineteenth century. He died of Bright's disease and bronchitis at his home, 291b Camden Road, Holloway, London, on 13 November 1914 and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 38668


Champion de Crespigny, Sir Claude, fourth baronet (1847-1935), military adventurer and sportsman, was born in Chelsea on 20 April 1847, the eldest son of Sir Claude Champion de Crespigny, third baronet (1818-1868), of Wivenhoe Hall, Essex, and his wife, Mary, second daughter of Sir J. Tyssen Tyrell, bt, MP. He attended Temple Grove School, East Sheen, until the age of thirteen, when he entered the navy, serving as a midshipman in the 'Warrior' in 1862. In 1866 he transferred to the army as an ensign, and was with the King's Royal Rifle Corps (60th) in Ireland and India. In 1867 he won the first of the many steeplechases in a racing career spanning nearly fifty years. He succeeded to the baronetcy the following year. Sir Claude considered fighting, whether with fists or pistols, to be a manly occupation, and he engaged in fisticuffs until his seventies. He devoted his life to the maxim: 'Where there is a daring deed to be done in any part of the world, an Englishman should leap to the front to accomplish it' (Champion de Crespigny, 'Sportsman's Life', 221). 
In 1870, irked by the restrictions of army life, Sir Claude resigned his commission to embark on the strenuous and dangerous pursuits he was to follow for the rest of his life. These included joining the Garde Cuirassiers, a German cavalry regiment, as a volunteer during the Franco-Prussian War, and being arrested as a spy three times by the French on his way home. He spent the next decade in the west country and Ireland, where his daring in the hunting field earned him the title of the 'Mad Rider'. While training with the Limerick artillery militia he saved a man from drowning, a feat he had first performed at the age of fifteen. A fearless swimmer, canoeist, and single-handed sailor, he attributed his confidence in rough seas to his grandfather, a naval officer who had saved so many lives that he was known as the 'Newfoundland Dog'. 
On 19 September 1872 Sir Claude married Georgiana Louisa Margaret (died 16 Feb 1935), second daughter of Robert McKerrel of Hillhouse, and they had five sons and four daughters. In 1880 he returned to Essex, and combined serving as a captain in the Suffolk yeomanry with his steeplechasing career (he found flat racing too dull), often riding three or four races in a day. A fall in one race left him unconscious from a kick in the head. After two days in bed he rolled his cricket ground, took a Turkish bath the next day, and rode in two more races the day after. His distaste for heavy betting set him apart from other gentleman riders of the time, as did the strenuous physical regimen he followed all his life. 
In 1882 Sir Claude took up ballooning, and in July 1883 became the first man to cross the North Sea, winning the Balloon Society's gold medal for this feat. In 1886 he caused considerable comment when he assisted at the execution of three murderers at Carlisle. Having been advised that he might shortly become high sheriff for Essex, and therefore responsible for executions within the county, he considered it his duty to ensure he knew what was involved. 
Sir Claude became the first European to swim the Nile rapids in 1889 and, ten years later, he and his wife went out to join their three sons in the South African War. He saw action as a scout with Porter's cavalry, while his wife nursed the wounded. Another visit to Africa in 1905 enabled him to combine 'a certain amount of fighting' in the Sotik punitive expedition on the Uganda/Kenya border with big-game hunting, including shooting a charging rhinoceros at three paces. 
In 1914, at the age of sixty-seven, Sir Claude rode in his last steeplechase, and thereafter devoted himself to the more leisurely pursuits, as he saw them, of sailing, swimming, high diving, and long-distance walking. Lean of face and of spare build, he was proud that his weight was still only 101/2 stone. 
Sir Claude published his 'Memoirs' in 1896 and 'Forty Years of a Sportsman's Life' in 1910 (new edn, 1925). He died at his home, Champion Lodge, Maldon, Essex, on 26 June 1935, and was buried in a mausoleum he had built in the grounds for his eldest son, who died in 1910. In the 1950s he was reburied in Hatfield Peverel churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 38669


Edwardes, George Joseph (1855-1915), musical theatre producer, was born at Cleethorpe Road, Clee, near Great Grimsby, on 8 October 1855, the eldest son in the family of four sons and three daughters of James Edwards, comptroller of customs, and his wife, Eleanor Widdup. His parents were from Wexford in Ireland and George was brought up a Roman Catholic. After attending St James's College, Clee, without distinction, he was sent to London to cram for entry to the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. But through his cousins the important Irish theatre managers John and Michael Gunn, he was quickly given the chance to work in the theatre world and he made his entree into the business at the age of twenty-one with a front-of-house job at Leicester's newly constructed Royal Opera House, run by former opera tenor Eliot Galer. He soon moved to London, and through the influence of Michael Gunn, who was an important financial partner in Richard D'Oyly Carte's production house, ended up working as treasurer at the Opera Comique during the initial runs of 'The Pirates of Penzance' and 'Patience' (1881). When Carte shifted his operation to the Savoy Theatre in the Strand, Edwards moved with him, and he was employed as acting manager at the new theatre during the productions of 'Iolanthe' (1882), 'Princess Ida' (1884), and 'The Mikado' (1885). On 9 July 1885 Edwardes (who had by now added an 'e' to his surname and 'Pius Nono' to his forenames) married Julia Lavinia Gwynne (1859-1934), a small-part player at the Savoy, daughter of David Putney, a publican. They had a son and three daughters. 
In 1885 Edwardes left the Savoy and moved to the Gaiety Theatre. John Hollingshead, at the head of the Gaiety since its opening seventeen years earlier, and responsible for building it into one of London's most effective and popular theatres, was on the verge of retiring, and Edwardes had been chosen as his successor. The two managers worked together on the production of the Gaiety's 1885 Christmas show, 'Little Jack Sheppard', after which Hollingshead moved out and Edwardes took over the running of the theatre. In his thirty years as proprietor he was to establish the Gaiety as the single most important and popular theatre for musical productions in the world. 
Hollingshead's legacy was a significant one. Not only did Edwardes inherit a theatre with a splendid reputation and an enthusiastic audience, he also inherited the beginnings of what would be a hugely popular resident company, headed by future stars Fred Leslie and Nellie Farren, and a highly profitable trend in musical plays. 'Little Jack Sheppard' was the first of what became known as 'new burlesques', a full-length burlesque play (instead of one which was, as before, just one item on an evening's programme) with a score of original music rather than the second-hand songs previously used in such productions. It was also a notable hit, and Edwardes followed it up with more of the same ('Monte Cristo Jr', 'Miss Esmeralda', 'Frankenstein', 'Faust Up-To-Date', 'Ruy Blas, or The Blase Roue', 'Carmen up-to-Data', 'Cinder-Ellen up-too-Late') and the 'new burlesques' of the Gaiety Theatre went round the world as the young producer sent out companies through the British provinces, to America, and as far afield as Australia carrying repertoires of his shows. 
Edwardes operated on numerous fronts from his headquarters at the Gaiety. While one of his companies played the Gaiety, a second toured. When the first took its latest show on the road, the other came back with a new production. Occasionally, too, he ventured with a production at another London theatre, and at other times he brought entertainments other than new burlesque into the Gaiety. On one famous occasion he mounted a pretty, second-hand comedy opera called 'Dorothy' with medium success. When he went to close the show to allow his burlesquers to return, his accountant took it up, transferred it to the Prince of Wales, and turned it into the longest running London musical of the nineteenth century. Even George Edwardes didn't always get it right. 
The new burlesque tradition lasted less than a decade before it transformed itself into a slightly different kind of entertainment. Fred Leslie died in 1892, Nellie Farren became disabled, and the style of show in which they had triumphed wilted. So Edwardes tried something else. He mounted a piece, at the Prince of Wales Theatre, which used all the elements of the new burlesque -- the cheerful, topical comedy, the bright songs and dances, the lively display, the popular performers -- but these, instead of being set in an incongruous fairytale story decked out in fantastical costumes, were used to decorate a straightforward wisp of an up-to-date, London tale. 'In Town' (1892), with popular music-hall comedian Arthur Roberts and established singing star Florence St John billed large above the title, featured Roberts as a lad-about-town giving a young aristocrat a tour of the slightly naughty highlights of London high and lowish life in the style of a French revue. The tour included, of course, a visit to the theatre, and the show took in scenes on stage and backstage. 'In Town' was a big success, and Edwardes moved on to produce another 'modern' piece, with a glimmer more of plot, 'The Gaiety Girl'. This proved even more successful, and when Edwardes produced his first 'musical comedy' (as his 'new' genre became known) at the Gaiety, the latest trend in musical theatre became firmly established. 'The Shop Girl' (1894) turned out to be even bigger than its predecessors, and the Gaiety's and Edwardes's style was fixed. It was a style which would make the Gaiety's reputation around the world. 
The degree of success which he had known in his first years as a producer encouraged Edwardes to expand. While new burlesque still reigned, he went into partnership with American producer Augustin Daly to build a new theatre which they might share. Daly's Theatre opened in 1893. Daly did not share for long, and soon Edwardes was filling the new house year round. 'A Gaiety Girl' ran part of its initial run at the Daly, and Edwardes subsequently mounted a twenty-year series of musical plays there. Partly by accident, the musicals which evolved at Daly's were different from those played at the Gaiety. The Daly's star team was topped by two staunchly romantic vocalists (baritone hero Hayden Coffin, soprano Marie Tempest) and the shows in which they and their successors teamed with soubrette Letty Lind, and with comic Huntley Wright ('The Geisha', 'A Greek Slave', 'San Toy', 'A Country Girl'), had a much more substantial kind of score and story than the dragonfly-weight pieces at the Gaiety. Thus, while at the turn of the century the Gaiety reigned over the 'musical comedy' theatre of its day ('My Girl', 'A Runaway Girl', 'The Circus Girl', 'The Messenger Boy', and 'The Toreador'), Daly's Theatre was the hub of all that was best and most successful in the art of the romantic musical. It was from Daly's that came the most successful and widely played English-language musical of the century: Sidney Jones and Owen Hall's worldwide hit 'The Geisha' (1896). 
Edwardes's 'empire' underwent some changes in the earliest years of the twentieth century. First the old Gaiety Theatre on the Strand was condemned by the city's roadmakers, and closed on 4 July 1903. Edwardes built a new Gaiety Theatre at the Aldwych to which he transferred his operations without missing a beat. Then he expanded to take in the Adelphi Theatre as well, and there he produced a further run of musical plays, not quite like either of his other continuing sets, of which 'The Quaker Girl' (1910) turned out the most memorable. He staged a variety of new pieces at the Gaiety and in other houses round the town, including some rather more book-based shows, first-rate musical comedies based on French plays ('The Spring Chicken', 'The Girl from Kay's', 'The Duchess of Dantzic', 'Kitty Grey'), and the less vertebrate, baby-blue shows of Paul Rubens ('Three Little Maids', 'Lady Madcap'). There was even an abortive attempt to bring back burlesque with 'The New Aladdin', but the main change in policy and style came as the result of a little palace revolution. Hayden Coffin and house designer Percy Anderson introduced a would-be writer friend to Edwardes, who allowed him to work on a text with his in-house team of show-makers, headed by James Tanner. The man proved a no-hoper and was eased out, but when the new Daly's show was mounted he claimed that his work had been stolen and he sued. Unwise words were said, and resentment and jealousy of Edwardes and his 'cronies', Tanner and stage director Pat Malone, and their dominant place in the musical theatre boiled over. Coffin and Anderson were dispensed with, and Edwardes soon switched to importing proven pieces from the newly resuscitated continental stage instead of having them written to order. He chose his moment well, and in the pre-1914 years he had vast successes with Messager's 'Veronique' and 'Les p'tites Michu', Lehar's 'Die lustige Witwe' ('The Merry Widow') and 'Der Graf von Luxemburg' ('The Count of Luxemburg'), Leo Fall's 'Die Dollarprinzessin' ('The Dollar Princess'), Jean Gilbert's 'Die geschiedene Frau' ('The Girl on the Train'), and Victor Jacobi's 'Leanyvasar' ('The Marriage Market'). 
George Edwardes was still the most important figure in the British musical theatre when his final illness overtook him in 1914. He died at his home, 11 Park Square West, Regent's Park, London, on 4 October 1915, and after a requiem mass at the Jesuit church in Farm Street, he was buried in St Mary's Roman Catholic cemetery at Kensal Green on 7 October. His wife survived him. In spite of some recent reverses he was a rich man, with properties at Windsor Forest, Ogbourne in Wiltshire, and a stud farm business at Ballykisteen in co. Tipperary (he was devoted to the turf). Plans were in place for the three principal theatres under his control at the time of his death, but the structures he had set up soon collapsed without him to control them, even though his friend Bobbie Evett managed to keep Daly's afloat for some time thanks to an enormous success with 'The Maid of the Mountains' (which he billed: 'George Edwardes presents...'). The musical theatre moved on to new styles of entertainment in an era which thoroughly deserved to be called post-Edwardesian, so large had he loomed over its development and international success. 


@@@@@


doc= 38672


Walters, Catherine (1839-1920), courtesan, was born on 13 June 1839 at 1 Henderson Street, Toxteth, Liverpool, the third of the five children of Edward Walters (died 1864), a customs employee, and his wife, Mary Ann Fowler. She was baptized as a Roman Catholic. Three attributes saved Catherine from the fate of most girls growing up in dockside Liverpool: her exceptional beauty, her practical nature, and her riding skills, acquired while working in a livery stable. Cheerfully amoral, she became, at the age of sixteen, the mistress of George, Lord Fitzwilliam, master of the Fitzwilliam hounds. He set her up in London and, on finally parting from her, made her a generous settlement. It was perhaps under his guidance that she developed her passion for hunting: in later years she was to ride regularly with the Quorn. 
Small and slender, with grey-blue eyes and chestnut-coloured hair, Catherine Walters never looked like a whore; she dressed with an unexpected decorousness. But there was nothing decorous about her talk: she was effervescent, outspoken, bawdy. Her naturalness was one of her chief attractions. Unlike so many prostitutes, she remained affectionate and sympathetic. 'She was the only whore in history to retain her heart intact,' wrote the journalist Henry Labouchere (Blyth, xii). 
It was as one of the celebrated 'horse-breakers' who paraded in Hyde Park that Catherine Walters first attracted wide public attention. She particularly drew the young Spencer Cavendish, Lord Hartington, eldest son of the seventh duke of Devonshire. By 1859 she had become his mistress and was installed in a house in Mayfair, with an annual allowance. By that time she was known as Skittles, possibly a reference to the fact that in youth she had earned a few pence by setting up the skittles in some local bowling alley. Once, when Lord Hartington was accompanying that tireless practical joker the prince of Wales on an official visit to Coventry, the mayor drew Hartington's attention to the town's bowling alley, explaining that the prince had asked especially for its inclusion in their tour in tribute to Hartington's love of skittles. 
When her relationship with Lord Hartington cooled, Catherine Walters moved to France. Here she quickly established herself as one of that select band of 'grandes cocottes' who were such a feature of Second Empire Paris. Among her many admirers was the young poet Wilfrid Scawen Blunt (1840-1922), who fell deeply in love with her and with whom she remained on good terms for the rest of her life. She was the inspiration for his narrative poem 'Esther'. 
By the fall of the Second Empire in 1870, Catherine Walters was back in England, dividing her time between hunting and entertaining a varied circle of men. Her Sunday afternoon tea parties were famous. Among her guests were W. E. Gladstone (though there is nothing in Gladstone's diaries to substantiate this) who was fascinated by prostitutes but with whom her relationship seems to have been platonic; and Albert Edward, prince of Wales ['see 'Edward VII], with whom it apparently was not. Even after their liaison had ended, the prince paid her an allowance and, whenever she was ill, sent his own doctor to attend to her. His letters to her were so confidential that once, when she was thought to be dying, he had his private secretary collect and destroy over three hundred of them. 
In 1872 Catherine Walters moved to 15 South Street, Park Lane, London, where she lived for the rest of her life. By the mid-1880s she was calling herself Mrs Baillie, but it seems unlikely that she actually married Alexander Horatio Baillie. Close friends of her sunset years were the faithful Blunt and the Hon. Gerald de Saumarez, whom she had first met when he was a schoolboy and to whom she bequeathed the bulk of her estate. Crippled by arthritis, she died at 15 South Street, of a cerebral haemorrhage, on 5 August 1920. Blunt arranged for her to be buried in the churchyard of the Franciscan monastery in Crawley, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 38675


McLachlan, Laurentia Margaret (1866-1953), abbess of Stanbrook and scholar, was born on 11 January 1866 at Coatbridge, Lanarkshire, and baptized Margaret at St Margaret's Church, Airdrie, the youngest of the seven children of Henry McLachlan (1828-1890), accountant, and his wife, Mary McAleese (1828-1900). From her father, a highlander, and a Huguenot born grandmother, McLachlan inherited French wit and charm; from her Irish mother, practicality and an ability to organize. These traits fused and developed into the extraordinary capacity for friendship and government she was to show as nun and abbess, inviting comparison with the twelfth-century Cistercian abbot, Ailred of Rievaulx, on the eve of whose feast she had been born. Like Ailred, Margaret did not enjoy robust health. Frail as a child (her father nicknamed her Bodle after the Scottish coin worth less than a ha'penny), her formal education was intermittent: spells at a dame-school in Coatbridge, and convent schools in Bothwell and Edinburgh comprised her primary schooling, while her secondary education was almost entirely at home directed by her clerical brother, James. Hers was not, however, an overly pious upbringing -- she later described herself in a letter to Sydney Cockerell as 'terribly fond of pleasure' ('In a Great Tradition', 93) and, at the time of starting school at Stanbrook Abbey, near Worcester, on 6 September 1881, a 'hater of nuns' (ibid., 81). Exactly four years later she became a nun of that same Stanbrook Abbey, an enclosed Benedictine community where she would spend the next seventy years. The reasons for such a volte-face are not clear. 'The why is God's secret', she wrote in 'Ad quid venisti', her 1934 pamphlet on vocation. Her mother excepted, the family initially resented the decision from which, she said, her father never fully recovered. But there was no estrangement. She had entered the noviciate on 2 February 1884, receiving the name Laurentia after the martyr St Laurence and, more proximately, Father Laurence Shepherd, Ampleforth monk and from 1863 to 1885 chaplain and great benefactor of Stanbrook. 
Interest in Gregorian chant sown in childhood, given impetus on a visit to the French Benedictine abbey of Solesmes in 1883, and nurtured in the daily singing of the divine office, flowered by 1914 when Dame Laurentia was widely acknowledged as the foremost authority on plainsong in English speaking countries. Organist from 1892 and precentress from 1893, she had caught the tide of nineteenth-century liturgical revival spearheaded at Solesmes and projected to Stanbrook by Laurence Shepherd, and became, herself, instrumental in that revival. In 1890 she had been asked to visit the nuns at Princethorpe Priory, the first of five such missions to foster the singing of plainsong. In touch with leading figures in plainsong such as Dom Mocquereau (Solesmes), she maintained an independent, pragmatic approach, detached from the musical controversies of the day. Her first published work, 'Gregorian music, an outline of musical palaeography illustrated by facsimiles of ancient manuscripts' (1897) by the Benedictines of Stanbrook, is far more than an epitome of Dom Mocquereau's work in the volumes of 'Paleographie musicale', the material restructured to suit the English temperament. In 1899 she began research on the thirteenth-century Worcester antiphoner, later published as the introduction to volume 12 of the 'Paleographie musicale' (1922-5). Of more widespread influence was 'A Grammar of Plainsong' (1905), written to implement Pius X's 1903 'Motu proprio' on church music. Translated into French, German, and Italian and running to four editions, the 'Grammar' was prefaced by an autograph letter from Pius X in recognition of Stanbrook's work for the restoration of the chant. That work permeated to grassroots through 'Plainsong for Schools' (1930). In 1927 Dame Laurentia was elected a vice-president of the Plainsong and Mediaeval Music Society and, from its inception in 1929, supported the Society of St Gregory, being listed among their patrons in 1937. However, the crowning achievement had come on 6 September 1934 when she was awarded the 'bene merenti' by Pius XI for her work in church music. 
Historical scholarship was an early interest: Dame Laurentia published 'St Egwin and his Abbey of Evesham' (1904); 'Stanbrook Abbey: a Sketch of its History, 1625-1925' (1925) and, in 1929, contributed an article to the 'Journal of Theological Studies' (30, 174-6) on St Wulfstan's prayerbook. Such study grew alongside liturgical work, for which she often consulted original manuscripts, lent to Stanbrook through the good offices of friends like Canon Wilson, librarian of Worcester Cathedral, and Sir Sydney Cockerell, director of the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. She brought to their study discipline, liturgical knowledge, and a certain monastic insight. From the rubrics in the Worcester antiphoner, she was able to reconstruct details of the medieval cathedral later confirmed by archaeology. To the six articles on medieval and musical subjects she published between 1904 and 1937 should be added the significant identification of an eighth-century fragment in Worcester Cathedral Library as the earliest manuscript of Paterius's 'De expositione novi et veteris testamenti'. 
The demands of the abbatial office, to which Dame Laurentia was elected on 24 November 1931, left little time for study; even so, in 1933 she became first woman vice-president of the Henry Bradshaw Society (founded in 1890 to edit rare liturgical texts) and helped produce two volumes for their proceedings in 1936 and 1937, her final contribution in this field -- a contribution none the less sufficient to elicit from Francis Wormald the encomium, 'a true daughter of St Benedict and Dom Jean Mabillon' ('The Times', 24 Aug 1953). 
There was little surprise at Dame Laurentia's being chosen abbess (she had been subprioress 1910-25 and prioress 1925-31), despite advanced years and increasing frailty. Some hold that such drawbacks, on the material plane, lent to her abbacy a deep spirit of trust, on her part, and an equally profound response of love from the community. In 1931 she was involved in reformulating the constitutions of the nuns of the English Benedictine congregation, while at Stanbrook she encouraged flexibility and personal initiative and recognized the need for leisure, allocating free time and an outdoor recreation area. To qualities of leadership she added those powers of sympathy and affection which had gained her a wide circle of friends, making her accessible to even the youngest sister. She is remembered giving correction with a twinkle in the grey-green eyes! Her last publications, six treatises based on conferences given to the nuns, bear witness to her spiritual wisdom. At her death, on 23 August 1953 in the abbey, she left a community remarkable for its unity and diversity -- a final echo of Ailred's Rievaulx and testament to her own influence. 
That influence has extended through the story of her friendships with Sir Sydney Cockerell and George Bernard Shaw, told in 'In a Great Tradition' (1956) by the Benedictines of Stanbrook, revised as 'The Nun, the Infidel and the Superman' by Dame Felicitas Corrigan (1985), reprinted in 1990 as 'Friends of a Lifetime'. Since 1988 she has been even more widely known through Hugh Whitemore's play, 'The Best of Friends', which, after a long West End run and national tour, enjoyed phenomenal success into the 1990s, touring eleven countries on four continents. The televising of the play brought the enclosed figure of Dame Laurentia into millions of homes. Such popularity suggests a shift in perception of her place in the national memory. Research on the chant has progressed and Dame Laurentia's contribution, historically significant as it will remain, plays little part in her enduring appeal. This lies rather in the 'enclosed nun with the unenclosed mind', as George Bernard Shaw described her (Corrigan, 'Friends of a Lifetime', 8), whose greatness of personality matched the stature of the medieval abbesses described by Bede. She was buried on 26 August 1953 at Stanbrook Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 38676


Du Val, Charles Henry (1846-1889), entertainer, was born at Platt Terrace, Rusholme, Manchester, on 27 October 1846, the youngest child and only son of Irish parents, John Du Val, a schoolmaster, and his wife, Eliza Ann, 'nee' Murray. He was educated in Manchester and articled to a solicitor, but abandoned the law in 1864 to join Oldham repertory theatre. In 1865 he went to Dublin, where he devised and presented the first version of his one-man show 'Odds and Ends'. A handsome man of middle height with brown wavy hair, he had a pleasant tenor voice, danced nimbly, and could mimic any accent: his impersonation of female characters was widely admired. He was adept at political satire and could hold the stage alone for two hours, provoking almost continual laughter. He wrote his own material, words, and music, and toured Ireland and Britain for more than ten years. 
On 9 May 1877 Du Val married Mary (Minnie) Dorcas Burke (1848-1914), the daughter of George Courtney Burke, a merchant, of Cork, at Christ Church, Dublin. They had one daughter and a son who died in infancy. Following a serious illness, possibly tuberculosis, Du Val decided to take his show to South Africa, and set sail in November 1879. He was also acting as a special correspondent for the 'Weekly Irish Times'. After a season in Cape Town, the Du Vals travelled throughout the country; Minnie, who was pregnant, returned to Ireland from Port Elizabeth. Du Val and his manager continued the tour, reaching Pretoria on 18 November 1880, where they were trapped by the Anglo-Transvaal War in the siege of the city until April 1881. Du Val joined the Pretoria Carabiniers and saw service in several engagements; he also edited the 'News of the Camp'. After the siege was lifted he completed his tour, and arrived back in Dublin in October 1881. He resumed his performances and also lectured on his experiences in the war. His book 'With a Show through Southern Africa' (1882) sold 25,000 copies in the first few weeks. 
In April 1883 Du Val made his London debut with his one-man show and was engaged for a short season at the Lesser St James's Hall, Piccadilly. It was so successful that he was brought back on 24 September in the Grand Hall, where he gave 431 consecutive performances, seen by more than half a million people. On 7 July 1884 he gave a command performance for the prince and princess of Wales. 
Du Val returned to South Africa in July 1885, but finding it deep in depression moved on to Mauritius, Ceylon, and India. In India he was commanded to appear before the nizam of Hyderabad and gave a gala performance for the viceroy on 12 January 1886. On his return home he moved from Dublin to London, where his second season opened on 30 July 1886, at the Prince's Theatre (later the Prince of Wales Theatre) in Coventry Street, Piccadilly. The show closed at the end of January 1887 because Du Val was suffering from laryngitis. 
The Du Vals made a third, successful, tour of South Africa in 1888 and went on to Mauritius and Ceylon. Du Val was exhausted and ill on reaching Ceylon and the tour was abandoned. They sailed for home on 13 February 1889. Du Val seemed better, but on the evening of 22 February 1889, during the passage through the Red Sea, he became agitated and ran up on deck, saying he wanted a walk. He was never seen again. His death made headlines in London and South Africa; reports suggesting suicide were denied, but stigma attached itself to his memory. He left a personal estate amounting to over $3000 and was survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 38681


Burgess, Henry (1781-1863), financial journalist and businessman, was born on 7 July 1781 at Grooby Lodge, Railby, Leicestershire, the seventh of the eleven children of Joseph Burgess (1735-1807), farmer and grazier, and Sarah, daughter of Joseph and Sarah Airey of Strickland, Kirby Kendal, Westmorland. Brought up within the Society of Friends, he attended George Blaxland's school at Hitchin, Hertfordshire. Little is known about his early career, save that he visited Paris in 1803, and by about 1805 had married (outside the society) Frances Ridsdale (1784-1847). They had four sons. 
Burgess became a cloth merchant in London during the wars against France, but in 1819 he sought to establish a new national postal service. Despite some governmental support, he faced mounting parliamentary opposition and was forced to discontinue his scheme, which left him with a hefty claim for compensation against the Treasury. In 1822 Burgess patented a lightweight coach -- a residue of this project -- and was also licensed to build ships on William Annesley's principles. By 1826 he had returned to the woollen trade, this time in Leeds. Described as 'intimately connected with manufacturing and banking concerns' in the north of England, he also became one of the most forceful opponents of government economic policy. An early critic (as H. B.) of the resumption of cash payments in 1819 (effectively, a return to the gold standard), he contributed useful evidence to the 1826 committee on promissory notes, emphasizing the importance of bills of exchange in currency management. He did so primarily from the viewpoint of the country bankers suffering from the 'evils' of the return to cash payments, which Burgess believed harmed the productive classes of provincial England while benefiting the rentier classes of London. In 1827 he had established offices at 81 Lombard Street on behalf of the country bankers and set up, with himself as editor, the 'Bankers' Circular', in order to give them a more effective voice in the making of government policy. At this point Burgess, a tory by predilection, found himself in growing sympathy with Sir James Graham and the more 'liberal whigs', and the 'Circular to Bankers' (as his journal became in September 1828) was to support the 'Reform Bill' in 1831-2. His services to the whigs over reform did not receive the recognition he sought (the secretaryship to the factory commission or to the West Indian loan commission). Instead, Burgess became the secretary to the Country Bankers' Committee, giving evidence to the select committee on banking in 1832 and defending the country banks' interests on the renewal of the Bank of England's charter in 1833. With early losses on the 'Circular' underwritten by the Quaker bankers Backhouse and Pease, he sought to widen its readership by a lower subscription in 1835, and thereafter it generally gave him an income of $1000 p.a. In common with Thomas Attwood and the Birmingham school, he staunchly promoted the interdependent interests of the country gentry, their bankers, and the provincial manufacturing interest against the injuries inflicted by an economic policy dominated by the financial interests of the Bank of England and its allies, the whigs. 
But Burgess was to be no more a friend to the tories after 1841, for Peel's economic policies since 1819 had been anathema to him. As a result the 'Circular' became in many ways the most effective and stringent critic of the 'Bank Charter Act' in 1844 and of the repeal of the corn laws in 1846. Burgess, 'incorrigible' in his 'commercial heresies' (Porter to Burgess, 25 April 1846, Burgess papers), was a key figure supplying information on which the protectionists, above all Lord George Bentinck, sought to build their alternative economic policy. 'Few men', the 'Morning Post' puffed, 'have rendered so great services to the cause of British productive industry' (20 July 1846). Burgess helped Bentinck to mastermind the select committee on the commercial crisis of 1847, a crisis he saw as the logical outcome of the misguided monetary policies of Peel's government. Disillusioned with free trade and banking policy, he retired as editor of the 'Circular' in July 1850. He had completed single-handed all but two of its issues, in effect 1180 economic tracts for the times, one of which he enlarged into 'Reflections on the Designs and Possible Consequences of the Anti-Corn Law League' (1843). Although partly a vehicle for Burgess's own crotchets, the 'Circular' also provided a genuine voice for the concerns of the country banking interest, and, in its combination of financial data and editorial opinion, set a precedent for journals such as 'The Economist'. It has proved a considerable resource for economic historians, for example R. C. O. Matthews ('A Study in Trade Cycle History', 1954), although it has been unaccountably neglected by historians of protectionist politics in the 1840s. 
Burgess, never simply a financial journalist, also engaged in a variety of speculative ventures. In the early 1830s, for example, he had sought, with two of his sons, to pioneer trade with Persia. This proved ill-fated, for the elder son absconded in the 1830s with large debts, leaving the younger Charles in effect a permanent hostage. His father's tireless efforts eventually secured his release in 1855, only for him to die before leaving Persian territory. The youngest son, George, however, did successfully make his career as a merchant in New York. Burgess's personal misfortunes were compounded by estrangement from his wife in the early 1840s and by her death in 1847. Nor were his business ventures any more successful, despite his persuading Barings, the City's leading merchant bank, to join Charles Attwood and himself in setting up the Weardale Iron Company in 1845. This led to the building of the 'new' town of Tow Law in co. Durham but proved a failure in the short term, and Burgess sold his share in 1848. He then turned his hand to a variety of mineral speculations, importing in 1848 the white ore from Germany that played an important part in Robert Mushet's early development of steel. After retiring from the 'Circular', he redoubled his speculative efforts, buying and selling mines and shares, mostly in northern England, the Forest of Dean, and Cornwall. None of these proved lucrative, and by the early 1860s Burgess, then in extremely poor health, was forced to sell up his personal possessions for $120. He died on 6 June 1863 at his home, 29 St Swithin's Lane, London, and was buried at Winchmore Hill, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 38683


Unwin, (Emma) Jane Catherine Cobden (1851-1947), suffragist and radical, was born on 28 April 1851 at Westbourne Terrace, London, the fourth of the six children of Richard Cobden (1804-1865), radical politician and statesman, and his wife, Catherine Anne (1815-1877), the youngest daughter of Hugh Williams, timber merchant, of Machynlleth, Montgomeryshire, and his wife, Elinor. After the death of their elder brother in Germany in 1856, Cobden's daughters formed a remarkable sisterhood in late Victorian and Edwardian Britain. The eldest sister, Kate (1844-1916), married Richard Fisher, a Sussex neighbour, who was to become a valuable recruit to the Cobden Club set up in 1866 in honour of their father. Ellen Millicent Ashburner (1848-1914), having married and then divorced (in 1899) the artist Walter Sickert, was to write several novels redolent of her father's life. Jane's younger sister (Julia Sarah) Anne Cobden-Sanderson (1853-1926), the wife of the Arts and Crafts bookbinder and printer Thomas J. Cobden-Sanderson, gravitated towards the Independent Labour Party and was to be imprisoned as a suffragette in 1906. Only the short life of Lucy Elizabeth Margaret (1861-1891) was to prove relatively uneventful. 
Having grown up in the shadow of a remarkable politician to whom they had been very close, on Cobden's premature death the sisters, and their mother, were left with a keen desire to protect his memory. Jane, educated intermittently by governesses and at small private schools in London, Southport, and Paris, became the most intimately involved in the family manoeuvres which led to the discontinuance of the edition of Cobden's correspondence which his political friends (also in large part the family's financial benefactors) had wished to publish and to its replacement by John Morley's 'Life of Cobden', published in 1881. After the death of their mother, the Cobden sisters, living independently in London, found many friendships among their father's political allies, but expanded into an artistic and literary cultural milieu which included the novelist George MacDonald and William and Jane Morris. Also among Jane's friends were several early advocates of women's suffrage, and in 1875 she decided 'No more aimless wanderings abroad for me, I shall enter into the Women's Suffrage Campaign and so have a real interest in life' (diary, Cobden MS 1071). This resolution took some years to mature, but from 1880, after several more extensive journeys abroad, especially to Algiers, Jane Cobden played an active role in women's Liberal politics, especially promoting women's suffrage within the Women's Liberal Federation. In 1888 she supported the majority of members of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, who favoured continued agitation through the Liberal Party, and as a founder member of the Women's Suffrage League she and Lady Sandhurst were the first women elected to the new London county council in 1889. Prematurely white-haired, quietly dressed, but striking in appearance, Jane sat for Bow and Bromley, where George Lansbury had ably managed her election. However, the legality of her position was questioned in a series of actions brought by Walter de Souza, with the result that, while she continued to serve on the council until 1892, she faced financial penalties and was not able to vote at its meetings; only in 1907 would women acquire full rights in local government. 
Jane Cobden remained active in the suffrage cause (she represented the Women's Franchise League at the World Congress of Representative Women in Chicago in 1893), but she was never a single-issue politician. In the 1880s she had also taken up with enthusiasm the cause of Irish home rule. She visited Ireland several times, most prominently in 1887 as part of the English women's mission to Ireland, and she lectured extensively in England for the Home Rule Union. She also took up the claims and supported the families of many prisoners and evicted tenants in Ireland, the 'victims' of English misgovernment. Many of her father's friends had become Unionists, but one of them, Thomas Bayley Potter, warmly approved her conduct, for 'You are true to the living and just instincts of your father.... You know your father's heart better than John Bright does' (Potter to Jane Cobden, 27 Oct 1887, Cobden MS 1065). 
Like many women's activists at this period, Jane Cobden had regarded marriage as secondary to a fulfilling career, but on 9 February 1892, at the relatively late age of forty-one, she became the wife of Thomas Fisher Unwin (1848-1935), a leading avant-garde publisher (at this time he published Conrad, Ibsen, Somerset Maugham, Nietzsche, and Olive Schreiner) and keen alpinist. Their marriage was one of genuine affection and devotion, even if on occasion The Jane, as she was known at the press, exercised an intrusive interest in its work. With Unwin, too, she was ready to take up a variety of causes, including international arbitration, Congo reform, and the rights of native peoples, and during the South African War she acted as secretary to the women's section of the pro-Boer South African Conciliation Committee. Most notably, ever anxious to advance her father's political principles, in 1903 she took up the defence of free trade against Chamberlain's tariff reform crusade, coining the term the 'hungry forties' and vindicating it in an evocative and brilliantly successful tract of that title. This, together with other numerous contributions from the Fisher Unwin press, did much to turn free trade into a progressive Edwardian cause. Fostered by the Fisher Unwins, the cult of Cobden burgeoned in his centenary year (1904), with his old Sussex home, Dunford House, becoming a much-visited 'shrine'. Jane Cobden Unwin also took a keen interest in the neighbouring village of Heyshott, especially its working men's Cobden Club, which she had helped found in 1879. In 1913 she published 'The Land Hunger: Life under Monopoly', a minor addition to the literature of Edwardian land reform, but one which did not repeat the success of its predecessor; significantly, her sister Anne (there was some jealousy between them) had preferred to enlist their father's memory on the side of land nationalization. 
Jane Cobden Unwin was a woman of sentiment and enthusiasm who took up (and sometimes speedily dropped) causes with a fire which brooked no opposition. In the years immediately before the First World War she acted on behalf of the wives and children of strikers in east London and Dublin as well as appealing on behalf of starving Arab women and children in Tripoli. She also acted as secretary of the Emma Cons memorial committee (Cons had also served on the LCC), its funds ultimately going to the Old Vic, originally set up by Cons as a coffee music-hall but turned into a theatre of national repute by Cons's niece, Lilian Baylis. During the First World War, Jane's strong interest in South Africa revived, and within the Anti-Slavery and Aborigines' Protection Society she became an inconveniently outspoken opponent of the segregation policy embodied in the 'Native Land Act' of 1913. After the war she also took up with great personal generosity the cause of the victims of the Black and Tans, remaining a leading British sympathizer with the cause of Irish freedom. 
Jane Cobden Unwin's idealism also led to her presenting Cobden's former home to the London School of Economics (LSE) in 1919, hoping thereby to inspire a new generation with her passions; she was, however, speedily disappointed, Beatrice Webb recording 'the poor lady, because she cannot ensure that the use of the place corresponds to her dreams, is regretting the gift' (B. Webb, diary, 2 May 1923); in 1923 the school sold Dunford back to the Fisher Unwins, although Jane remained a governor of the LSE until 1928. Dunford House instead now became a significant centre for international meetings devoted to the Cobdenite causes of free trade, peace, and goodwill, with a series of conferences and lectures, enlisting the help of valuable recruits such as F. W. Hirst and the American internationalist N. M. Butler. Jane also spent much time obsessively arranging and rearranging Cobden's papers before gradually and selectively depositing them in the British Museum. Following Fisher Unwin's death in 1935, Jane Cobden Unwin, now in her eighties, led an increasingly solitary life at her home, Oatscroft, near Dunford House, but occasionally wrote to the press on Cobdenite points. She died at Whitehanger Nursing Home in Fenhurst, Surrey, on 7 July 1947. 


@@@@@


doc= 38684


Heckford, Sarah Maud (1839-1903), philanthropist, writer, and traveller, was born at Blackrock, Dublin, on 30 June 1839, the youngest of the three daughters of William Goff (died 1848), one time governor of the Bank of Ireland, and his wife, Mary Clibborn (died 1845). The daughters were all educated at home. Pleasant-faced, though not pretty, with dark brown hair, Sarah contracted tuberculosis of the spine at the age of nine which left her with a hump on her right shoulder and slightly lame. A talented pianist, she also painted well and loved horses and riding. 
William Goff left Ireland with his family in 1842, settling in Dresden. Mary Goff died in 1845 and her eldest daughter, Jane, soon afterwards. Their aunt Abigail Clibborn came out to look after Annie and Sarah. The family went to Switzerland, and in 1848 moved to Paris, where they were caught up in the revolution. From Paris they went to London where William Goff took rooms in Eaton Square, near his bachelor brother Robert. Shortly after Sarah's ninth birthday her father committed suicide. He had appointed his brother Robert (died 1866) as the girls' guardian; they and Aunt Abigail moved in with him. Their father had insisted on regular lessons, but their uncle thought 'accomplishments' all that girls needed, and their sole duty to make a good marriage. Sarah Goff revelled in music lessons and went regularly to the National Gallery to copy pictures there. 
In 1859, after the death of their aunt, the sisters took a house in Warwick Square, Pimlico, London. Each having inherited money from their parents, they were independent. Sarah Goff had become a serious, intense, strong-minded young woman determined never to be handicapped by her lameness, but still under the influence of her elder sister. Fired by the women's movement she became a committed feminist. She wanted to train as a doctor but women could not matriculate at that time. Complaining bitterly about 'the barriers of young-lady-dom', she abandoned churchgoing and visited the poorer streets near her home trying to help the women and children there. After an unhappy love affair she began to explore the East End and was appalled by what she saw. 
It was the cholera epidemic of 1866 which set Sarah Goff free from having her 'life choked out' in respectable Belgravia. Both the Goff sisters answered Catherine Gladstone's appeal for nurses. Sarah, now twenty-six, was sent to the Wapping Fever Hospital, east of Tower Bridge, where Nathaniel Heckford was one of the doctors in charge. Born in Calcutta in April 1842, the son of Nathaniel Heckford, he was dark, good-looking, and easy-going, with a passion for children and animals. Finding Sarah poring over Gray's 'Anatomy' on night duty, he encouraged her to study medicine, offering to tutor her for examinations. They were married at the Little Portland Street Unitarian Chapel on 28 January 1867. 
With Sarah's money they founded the East London Hospital for Children and Dispensary for Women in two old warehouses in the Ratcliff Highway and lived on the premises. Sarah, who continued her medical studies, was the matron and attended women at home for their confinements. Dr Elizabeth Garrett (later Garrett Anderson) joined their staff the following year, a move strongly opposed in some quarters. Charles Dickens visited the hospital and the publicity he provided brought in funds that made possible a purpose-built hospital in Shadwell. In 1963 it was amalgamated with the Queen Elizabeth Hospital for Children in Hackney. 
In 1870 Nathaniel Heckford fell ill, and he died of tuberculosis on 14 December that year. The couple had no children but had adopted a girl of twelve, Marian Matthews Heckford, an orphan who had been a patient at the East London Hospital. Sarah Heckford worked on the plans for the new hospital and as a lady visitor at the existing one. In 1873 she published 'The Life of Christ and its Bearing on the Doctrines of Communism', which applied Christian principles to contemporary social problems. She was a quiet revolutionary, an idealist who abhorred violence, cruelty, and injustice, and had the courage of her convictions. 
When the new hospital was complete Sarah Heckford settled most of her remaining capital on it. She went to Naples with Marian, then aged seventeen, who met and married a young lawyer there. Sarah Heckford travelled to India and worked for the zenana mission, which gave medical help to women in purdah. For more than a year she was the resident medical adviser to the begum of Bhopal. In 1878, after a bout of malaria, she returned to England. Purchasing shares in the Transvaal Farming, Mining, and Trading Association, she set sail for South Africa, intending to make her living farming. She arrived at Durban in December 1878, and travelled to Pretoria with a party of new settlers. On arrival they found they had been hoaxed and the farms they had been promised were non-existent. Short of money, she became a governess for two years on the farm Nooitgedacht. Then she bought a wagon, a team of oxen, and some trading goods and started for the Soutpansberg with only a driver and a small boy to lead the oxen. She did good trade and arrived back in Pretoria just before the outbreak of the Anglo-Transvaal War in December 1880. During the siege of Pretoria she went to the commander of the British garrison and offered to ride through the Boer lines with dispatches for General Colley, who was trying to reach the town from Natal. When he refused she retired to her wagon and passed the time writing her second book, 'A Lady Trader in the Transvaal', which was published in London in 1882. She was furious at the retrocession of the Transvaal after the end of the war in April 1881, and refused to remain under Boer rule. On her return to London she campaigned on behalf of the people she called the 'English Africanders', English-speaking farmers and traders who had been ruined and were being persecuted by the Boers. 
In 1884 Sarah Heckford's novel 'Excelsior' was published, which is thinly veiled autobiography. She also wrote 'The Story of the East London Hospital' (1887) to raise funds, though she was no longer actively involved with it. She founded a co-operative store at Woolwich, based on the ideas of communism expressed in her book of 1873. She shared an interest in spiritualism and the occult with her friend Lady Sarah Nicholson, and took part in seances at the Nicholsons' home, where she went into trances and produced examples of automatic writing. 
Before leaving South Africa, Sarah Heckford had bought a farm, Jackalsfontein, south of Pretoria. Hearing of the discovery of gold on the Witwatersrand, she returned to South Africa, where she spent most of the rest of her life. Finding there was no gold on Jackalsfontein, she tried to sell it to raise capital for a scheme for education and medical care among the farming community. Failing to find a buyer, she took a two-roomed shanty in Johannesburg and set up as a share broker, selling mining shares. With her greying hair cut in a short Eton crop, she became a well-known figure as she rode about town. Her timing was disastrous, and when the mines struck pyrites in March 1889 her business crashed, leaving her penniless. By the time the discovery of the cyanide process put the mines back into profitability she had sold out. She bought another wagon and span of oxen and rode transport again. This business thrived; she bought a farm, Ravenshill, in the Soutpansberg, and brought her friend Sarah Eland and her son out from England to settle on it. Sarah Heckford continued trading and transport riding. In the winter of 1891 she spent several months camping on the Klein Letaba goldfields. Using this experience she wrote and published 'True Transvaal Tales'. 
In 1893 Sarah Heckford rented another farm near Ravenshill and became friendly with Modjadje, the 'Rain Queen', being the only white person to penetrate her kraal. Once a house had been built on Ravenshill she and the Elands moved there in January 1894, but the area was disturbed by fights between the Boers and the Africans. Eventually she returned to Nooitgedacht where she became governess to the children of her former pupils. She was there when the South African War broke out in October 1899, and twice rode messages concerning the movements of the Boer forces to Lord Roberts. On the second occasion, aged sixty, alone and ill, she rode the 40 miles to Pretoria (which Roberts had taken in June 1900) in the course of one wintry day, warning the British at Commandonek on her way. She could not return to her farm, and remained in Pretoria to help reorganize and reopen the schools which had closed at the start of the war. She returned to her plans for farm schools and wrote a 'Report on the educational needs of the Transvaal Colony from the Transvaal Women's Educational Union to the education department of the colony'. She finished it in March 1901, and it was sent to London. 
Sarah Heckford then devised an adult-education programme for Boer women to be put in place after the war. In 1901 she went to London to buy a magic lantern and slides to illustrate the historical lectures she was writing for the scheme. She was violently opposed to Emily Hobhouse, who had protested against the British use of concentration camps during the South African War, and wrote to the papers with her own views. Requests to speak on South Africa poured in. Although an emotional speaker, she nevertheless had a firm grasp of facts and the ability to marshal them cogently. She also worked hard for the British Women's Emigration Society, urging teachers in particular to go out to South Africa after the war. 
In spite of failing health and becoming blind in one eye Sarah Heckford continued to write and to travel the country on speaking engagements. By the end of 1902 she had completed her lectures and assembled the slides to illustrate them. Although clearly unwell she insisted on returning to Pretoria in February 1903, where she died on 17 April of the same year. She was buried in the old cemetery, Church Street East, Pretoria, on 19 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 38685


Ecroyd, William Farrer (1827-1915), worsted manufacturer and politician, was born on 14 July 1827, at Lomeshaye, near Burnley, Lancashire, the first of the four children of William Ecroyd (1796-1876), worsted spinner, and his second wife, Margaret (1797-1835), the eldest daughter of William Farrer, a farmer at Wythmoor, Kendal, and his wife, Mary. Yeomen in origin (their ancestry was traced back to the fourteenth century by Ecroyd's second son, the historian William Farrer), the Ecroyds became members of the Society of Friends in the 1680s. They added further small estates to their existing property in the early eighteenth century, and in 1747 set up the worsted spinning and weaving firm at Edgend, moving in 1780 to Lomeshaye, where the family was to continue to run the firm until 1933. 
Educated at Lower Bank Academy, Blackburn, Ecroyd went on in 1837 to the Quaker Ackworth School before joining the family firm in 1841. Having learned the trade under his father, a good-humoured, fat, and communicative mill owner, Ecroyd was made a partner in 1849. This was a period of rapid growth and prosperity for the firm, as it extended its manufacturing capacity to over 3000 looms, and its workforce to about 1250. By the 1860s, it was one of the few remaining houses producing soft woollen fabrics in 150 varieties for the home and foreign trade. Imbued with a strong religious sense of the stewardship of wealth, Ecroyd was involved in a wide range of activities designed to improve the condition of the workpeople and to mollify the embittered industrial relations which had marked north-east Lancashire in the early 1850s. He ensured that the Lomeshaye mills were equipped with healthy, well ventilated rooms and provided dining-rooms, a sick club, a mill library, and half-time schools. He was widely esteemed not only for his business sense but his upright conduct, fair dealing with the workforce, and unselfish actions. However, Ecroyd's broadening theological vision, derived from Kingsley, Maurice, and Arnold, increasingly separated him from his father and from the narrow tenets of the Quakers, which he now believed inhibited the proper Christian endeavours of employers. In 1851 Ecroyd had married, within the Society of Friends, Mary (died 1867), daughter of Thomas Backhouse of York, a railway and bank director with strong botanical interests; they had three sons and six daughters. Following his second marriage in 1869 to the Baptist Anna Maria (1831-1913), daughter of another local employer George Foster (once a partner of Cobden and a strong free trader), Ecroyd and his wife continued to attend Quaker meetings but he was to renounce formally his membership of the Society of Friends following his father's death. 
Having abandoned his family's Quakerism, Ecroyd also abandoned its Liberalism, standing unsuccessfully for parliament in 1874 as Conservative candidate for Carlisle, upholding in politics the Church of England principles which he had now embraced. He also spoke widely on behalf of denominational education and served on the executive of the National Educational Union from 1875 to 1879. His political views, however, were to move in less conventional directions by the later 1870s, when the worsted industry began to suffer more than most from the impact of foreign, especially French, competition. Ecroyd, a member of the Anti-Corn Law League as a youth and a keen reader of political economy, now became one of the more thoughtful critics of free trade and the most articulate exponent of the alternative creed of 'fair trade'. In 1879 he composed its leading tract, 'The Policy of Self-Help', arguing that Britain's policy of free trade would only be reciprocated by other nations if Britain herself imposed import duties both on foreign wheat and manufactured imports. At the same time, free imports from the colonies would strengthen the empire (on the federal model of the United States) and help prevent Britain's decline to the rank of third-rate power. 
Ecroyd stood unsuccessfully on this platform ('Ecroydism' as his opponent Lord Hartington called it) in North-East Lancashire in 1880 but won a dramatic by-election victory at Preston in 1881. 'Fair trade' was now at its peak and, with several spokesmen in the House of Commons, was able to bring considerable pressure to bear during the unsuccessful renegotiation of the Anglo-French commercial (Cobden) treaty of 1880-82. Ecroyd did not defend Preston in 1885 (on grounds of ill health) but did unsuccessfully oppose Hartington in the Rossendale division of Lancashire. He was not to stand again but in 1885 he was appointed by Lord Salisbury to the royal commission on the depression in trade and industry, which provided the most effective outlet for the 'fair trade' analysis of the British economy in the later nineteenth century. Ecroyd himself dropped from the forefront of this movement after 1886 but its central strands were to be taken up by Chamberlain, with Ecroyd's warm encouragement and approval, in his advocacy of tariff reform in 1903. Ecroyd was ready to campaign locally for tariff reform and reputedly wrote several tariff reform pamphlets. 
After 1886 Ecroyd moved back from the national scene to the family firm, and increasingly to the Herefordshire estate at Credenhill which he had acquired in 1880. There he devoted himself to agriculture but also to replicating in the countryside the paternalism he had first practised in the town, erecting model dwellings and new schools, taking over the patronage of and restoring the local church, rebuilding the parsonage, and aiding the Revd Charles Henry Bulmer in his campaign against the adulteration of cider. Yet Ecroyd still spent much time in Lancashire, and at his estate at Whitbarrow in Westmorland. Having overseen the reconstruction of the family firm on limited liability lines in 1896, he remained nominally its chairman until his death, but increasingly withdrew from its affairs. By the standards of its time, it was now only a modestly sized enterprise and Ecroyd's own fortune probably owed more to prudent speculation in overseas railways than to his industrial shareholdings. In 1896 he commemorated over fifty years' service with a retirement address on the duties of employers ('A Few Words to the Workers at Lomeshaye Mills', 1896), with the factory evoked more as a site of moral training than of profit-making. His own practice of such duties had been exemplary, not only within his factory but in his providing the adjoining town of Nelson with schools, a new Anglican church (St Mary's) in 1884, and generous support of Burnley Hospital. He also acted as JP in both Lancashire and Herefordshire and was deputy lieutenant of Herefordshire. 
An invalid in later years, Ecroyd died at Credenhill on 9 November 1915, and was buried there on 11 November. Between the 1850s and 1880s he had been a frequent traveller in Europe, and in England, a keen admirer of natural beauty, much influenced by Wordsworth. Ecroyd's own interest in history (he believed his name was derived from the Mercian King Croyda, also providing the derivation of Credenhill, which itself abutted Offa's Dyke) was taken up by his sons, while his eldest son Thomas Backhouse Ecroyd (1857-1945) took over the declining firm. Part of the Credenhill estate later became home to the Special Air Service. 


@@@@@


doc= 38687


Grenfell, Henry Riversdale (1824-1902), merchant banker, was born on 5 April 1824, the younger son (in a family of four) of Charles Pascoe Grenfell (1790-1867) ['see under 'Grenfell family], copper merchant, and later Liberal MP, and his wife, Lady Georgiana Molyneux, eldest daughter of the second earl of Sefton. The Grenfell family, originally from Cornwall, had risen to prominence and wealth as the London partners of various copper enterprises during the early industrial revolution, particularly under Grenfell's grandfather, Pascoe Grenfell ['see under 'Grenfell family]. 
Grenfell, like his father and brother, was educated at Harrow School (1836-8) and at Christ Church, Oxford (matriculated 1842). A prompt start in the City of the 1840s ended in family disagreements, and Grenfell, under the wing of his Christ Church friend Chichester Fortescue, entered more fully the world of politics and London society. Among his friends he was nicknamed Wigs. He acted as private secretary to Lord Panmure at the War Office, and to Sir Charles Wood at the India Office. He also became an intimate of the 'Nuneham set' of Lady Waldegrave, whose notice he wrote for the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. He entered parliament, for Stoke, in 1862, but by then his career had veered back towards the City after the untimely death of his brother, Charles, in 1861. Edged out as Liberal candidate at Stoke in 1868, he contested South-West Lancashire with W. E. Gladstone -- the first of a series of failures to re-enter parliament. He was for the most part a Liberal of the 'juste milieu', friend of Italy (see his 'Italy', 1863), foe to Governor Eyre. But by 1886 he was a Liberal Unionist, acting in the forefront of City opposition to home rule. 
Within the City Grenfell slipped easily into the hereditary world of the Bank of England, succeeding his father as a director in 1865 (part of an almost continuous tradition of family service between 1830 and 1940). He took his turn as deputy governor (1879-81) and as governor (1881-3), and remained a director until his death. He played an active part in defending the bank from its critics, and in urging (in vain) a consolidating banking act to tidy up the loose ends left by Peel's 'Bank Charter Act' of 1844. His growing enthusiasm for monetary issues led to his joining the Political Economy Club in 1876 (he served as its treasurer from 1882 to 1900). Most importantly, he became after 1880, with his fellow bank director Henry Hucks Gibbs, an inexhaustible advocate of the bimetallic standard, which he defended in several pamphlets published in 1886, and various subsequent writings and articles, especially in 'The Bimetallist', 1895-1901. Although influenced in this by French and American theorists, he claimed that his views arose from his practical experience as a bank director. Yet this crusade commanded little support within the bank despite Grenfell's (even while governor) forcefully propagating his views through the International Monetary Standard Association, and, in a more populist vein, the Bimetallic League. He gave evidence to the royal commission on precious metals in 1887, served as vice-president of the International Monetary Congress at Paris in 1889, and did much to keep the issue firmly in the public mind. This represented a significant attempt to formulate an economic policy to remedy falling prices during the 'great depression', while in several ways anticipating twentieth-century international monetary diplomacy and perceptions of a damaging conflict of interests between the 'City' and 'industry' in the British economy. 
Outside the bank parlour, Grenfell took on the crop of directorships and responsibilities appropriate for 'one of the City's most eminent personages' ('The Times', 26 Nov 1887). He sat on the royal commission investigating the Metropolitan Board of Works in 1888-9, and chaired, 'inter alia', the National Mortgage and Agency Co., New Zealand, the Royal Sardinian Railway, and the Buenos Aires Water Co. But in 1887 his association with the more dubious Harney Park Dacotah Tin Mining Co. led to his losing a suit for slander brought by the founder of the 'Financial News', Harry Marks. In 1892 the family firm itself was wound up, with Grenfell falling into comparative poverty by City standards (leaving some $38,000 at death). 
On 25 July 1867 Grenfell married Alethea Louisa (1829/30-1923), daughter of Henry John Adeane, MP for Cambridgeshire from 1857 to 1865. Their only child, Edward Charles Grenfell prospered with J. S. Morgan & Co. (later Morgan Grenfell), and became Baron St Just. Grenfell himself died of pneumonia at his country home, Bacres, Hambleden, Buckinghamshire, on 11 September 1902. 


@@@@@


doc= 38688


Hindley, Charles (1796-1857), politician and factory reformer, was born on 25 June 1796 at the Fairfield Moravian Settlement, Droylsden, near Manchester. He was the third son of Ignatius Hindley (1756-1803), a muslin manufacturer in Dukinfield, Cheshire, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Ambler (1762-1801). 
Hindley was educated within the Moravian community, first at the academy at Fairfield, then at Fulneck, near Leeds. He went on to study with the Revd C. A. Pohlman at Haverfordwest in Wales before becoming classical and mathematical tutor at the Moravian settlement at Gracehill, Ireland. He was intended for the Moravian ministry and had started to preach locally when the death of his elder brother in 1819 led to his return to manage the family's two cotton mills. The Hindleys were among the earliest mill owners in Dukinfield and Charles obviously inherited their entrepreneurial spirit as the business expanded in the 1820s. 
Hindley married Hannah Buckley (1801-1837), a Mossley mill owner's daughter, in September 1822. They had six children, but only two daughters, Hannah (1830-1857) and Susan (1835-1846), survived infancy. These girls were brought up by Hindley's second wife, Ann (1805-1854), whom he married in 1839. She was the daughter of Richard Fort of Read Hall, Lancashire. Ann became a Moravian and was involved in many of her husband's interests, including the Ashton under Lyne Mechanics' Institute. She predeceased him on 16 December 1854. Hindley's daughter Hannah was the author of two locally published books which describe the family's travels in the Holy Land. She married Henry Woods, who became MP for Wigan, and she died on 12 July 1857. 
Hindley was involved in social concerns from the 1820s, when he helped set up the Ashton Mechanics' Institute (1825), of which he was president until his death. By the early 1830s he had made his fortune and had begun to devote his mind and wealth to social and political concerns, adopting the cause of factory reform. His speeches show humanitarian concern for the health and educational welfare of children working in the mills. After an agitation in which he was involved, Ashton became a parliamentary constituency and he unsuccessfully contested the seat in December 1832, but was elected in January 1835 and remained Liberal MP until his death. 
Althorp's 'Factory Act' had become law in 1833, but was proving ineffective and Hindley's entrance to parliament was seen by the factory reformers as a chance to remedy this. He introduced a new bill designed gradually to introduce a ten-hour day for workers under the age of twenty-one, but this was felt to be too cautious by many in the factory movement, especially Richard Oastler. They were further disillusioned when Hindley dropped the bill in return for a government promise to enforce the 1833 act more rigorously. In 1834 and 1836 legal proceedings were taken against Hindley's own mill (the day-to-day running of which was in the hands of his nephew) for breaches of the 'Factory Act' and long hours were still being worked there in 1848. As a result Hindley became an ambivalent figure, and he never regained the trust of some factory reformers, in particular Joseph Rayner Stephens, whose denunciations of him as untrustworthy coloured Hindley's subsequent reputation. 
Hindley continued to support factory reform and in 1843 served on a select committee inquiring into the operation of the 'Factory Acts'. He had Chartist sympathies and has been credited with helping to draw up the 'People's Charter', but, although he was one of several MPs involved in the early stages, he was not connected with the final draft. He voted for the ballot in 1853. He was also president of the Universal Peace Society in the 1840s and presided over the first International Peace Congress in London. 
Hindley died of heart disease on 1 December 1857 at his home, Dartmouth House, Queen Street, Westminster, and was buried four days later in the Moravian cemetery, Chelsea. His final illness and its treatment were the subject of a pamphlet by the physician Augustus Bozzi Granville, 'Dr Todd and the Late Member for Ashton: Fatal Effect of the stimulating Treatment of Disease' (1860). 


@@@@@


doc= 38689


Philips, Sir George, first baronet (1766-1847), textile industrialist and politician, was born on 24 March 1766, the second son of the eight children of Thomas Philips (1728-1811), a Manchester merchant (later of Sedgley), and his wife, Mary Jolley (died 1806), the daughter and heir of John Rider, also a Manchester merchant, and his wife, Sarah. The Philips family formed a large kinship group extensively involved in the growth of the eighteenth-century textile industry from their roots as yeomen in Staffordshire. Philips's father was a partner in the pioneering firm of J. and N. Philips, the largest tape manufacturers in Europe, but was also involved in a hatting business with a growing American market in the late 1780s. He first sent his son to Chetham's School in Manchester, although later he was moved to dissenting schools, first Stand grammar school, then Mr Harrison's Unitarian school at Manchester. Philips escaped the toils of his narrow Wesleyan Methodist upbringing through a growing association with the Philipses of Hollinghurst, whom he considered 'greatly superior in manners and knowledge of the world' (Philips, fol. 8), and on 16 October 1788 he married Sarah Anne, the daughter of Nathaniel Philips. A keen autodidact, Philips was active in Manchester's cultural life (through its Literary and Philosophical Society and the Portico Library) and its radical politics, with John Ferriar, Thomas Walker, and Dr Thomas Cooper among his friends. In 1792 he published 'The Necessity of a Speedy and Effectual Reform in Parliament', a forceful plea for universal, including female, suffrage, but one he was soon eager to disavow. In this heady period of social defiance, he also indulged openly in a passionate adulterous affair, alienating many of his Manchester friends. 
However, Philips's abounding energies were most keenly consumed in exploiting the vast commercial opportunities of the 1790s through a series of business ventures which mark him out as one of the most successful and wealthiest entrepreneurs of the industrial revolution. Firstly, J. and N. Philips, with mills in Staffordshire and Lancashire as well as warehouses in Manchester, continued to prosper, producing huge rewards, from which he withdrew over $250,000 between 1807 and 1831. Secondly, the Salford twist mill, an offshoot of the former, was conducted by Philips with the extremely talented G. A. Lee (1761-1826) as manager. This was one of Manchester's largest and most technologically advanced cotton-spinning factories -- one of Manchester's first iron-framed buildings and the first mill to use gas lighting. Thirdly, T. Philips & Co. (Manchester and London), although wound down after his father's death, left Philips with a network of properties in Manchester and America, which continued to offer considerable rental income. Finally, Philips was also a partner in Boddington, Philips, and Sharp, a firm of West Indian merchants, with lucrative trading operations in sugar and other goods. Philips was no mere sleeping partner in these ventures but conducted an active search for new markets, took a keen interest in technological change, made good use of his extensive contacts in London, Manchester, and America, and, most importantly, chose and retained able managers. 
Even so, like many first-generation industrialists, Philips was socially ambitious. Given his ample wealth, and through his partner 'Conversation' Sharp -- Richard Sharp (1759-1835) -- he found a ready entree into metropolitan whig politics, joining, for example, Sir James Mackintosh's dining club known as the King of Clubs in 1807. His son, George Richard (1789-1883), was sent to Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, and in 1819 married Sarah Georgiana, the daughter of Lord Waterpark. Intent on entering parliament, Philips was brought in by Sir William Manners for Ilchester in 1812 at a cost of $5000. In 1818, following a loan of $50,000 to the duke of Norfolk, Philips displaced Creevey at Steyning, where he was in turn succeeded in 1820 by his son. Philips himself, supported by prudent purchases of property, sat for Wootton Bassett from 1820 to 1830, thus for a third time representing one of the corrupt boroughs he aspired to abolish. 
Unlike many textile magnates, Philips was a ready speaker in the House of Commons, and was an early advocate of free trade, an opponent of factory legislation, and a critic of trade unions; he spoke up for the peaceable intentions of the Lancashire reformers in 1818 and after Peterloo. He undoubtedly proved an effective voice for the cotton industry, well deserving his reputation as the 'unofficial member for Manchester' (Wadsworth and De Mann, 289). He maintained close links with the business community, acting as first chairman of the Manchester Royal Exchange, working with the Manchester chamber of commerce, and helping found the 'Manchester Guardian' in 1821. He also sought local subscriptions to London University. He enjoyed the friendship of leading whigs, including Grattan, Tierney, and Lord Holland. The wit the Revd Sydney Smith regularly visited Sedgley, where he amiably mocked his host -- 'the cotton king', 'Philosopher Philips', or 'Marcus Tullius Philips', who 'doubles his capital twice a week; we talk much of cotton, more of the fine arts, as he has lately returned from Italy, and purchased some pictures which were sent out from Piccadilly on purpose to intercept him' ('Letters of Sydney Smith', 1.365-6). 
Unusually, Philips's pursuit of landed status followed rather than preceded entry to the Commons, and it was only after a prolonged search that in 1819 he committed his money to land. Following the lead of his Manchester cousin and partner, Robert Philips (1760-1844), he acquired sizeable estates (some 3500 acres by 1827) in Warwickshire. As a result, in 1827 he finally retreated from the smoke of Sedgley to Weston House, Long Compton, rebuilt in Gothic revival style by Edward Blore at a considerable cost and fashionably furnished by A. W. N. Pugin. In 1828 he was made a baronet by Lord Goderich's ministry, only the second cotton spinner to achieve this status. He left parliament in 1830, but in 1832 he was brought out by his new Liberal neighbours in South Warwickshire (to the disgust of some local tories), and, despite having suitably cut his cloth to defend the corn laws, he finally retired from parliament in 1834. In rustic seclusion, he enjoyed the social rewards of his ample profit making, acting as JP, host, and art patron, while venturing to London for the intellectual refinement of the Royal Institution. The tranquillity of domestic life also precipitated a vivid religious conversion, and, following the death on 2 September 1844 of the wife he had betrayed in his youth, he composed his memoirs, one of the few introspective documents produced by the entrepreneurs of the industrial revolution, recording the exploits of an ambitious, vainglorious, impetuous, and restless man of parts, now a repentant sinner. Philips died at Weston House on 3 October 1847 and was buried at Long Compton, a parish in which, following his wife's example, he had acted as a conscientious landlord. He was succeeded by his only child, who maintained a profitable if remote link with the Manchester business, while enjoying parliament, landed society, and the aristocratic connections reinforced by the marriages of his three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 38691


Lee, Lennox Bertram (1864-1949), textile industrialist, was born on 7 November 1864 at 2 Camp Place, Camp Street, Broughton, Salford, the eldest son of the eight children of Sir Joseph Cocksey Lee (1832-1894), cotton spinner and merchant, and his wife, Henrietta Burleigh (died 1922), daughter of James Hill, Independent minister at Clapham, London. He was educated at Thorpe Mandeville School and Eton College before serving in the Sherwood Foresters (1883-5), and travelling extensively in Africa. In 1889 Lee joined the Rossendale Printing Company, a family firm, which in 1899 he took into the Calico Printers' Association (CPA). This amalgamation brought together forty-six printing firms and thirteen merchants to form what was then the United Kingdom's largest company. Having rapidly acquired a reputation as one of the trade's leading practical men, Lee joined the CPA executive, and became its chairman in 1902. The CPA's initial performance proved disappointing, but under Lee's guidance the size of the board was reduced from an unwieldy eighty-four, nearly one-third of the original capacity was closed down, competition was limited by inter-firm agreements, and a research department was set up. 
Following these successes, Lee was the undisputed choice as chairman of the board in 1908, a position he held until 1947, an unusual longevity within the corporate economy. By 1914 Lee had again reformed the CPA management and marketing structures, even if the company's main aim remained price stability through trade agreements and reduced capacity rather than the aggressive pursuit of growth. This conservative strategy allowed the CPA to share in the cotton industry's Edwardian summer, outwardly demonstrated by the opening of its new offices, the St James Building, Oxford Street, Manchester, in 1912, then the largest steel-framed building in Britain. 
The First World War was a stark reminder to Lee that the textile industry faced threats from two directions: that of the home government, and that of foreign competition, principally from India and Japan. Lee was a thoroughly reluctant participant in government schemes to produce British dyes to replace German and Swiss ones, wholly disbelieving in the power of the official mind to intervene efficaciously in business concerns. On the other hand, he was prepared to serve on several committees, and to back the British Trade Corporation (1916-26) in its ill-fated schemes for commercial expansion. After the war, however, he became an insistent advocate of business as usual, leading efforts to repeal the 'Dyestuffs Act' of 1920. More positively, Lee recognized the drastic need for his own firm, as for the cotton industry as a whole, to adjust in order to survive, as both the volume and the profitability of British trade slumped in the 1920s. But adaptation posed a dilemma which the CPA failed satisfactorily to resolve -- namely was it to remain merely a congeries of family firms, effecting some economies of scale while maintaining its traditional role of printing goods on commission for 'merchant-convertors', or was it, as Lee wished, to become a large, centrally controlled and vertically integrated modern enterprise, producing, printing, and merchanting its own cloth? The company oscillated between these strategies, continuing the process of internal rationalization, but achieving only limited success in its attempt at vertical integration, specialist finishes, and direct-selling schemes. 
With keen foresight, Lee also pioneered direct investment abroad, with printworks in China in 1928, in Egypt in 1934, and in India in 1936, followed by Java, Australia, and South Africa during the Second World War. Ironically, this strategy, which Lee had urged in the First World War, reached fruition only in the Second, while the excessive devolution of control abroad, favoured by the board, but not by Lee, squandered the CPA's opportunity to prosper as a truly multinational company. The CPA's defensive mentality was further confirmed in 1941, when following the major discovery of Terylene in its laboratories, it allowed ICI to develop this product under licence. The lucrative royalties from Terylene, however, gave Lee the satisfaction of restoring dividend payments (suspended since 1929) in 1947, the year in which he also resigned as chairman, having ensured the succession of his son, R. M. Lee (1902-1972). A tall, stately figure, whose goatee beard lent the mien of a Spanish grandee, Lee ultimately proved far more autocratic in manner than decisive in business strategy. 
After the First World War, Lee continued to act as an important custodian and outspoken defender of Lancashire traditions and interests. In the 1920s he did so from within the Federation of British Industry, first as its Manchester chairman, and in 1929-30 as its president. In that role, and as a consistent free trader, he briefly held back the FBI's accelerating drift towards protection. He served on the influential Macmillan committee, urging in an addendum to the main report the need both for industrial rationalization and for close co-operation with trade unions, a reflection of his involvement in negotiations between employers and the TUC in the wake of the Mond-Turner talks. In the economic crisis of 1929-31 Lee resisted tariffs as likely to undermine, rather than encourage, the rationalization of industry, although throughout the 1930s he advocated an important role for government in backing up collective regulation by business. 
With Manchester public life holding little attraction, Lee preferred to retreat to his Herefordshire estate at How Caple. He had lived there since 1901 with his wife, Edith Gertrude (died 1964), daughter of Malcolm MacLellan of Glasgow, whom he married on 21 June 1892, and their three children. He played an active part in county society, reared pigs, and took a keen interest in the welfare of the Church of England and the architectural beauties of its buildings, especially as a benefactor of Hereford Cathedral. Lee died at home at How Caple Court on 14 December 1949 and was buried at How Caple. He had lived to see the jubilee of the CPA and oversee the publication of its history, itself a revealing chronicle of the frustrated vision and dynastic tenacity which had marked, and marred, his career. 


@@@@@


doc= 38692


Garvice, Charles Andrew (1850-1920), writer, was born in Limehouse, London, on 24 August 1850, the son of Andrew John Garvice (1816-1851), bricklayer, and his wife, Mira, 'nee' Winter (1819-1870). He was baptized on 18 September 1850 at St Dunstan and All Saints' Church in Stepney, London. Fatherless from infancy, at the age of twenty he was living with his maternal uncle following his mother's death, and was working as a bookseller. Obscurity otherwise envelops the formative phase in the career of an author who became a publishing phenomenon -- 'the most successful novelist in England', according to Arnold Bennett in 1910. There is no record of his marriage, although he had married by 1873, when he dedicated his debut publication, 'Eve: and other Verses', to his wife; they had two sons and five daughters. Possibly, Garvice had married abroad, as in the preface to 'Eve' he says that he 'scribbled on foreign steam-boats and in railway carriages'. He also alludes to a struggling existence, including, perhaps, a bereavement: 'Most of them [the verses] were written at midnight when the hand was too weary to write and the brain to forge stronger work; some few were born under the cloud of a heavy sorrow.'. 
From 'Eve' and his first published novel, 'Maurice Durant' (1875), it may be surmised that Garvice had lived in Italy, perhaps also in the American West, although the circumstantial detail is not such as to make this supposition completely convincing; and among later Garvice stories were also Australian bushranger tales. 'Maurice Durant' was dedicated to the actor Henry Irving, 'with the warmest admiration and esteem'; and it contained a preface addressed from The Retreat, Cookham, in Berkshire. The text and chapter epigraphs indicate something of Garvice's education: an acquaintance at least with Greek, Roman, and English classical literature. A hero of the story is Chudleigh Chichester, a baronet's son; and this unusual forename was given by the author to a son of his own who was born on 12 January 1875 and who joined the Royal Dublin Fusiliers in 1896. Chudleigh Garvice was made DSO in the South African War; afterwards, in Egypt, he rose to major and was commandant of police at Alexandria when he died on 23 March 1921. 'Maurice Durant' is revealing too about Charles Garvice's politics, which may be captioned as tory democrat. A centrepiece of the story involves a parliamentary election in which Chudleigh Chichester is victorious on account of his 'outspoken determination to uphold the British throne and constitution' and to act as 'the working man's friend by voting for the reduction of taxes and the labour time'. His opponents are a self-made Manchester millionaire who cheerfully advocates 'rampant liberalism', and an alternative 'labourers' friend' who has large red hands and 'greasy shock head', spouts revolutionary balderdash, and organizes roughs to break up Chudleigh's meetings. This was an immature story, but the politics stuck. Later Garvice would serve as Conservative county councillor for the Northam district of north Devon; he joined the Primrose League and Freemasons; and a socially conservative philosophy formed the bedrock of all his tales -- that there was nothing really wrong with the world that could not be fixed by good hearts beating in honest men and virtuous women. 

'Maurice Durant' was published first in periodical serialization, where it had a fair amount of success. The book version did not, and Garvice explained its failure in marketing, not literary, terms: it was overlong and overpriced for popular sales. Astuteness as a businessman of letters would become Garvice's trademark, and for the next twenty years he published no more books, only stories for fiction magazines on both sides of the Atlantic. He was editor as well as chief contributor for one of the periodicals of the American publisher George Monro, which sold for 7died in England. Garvice was sufficiently well paid to buy Moorlands, a dairy farm at Little Silworthy in north Devon, about which he wrote in 'A Farm in Creamland' (1911). He began to farm directly in 1903, though he had owned the property earlier; more extraordinarily, he became president of the Farmers' and Landowners' Association, though he described himself still as an amateur farmer. It was at a debating society at neighbouring Bideford that Garvice discovered his talent for public speaking. In those pre-broadcasting days, lecturing was a remunerative sideline for an author. A favourite on the circuit, Garvice became president of the Institute of Lecturers. 
Garvice's literary career had been relaunched at the end of the 1890s, when the stranglehold over publishing practices exerted by Mudie's and Smith's circulating libraries had been broken, and the format for new novels was the single volume, price 6's'., rather than the three-decker selling for a guinea and a half. There was not one but several reading publics, however; Garvice's embraced those possessed of pennies rather than shillings: the mass reading public, comprising people educated to elementary level following the 1870 act. It was the sixpenny paper-covered Garvice, not the 6's'. hard-backed Garvice, which emerged 'as numerous in the shops and on the railway bookstalls as the leaves of Vallombrosa'. This description was by Eveleigh Nash, whose literary agency included Garvice among its first clients and negotiated the simultaneous publication of four of his novels, 'Nance', 'A Coronet of Shame', 'Her Heart's Desire', and 'The Outcast of the Family', in 1900. Nash and, after him, the literary agency of A. P. Watt, deserve some credit for accelerating the Garvice vogue, but the original discovery was made in America, where 'Just a Girl' (1898) had sold 100,000 copies. The publicity it received there attracted reviewers in England, who assured readers that here was a born story writer of thrilling romances and pulsating adventures which were healthy in tone. This last was important for a church- and chapel-going audience who still retained suspicions that novel reading was sinful; and it was notable that Garvice's novels were strongly commended by Robertson Nicoll in the 'British Weekly' and by other religious periodicals -- the 'Methodist Times', 'The Baptist', the 'Christian World', and 'Church Family Magazine' -- as well as by the national and provincial dailies and the decidedly secular 'Sportsman' and 'Referee'. 'Round a large kiosk at a popular seaside place', observed 'T. P.'s Weekly' in 1911, 'Garvice's love stories fairly dominated its shelves. A dozen of them at least were displayed in the best places, and in provident quantity'. 
Between 1900 and 1920 over fifty novels flowed from Garvice's pen -- more correctly, from his secretary's typewriter because, thorough professional that he was, he took to dictating his work, pipe smoking all the while. These tales were not all the product of a fifty- and sixty-year-old imagination, but recycled from his long apprenticeship of writing 'feuilleton'. Garvice originally sold his stories outright but, as his wealth increased, 'I got them back by the simple expedient of buying the periodical, lock, stock and barrel in which they appeared; and I am glad to be able to state that I hold now the copyright of everything I have written', he told Douglas Sladen in 1913. Sladen, the first editor (1897-9) of 'Who's Who', was a friend and neighbour of Garvice who, in his prime, resided at 4 Maids of Honour Row, by the palace at Richmond, as well as keeping the Thatch Cottage, Hambledon, near Henley-on-Thames. Garvice had, Sladen recorded in 1914, 'the largest sales of any one in the world. I have seen the figures. Last year's sales alone amounted to 1,750,000 copies -- books of all prices' (Sladen). The 'Daily Chronicle''s estimate in 1911 was that his readership was 6 million; nor did the First World War slow his popularity, and the final computation must result in a staggering sum. 
Riding, fishing, and cycling were among the recreations Garvice listed in 1905; and the first two persisted, the cycling being overtaken by motoring with advancing age and riches. Garvice was clubbable, a member of the Garrick, Whitefriars, and Authors', indeed chairman of the last, whose fortunes he restored after 1908 when it had appeared doomed to closure. He was made a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature, although intellectual types joked that he 'did not strain himself to write Literature; he just lured away Ford Madox Ford's secretary, for he felt sure that, working so much with Ford, she must have caught it from him' (Jepson). Garvice was not dim or humourless -- 'The Scribblers' Club' (1909) is a clever set of droll short stories about the literary world -- but he was unpretentious. He saw nothing wrong in brightening the lives of millions of readers with a string of unsophisticated romances, which careered along pell-mell and tumbled over all sorts of obstacles before reaching that always satisfying terminus where villainy is defeated and virtue rewarded. Garvice joined sympathy to vitality. He was the 'kindest, most self-effacing' man, thought Baroness Orczy, who served with him in 1914-15 on a committee of the Society of Authors which dispensed relief to impoverished colleagues. Garvice's own fortune was vast: his will, made in 1917 and proved at $71,049 6's'. 9died, mentioned his wife, Elizabeth (1852/3-1937), and indicated that he had already made extensive provision for his surviving children. Garvice died on 1 March 1920 at his home in Richmond, from cerebral haemorrhage, after lying in a coma for eight days. 


@@@@@


doc= 38693


Forwood, Sir Arthur Bower, first baronet (1836-1898), politician, was born on 23 June 1836 at Edge Hill, Liverpool, the eldest of the four sons of Thomas Brittain Forwood (1810-1884), shipbroker, and his wife, Charlotte (1814-1861), daughter of William Bower, cotton broker. His paternal grandfather, George, the son of a royal naval lieutenant from Plymouth who was killed in action, was the first to establish the Forwoods in Liverpool, and in 1812 was a partner in the Otterspool oil works. Arthur's father joined Leech, Harrison & Co. (founded in 1785), commission merchants, at the age of fourteen and became a partner in 1837. During Forwood's childhood, the family moved home several times, to Marsh Lane, Bootle, and to Crosby Road, Seaforth, both then sylvan suburbs commanding marine views, to escape the spreading city. Based on the port's prosperity, Liverpool grew in population from 210,000 in 1831 to 685,000 in 1901. This made it the second city in Britain after London in size, 'the second city of the Empire', Liverpudlians boasted. One of Arthur Forwood's political designs was to register that weight in national affairs. 
Absorption in business precluded Forwood's forebears from much involvement in public life, though his grandfather published pamphlets on economic and social questions, and his father was active in the chamber of commerce and on the Mersey Docks Board. When he retired from business and bought Thornton Manor, Cheshire, Thomas Forwood became a county magistrate and chairman of the building restoration committee of Chester Cathedral. Arthur, locally schooled at Liverpool Collegiate, started work in his father's firm, as did his three brothers after him. One, William Forwood (1840-1928; knighted 1883), wrote that their father refused to send them to Oxbridge, arguing that 'a university training would spoil' them for business. In 1862 Arthur and William bought out their father and took over the management. Already, Arthur Forwood demonstrated in business that hard-headedness and perspicacity which later were hallmarks of his politics. Visiting America in 1861, he was sure that civil war was coming. He backed his judgement by buying cotton heavily, on which the firm made substantial profits. He also moved Leech, Harrison, and Forwood into steamship ownership, trading to the West Indies, so successfully that he forced their competitors to amalgamate with them in a new company, the West Indian and Pacific Company. Forwood managed this company for nine years, before turning to politics. He had not done with business, however: the premium the Forwoods received for surrendering their interest in the West Indian and Pacific Company enabled them to found the Atlas Company, running steamers between New York and the West Indies; and Arthur gave time to this even as his political interests expanded. 
Forwood joined Liverpool's municipal council in 1871. He served as councillor or alderman for twenty-seven years, and was mayor in 1878-9. He was secretary of the Constitutional Association from 1868 and chairman from 1880, in effect head of the Liverpool conservative caucus. The decisive year was 1875 when Irish nationalism first seriously disturbed municipal politics, leading to the election ten years later as MP for Liverpool Scotland of the only Irish nationalist ever to win a parliamentary seat on the British mainland, T. P. O'Connor. Forwood marshalled the non-Catholic Irish electors to resist the subordination of Liverpool interests to Irish separatism. Constitutionally, Forwood was orthodox, a resolute champion of the union and empire, monarchy and church, Lords and Commons; but he was alarmed that Conservative leaders nationally were too faint-hearted or stuck up to promote this creed in urban centres and to invest traditional institutions with a democratic seal. Forwood also encountered timidity in the Liverpool merchant plutocracy. He won support for the establishment of an episcopal see (1880) and University College (1881); but the merchants were unnerved by his advocacy of universal household suffrage and redistribution of seats, temperance reform and comprehensive employers' liability legislation, old age pensions and adventures in municipalization, including council housing as well as public utilities and transport. Forwood broadcast his ideas in a pamphlet in 1883 on housing the working classes, and in articles in the 'Contemporary Review' (1883-4) on democratic toryism and single-member constituencies. He encouraged popular political organization in the Liverpool Working Men's Conservative Association, the largest such body in the country; moreover, he courted the Orange order and abetted campaigns to enforce church discipline against ritualism. His ambition of representing Liverpool in parliament was dashed in 1882 in a by-election defeat when his candidature was undermined from within the Conservative establishment. Undaunted, he spearheaded the assertion of urban Conservative leaders in the national union in 1884-5 and, though disappointed by Lord Randolph Churchill's errancy, he won the mind of Lord Salisbury during the franchise crisis, whose settlement emerged on lines he advised. 
At the general election held under the new arrangements in December 1885, Forwood was returned for Ormskirk: wisely, he did not divide his supremacy in Liverpool by representing one of its constituencies. Salisbury appointed him financial secretary to the Admiralty, a post he held from 1886 to 1892, during a period of agitation for fleet re-equipment. Forwood was the first shipowner to become an Admiralty minister and, in 1892, the first serving town councillor to become a privy councillor. His superior at the Admiralty, Lord George Hamilton, reckoned Forwood a 'hustler', with 'a rare driving power as an administrator and reformer, but not the knack of making himself popular' ('Parliamentary Reminiscences and Reflections, 1886-1906', 1922, 35). The sense of a man who had risen above his proper station was apparently confirmed when, in a slip during a parliamentary debate, Forwood called the speaker 'Mr Mayor'. When the Conservatives resumed office in 1895, Forwood was denied preferment and scarcely mollified by a baronetcy (5 September 1895). He was rich -- at his death, his effects were probated at $87,321 19's'. 7died -- and his heir, Dudley (1875-1961), was educated at Harrow School. Though no man below cabinet rank did more to promote tory democracy in the country than Forwood, his unvarnished manner was as unappealing to the aristocratic elite who dominated the Conservative Party as it was to his party opponents in Liverpool who likened his rule to the ruthlessness of an American city boss. The Liberal leader, the merchant shipowner, Sir Robert Holt, wrote that 'he is certainly short of the instincts of a Gentleman and carries his political bias too far so as to be unjust to others' (Waller, 153). Holt acknowledged Forwood's effectiveness, however: 'What he decided to do he worked at till he did it' (ibid., 166). The foundations he laid, of a popular Conservatism pursuing both progressive and protestant causes, were tended by his immediate successors, Sir Archibald Salvidge and Sir Thomas White, and sustained the Conservative ascendancy in Liverpool until 1955. Forwood's political creed and style created acrimony but did not break down the interconnection of the provincial elite. He himself twice married into Liberal families, marrying first on 26 October 1858 Lucy, daughter of Simon Crosfield, who died aged thirty-six from jaundice on 5 November 1873, and second on 1 September 1874 Mary Anne Eliza (Lizzie), daughter of Thomas Baines, who survived him. Forwood died at his home, The Priory, Gateacre, on 27 September 1898, from colitis leading to heart failure. 


@@@@@


doc= 38694


Jeremiah James Colman (1830-1898), born on 14 June 1830 at Stoke Holy Cross. Little is known about the education of either the elder Jeremiah or James. They were committed Baptists, upheld liberal principles, and campaigned for civil and religious liberties and free trade. The elder Jeremiah was a founder member of the committee of a local Lancastrian school, was elected to the first board of guardians, and initiated the Stoke Holy Cross New Benefit Society and the politically progressive 'Norfolk News' in 1846. He served as sheriff of Norwich in 1845-6 and became mayor the following year, filling the offices occupied later by James and his son, Jeremiah James. The elder Jeremiah's move to Norwich in 1841 in effect left James in charge of the mustard-making business of J. and J. Colman at Stoke. The death of Jeremiah at Newmarket Road, Heigham, Norwich, on 3 December 1851, led to the partnership's being extended to include Jeremiah James. Three years later James died, on 19 October 1854, at 8 Marine Parade, Lowestoft, from the cumulative effect of many wearisome years as a commercial traveller and his exertions in expanding the business. The workforce had grown from fewer than fifty workers in the 1830s to about 500 by the late 1850s. 
As the business expanded the partnership was extended to include two of James's brothers, Henry Jeremiah (1814-1895) and Edward Colman (1808-1874), whose London agency, which they had established independently, became part of the J. and J. Colman organization in 1844. James's death, however, left Jeremiah James as the sole manager of the Stoke business at the age of twenty-four. The most formative influences on Jeremiah James were the Colman family traditions of liberalism and nonconformity and the belief which his parents expressed in the importance of applying the principles of both to life and labour. His early education at the Poringland Mill School of Samuel Colman, an uncle, and then at a small dame-school was followed by private tuition in Norwich under John Doman, Samuel Colman's brother-in-law. Further education continued through membership of the Norwich Young Men's Mutual Improvement Society, a group whose members met to write, read, and discuss religious, moral, political, and social issues. He was a teaching member of St Mary's Baptist Chapel in Norwich from the 1850s, where he was deacon between 1861 and 1870. 
Devout and serious in his approach to life, Jeremiah James was also a somewhat reluctant entrepreneur, requiring reassurance from his mother that the moral imperatives of a nonconformist conscience would not conflict with the demands and responsibilities of running the family business. Perhaps reflecting on the experience of his father he expressed a fear that a life dedicated to success and expansion of the company might leave insufficient time for service in the faith, self improvement, and earnest recreation and that selfishness, influence, and wealth so often associated with business would need to be resisted. On assuming control of J. and J. Colman when his father died he also acknowledged the 'perilous position' of being 'at so young an age, master absolutely and unreservedly of so many people, and sometimes to have to demand an implicit though be it reluctant obedience' (Colman, 80). On 25 September 1856 he married Caroline [


@@@@@


doc= 38695


James Colman (1801-1854). Born on 18 November 1801, James was the eldest of fifteen children of Robert Colman (1775-1867), a dairy and turkey farmer of Rockland St Andrew, Norfolk, and his wife, Ann Mills. James was taken into partnership with Jeremiah in 1823. On 1 August 1826 James married Mary (1805-1898), daughter of John Burlingham, a Norfolk miller and seed merchant. They had two children, the eldest being 


@@@@@


doc= 38696


Jeremiah Colman (1777-1851), originally a flour miller at Bawburgh, who in 1814 purchased the flour and mustard making concern of Edward Ames at Stoke Holy Cross, near Norwich, Norfolk. On 15 November 1802 Jeremiah married Ann, daughter of Thomas Theobold, textile manufacturer; their childless marriage led to their adoption, about 1806, of their nephew 


@@@@@


doc= 38700


Pilkington family (per. c.1825-1925), glass manufacturers, came to prominence with Richard Pilkington (1795-1869) and William Pilkington (1800-1872), the brothers who in their lifetime came to dominate British window glass manufacture. Their father, William (1765-1831), came of upwardly mobile farming stock at Horwich near Bolton, 18 miles to the north-east of St Helens. In 1779, when William was fourteen, he was apprenticed to a physician in the hamlet of Hardshaw at the heart of a coalmining district to which glass making and other furnace industries had been attracted. He was then sent to St George's Hospital, London, for six months or more in 1785-6, and finally had bought for him a partnership in his former master's practice. Like other physicians of his day, he kept an apothecary's shop which also sold wines and spirits. 
William Pilkington's sister, Elizabeth, came to keep house for him and in 1793 she married Joseph Rylands, a linen weaver in the neighbouring township of Parr who later opened a draper's shop in St Helens. Their third son, John, starting in the textile business in a small way locally, soon moved elsewhere in the county and, as the proprietor of the greatest textile manufacturing business in the kingdom, became Manchester's first multi-millionaire, still well remembered by the John Rylands Library which his third wife created in his memory. 
Having lost his housekeeper, in 1794 Dr Pilkington married Ann Hatton (died 1815). Of their thirteen children, the two older sons, Richard, born on 20 August 1795, and William, born on 14 May 1800, were destined to take over the wine and spirit business; both were apprenticed to Liverpool firms and joined their father in 1817 and 1820 respectively. The third son to survive childhood, Thomas, born on 24 November 1804, joined them later. In 1823, with dramatic cuts in the spirit duty and consequently great expansion of the business in prospect, William Pilkington & Sons began to rectify and compound raw spirits themselves. In 1826, a year after the duty had been halved, the elder William, by then aged sixty-one and a successful businessman, retired to Windle Hall, set in large grounds on a healthy hillside to the north of St Helens, which he rented for $300 a year. At his death in 1831 he left a small fortune of $20,000. 
Meanwhile, in 1821, spirits had married beer. Dr Pilkington's second daughter, Eleanor, born on 11 May 1798, married Peter Greenall (1796-1845). Although the Greenalls had been common brewers in St Helens from 1762, a later partnership in the brewery at Warrington had become more central to their affairs. Peter Greenall was sent in 1818 to manage their brewery at St Helens, where they had become the largest land and property owners. Making the most of the authority which this gave him, Greenall came to dominate local affairs and in 1841 became MP for one of the borough seats at nearby Wigan. 
By the middle of the 1820s, increased economic activity had stimulated building in the neighbourhood and led to the creation of a new window glass factory, the St Helens Crown Glass Company, to which Greenall and the younger William Pilkington were each invited to subscribe a two-elevenths share, along with other local people and two glass making specialists. Each share in the St Helens Crown Glass Company, valued at only $1000 at the end of 1827 after its first glass making cone had come into production, grew to over $1600 to cover working costs. By then the glass making partners responsible for the management had become involved in a prolonged dispute with the excise commissioners, who were responsible for collecting the duty payable on glass, and had to sell their three shares. Greenall and William Pilkington acquired them and those of the other two local partners who also decided to withdraw. Greenall then owned three shares and Pilkington, on behalf of himself and his elder brother Richard, the remaining eight. William Pilkington, who had proved himself an effective entrepreneur at the wine and spirit business, especially on the selling side, took over the management. Fortunately that enterprise was doing very well at this critical juncture, bringing in about $5000 a year clear profit. 
Greenall and Pilkingtons, as the firm was often then called, had another stroke of good fortune: the other, older crown glassworks in the district ran into trouble with the excise commissioners over the payments of duty. This helped the struggling infant to survive the depression of the later 1820s and early 1830s. William Pilkington, a great believer in face-to-face relationships, travelled to Ireland and the main markets of Great Britain to establish new outlets for St Helens glass, keeping in touch with his elder brother, who remained at Windle Hall, and sending him a stream of instructions. They both lived for the business, though Richard, a devout Congregationalist, and William, who turned Anglican, were strong supporters of their churches and known for their private philanthropy. 
Two more glasshouse cones were added when circumstances improved in the mid-1830s. When building again declined, later in the decade, the firm was fortunate that Greenall was a partner in Parr's Bank, Warrington, for the firm's overdraft there in 1838 reached $17,000, a sum far larger than the bank could possibly have recouped at that time. The Pilkingtons took the opportunity to sell their wine and spirit business on the grounds that their brother Thomas, later to emerge as the black sheep of the family, was withdrawing from its management. 'If we could have given up the Glass Works', William Pilkington informed an enquirer in March 1836, 'we should, but from great outlay of Capital in building... we thought it better to give up one of them than verify the old adage of having too many irons in the fire' (Barker, 78). William Pilkington and his large family, no longer able to live at the shop, moved to more spacious quarters, first Millbrook House in Eccleston, in a salubrious neighbourhood to the west of St Helens, and later, in 1850, to Eccleston Hall itself. 
William Pilkington had married in 1821 Charlotte Boyes; fourteen children were born between 1825 and 1849, twelve of whom survived infancy. Six of the survivors were boys. In 1838 the elder brother, Richard, then married Ann (died 1883), a daughter of Richard Evans of Haydock near St Helens, one of Lancashire's most successful coal owners. Richard and Ann had six children, all boys. The Pilkington partners, therefore, found themselves confronted by the problem, not of finding two suitable sons each to succeed them, but of seeing the others settled in suitable jobs elsewhere. Of William Pilkington's younger sons, George (1840-1923) and Leonard (1847-1925) became chemical manufacturers at Widnes to the south of St Helens on the Mersey, and Harold (1844-1879) was trained for the law and became town clerk of St Helens. William's second son, Richard (1830-1894), a mechanical engineer, spent some time with the firm but then, for reasons unknown, took his skills to London. It was the eldest son, William (1827-1903), better known (from subsequent residences) as Sutton Bill or Roby Bill to distinguish him from his cousin of the same name, and Thomas (1835-1925), who rose from their lowly jobs at the works to become partners, in 1844 and 1853 respectively. Richard's eldest sons, (William) Windle Pilkington (1839-1914) and Richard Pilkington (1841-1908), joined them in 1857 and 1858-9. The others, Edward (1843-1923), Alfred (1844-1896), Charles (1850-1918), and Lawrence (1855-1941) joined their Evans uncles in the Clifton and Kearsley collieries near Manchester. Lawrence's daughter, Margaret (1891-1974), trained at the Slade School of Fine Art and became a prominent patron of the arts in Manchester and honorary director of the Whitworth Art Gallery there from 1939 to 1959. 
In the early 1840s, as the two families grew, Peter Greenall MP decided to withdraw from the partnership. By an agreement signed on 1 February 1842 his three shares were to be repaid in quarterly instalments of $250 over the following seven years, thus valuing the business as a whole at about $25,700. Before the seven years were up, however, he died from a stroke on 18 September 1845, while on a visit to William Pilkington at Millbrook House. 
By then Pilkington Brothers had embarked upon the manufacture of glass by the sheet (pressed from split and flattened cylinders). This process enabled much larger panes to be made than by the existing crown (spun circular) process which the glass excise duty (levied by weight rather than by volume) favoured. When the duty was removed in 1845, followed by the abolition of the window tax in 1851, the three firms which already made sheet glass -- Pilkingtons at St Helens, Chances at Smethwick near Birmingham, and Hartleys, who had opened a factory in 1838 at Sunderland, co. Durham -- drove out of business the longer-established crown glass producers in the north-east, the traditional centre of British window-glass production. All three made the most of the rapidly growing market as prices fell, and Pilkingtons also cut costs and boosted its profits by mining its own coal and selling it to others. It also diversified into rolled plate glass. Between 1851 and 1854 Pilkingtons' output increased from 80 to 150 tons a week. It then had nine furnaces, which gave it parity with the older firm of Chances and 50 per cent more capacity than Hartleys. The removal of the duties on glass had, however, been accompanied by progressive cuts in import duties. When the latter were finally removed in 1857 imports into Britain, mainly from Belgium, negligible in 1850, grew rapidly and during the 1860s captured all the increased demand, British producers barely maintaining the levels of the 1850s. 
This was the daunting challenge which confronted the second generation when they joined their fathers on a newly formed board in 1862, and, three years later, took control of the business. The elder Richard Pilkington died at Windle Hall on 30 December 1869 and his brother William on 12 September 1872 at Downing Hall near Holywell, Flintshire, whence he had retired a few years before. Both left a respectable, if not vast, personal fortune. 
Their sons brought new energy and enterprise to the business. As they grew up, they had gained a local reputation as young bloods, and their liveliness and willingness to take risks were not lost when they became responsible businessmen. Windle showed particular flair. During the later 1860s he kept watch on the development of tank furnaces. These produced molten glass continuously so that the glass-blowers could be kept at work round the clock, instead of intermittently as was inevitably the case with pots which had to be slowly recharged and reheated every time before blowing could begin. He spent several months abroad in 1872 so that he could monitor the Siemens Brothers' work on tanks at a Dresden glassworks, immediately took a licence to continue development at St Helens, and refused to be deterred when the other partners pleaded with him to stop experimenting on grounds of the continuing costs. When ultimately successful, he rapidly replaced pots with tank furnaces, secured a preferential rate of royalty from Siemens, and gained great advantage over the two British rivals. While all this was happening, Pilkingtons decided to build a completely new factory in another part of St Helens to manufacture the costlier cast plate glass. The market was then booming and Pilkingtons could finance the tanks and new works entirely from its profits. It also started to develop a flourishing export trade, particularly across the Atlantic. The business became larger and more profitable than ever in the last quarter of the nineteenth century, often seen by historians as an era of industrial difficulty. Pilkington Brothers became a private limited company in 1894 with a nominal capital of $1.4 million, a figure which reflected its true value. This grew to $2.6 million by 1903 and to $4.2 million by 1914 when the last of the senior members of the second generation died. 
Three of the four board members devoted much more attention to urban development than their fathers had done. Thomas, who did not, retired to Herefordshire in 1898 and, after the South African War, divided his time between Caithness and London (and later Bournemouth), lived to the ripe old age of ninety, and died in 1925. The other three were much more public-spirited. Thomas's brother, Roby Bill, was involved in the incorporation of St Helens in 1868. He was an active Anglican and the life and soul of the local conservative association. He probably transferred most of his wealth to his children before his death in 1903. Their cousin Windle was an equally devoted Congregationalist, as his father and grandfather had been before him. He supported the local ragged school and education development generally, the YMCA, the St Helens Hospital, and the District Nursing Association. He was a town councillor in 1870-90, mayor in 1901-2, and a freeman in 1905. He died on 15 March 1914 in Cannes, France. His younger brother Richard was also actively involved in local government (mayor 1881 and 1896-8) and, like his brother, became a colonel in the volunteers. He was elected MP for Newton, Lancashire, at a by-election in 1899 and held the seat until 1906. He died in 1908. Three of the four members of the second generation sent two sons into the business ['see 'Pilkington, William Henry], Thomas only one. Unlike their fathers, they had been educated at Eton, Harrow, Clifton, or Shrewsbury. Most had gone on to Oxford or Cambridge. 
The elder Pilkingtons, Richard and William, who helped to found the business and then guided it through unforeseen danger of collapse to pre-eminence, had the initial benefit of considerable financial support and an adequate business apprenticeship. Returns from the firm which they struggled so hard to build up over four decades gave their many children a good start in the world. The four sons who took over from them proved worthy successors and made St Helens the centre of window and plate glass manufacture in the kingdom. Pilkington became the leading name in the locality, though it was as yet little known elsewhere in the country. 


@@@@@


doc= 38701


Pilkington family (per. c.1825-1925), glass manufacturers, came to prominence with Richard Pilkington (1795-1869) and William Pilkington (1800-1872), the brothers who in their lifetime came to dominate British window glass manufacture. Their father, William (1765-1831), came of upwardly mobile farming stock at Horwich near Bolton, 18 miles to the north-east of St Helens. In 1779, when William was fourteen, he was apprenticed to a physician in the hamlet of Hardshaw at the heart of a coalmining district to which glass making and other furnace industries had been attracted. He was then sent to St George's Hospital, London, for six months or more in 1785-6, and finally had bought for him a partnership in his former master's practice. Like other physicians of his day, he kept an apothecary's shop which also sold wines and spirits. 
William Pilkington's sister, Elizabeth, came to keep house for him and in 1793 she married Joseph Rylands, a linen weaver in the neighbouring township of Parr who later opened a draper's shop in St Helens. Their third son, John, starting in the textile business in a small way locally, soon moved elsewhere in the county and, as the proprietor of the greatest textile manufacturing business in the kingdom, became Manchester's first multi-millionaire, still well remembered by the John Rylands Library which his third wife created in his memory. 
Having lost his housekeeper, in 1794 Dr Pilkington married Ann Hatton (died 1815). Of their thirteen children, the two older sons, Richard, born on 20 August 1795, and William, born on 14 May 1800, were destined to take over the wine and spirit business; both were apprenticed to Liverpool firms and joined their father in 1817 and 1820 respectively. The third son to survive childhood, Thomas, born on 24 November 1804, joined them later. In 1823, with dramatic cuts in the spirit duty and consequently great expansion of the business in prospect, William Pilkington & Sons began to rectify and compound raw spirits themselves. In 1826, a year after the duty had been halved, the elder William, by then aged sixty-one and a successful businessman, retired to Windle Hall, set in large grounds on a healthy hillside to the north of St Helens, which he rented for $300 a year. At his death in 1831 he left a small fortune of $20,000. 
Meanwhile, in 1821, spirits had married beer. Dr Pilkington's second daughter, Eleanor, born on 11 May 1798, married Peter Greenall (1796-1845). Although the Greenalls had been common brewers in St Helens from 1762, a later partnership in the brewery at Warrington had become more central to their affairs. Peter Greenall was sent in 1818 to manage their brewery at St Helens, where they had become the largest land and property owners. Making the most of the authority which this gave him, Greenall came to dominate local affairs and in 1841 became MP for one of the borough seats at nearby Wigan. 
By the middle of the 1820s, increased economic activity had stimulated building in the neighbourhood and led to the creation of a new window glass factory, the St Helens Crown Glass Company, to which Greenall and the younger William Pilkington were each invited to subscribe a two-elevenths share, along with other local people and two glass making specialists. Each share in the St Helens Crown Glass Company, valued at only $1000 at the end of 1827 after its first glass making cone had come into production, grew to over $1600 to cover working costs. By then the glass making partners responsible for the management had become involved in a prolonged dispute with the excise commissioners, who were responsible for collecting the duty payable on glass, and had to sell their three shares. Greenall and William Pilkington acquired them and those of the other two local partners who also decided to withdraw. Greenall then owned three shares and Pilkington, on behalf of himself and his elder brother Richard, the remaining eight. William Pilkington, who had proved himself an effective entrepreneur at the wine and spirit business, especially on the selling side, took over the management. Fortunately that enterprise was doing very well at this critical juncture, bringing in about $5000 a year clear profit. 
Greenall and Pilkingtons, as the firm was often then called, had another stroke of good fortune: the other, older crown glassworks in the district ran into trouble with the excise commissioners over the payments of duty. This helped the struggling infant to survive the depression of the later 1820s and early 1830s. William Pilkington, a great believer in face-to-face relationships, travelled to Ireland and the main markets of Great Britain to establish new outlets for St Helens glass, keeping in touch with his elder brother, who remained at Windle Hall, and sending him a stream of instructions. They both lived for the business, though Richard, a devout Congregationalist, and William, who turned Anglican, were strong supporters of their churches and known for their private philanthropy. 
Two more glasshouse cones were added when circumstances improved in the mid-1830s. When building again declined, later in the decade, the firm was fortunate that Greenall was a partner in Parr's Bank, Warrington, for the firm's overdraft there in 1838 reached $17,000, a sum far larger than the bank could possibly have recouped at that time. The Pilkingtons took the opportunity to sell their wine and spirit business on the grounds that their brother Thomas, later to emerge as the black sheep of the family, was withdrawing from its management. 'If we could have given up the Glass Works', William Pilkington informed an enquirer in March 1836, 'we should, but from great outlay of Capital in building... we thought it better to give up one of them than verify the old adage of having too many irons in the fire' (Barker, 78). William Pilkington and his large family, no longer able to live at the shop, moved to more spacious quarters, first Millbrook House in Eccleston, in a salubrious neighbourhood to the west of St Helens, and later, in 1850, to Eccleston Hall itself. 
William Pilkington had married in 1821 Charlotte Boyes; fourteen children were born between 1825 and 1849, twelve of whom survived infancy. Six of the survivors were boys. In 1838 the elder brother, Richard, then married Ann (died 1883), a daughter of Richard Evans of Haydock near St Helens, one of Lancashire's most successful coal owners. Richard and Ann had six children, all boys. The Pilkington partners, therefore, found themselves confronted by the problem, not of finding two suitable sons each to succeed them, but of seeing the others settled in suitable jobs elsewhere. Of William Pilkington's younger sons, George (1840-1923) and Leonard (1847-1925) became chemical manufacturers at Widnes to the south of St Helens on the Mersey, and Harold (1844-1879) was trained for the law and became town clerk of St Helens. William's second son, Richard (1830-1894), a mechanical engineer, spent some time with the firm but then, for reasons unknown, took his skills to London. It was the eldest son, William (1827-1903), better known (from subsequent residences) as Sutton Bill or Roby Bill to distinguish him from his cousin of the same name, and Thomas (1835-1925), who rose from their lowly jobs at the works to become partners, in 1844 and 1853 respectively. Richard's eldest sons, (William) Windle Pilkington (1839-1914) and Richard Pilkington (1841-1908), joined them in 1857 and 1858-9. The others, Edward (1843-1923), Alfred (1844-1896), Charles (1850-1918), and Lawrence (1855-1941) joined their Evans uncles in the Clifton and Kearsley collieries near Manchester. Lawrence's daughter, Margaret (1891-1974), trained at the Slade School of Fine Art and became a prominent patron of the arts in Manchester and honorary director of the Whitworth Art Gallery there from 1939 to 1959. 
In the early 1840s, as the two families grew, Peter Greenall MP decided to withdraw from the partnership. By an agreement signed on 1 February 1842 his three shares were to be repaid in quarterly instalments of $250 over the following seven years, thus valuing the business as a whole at about $25,700. Before the seven years were up, however, he died from a stroke on 18 September 1845, while on a visit to William Pilkington at Millbrook House. 
By then Pilkington Brothers had embarked upon the manufacture of glass by the sheet (pressed from split and flattened cylinders). This process enabled much larger panes to be made than by the existing crown (spun circular) process which the glass excise duty (levied by weight rather than by volume) favoured. When the duty was removed in 1845, followed by the abolition of the window tax in 1851, the three firms which already made sheet glass -- Pilkingtons at St Helens, Chances at Smethwick near Birmingham, and Hartleys, who had opened a factory in 1838 at Sunderland, co. Durham -- drove out of business the longer-established crown glass producers in the north-east, the traditional centre of British window-glass production. All three made the most of the rapidly growing market as prices fell, and Pilkingtons also cut costs and boosted its profits by mining its own coal and selling it to others. It also diversified into rolled plate glass. Between 1851 and 1854 Pilkingtons' output increased from 80 to 150 tons a week. It then had nine furnaces, which gave it parity with the older firm of Chances and 50 per cent more capacity than Hartleys. The removal of the duties on glass had, however, been accompanied by progressive cuts in import duties. When the latter were finally removed in 1857 imports into Britain, mainly from Belgium, negligible in 1850, grew rapidly and during the 1860s captured all the increased demand, British producers barely maintaining the levels of the 1850s. 
This was the daunting challenge which confronted the second generation when they joined their fathers on a newly formed board in 1862, and, three years later, took control of the business. The elder Richard Pilkington died at Windle Hall on 30 December 1869 and his brother William on 12 September 1872 at Downing Hall near Holywell, Flintshire, whence he had retired a few years before. Both left a respectable, if not vast, personal fortune. 
Their sons brought new energy and enterprise to the business. As they grew up, they had gained a local reputation as young bloods, and their liveliness and willingness to take risks were not lost when they became responsible businessmen. Windle showed particular flair. During the later 1860s he kept watch on the development of tank furnaces. These produced molten glass continuously so that the glass-blowers could be kept at work round the clock, instead of intermittently as was inevitably the case with pots which had to be slowly recharged and reheated every time before blowing could begin. He spent several months abroad in 1872 so that he could monitor the Siemens Brothers' work on tanks at a Dresden glassworks, immediately took a licence to continue development at St Helens, and refused to be deterred when the other partners pleaded with him to stop experimenting on grounds of the continuing costs. When ultimately successful, he rapidly replaced pots with tank furnaces, secured a preferential rate of royalty from Siemens, and gained great advantage over the two British rivals. While all this was happening, Pilkingtons decided to build a completely new factory in another part of St Helens to manufacture the costlier cast plate glass. The market was then booming and Pilkingtons could finance the tanks and new works entirely from its profits. It also started to develop a flourishing export trade, particularly across the Atlantic. The business became larger and more profitable than ever in the last quarter of the nineteenth century, often seen by historians as an era of industrial difficulty. Pilkington Brothers became a private limited company in 1894 with a nominal capital of $1.4 million, a figure which reflected its true value. This grew to $2.6 million by 1903 and to $4.2 million by 1914 when the last of the senior members of the second generation died. 
Three of the four board members devoted much more attention to urban development than their fathers had done. Thomas, who did not, retired to Herefordshire in 1898 and, after the South African War, divided his time between Caithness and London (and later Bournemouth), lived to the ripe old age of ninety, and died in 1925. The other three were much more public-spirited. Thomas's brother, Roby Bill, was involved in the incorporation of St Helens in 1868. He was an active Anglican and the life and soul of the local conservative association. He probably transferred most of his wealth to his children before his death in 1903. Their cousin Windle was an equally devoted Congregationalist, as his father and grandfather had been before him. He supported the local ragged school and education development generally, the YMCA, the St Helens Hospital, and the District Nursing Association. He was a town councillor in 1870-90, mayor in 1901-2, and a freeman in 1905. He died on 15 March 1914 in Cannes, France. His younger brother Richard was also actively involved in local government (mayor 1881 and 1896-8) and, like his brother, became a colonel in the volunteers. He was elected MP for Newton, Lancashire, at a by-election in 1899 and held the seat until 1906. He died in 1908. Three of the four members of the second generation sent two sons into the business ['see 'Pilkington, William Henry], Thomas only one. Unlike their fathers, they had been educated at Eton, Harrow, Clifton, or Shrewsbury. Most had gone on to Oxford or Cambridge. 
The elder Pilkingtons, Richard and William, who helped to found the business and then guided it through unforeseen danger of collapse to pre-eminence, had the initial benefit of considerable financial support and an adequate business apprenticeship. Returns from the firm which they struggled so hard to build up over four decades gave their many children a good start in the world. The four sons who took over from them proved worthy successors and made St Helens the centre of window and plate glass manufacture in the kingdom. Pilkington became the leading name in the locality, though it was as yet little known elsewhere in the country. 


@@@@@


doc= 38702


Pilkington family (per. c.1825-1925), glass manufacturers, came to prominence with Richard Pilkington (1795-1869) and William Pilkington (1800-1872), the brothers who in their lifetime came to dominate British window glass manufacture. Their father, William (1765-1831), came of upwardly mobile farming stock at Horwich near Bolton, 18 miles to the north-east of St Helens. In 1779, when William was fourteen, he was apprenticed to a physician in the hamlet of Hardshaw at the heart of a coalmining district to which glass making and other furnace industries had been attracted. He was then sent to St George's Hospital, London, for six months or more in 1785-6, and finally had bought for him a partnership in his former master's practice. Like other physicians of his day, he kept an apothecary's shop which also sold wines and spirits. 
William Pilkington's sister, Elizabeth, came to keep house for him and in 1793 she married Joseph Rylands, a linen weaver in the neighbouring township of Parr who later opened a draper's shop in St Helens. Their third son, John, starting in the textile business in a small way locally, soon moved elsewhere in the county and, as the proprietor of the greatest textile manufacturing business in the kingdom, became Manchester's first multi-millionaire, still well remembered by the John Rylands Library which his third wife created in his memory. 
Having lost his housekeeper, in 1794 Dr Pilkington married Ann Hatton (died 1815). Of their thirteen children, the two older sons, Richard, born on 20 August 1795, and William, born on 14 May 1800, were destined to take over the wine and spirit business; both were apprenticed to Liverpool firms and joined their father in 1817 and 1820 respectively. The third son to survive childhood, Thomas, born on 24 November 1804, joined them later. In 1823, with dramatic cuts in the spirit duty and consequently great expansion of the business in prospect, William Pilkington & Sons began to rectify and compound raw spirits themselves. In 1826, a year after the duty had been halved, the elder William, by then aged sixty-one and a successful businessman, retired to Windle Hall, set in large grounds on a healthy hillside to the north of St Helens, which he rented for $300 a year. At his death in 1831 he left a small fortune of $20,000. 
Meanwhile, in 1821, spirits had married beer. Dr Pilkington's second daughter, Eleanor, born on 11 May 1798, married Peter Greenall (1796-1845). Although the Greenalls had been common brewers in St Helens from 1762, a later partnership in the brewery at Warrington had become more central to their affairs. Peter Greenall was sent in 1818 to manage their brewery at St Helens, where they had become the largest land and property owners. Making the most of the authority which this gave him, Greenall came to dominate local affairs and in 1841 became MP for one of the borough seats at nearby Wigan. 
By the middle of the 1820s, increased economic activity had stimulated building in the neighbourhood and led to the creation of a new window glass factory, the St Helens Crown Glass Company, to which Greenall and the younger William Pilkington were each invited to subscribe a two-elevenths share, along with other local people and two glass making specialists. Each share in the St Helens Crown Glass Company, valued at only $1000 at the end of 1827 after its first glass making cone had come into production, grew to over $1600 to cover working costs. By then the glass making partners responsible for the management had become involved in a prolonged dispute with the excise commissioners, who were responsible for collecting the duty payable on glass, and had to sell their three shares. Greenall and William Pilkington acquired them and those of the other two local partners who also decided to withdraw. Greenall then owned three shares and Pilkington, on behalf of himself and his elder brother Richard, the remaining eight. William Pilkington, who had proved himself an effective entrepreneur at the wine and spirit business, especially on the selling side, took over the management. Fortunately that enterprise was doing very well at this critical juncture, bringing in about $5000 a year clear profit. 
Greenall and Pilkingtons, as the firm was often then called, had another stroke of good fortune: the other, older crown glassworks in the district ran into trouble with the excise commissioners over the payments of duty. This helped the struggling infant to survive the depression of the later 1820s and early 1830s. William Pilkington, a great believer in face-to-face relationships, travelled to Ireland and the main markets of Great Britain to establish new outlets for St Helens glass, keeping in touch with his elder brother, who remained at Windle Hall, and sending him a stream of instructions. They both lived for the business, though Richard, a devout Congregationalist, and William, who turned Anglican, were strong supporters of their churches and known for their private philanthropy. 
Two more glasshouse cones were added when circumstances improved in the mid-1830s. When building again declined, later in the decade, the firm was fortunate that Greenall was a partner in Parr's Bank, Warrington, for the firm's overdraft there in 1838 reached $17,000, a sum far larger than the bank could possibly have recouped at that time. The Pilkingtons took the opportunity to sell their wine and spirit business on the grounds that their brother Thomas, later to emerge as the black sheep of the family, was withdrawing from its management. 'If we could have given up the Glass Works', William Pilkington informed an enquirer in March 1836, 'we should, but from great outlay of Capital in building... we thought it better to give up one of them than verify the old adage of having too many irons in the fire' (Barker, 78). William Pilkington and his large family, no longer able to live at the shop, moved to more spacious quarters, first Millbrook House in Eccleston, in a salubrious neighbourhood to the west of St Helens, and later, in 1850, to Eccleston Hall itself. 
William Pilkington had married in 1821 Charlotte Boyes; fourteen children were born between 1825 and 1849, twelve of whom survived infancy. Six of the survivors were boys. In 1838 the elder brother, Richard, then married Ann (died 1883), a daughter of Richard Evans of Haydock near St Helens, one of Lancashire's most successful coal owners. Richard and Ann had six children, all boys. The Pilkington partners, therefore, found themselves confronted by the problem, not of finding two suitable sons each to succeed them, but of seeing the others settled in suitable jobs elsewhere. Of William Pilkington's younger sons, George (1840-1923) and Leonard (1847-1925) became chemical manufacturers at Widnes to the south of St Helens on the Mersey, and Harold (1844-1879) was trained for the law and became town clerk of St Helens. William's second son, Richard (1830-1894), a mechanical engineer, spent some time with the firm but then, for reasons unknown, took his skills to London. It was the eldest son, William (1827-1903), better known (from subsequent residences) as Sutton Bill or Roby Bill to distinguish him from his cousin of the same name, and Thomas (1835-1925), who rose from their lowly jobs at the works to become partners, in 1844 and 1853 respectively. Richard's eldest sons, (William) Windle Pilkington (1839-1914) and Richard Pilkington (1841-1908), joined them in 1857 and 1858-9. The others, Edward (1843-1923), Alfred (1844-1896), Charles (1850-1918), and Lawrence (1855-1941) joined their Evans uncles in the Clifton and Kearsley collieries near Manchester. Lawrence's daughter, Margaret (1891-1974), trained at the Slade School of Fine Art and became a prominent patron of the arts in Manchester and honorary director of the Whitworth Art Gallery there from 1939 to 1959. 
In the early 1840s, as the two families grew, Peter Greenall MP decided to withdraw from the partnership. By an agreement signed on 1 February 1842 his three shares were to be repaid in quarterly instalments of $250 over the following seven years, thus valuing the business as a whole at about $25,700. Before the seven years were up, however, he died from a stroke on 18 September 1845, while on a visit to William Pilkington at Millbrook House. 
By then Pilkington Brothers had embarked upon the manufacture of glass by the sheet (pressed from split and flattened cylinders). This process enabled much larger panes to be made than by the existing crown (spun circular) process which the glass excise duty (levied by weight rather than by volume) favoured. When the duty was removed in 1845, followed by the abolition of the window tax in 1851, the three firms which already made sheet glass -- Pilkingtons at St Helens, Chances at Smethwick near Birmingham, and Hartleys, who had opened a factory in 1838 at Sunderland, co. Durham -- drove out of business the longer-established crown glass producers in the north-east, the traditional centre of British window-glass production. All three made the most of the rapidly growing market as prices fell, and Pilkingtons also cut costs and boosted its profits by mining its own coal and selling it to others. It also diversified into rolled plate glass. Between 1851 and 1854 Pilkingtons' output increased from 80 to 150 tons a week. It then had nine furnaces, which gave it parity with the older firm of Chances and 50 per cent more capacity than Hartleys. The removal of the duties on glass had, however, been accompanied by progressive cuts in import duties. When the latter were finally removed in 1857 imports into Britain, mainly from Belgium, negligible in 1850, grew rapidly and during the 1860s captured all the increased demand, British producers barely maintaining the levels of the 1850s. 
This was the daunting challenge which confronted the second generation when they joined their fathers on a newly formed board in 1862, and, three years later, took control of the business. The elder Richard Pilkington died at Windle Hall on 30 December 1869 and his brother William on 12 September 1872 at Downing Hall near Holywell, Flintshire, whence he had retired a few years before. Both left a respectable, if not vast, personal fortune. 
Their sons brought new energy and enterprise to the business. As they grew up, they had gained a local reputation as young bloods, and their liveliness and willingness to take risks were not lost when they became responsible businessmen. Windle showed particular flair. During the later 1860s he kept watch on the development of tank furnaces. These produced molten glass continuously so that the glass-blowers could be kept at work round the clock, instead of intermittently as was inevitably the case with pots which had to be slowly recharged and reheated every time before blowing could begin. He spent several months abroad in 1872 so that he could monitor the Siemens Brothers' work on tanks at a Dresden glassworks, immediately took a licence to continue development at St Helens, and refused to be deterred when the other partners pleaded with him to stop experimenting on grounds of the continuing costs. When ultimately successful, he rapidly replaced pots with tank furnaces, secured a preferential rate of royalty from Siemens, and gained great advantage over the two British rivals. While all this was happening, Pilkingtons decided to build a completely new factory in another part of St Helens to manufacture the costlier cast plate glass. The market was then booming and Pilkingtons could finance the tanks and new works entirely from its profits. It also started to develop a flourishing export trade, particularly across the Atlantic. The business became larger and more profitable than ever in the last quarter of the nineteenth century, often seen by historians as an era of industrial difficulty. Pilkington Brothers became a private limited company in 1894 with a nominal capital of $1.4 million, a figure which reflected its true value. This grew to $2.6 million by 1903 and to $4.2 million by 1914 when the last of the senior members of the second generation died. 
Three of the four board members devoted much more attention to urban development than their fathers had done. Thomas, who did not, retired to Herefordshire in 1898 and, after the South African War, divided his time between Caithness and London (and later Bournemouth), lived to the ripe old age of ninety, and died in 1925. The other three were much more public-spirited. Thomas's brother, Roby Bill, was involved in the incorporation of St Helens in 1868. He was an active Anglican and the life and soul of the local conservative association. He probably transferred most of his wealth to his children before his death in 1903. Their cousin Windle was an equally devoted Congregationalist, as his father and grandfather had been before him. He supported the local ragged school and education development generally, the YMCA, the St Helens Hospital, and the District Nursing Association. He was a town councillor in 1870-90, mayor in 1901-2, and a freeman in 1905. He died on 15 March 1914 in Cannes, France. His younger brother Richard was also actively involved in local government (mayor 1881 and 1896-8) and, like his brother, became a colonel in the volunteers. He was elected MP for Newton, Lancashire, at a by-election in 1899 and held the seat until 1906. He died in 1908. Three of the four members of the second generation sent two sons into the business ['see 'Pilkington, William Henry], Thomas only one. Unlike their fathers, they had been educated at Eton, Harrow, Clifton, or Shrewsbury. Most had gone on to Oxford or Cambridge. 
The elder Pilkingtons, Richard and William, who helped to found the business and then guided it through unforeseen danger of collapse to pre-eminence, had the initial benefit of considerable financial support and an adequate business apprenticeship. Returns from the firm which they struggled so hard to build up over four decades gave their many children a good start in the world. The four sons who took over from them proved worthy successors and made St Helens the centre of window and plate glass manufacture in the kingdom. Pilkington became the leading name in the locality, though it was as yet little known elsewhere in the country. 


