@@@@@


doc= 38703


Pilkington family (per. c.1825-1925), glass manufacturers, came to prominence with Richard Pilkington (1795-1869) and William Pilkington (1800-1872), the brothers who in their lifetime came to dominate British window glass manufacture. Their father, William (1765-1831), came of upwardly mobile farming stock at Horwich near Bolton, 18 miles to the north-east of St Helens. In 1779, when William was fourteen, he was apprenticed to a physician in the hamlet of Hardshaw at the heart of a coalmining district to which glass making and other furnace industries had been attracted. He was then sent to St George's Hospital, London, for six months or more in 1785-6, and finally had bought for him a partnership in his former master's practice. Like other physicians of his day, he kept an apothecary's shop which also sold wines and spirits. 
William Pilkington's sister, Elizabeth, came to keep house for him and in 1793 she married Joseph Rylands, a linen weaver in the neighbouring township of Parr who later opened a draper's shop in St Helens. Their third son, John, starting in the textile business in a small way locally, soon moved elsewhere in the county and, as the proprietor of the greatest textile manufacturing business in the kingdom, became Manchester's first multi-millionaire, still well remembered by the John Rylands Library which his third wife created in his memory. 
Having lost his housekeeper, in 1794 Dr Pilkington married Ann Hatton (died 1815). Of their thirteen children, the two older sons, Richard, born on 20 August 1795, and William, born on 14 May 1800, were destined to take over the wine and spirit business; both were apprenticed to Liverpool firms and joined their father in 1817 and 1820 respectively. The third son to survive childhood, Thomas, born on 24 November 1804, joined them later. In 1823, with dramatic cuts in the spirit duty and consequently great expansion of the business in prospect, William Pilkington & Sons began to rectify and compound raw spirits themselves. In 1826, a year after the duty had been halved, the elder William, by then aged sixty-one and a successful businessman, retired to Windle Hall, set in large grounds on a healthy hillside to the north of St Helens, which he rented for $300 a year. At his death in 1831 he left a small fortune of $20,000. 
Meanwhile, in 1821, spirits had married beer. Dr Pilkington's second daughter, Eleanor, born on 11 May 1798, married Peter Greenall (1796-1845). Although the Greenalls had been common brewers in St Helens from 1762, a later partnership in the brewery at Warrington had become more central to their affairs. Peter Greenall was sent in 1818 to manage their brewery at St Helens, where they had become the largest land and property owners. Making the most of the authority which this gave him, Greenall came to dominate local affairs and in 1841 became MP for one of the borough seats at nearby Wigan. 
By the middle of the 1820s, increased economic activity had stimulated building in the neighbourhood and led to the creation of a new window glass factory, the St Helens Crown Glass Company, to which Greenall and the younger William Pilkington were each invited to subscribe a two-elevenths share, along with other local people and two glass making specialists. Each share in the St Helens Crown Glass Company, valued at only $1000 at the end of 1827 after its first glass making cone had come into production, grew to over $1600 to cover working costs. By then the glass making partners responsible for the management had become involved in a prolonged dispute with the excise commissioners, who were responsible for collecting the duty payable on glass, and had to sell their three shares. Greenall and William Pilkington acquired them and those of the other two local partners who also decided to withdraw. Greenall then owned three shares and Pilkington, on behalf of himself and his elder brother Richard, the remaining eight. William Pilkington, who had proved himself an effective entrepreneur at the wine and spirit business, especially on the selling side, took over the management. Fortunately that enterprise was doing very well at this critical juncture, bringing in about $5000 a year clear profit. 
Greenall and Pilkingtons, as the firm was often then called, had another stroke of good fortune: the other, older crown glassworks in the district ran into trouble with the excise commissioners over the payments of duty. This helped the struggling infant to survive the depression of the later 1820s and early 1830s. William Pilkington, a great believer in face-to-face relationships, travelled to Ireland and the main markets of Great Britain to establish new outlets for St Helens glass, keeping in touch with his elder brother, who remained at Windle Hall, and sending him a stream of instructions. They both lived for the business, though Richard, a devout Congregationalist, and William, who turned Anglican, were strong supporters of their churches and known for their private philanthropy. 
Two more glasshouse cones were added when circumstances improved in the mid-1830s. When building again declined, later in the decade, the firm was fortunate that Greenall was a partner in Parr's Bank, Warrington, for the firm's overdraft there in 1838 reached $17,000, a sum far larger than the bank could possibly have recouped at that time. The Pilkingtons took the opportunity to sell their wine and spirit business on the grounds that their brother Thomas, later to emerge as the black sheep of the family, was withdrawing from its management. 'If we could have given up the Glass Works', William Pilkington informed an enquirer in March 1836, 'we should, but from great outlay of Capital in building... we thought it better to give up one of them than verify the old adage of having too many irons in the fire' (Barker, 78). William Pilkington and his large family, no longer able to live at the shop, moved to more spacious quarters, first Millbrook House in Eccleston, in a salubrious neighbourhood to the west of St Helens, and later, in 1850, to Eccleston Hall itself. 
William Pilkington had married in 1821 Charlotte Boyes; fourteen children were born between 1825 and 1849, twelve of whom survived infancy. Six of the survivors were boys. In 1838 the elder brother, Richard, then married Ann (died 1883), a daughter of Richard Evans of Haydock near St Helens, one of Lancashire's most successful coal owners. Richard and Ann had six children, all boys. The Pilkington partners, therefore, found themselves confronted by the problem, not of finding two suitable sons each to succeed them, but of seeing the others settled in suitable jobs elsewhere. Of William Pilkington's younger sons, George (1840-1923) and Leonard (1847-1925) became chemical manufacturers at Widnes to the south of St Helens on the Mersey, and Harold (1844-1879) was trained for the law and became town clerk of St Helens. William's second son, Richard (1830-1894), a mechanical engineer, spent some time with the firm but then, for reasons unknown, took his skills to London. It was the eldest son, William (1827-1903), better known (from subsequent residences) as Sutton Bill or Roby Bill to distinguish him from his cousin of the same name, and Thomas (1835-1925), who rose from their lowly jobs at the works to become partners, in 1844 and 1853 respectively. Richard's eldest sons, (William) Windle Pilkington (1839-1914) and Richard Pilkington (1841-1908), joined them in 1857 and 1858-9. The others, Edward (1843-1923), Alfred (1844-1896), Charles (1850-1918), and Lawrence (1855-1941) joined their Evans uncles in the Clifton and Kearsley collieries near Manchester. Lawrence's daughter, Margaret (1891-1974), trained at the Slade School of Fine Art and became a prominent patron of the arts in Manchester and honorary director of the Whitworth Art Gallery there from 1939 to 1959. 
In the early 1840s, as the two families grew, Peter Greenall MP decided to withdraw from the partnership. By an agreement signed on 1 February 1842 his three shares were to be repaid in quarterly instalments of $250 over the following seven years, thus valuing the business as a whole at about $25,700. Before the seven years were up, however, he died from a stroke on 18 September 1845, while on a visit to William Pilkington at Millbrook House. 
By then Pilkington Brothers had embarked upon the manufacture of glass by the sheet (pressed from split and flattened cylinders). This process enabled much larger panes to be made than by the existing crown (spun circular) process which the glass excise duty (levied by weight rather than by volume) favoured. When the duty was removed in 1845, followed by the abolition of the window tax in 1851, the three firms which already made sheet glass -- Pilkingtons at St Helens, Chances at Smethwick near Birmingham, and Hartleys, who had opened a factory in 1838 at Sunderland, co. Durham -- drove out of business the longer-established crown glass producers in the north-east, the traditional centre of British window-glass production. All three made the most of the rapidly growing market as prices fell, and Pilkingtons also cut costs and boosted its profits by mining its own coal and selling it to others. It also diversified into rolled plate glass. Between 1851 and 1854 Pilkingtons' output increased from 80 to 150 tons a week. It then had nine furnaces, which gave it parity with the older firm of Chances and 50 per cent more capacity than Hartleys. The removal of the duties on glass had, however, been accompanied by progressive cuts in import duties. When the latter were finally removed in 1857 imports into Britain, mainly from Belgium, negligible in 1850, grew rapidly and during the 1860s captured all the increased demand, British producers barely maintaining the levels of the 1850s. 
This was the daunting challenge which confronted the second generation when they joined their fathers on a newly formed board in 1862, and, three years later, took control of the business. The elder Richard Pilkington died at Windle Hall on 30 December 1869 and his brother William on 12 September 1872 at Downing Hall near Holywell, Flintshire, whence he had retired a few years before. Both left a respectable, if not vast, personal fortune. 
Their sons brought new energy and enterprise to the business. As they grew up, they had gained a local reputation as young bloods, and their liveliness and willingness to take risks were not lost when they became responsible businessmen. Windle showed particular flair. During the later 1860s he kept watch on the development of tank furnaces. These produced molten glass continuously so that the glass-blowers could be kept at work round the clock, instead of intermittently as was inevitably the case with pots which had to be slowly recharged and reheated every time before blowing could begin. He spent several months abroad in 1872 so that he could monitor the Siemens Brothers' work on tanks at a Dresden glassworks, immediately took a licence to continue development at St Helens, and refused to be deterred when the other partners pleaded with him to stop experimenting on grounds of the continuing costs. When ultimately successful, he rapidly replaced pots with tank furnaces, secured a preferential rate of royalty from Siemens, and gained great advantage over the two British rivals. While all this was happening, Pilkingtons decided to build a completely new factory in another part of St Helens to manufacture the costlier cast plate glass. The market was then booming and Pilkingtons could finance the tanks and new works entirely from its profits. It also started to develop a flourishing export trade, particularly across the Atlantic. The business became larger and more profitable than ever in the last quarter of the nineteenth century, often seen by historians as an era of industrial difficulty. Pilkington Brothers became a private limited company in 1894 with a nominal capital of $1.4 million, a figure which reflected its true value. This grew to $2.6 million by 1903 and to $4.2 million by 1914 when the last of the senior members of the second generation died. 
Three of the four board members devoted much more attention to urban development than their fathers had done. Thomas, who did not, retired to Herefordshire in 1898 and, after the South African War, divided his time between Caithness and London (and later Bournemouth), lived to the ripe old age of ninety, and died in 1925. The other three were much more public-spirited. Thomas's brother, Roby Bill, was involved in the incorporation of St Helens in 1868. He was an active Anglican and the life and soul of the local conservative association. He probably transferred most of his wealth to his children before his death in 1903. Their cousin Windle was an equally devoted Congregationalist, as his father and grandfather had been before him. He supported the local ragged school and education development generally, the YMCA, the St Helens Hospital, and the District Nursing Association. He was a town councillor in 1870-90, mayor in 1901-2, and a freeman in 1905. He died on 15 March 1914 in Cannes, France. His younger brother Richard was also actively involved in local government (mayor 1881 and 1896-8) and, like his brother, became a colonel in the volunteers. He was elected MP for Newton, Lancashire, at a by-election in 1899 and held the seat until 1906. He died in 1908. Three of the four members of the second generation sent two sons into the business ['see 'Pilkington, William Henry], Thomas only one. Unlike their fathers, they had been educated at Eton, Harrow, Clifton, or Shrewsbury. Most had gone on to Oxford or Cambridge. 
The elder Pilkingtons, Richard and William, who helped to found the business and then guided it through unforeseen danger of collapse to pre-eminence, had the initial benefit of considerable financial support and an adequate business apprenticeship. Returns from the firm which they struggled so hard to build up over four decades gave their many children a good start in the world. The four sons who took over from them proved worthy successors and made St Helens the centre of window and plate glass manufacture in the kingdom. Pilkington became the leading name in the locality, though it was as yet little known elsewhere in the country. 


@@@@@


doc= 38704


Wise, Edward Frank (1885-1933), economist and politician, was born at 13 Albert Street, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, on 3 July 1885, the elder son of Edward Wise, a fishmonger, and his wife, Ellen Clayton ('nee' Peel). He was educated at Guildhall feoffment elementary school, King Edward VI School in Bury St Edmunds, and Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he graduated as second senior optime in the mathematical tripos (1906) and with a second in part one of the natural sciences tripos (1907). In 1907 he entered the civil service as a junior clerk in the House of Commons and he was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1911. In that year he became sub-warden at Toynbee Hall, which he gave as his residence when on 2 November 1912 at St Paul's Church, Hampstead, he married Dorothy Lilian ('b'. 1886), the daughter of William Shepperson Owen, a bank manager. Having studied at Royal Holloway College, she was a graduate of London University and a lecturer in English there. They had one son and three daughters. 
In 1912 Wise became principal clerk to the National Health Insurance Commission and was subsequently secretary to the Anglo-Russian supplies committee of the War Office (1914-15), assistant director of army contracts in charge of clothing and raw materials (1915-17), and principal assistant secretary to the Ministry of Food (1917-18). He was one of the British representatives on the Inter-Allied Supreme Economic Council (1919) and assistant secretary at the Board of Trade (1922). These last responsibilities involved work on wartime food rationing, the food supply position in post-war Europe, the Russian famine of the early 1920s, and discussions with Russian trade delegates. Wise also attended the post-war international economic conferences at San Remo (1920) and Genoa (1922). He was created CB in 1919 and resigned from the civil service in February 1923 before taking up a post as an economic adviser on foreign trade to the Russian co-operative movement during the period 1923-9. 
Wise's civil service experience with army contracts and the Ministry of Food, followed by his work with the Russian co-operative movement, helped to shape his thinking on economic questions, as did his socialism, which found expression in a membership of the Independent Labour Party that predated 1914. Like E. M. H. Lloyd, he saw the potential for translating aspects of wartime planning into socialist economic practice, as was apparent in his contribution to the formulation of the Independent Labour Party's policy on agriculture in the early 1920s. Influenced by Wise, an Independent Labour Party committee set up to report on agriculture and the land proposed the establishment of a board of supply for the bulk purchase of imports that, in regulating supply, would control prices of agricultural produce. The idea was subsequently embodied in H. N. Brailsford's 'Socialist Policy for Agriculture' (1924) and had an impact on the agricultural policy of the Labour Party. 
Similar views on the planning and regulation of the supply of basic commodities were articulated in 'The Living Wage' (1926), which Wise co-wrote with J. A. Hobson, H. N. Brailsford, and A. Creech Jones. The decisive analytical and prescriptive inputs were those of Hobson and Brailsford, but a key element in it was its proposed control of the supply and prices of imported food and raw materials, and here one can certainly detect the mind of Wise. Such ideas were also to the fore in Wise's 'Profiteering in bread: how to stop it: evidence given on behalf of the Independent Labour Party before the royal commission on food prices' (1926) and his sympathetic account, 'The Russian Co-Operative Movement' (1926). 
Having stood unsuccessfully for Bradford North in the general election of 1924, Wise was elected MP for Leicester East in 1929. Against the background of the global depression in the price of agricultural prices of the 1920s his maiden speech in the House of Commons favoured a state-financed and directed price stabilization scheme for wheat ('Hansard 5C', 231, 30 Oct 1929, 188-95); it was subsequently published as an Independent Labour Party pamphlet, 'Wheat: Dumping v. State Purchase' (1929). He was critical of the Labour Party leadership on a number of important policy issues and in particular Snowden's view in the late 1920s and early 1930s that the Bank of England and the conduct of monetary policy should be made impervious to political influences. As Wise saw it, the City, with the Bank of England at its heart, was infused with a capitalist bias and unless its power to create and direct investment was broken there was little hope of the Labour Party's implementing a radical economic strategy. He therefore advocated the nationalization of the Bank of England and the joint-stock banks and continued to press for this after the demise of the second minority Labour government in 1931. He also criticized that government's attempts to rationalize the coal industry through the 'Coal Mines Reorganization Act', 1930, making clear in his contributions to parliamentary debates that public ownership would alone provide a solution to the problems of the coal industry. He lost his seat at Leicester in the general election of 1931. 
At the Labour Party conference of 1932 Wise successfully introduced an amendment to Hugh Dalton's resolutions on currency, banking, and finance. The amendment proposed the nationalization of the joint-stock banks and other financial institutions and was carried despite the objections of the leadership. After the conference he was invited by the party's finance and trade committee, along with Clement Attlee, to prepare a memorandum on the joint-stock banks. The result was a detailed plan for their nationalization which found expression in the Labour Party's 'Socialism and the Condition of the People' (1933). 
Though critical of many aspects of the 1929-31 Labour government's conduct, Wise, in the aftermath of its demise, believed that the Labour Party's consequent leftward shift created the basis for the active involvement of the Independent Labour Party in the pursuit of a manifestly socialist strategy. However, in the early 1930s the Independent Labour Party became increasingly critical of the Labour leadership's position on many issues and Wise was caught up in the controversy over whether or not it should disaffiliate. As a persistent opponent of disaffiliation, arguing that outside the Labour Party the Independent Labour Party would degenerate into a sectarian minority, Wise rapidly found himself in a minority within its national administrative council (of which he had been a member since the early 1920s). When the decision to disaffiliate came, he helped to establish the Socialist League, comprising members of the Society for Socialist Inquiry and Propaganda and the Independent Labour Party affiliationists. He became its chairman shortly before his death. The Socialist League published two of his contributions to the early 1930s debate on the fate of the City and the conduct of monetary policy under a future Labour government: 'The Control of Finance and the Financiers' (1932) and 'The Socialisation of Banking' (1934). 
Wise died suddenly of heart failure on 5 November 1933 in a field adjoining Wallington Hall, Morpeth, Northumberland, the home of C. P. Trevelyan; his wife survived him. He was buried at Wallington Hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 38705


Hunt, (Isabel) Violet (1862-1942), author and literary hostess, was born on 28 September 1862 at 29 Old Elvet, Durham, the eldest of the three daughters of Alfred William Hunt (1830-1896), landscape watercolourist, and Margaret Raine Hunt (1831-1912), novelist and translator. She was tutored at home and in 1877 graduated from Notting Hill and Ealing high school, one of London's first public day schools for girls, going on to study at the Kensington Art School (1877-9). 
Violet Hunt had literary aspirations, a sharp tongue, and the magnetism to attract influential people. An early admirer was the young Oscar Wilde, who called her 'the sweetest Violet in England' ('Letters of Oscar Wilde', 64). In her memoirs she asserted that she 'as nearly as possible escaped the honour of being Mrs. Wilde' (Hunt, 168). In fact she really preferred older married men, including her first lover, George Henry Boughton, a Royal Academy artist, and Oswald John Frederick Crawfurd (1834-1909), a diplomatist and publisher, from whom she contracted syphilis during their relationship (1890-1900). She seduced Somerset Maugham, and was in turn seduced by H. G. Wells; later she was known as the self-proclaimed wife of Ford Madox Ford (1873-1939), then known as Hueffer. Her ten-year affair with the writer, eleven years her junior, was one of the saddest stories in literary history: it resulted in scandal, lawsuits, and tabloid headlines. 
Violet Hunt wrote short stories, seventeen novels, a memoir of her Edwardian years, and a biography of Elizabeth Siddal, wife of Dante Gabriel Rossetti. Novels such as 'The Maiden's Progress' (1894) and 'A Hard Woman' (1895) are typical examples of the 'new woman' genre, exploring various routes of resistance to the constraints placed on women by late nineteenth-century society. 'The Human Interest' (1899), its heroine 'a great Ibsenite', frankly explores sexual problems, as does much of her fiction, including her later novel 'White Rose of Weary Leaf' (1908), felt by many to be her best work, and the short-story collection 'Tales of the Uneasy' (1911). Her autobiographical novels, 'Their Lives' (1916), where Wilde appears as Philip Wynyard, and 'Their Hearts' (1921) are of interest for their depictions of notable figures. 
Violet Hunt's literary reputation stems, however, more from her Kensington salons at South Lodge, Campden Hill, where she entertained Rebecca West, Ezra Pound, Joseph Conrad, Wyndham Lewis, D. H. Lawrence, and Henry James; she founded the Women Writers' Suffrage League, and in 1921 she co-founded PEN with Mrs C. A. 'Sappho' Dawson, electing John Galsworthy as president. In 1908 she helped Ford to start the 'English Review', the literary magazine that discovered D. H. Lawrence, with the publication of 'The Odour of Chrysanthemums'. Lawrence said wryly of Hunt: 'I rather like her -- she's such a real assassin' ('Collected Letters', 98). Violet Hunt appears as the manipulative Florence in Ford's 'The Good Soldier' and the termagant Sylvia in 'Parade's End'. In 'The Moon and Sixpence' Maugham used her as the original for Rose Waterford, a Pre-Raphaelite beauty who looked on life as an opportunity for writing novels. Her features inform the paintings of Edward Burne-Jones and Walter Sickert, for both of whom she modelled. 
Violet Hunt died of pneumonia at South Lodge during the blitz at the age of seventy-nine on 16 January 1942, and was buried in the Brookwood cemetery. 'The Times''s obituary noted that, artistically, 'certain types -- especially of disagreeable worldly women -- she drew with extreme skill', and accurately concluded that, personally, 'kindness of heart and feeling for the troubles of others lay behind her often acid speeches' ('The Times', 19 Jan 1942). 


@@@@@


doc= 38706


Bastable, Charles Francis (1855-1945), economist, was born at Charleville, co. Cork, the only son of the Revd Robert Bastable (1800-1889), rector of Knocktemple and Kilbolane. His mother was a daughter of Dr Little of Sligo. He was educated at Fermoy College, Fermoy, co. Cork, and in 1873 entered the University of Dublin, Trinity College, where he graduated BA in 1878 with a senior moderatorship (first-class honours) in history and political science, a course which then included political economy. He proceeded to the degrees of MA in 1882 and LLD in 1890. 
At first Bastable thought of practising law as a career, and he was called to the Irish bar in 1881; but in 1882 an opportunity of developing his interest in economic studies arose. The Whately professorship of political economy in Trinity College, Dublin, had been filled quinquennially by examination since its establishment in 1832; Bastable was the successful candidate at the examination which took place in 1882 and was appointed to the chair. At the end of his term of office in 1887 the regulations governing the post were altered; he was elected for a second term and went on to hold the position as a non-fellow professor for another forty-five years until his retirement in 1932. Thus although he had ten predecessors in the Whately chair, Bastable was the first to retain it as a professional academic economist and he became well known to other such economists throughout Europe in his time. Yet initially at least the duties of the post were not such as to occupy all the time of an established academic and the salary reflected this. Hence Bastable was compelled to seek other posts; he held the chair of jurisprudence and political economy at Queen's College, Galway, from 1883 until 1903, was appointed professor of jurisprudence and international law in Trinity College, Dublin, in 1902, and became regius professor of laws in 1908, a post which he also held until his retirement in 1932. In 1905 he was George Rae lecturer at the University College of North Wales and he was Warburton lecturer at the University of Manchester in the academic year 1909/10. 
A founder member of the Royal Economic Society, Bastable served on its first council and contributed a total of twenty-six articles to its 'Economic Journal' between 1891 and 1920. At the Oxford meeting of the British Association in 1894 he was president of section F, economics and statistics. He was an honorary secretary of the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland from 1886 until 1895 and one of its vice-presidents until 1915. In 1921 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. After the formation of the Irish Free State he was a member of its fiscal inquiry committee of 1923. 
Although throughout his long teaching career Bastable always gave courses on legal subjects, his main research interest was in economics, especially in international trade, money, and public finance. In the theory of international trade he followed the broad lines of the analysis of comparative costs and reciprocal demand as first set out by David Ricardo and developed by J. S. Mill, but made significant improvements within them. These were incorporated into the successive editions of his 'Theory of International Trade' (1st edn, 1887), a work which he described as 'specially intended for serious students of economic theory'. It reached a wide audience of such students, being translated into French and Italian. 'The Commerce of Nations' (1891) was a more popular book, in which Bastable, who was sympathetic to the historical method in economics as developed by his compatriots J. K. Ingram and T. E. Cliffe Leslie, took the approach 'that existing commercial policy and the doctrines respecting it are best explained by reference to their history'. In a succinct review of the development of world trade from the seventeenth century up to his own day he did not attempt to conceal his own belief in the merits of free trade, but the conclusion which he reached was realistic and prescient: 'though we cannot expect any speedy abandonment of the protective system, which will doubtless continue for a long time, we may look for breaches in it and at intervals steady and sustained reforms, leading finally, though by slow degrees, to the adoption of complete free trade. (3rd edn, 1903, 211)' Bastable's contributions to the classical theory of international trade gained him a more lasting, if limited, reputation than his work in public finance, to which he devoted as much, if not more, attention. In the United Kingdom in the late Victorian era, when the public sector was small and taxation low, it was a subject which was not the focus of much attention. There had been no comprehensive treatment of it since the time of J. R. McCulloch and, although he published many articles on aspects of the subject, Bastable's major contribution was that he provided just such a survey at an appropriate time. His 'Public Finance' (1892) drew on his extensive knowledge of European and American as well as British writings in that field to provide a clear statement of accepted principles and practices. The book became a definitive text, a handbook for civil servants as well as academic students, which was not superseded until the 1930s, when the principles of fiscal policy which Bastable and his contemporaries regarded as fundamental were being challenged, most notably by J. M. Keynes and his followers. 
The heavy teaching load which Bastable always carried limited his ability to produce original work in his later years. With characteristic modesty he decided against revising his 'Public Finance' thoroughly, on the ground that it was a task for which a younger man, who could take a more radical approach, would be better suited. Held in high regard by his many pupils, Bastable was a reserved and very private man, who lived a secluded life after his retirement. Survived by his wife, Josephine Anna, and son, he died at his home, 52 Brighton Road, Rathgar, co. Dublin, on 3 January 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 38711


MacCarthy, Sir (Charles Otto) Desmond (1877-1952), literary reviewer and drama critic, was born at Plymouth, Devon, on 20 May 1877, the only child of Charles Desmond MacCarthy (1832/3-1895), bank agent, and Louise Jeanne Wilhelmine de la Chevallerie (1854-1938). His ancestors were English, Irish, and German. He spent his childhood in Leeds, and went on to attend Eton College (1888-94), where he was educated, he said, by the boys, and then Trinity College, Cambridge, where his education was continued by his friends and himself. Elected to the Apostles, he came to know G. M. Trevelyan and R. C. Trevelyan, Roger Fry, Bertrand Russell, E. M. Forster, and especially G. E. Moore, whose closest friend he became. Through friendship with younger Apostles and other members of Trinity, such as Lytton Strachey, Leonard Woolf, and Clive Bell, he became involved with the Bloomsbury group. MacCarthy read history and graduated aegrotat in 1897, started to study philosophy with Moore for a further degree, and after a term at Leipzig University prepared to be a novelist by reading extensively. He was acquainted with Samuel Butler, George Meredith, Leslie Stephen, and Henry James, all of whom influenced his development. On the death of his father in 1895 (his possessive mother survived until 1938) MacCarthy inherited about $150 a year and remained impecunious for most of his career. He began, therefore, in 1903 to write not fiction but reviews. By 1906 he had become the drama critic for the Liberal 'Speaker', and recognized the importance of the Vedrenne-Barker productions at the Court Theatre, particularly those of George Bernard Shaw's plays. MacCarthy's reviews, collected in his first book, 'The Court Theatre' (1907), were, Shaw told him, closer to the mark than those of other critics. MacCarthy applied Moore's ideas in 'Principia ethica' to the plays, and his criticism is still among the best that has been written of Shaw. 
On 29 August 1906 MacCarthy married Mary Warre-Cornish ['see below'] and began to edit the 'New Quarterly', which a Cambridge friend financed for him; it lasted for three years and published significant work by Butler, Russell, Moore, and Fry. In 1910 MacCarthy became the secretary for Fry's celebrated first post-impressionist exhibition, and the introduction that he wrote for the catalogue became his most widely quoted work. He reviewed intermittently for various periodicals until 1913, when at Shaw's suggestion he was invited by Beatrice and Sidney Webb to become the drama critic for the 'New Statesman'. (A lifelong Liberal, MacCarthy wrote most of his work for socialist and then Conservative papers.) During the First World War he served with the Red Cross and then joined naval intelligence. He became literary editor of the 'New Statesman' under Clifford Sharp in 1920, and wrote a weekly column signed with the fitting pseudonym Affable Hawk. MacCarthy later described how rude Sharp could be about his exasperating elusiveness: Sharp 'would glare and I would despair -- but not reform' (MacCarthy, 'Experience', xv). As an editor he helped train many reviewers, including his successors Raymond Mortimer and Cyril Connolly. In 1927 MacCarthy began speaking on books for the BBC and over the next twenty-five years he broadcast hundreds of popular talks. The next year he succeeded Edmund Gosse as the principal reviewer for the 'Sunday Times'. With a readership that reached 500,000, the paper made him the most influential literary journalist of the time. Also in 1928 he started 'Life and Letters', a general literary monthly underwritten by another patron. MacCarthy's involvement lasted until 1934, and in the course of his editorship he published work by Butler, Russell, Max Beerbohm, Hilaire Belloc, Thomas Hardy, Aldous Huxley, Virginia Woolf, Clive Bell, and many others. 
MacCarthy had a wide literary and social acquaintance, and his charm as a sympathetic conversationalist (rather than a talker, for he was not a monologist) was legendary. But his development continued to be a disappointment to himself and his friends. Leonard Woolf thought the influence of Moore's high standards might have been to blame, and MacCarthy conceded that high standards and indolence had blighted his career. Only by procrastinating, he once explained, could he avoid spending 'a preposterous amount of time titivating' (Cecil and Cecil, 286). After abandoning attempts to write a novel before the war, MacCarthy planned to make a study of John Donne. In the 1920s Byron became his subject, and he gave the unpublished Clark lectures on him in 1929; in the 1930s it was to be a biography of Tolstoy. But the only books MacCarthy produced were collections of journalism. The second, called 'Remnants', was published in 1918. A selection of his biographical sketches appeared as 'Portraits': volume 1 came out in 1931, but no second volume followed. Subsequent collections of reviews appeared as 'Criticism' (1932), 'Experience' (1935), 'Drama' (1940), and 'Shaw' (1951). Three posthumous selections reusing some material from earlier books were 'Memories', 'Humanities' (both 1953), and 'Theatre' (1954). MacCarthy was knighted in 1951 and died in a nursing home in Cambridge of asthma, emphysema, and pneumonia, on 7 June 1952, shortly after receiving an honorary DLitt. He was buried in St Giles's churchyard, Cambridge. 
MacCarthy accurately described himself as 'an acute and balanced critic who sometimes writes uncommonly well' (Cecil and Cecil, 292); yet as a weekly reviewer he was forced to serve up unripe thoughts and 'translate at once every feeling into intellectual discourse' (MacCarthy, 'Portraits', viii). He was distressed by 'an involved limpness' in some of his writing (MacCarthy, 'Experience', xi), and his good friend Virginia Woolf, who, like others, was entranced by his charm, complained of the 'damnable tepidity' of his review of 'The Waves' ('Diary of Virginia Woolf', 4.56). Something of MacCarthy's charm as well as tepidity is captured in the character of Bernard in that novel. MacCarthy was a traditional, eclectic, somewhat sceptical, rather unoriginal, but very widely read critic. His viewpoint was formed before the First World War and he regarded modernist writing with misgiving. (He confessed to being a backward and reluctant admirer of Woolf.) MacCarthy himself best described his critical theory in the preface to 'Criticism', where he argued that 'aesthetic taste is only further discrimination upon preferences determined by other causes'. Part of the critic's job was to discuss ideas current both now and in the author's time, he continued, and therefore the reader's psychology was as much the critic's concern as the book being read. Perhaps MacCarthy's deepest literary conviction was that 'a work of art whatever its theme must somehow, somewhere, suggest the desirability of life' ('Drama', 152). 

Mary Josepha MacCarthy, Lady MacCarthy (1882-1953), writer, was born at Lynton, Devon, in August 1882, the daughter of Francis Warre Warre-Cornish (1839-1916), vice-provost of Eton, and Blanche Ritchie (1848-1922), novelist, whose eccentric sayings were collected as 'Cornishiana'. Her marriage to Desmond MacCarthy on 29 August 1906 produced two sons, Michael and Dermod, and a daughter, Rachel (Lady David Cecil). An original, amusing, if diffident and distracted, personality, Molly MacCarthy has been credited with coining the term 'Bloomsbury' as applied to her friends; in 1920 she founded Bloomsbury's Memoir Club to encourage Desmond's writing. Her novel 'A Pier and a Band' (1918) amusingly represents characters resembling herself and her husband. An engaging memoir, 'A Nineteenth-Century Childhood', appeared in 1924. She suffered from her husband's feckless gregariousness. Deafness cruelly increased her isolation from his social life, but she continued to write, publishing biographical studies in 'Fighting Fitzgerald and other Papers' (1930) and 'Handicaps: Six Studies' (1936), and then a volume of miscellaneous sketches, entitled 'Festival, etc.' (1936). A sequel to her childhood memoir was never completed. Molly MacCarthy died of heart failure on 28 December 1953 at Garrick's Villa, Hampton, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 38712


Featherstonehaugh, George William (1780-1866), geologist and diplomatist, was born on 9 April 1780 in London, the second child and only son of George Featherstonehaugh (1744-1780), a lead merchant of Southwark, descended from a formerly wealthy Northumberland family, and his wife, Dorothy Simpson (1751-1847). His father died the year that George was born, and his mother returned with her children to her native Scarborough, where she supported her family by running a millinery shop. 
Educated at the Revd Robert Howard's school at Throxenby, and Stepney House, near Scarborough, Featherstonehaugh developed a keen interest in mineralogy and natural history. Unable to afford a university education he travelled on the continent in 1799-1800 and then established an import export agency in Leghorn. By 1804 business reverses had ruined his prospects and he tried commercial life in London for two years before sailing for Boston in 1807. The following year he met Sarah (Sally) Duane (1775-1828), who had inherited land near Schenectady, New York. They married on 6 November 1808. The couple later had four children. Featherstonehaugh set to work to farm his wife's estate on scientific principles, importing bloodstock on a grand scale. He served as corresponding secretary to the state board of agriculture and, together with the board's president, Stephen Van Rensselaer, he promoted the construction of a railway from Schenectady to Albany, obtaining a charter in 1826 to incorporate the Mohawk and Hudson Rail Road Company (the first successful railway in the United States). 
In 1826 Featherstonehaugh returned to England to research railway developments. He received instruction from the geologist William Smith and in 1827 was elected a fellow of the Geological Society of London. Featherstonehaugh's wife died upon their return to New York, on 6 May 1828; their house burnt to the ground the following year. Featherstonehaugh abandoned agriculture, resigned as a director of the railway, and in 1831 moved to Philadelphia to focus on intellectual pursuits. In the same year, on 28 January, he married Charlotte Williams Carter (1812-1879) of Virginia; they had three children. Also in 1831, after publishing two literary efforts and delivering a lecture series on geology, Featherstonehaugh founded the 'Monthly American Journal of Geology and Natural History'. Beset by problems, Featherstonehaugh's periodical ceased publication in 1832. Nevertheless, it had raised his public profile and in 1834, supported by Roderick Murchison, he won appointment as the United States government's first geologist to survey the structure and mineral resources of Arkansas and adjacent territories. His official report appeared the following year; he published a popular account in 1844. In 1835, elected to the Royal Society, he surveyed parts of Wisconsin and Minnesota, again producing a detailed report and, in 1846, a popular version criticizing America's territorial aggression and demagoguery. In 1837 Featherstonehaugh conducted a third reconnaissance of mining regions in Wisconsin, Missouri, North Carolina, and neighbouring states. While withdrawal of funding prevented his completing a geological map of the United States, Featherstonehaugh broadened understanding of the structure of North America through application of the stratigraphical and causal theories of his English geological colleagues. 
In 1839 Featherstonehaugh was appointed by Palmerston as a boundary commissioner to survey the territory disputed between the United States and Britain on the Maine-New Brunswick border. Accompanied by Richard Zachariah Mudge of the Ordnance Survey, he conducted two months of hard field research to build a case, based on scientific observations and a political interpretation of geological formations, to support Britain's claim to this wilderness. Britain praised his 1840 report as objective, while the United States condemned it as the concoction of a viper who had taken advantage of his publicly funded geological knowledge to sell out his adopted country. Featherstonehaugh continued to support the British position, but the Webster-Ashburton treaty of 1842 divided the territory between the rivals. 
Agitating for a new diplomatic role Featherstonehaugh was rewarded with the British consulship at Le Havre in 1844, a position he held until his death there on 27 or 28 September 1866. The high point of his otherwise routine tenure was his dramatic role in helping Louis Philippe escape to England during the revolution of 1848. Buried at Le Havre, Featherstonehaugh was remembered in obituaries in 'The Times' and the 'Journal of the Geological Society'. He was survived by his second wife. His remains were moved to the family vault at Tunbridge Wells on 11 April 1889. 
A tall, gaunt, fastidious teetotaller, Featherstonehaugh cut an odd figure on the American frontier. His prejudices against the informality, materialism, and cultural backwardness of Jacksonian America did little to endear him to his hosts; his blatant elitism and bullying of subordinates revealed an arrogant authoritarianism based on unwavering faith in the superiority of the English upper classes. A tory and an Anglican, Featherstonehaugh was a complex man of intense feelings who appreciated the beauty of nature and ably recorded the startling variety of life, including the tragedy of the American Indians. Intelligent, observant, and adventurous, Featherstonehaugh successfully changed careers four times despite terrible setbacks. While he found his most congenial work in his latter years as a consul, his fame rests on his pioneering work in the United States as a geological explorer and publicist. 


@@@@@


doc= 38713


Spencer, John, first Earl Spencer (1734-1783), politician, was born on 19 December 1734, the only son of John Spencer (1708-1746), a landowner, and his first wife, Georgiana Caroline (1716-1780), the third daughter of John Carteret, second Earl Granville (1690-1763). Since he had not been expected to survive infancy he was educated at home by tutors. His younger sister Diana died aged only eight. 
Spencer was just eleven and a half when in the summer of 1746 his father died and he succeeded to the considerable family estates. He also inherited the bulk of the property, including the new house and park at Wimbledon, left by the will of Sarah Churchill, duchess of Marlborough, but with the strict proviso that if he accepted any office or pension from the crown this inheritance was to pass to the next heir. Until he came of age, however, he could not take control of this fortune. His estates and finances were managed by trustees, while he went on a grand tour of France and Italy and gained a lifelong interest in art and architecture. 
On 20 December 1755, the day after his twenty-first birthday, Spencer married Margaret Georgiana Poyntz (1737-1814) ['see 'Spencer, (Margaret) Georgiana], the eighteen-year-old daughter of a leading diplomatist, Stephen Poyntz, of Midgham House, Berkshire, and his wife, Anna Maria, 'nee' Mordaunt. The marriage ceremony, unusually, took place in private. While five hundred guests were being entertained at a ball at Althorp, those privy to the secret withdrew to a large upstairs room for the marriage. Not until Christmas was the news made public. In the new year husband and wife drove to London and were presented at court, where they became close friends of the royal family. They soon had a growing family of their own: Georgiana (1757-1806), later duchess of Devonshire ['see 'Cavendish, Georgiana], George John Spencer (1758-1834), who succeeded his father as the second earl, and Henrietta, known as Harriet (1761-1821) ['see 'Ponsonby, Henrietta Frances], who married Viscount Duncannon, heir to the earl of Bessborough. 
Although his political prospects were rendered nugatory by the terms of Sarah Churchill's will, Spencer, after an expensive by-election defeat at Bristol in 1756, entered the House of Commons later that year as MP for Warwick. He was a member of the old whig corps, and the duke of Newcastle secured him a viscountcy in 1761. He followed Newcastle into opposition in 1762, and when the former Newcastle party returned to office in 1765 was rewarded with an earldom. He rarely attended the House of Lords on account of his poor state of health. 
By this time Spencer was the owner of a magnificent London house. Designed by John Vardy, this Palladian mansion overlooked Green Park, and took ten years, from 1756 to 1765, to build. Its beautiful rooms, some the work of Vardy's rival James 'Athenian' Stuart, became the centre for great entertainments and the home of a fine collection of Italian paintings and family portraits by Sir Joshua Reynolds and Thomas Gainsborough. Spencer and his wife, however, preferred life at the family home, Althorp. There, looked after by eighty servants, he built up a fine library, especially strong in history, literature, and classical mythology. But his chief passion was hunting. As master of the Pytchley hunt, he spent more on the sport and his stables than on the day-to-day running of his houses. Despite all this considerable expenditure on top of an excessive love of gambling, Spencer still found the resources to improve his main inheritance from Sarah Churchill, the house and park at Wimbledon. In 1760 he commissioned Capability Brown to transform the park into a place described in one newspaper of 1785 as 'perhaps as beautiful as anything near London'. He held garden parties on the lawns, and enjoyed himself shooting, as well as fishing in the new lake. He also employed Stuart to redecorate the house in the latest neo-classical style. Wimbledon thus became the perfect country retreat from the noise, dirt, and disease of London, especially in the spring and at midsummer. Lady Spencer, writing to her son in the spring of 1781, expressed her delight in 'the beauty of the scene, the birds, the flowers, the verdure and every other charms the country abounds with' (BL, Althorp MSS, G275). 
Throughout the 1760s and the 1770s Spencer suffered from a series of illnesses -- crippling chest and stomach pains, gout, and various fevers and nervous palpitations. To restore his health he paid frequent visits to Bath to drink the waters and to Scarborough to bathe and take the sea air. He often crossed the channel to stay at Spa or to go on grand tours with his family. In all these troubles he was supported by his strong Anglican faith and the devotion of his wife. During the summer of 1783, however, even Georgiana confessed in a letter to her son that she became 'quite discouraged' as 'all his old complaints returned' (BL, Althorp MSS, G276). She took him to Margate and finally in late September back to Bath. Spencer seemed no better for taking the waters, but managed to ride every day. Then on 25 October Georgiana, 'sadly alarmed', wrote to her son that his father 'now wanders when he wakes and is not sure where he is' (BL, Althorp MSS, G276). Six days later, on 31 October 1783, he died in Bath. He was only forty-eight years old. He was buried on 9 November in the family vault at St Mary's Church, Great Brington, just outside the gates of Althorp Park. 'Handsome with dark romantic looks' (Friedman, 38), Spencer was said to be 'generous and amiable' (Le Marchant), although very extravagant and at times bad-tempered because of almost continuous ill health. He left his son massive debts, yet greatly increased his family estates and also its prestige by being the employer of leading architects, the collector of Italian paintings, and the friend and patron of Sir Joshua Reynolds, Laurence Sterne, David Garrick, and Thomas Linley. His widow died in St Albans on 18 March 1814 and was buried in St Mary's Church, Great Brington, on 30 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 38714


Spencer, George (1799-1864), Roman Catholic priest, was born at Admiralty House, London, on 21 December 1799, the youngest of the eight children of George John Spencer, second Earl Spencer (1758-1834), first lord of the Admiralty, and his wife, Lavinia (1762-1831), daughter of Charles Bingham, first earl of Lucan. He had four brothers, including John Charles Spencer, Robert Cavendish Spencer, and Frederick Spencer ['see under 'Spencer, Robert Cavendish], and three sisters, including Sarah Lyttelton; one brother and a sister, however, died in infancy. After education at home, Spencer went to Eton College, before proceeding in 1817 to Trinity College, Cambridge, to read classics, mathematics, and divinity. Placed in the first class in both the 1818 and the 1819 examinations, he received his MA in 1819. He was ordained a deacon of the Church of England on 22 December 1822 and priest on 13 June 1824; in January 1825 he became rector of St Mary's, Brington, on the family's Althorp estate. After a chance encounter with Father William Foley of Northampton and subsequent discussions with him and with Ambrose Phillipps De Lisle, Spencer was received into the Roman Catholic church in Leicester by a Belgian Dominican priest, Father Charles Caestryck, on 30 January 1830. He then went to the English College, Rome, to study for the Catholic priesthood and was ordained on the feast of St Augustine of Canterbury, 26 May 1832, in the church of St Gregory the Great on the Coelian Hill. While he was in Rome he met Father Dominic Barberi, professor of theology at the Passionist retreat of saints John and Paul. Spencer returned to England and was appointed to Walsall in August 1832, and in November 1832 to West Bromwich, with responsibility also for Dudley. 
Although massively built, Spencer was physically delicate, and it was a serious illness in 1838 which brought about the beginning of his life's work: his Crusade of Prayer for Unity in the Truth. Sent to the continent to recuperate, he was invited to address the French clergy at St Sulpice in Paris. When his request for prayers for the conversion of England was favourably received, he extended it wherever he travelled and, on his return to England, throughout the British Isles. In January 1840 he went to Oxford to ask John Henry Newman and his followers to pray for unity in the truth. Newman later wrote in his 'Apologia pro vita sua' that he could have 'laughed for joy' to see him. He refused to dine with him, however, because he regarded him as ''in loco apostatae' [an apostate] from the Anglican Church'. Nevertheless he did draw up prayers for reunion. The modern movement for Christian unity may be said to date from their meeting. The decree on ecumenism, 'Unitatis redintegratio', issued by the Second Vatican Council in 1964, owed much to Spencer's inspiration and writings. 
In 1839 Spencer was appointed to St Mary's College, Oscott, as spiritual director. In 1839-41 he was largely responsible for facilitating Father Dominic Barberi's foundation of the Passionist congregation in England, and in 1846-7 he entered the Passionist noviciate at Aston Hall near Stone, Staffordshire, taking the religious name Ignatius of St Paul. From his profession of vows in January 1848 he travelled throughout the British Isles and Europe, preaching the passion and seeking prayers for the conversion of England and the sanctification of Ireland. He also advocated temperance. Between 1849 and 1864, in co-operation with Father Gaudentius Rossi, CP, and Elizabeth Prout, he was instrumental in founding the Sisters of the Cross and Passion, a new religious congregation with no dowry requirements for admission and no class distinctions. He also assisted this congregation to provide homes for factory girls. 
Spencer died suddenly from a heart attack at Monteith House, Carstairs, Lanarkshire, on 1 October 1864. His remains were conveyed to St Anne's Passionist Retreat, Sutton, St Helens, where he had been rector, and his funeral took place on 5 October 1864. He was interred in the crypt, but in 1973 his remains were removed to a side chapel in the new church of St Anne and Blessed Dominic in Sutton, where they lie beside those of Blessed Dominic Barberi and Elizabeth Prout. The cause for his canonization was introduced in June 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 38715


Lyttelton, Sarah, Lady Lyttelton (1787-1870), courtier, was born at Althorp, Northamptonshire, on 29 July 1787, the eldest daughter of George John Spencer, second Earl Spencer (1758-1834), and his wife, Lavinia Bingham (1762-1831), daughter of the first Earl Lucan. Her youth was happy, if uneventful, spent among a large circle of family and friends. Her brothers included John Charles Spencer, Robert Cavendish Spencer, Frederick Spencer ['see under 'Spencer, Robert Cavendish], and George Spencer. At Althorp she engaged in good works, teaching the village girls, and at Spencer House in London her family held a prominent place among the whig aristocracy, although she did not care greatly for the amusements of society. Her looks were described no more fulsomely than as 'pleasing' and throughout her life she was shy, the result of her mother's sharply snubbing manner. A deeply religious evangelical, her warm and sympathetic nature made her the confidante of her family. On 3 March 1813 she married the Hon. William Henry Lyttelton (1782-1837): Creevey described them as 'the happiest couple in the world' (GEC, 'Peerage'). They had three sons and two daughters, whose upbringing was Lady Sarah's main preoccupation. On 12 November 1828, William Lyttelton succeeded his half-brother as third Baron Lyttelton, and Hagley Hall, near Stourbridge, in Worcestershire, became Lady Lyttelton's home. Lord Lyttelton's death on 30 April 1837 after a decade of ill health left her a widow, and the approaching marriage of her eldest son, George William Lyttelton, to Mary Glynne, made her feel it appropriate to leave Hagley. 
In 1837, Lady Lyttelton was offered the position of lady of the bedchamber to the young Queen Victoria, and, her mourning for her husband over, she went into waiting for the first time on 2 October 1838, attending the queen at her marriage in 1840. Her sympathetic disposition made her a favourite at court, although she felt that she 'blundered and boggled as usual' ('Correspondence', 279) in her tasks of handing the queen her shawl, her bouquet, bag, or opera glasses. In 1842 Prince Albert reorganized the royal household, and the nursery in particular, and Lady Lyttelton was appointed governess. She took up her position, which was no sinecure, in April 1842, taking charge of the preliminary education of the princess royal and the prince of Wales, who nicknamed her 'Laddle'. She found her position agreeable, despite difficulties with the prince of Wales, about whom she remarked 'my heavy burden [is] increased to a crushing weight when I think of that child' ('Correspondence', 362). She enjoyed the full confidence of both Victoria and Albert, except perhaps on questions of religion; but was, nevertheless, diffident about her competence. 
In October 1850 her youngest daughter, Lavinia, died, leaving four young daughters, and Lady Lyttelton resigned her appointment in the following month. She returned to Hagley, where, after 1857, she transferred her talents to the education of the twelve motherless children of her eldest son: one of them recalled her as 'a stately, benevolent figure full of kindness and dignified humour, and of steadfast old-fashioned piety' (Lyttelton, 10). It was at Hagley that Lady Lyttelton died, on 13 April 1870, and she was buried there in the family vault. 


@@@@@


doc= 38720


Moody, Theodore William (1907-1984), historian, was born in Belfast on 26 November 1907, the second child and only son of William John Moody and his wife, Ann Isabella Dippie, members of the Plymouth Brethren sect. A scholar and teacher of eminence, 'he was driven by an inner force elevated by a dedication which was not just scholarship but which embraced it' (Martin, 5). 
Moody is principally renowned as a major influence on the development of research-based Irish history and its dissemination. He was educated at the Royal Belfast Academical Institution from 1920 to 1926, when he entered the Queen's University of Belfast; he received a BA there in 1930 after an outstanding undergraduate career. That same year he went to the Institute of Historical Research and King's College, University of London, to begin research under the direction of Eliza Jeffries Davis. R. H. Tawney was a formative influence on him in London. He was awarded a PhD and elected a fellow of the Royal Historical Society in 1934. While in London he met Margaret Robertson, whom he married in 1935. They had four sons and a daughter. In 1932 he returned to Queen's to take up an appointment as assistant in history to James Eadie Todd, his former tutor, before becoming a lecturer in Irish history in 1935. 
Moody was among a handful of university academics who sought to transform Irish historical scholarship, and their efforts 'took on a distinctly institutional -- even bureaucratic form' (Brady, 3-4). In February 1936 he was the chief impetus behind the founding of the Ulster Society for Irish Historical Studies. Together with Robin Dudley Edwards, a contemporary at the Institute of Historical Research, he created the Irish Committee of Historical Sciences in March 1938 so that Ireland could be represented on the Comite International des Sciences Historiques. Perhaps the most significant consequence of their collaboration was the founding of 'Irish Historical Studies'; the first issue appeared in March 1938 with Moody and Edwards as co-editors. Moody remained joint editor until 1977. Consciously modelled on prestigious academic journals in Germany, France, the United States, and Great Britain, the journal was intended to provide an outlet for Irish scholarship dedicated to the 'scientific' study of history. It contained scholarly articles, contributions on research methods, edited documents, critical bibliographies, historical revisions, notices of library collections, reviews of books, and listing of theses, along with inventories of books and articles in other Irish journals. 
Moody's revised PhD thesis was published in 1939 under the title 'The Londonderry Plantation, 1609-41: the City of London and the Plantation in Ulster'. On 5 June 1939 he was appointed to a fellowship in Trinity College, Dublin, and succeeded to the Erasmus Smith chair of history a few months later. In 1940 he was elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy. He held numerous offices within Trinity College (tutor, 1939-52; senior tutor, 1952-8; senior lecturer, 1958-64; and the first dean of the arts faculty, 1967-9), and dedicated himself to bringing it into the 'mainstream of national life' (Martin, 6). On the death of Edmund Curtis in 1943 Moody took on the chief responsibility for managing the school of history, and he remained chairman of its committee until 1977. In 1944 with Dudley Edwards and David B. Quinn he edited 'Studies in Irish History', a series of monographs on Irish history which concluded in 1957; he also edited the second series between 1960 and 1975. As a protestant (he began attending the meetings of the Society of Friends in 1960, his wife in 1963), Moody might have chosen to restrict his role to Trinity College, then something of a pariah within the new Irish state, a situation intensified by the Roman Catholic hierarchy's ban on Catholics attending it, but he laboured long and devotedly for the ultimately successful mission of reconciling the college, the Catholic church, and the state. Moody served on the Irish Manuscripts Commission (1943-84), the Irish Broadcasting Council (1953-60), the Irish Broadcasting Authority (1960-72), the advisory committee on cultural relations (1949-63), and the government-appointed commission on higher education (1960-67); this last proved a frustrating experience. From 1972 he was a member of the academic council of the Irish School of Ecumenics. He was particularly interested in radio and television as a medium for education. This grew out of his interest in the curriculum followed in Ireland's schools and in public dissemination of specialist scholarship. In 1969 he wrote 'if history at its best is not made available to the educated public as a whole, it fails in one of its essential social functions' (Brady, 39). Moody suggested to the Irish Broadcasting Council the motif for what became the annual Thomas Davis lectures, first aired in 1953, which present the best in Irish scholarship for a non-specialist audience. With his former pupil at the Queen's University of Belfast J. C. Beckett he edited two series of broadcasts on Ulster, the first made in later 1954 ('Ulster since 1800: a Political and Economic Survey') and the second in 1957 ('Ulster since 1800, Second Series: a Social Survey'). 
In collaboration with Beckett, Moody wrote 'Queen's, Belfast, 1845-1949: the History of a University' (2 vols., 1959), which serves as a model for this type of study. That year he was awarded an honorary DLitt. by the Queen's University. Undoubtedly the largest project of Moody's career -- the multi-volume 'A New History of Ireland', in a format similar to the 'New Cambridge Modern History' -- began with his presidential address to the Irish Historical Society in 1962. He chaired the board of editors from 1968 until his death. The first volume appeared in 1977. From 1964 to 1966 he was a Leverhulme research fellow, and spent 1965 at the Institute of Advanced Studies at Princeton. In 1966, with Professor F. X. Martin, he initiated a series of twenty-one lectures published as 'The Course of Irish History' (1967), a striking attempt to bring scholarship to the people. 
Much of Moody's historical writing is found in articles. However, his short book 'The Ulster question, 1603-1973' was published in 1974. In 1977 Moody retired; he was elected a corresponding fellow of the British Academy that year and in 1978 awarded a DLitt. by the National University of Ireland. In a much cited lecture (published in 1978) which retrospectively attempted to define his career-long objectives he proclaimed 'the mental war of liberation from servitude to the myth is an endless and it may be an agonising process. It is, I believe, one in which Irish historians are called on to take an active part' (Brady, 24). 
Moody was a fastidious scholar, and the combined weight of college, public, and historical burdens led as the years progressed to a legendary dilatoriness. His commitment to fostering 'inclusiveness' in Irish life fostered a parochialism which blinded him to influential scholarly innovations in Great Britain, Europe, and the United States. His most substantial authored work, 'Davitt and Irish Revolution, 1848-1882', did not appear until 1981. His scholarly reputation will probably remain linked to this study. Although Moody's earlier interest was in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, he was entrusted by Michael Davitt's son with his father's voluminous papers. Constructing a biography of Davitt was to be his chief personal scholarly preoccupation. This huge tome, a model of meticulous research, was as much a history of the times as of the man. Overall, the volume reveals Moody's great strengths and limitations. On the negative side it is often excessively detailed, nor could it be termed 'value-free' history, given that it reflects the author's own preference for liberal-nationalist sentiment. Possibly Moody's enduring works published posthumously will prove to be the collaborative editions: 'Florence Arnold-Foster's Irish Journal' (1988) and the multi-volume 'The Writings of Theobald Wolfe Tone, 1763-98' (from 1998). Moody's historical project began to come under scrutiny during the 1980s, a process that culminated in Brendan Bradshaw's critique 'Nationalism and historical scholarship in modern Ireland', published in 'Irish Historical Studies' (1989). Bradshaw took issue with Moody's austere methods and consciously directive agenda, and suggested that he was intellectually and politically naive; the net effect in Bradshaw's estimation was to desensitize Irish historical writing. Although this verdict itself has been contested, there is no doubt that Moody's work has subsequently been viewed in a different light. 
As a teacher and supervisor of research, Moody commanded affection. A childhood stammer sometimes affected his delivery in lectures but he was known as a fine and committed tutor. A number of the ablest Irish historians learned their craft under his guidance as a research supervisor. Moody retired in 1977 with his health deteriorating. He died in Dublin on 11 February 1984 and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground, Temple Hill, Blackrock. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 38721


Connell, James (1852-1929), socialist and writer of The Red Flag, was born on 27 March 1852 in McCormack's Yard, Kilskyre, Crossakiel, co. Meath, Ireland, the eldest of thirteen children born to Thomas Connell, farm labourer, and his wife, Ann Shaw. It is likely that he was born O'Connell, as other family members, including his brother Canon O'Connell of Scarborough, carried this version of the name. Biographical details of his parents and siblings are scarce, but a brother was known to have been active in the Irish Bakers', Confectioners' and Allied Workers' Amalgamated Union. 
Connell's father moved his family to Birr, King's county, in 1862, where he worked as a groom or gamekeeper for the earl of Rosse. James acquired a love of the land, developing a lifelong interest in poaching and in land agitation. In 1870 he moved to Dublin and worked as a docker. Here he fell under the influence of the socialist John Lange (or Laing), and debated theoretical matters on Sunday rambles with the Free Literary Union. Here he met, among others, Fred Ryan, pioneer socialist and later secretary of the Socialist Party of Ireland. In January 1875 he emigrated to London, where he quickly became involved in socialist and Irish nationalist politics. He married an English woman, Catherine Angier, in Poplar, London, on 2 September 1882; they had one child, Norah, and separated when she was thirteen. 
Connell's first political activity was in the Irish Republican Brotherhood, being sworn in at Birr in 1870. He also claimed to have founded the first London branch of the National Land League of Great Britain in Poplar in 1879 and to have served on its executive. The league was, in fact, inaugurated on 25 March 1881 under the presidency of Justin McCarthy, with the intention of informing British workers about the Irish land question and their 'community of interests' with Irish tenant farmers. Connell claimed original membership of the Social Democratic Federation (SDF), remaining active for ten years, although he 'never cared for the management'. He was certainly an associate of H. M. Hyndman, and wrote for 'Justice', the SDF party organ, on a regular basis. In September 1890 he stood unsuccessfully for the SDF in Finsbury, failing to attract the Irish vote, which went to the Liberal, and being attacked by T. P. O'Connor's 'Star'. Later he became a member of the Independent Labour Party. In 1888 he was named before the commission on Parnellism and crime as an 'advocate of treason, sedition, assassination and violence' (Boyd, 'Irish Trade Unions', 58). Long political activity gave him contact with nearly all the leading trade union and labour movement figures of his day, many regularly visiting him to enjoy his lively company and gift for conversation. 
Connell's source of income is unclear: he had various jobs, including some journalism, and had a regular entry in the 'Labour Yearbook' as a speaker on socialism, Darwinism, philosophy, and the game laws. Francis Williams recalled Connell's famous discourse on evolution, entitled 'From protoplasm to man', being so erudite that 'he was never known in the course of a two hours' talk to get beyond the introduction' (Williams, 103). From 1909 until his death he was secretary of the Workingmen's Legal Aid Society, based in Chancery Lane, London, providing advice on compensation and other claims. He was well known in Fleet Street, and was visited in his favourite haunt, the Golden Cross in the Strand, by many trade union and Labour leaders. He was 6 feet 1, and wore a black sombrero, a flowing Inverness cape, and bright red scarf; his theatrical manner led many to think he was a Shakespearian actor. He successfully published a series of pamphlets: 'Brothers at Last: a Centenary Appeal to Celt and Saxon'; 'Socialism and the Survival of the Fittest' (3rd edn, 1908); 'The Truth about the Game Laws' (which was published by the Humanitarian League despite their objections to his trapping and poaching, which latter once resulted in Connell being fined in Croydon court); and 'Confessions of a Poacher' (1901). This last sold 80,000 copies in several editions by C. A. Pearson, having first appeared in serial form in 'Titbits'. He always kept dogs and was inseparable from his favourite lurcher, Nellie, his companion on frequent walks and poaching expeditions. 
In the Christmas issue of 'Justice' in 1889 Harry Quelch published Connell's song 'The Red Flag'. It was written, he claimed, on a fifteen-minute train journey from Charing Cross to New Cross, and was intended to raise working-class morale and as a celebration of the London dock strike. It was inspired by Connell's knowledge of and commitment to international working-class struggle, as the verses attest. Originally set to the popular air 'The White Cockade', Adolphe Smythe Headingley in 1895 rearranged it to the tune 'Maryland', or 'Der Tannenbaum', with which tune it was principally sung thereafter. Connell hated the change, and George Bernard Shaw dismissed the new air as being like 'a funeral dirge to the eels' (Boyd, 'In search of Jim Connell'). Labour Party leader James Ramsay MacDonald liked neither the song nor its author, and in 1925 the 'Daily Herald' held a competition with a $50 prize to find a new, better Labour anthem. Judged by Hugh Roberton, founder of the Glasgow Orpheus Choir, and John McCormack, the Irish tenor, over 300 entries failed to produce a winner. Connell was delighted. Although Connell makes no reference to it, a poem 'The Red Flag' by the Chartist poet Alfred Fennell, first published in the 'Red Republican' in 1850, may have provided the original inspiration. Connell's 'Red Flag' was sung at the conclusion of Labour Party and Trades Union Congress conferences, and raised the rafters of the House of Commons when sung by the 393 victorious Labour MPs after the 1945 general election. 
Connell wrote many other songs and poems published in the left-wing press. He was on the staff of Keir Hardie's 'Labour Leader', where his material regularly appeared. His work also appeared in Ireland: James Larkin published 'The Blackleg' in the 'Irish Worker' on 22 November 1913, and the 'Voice of Labour' printed 'The Minor' on 16 August 1918. A collection, 'Red Flag Rhymes' (n.d.), was republished in several editions. 'The Red Flag' is the only generally surviving Connell piece, and appears as a standard entry in all socialist song collections. He retained an interest in Irish affairs, actively generating support in Britain for the Dublin workers during the 1913 lock-out and returning for occasional meetings, such as that of the Ballinlough Land Back to the People Committee at Crossakiel on 30 August 1918. 
Connell died at 390 High Street, Catford, Lewisham, on 8 February 1929 from bronchitis. He was cremated on 14 February at Golders Green crematorium. The 'Daily Herald' obituary (9 February 1929) noted that he was 'essentially a man of the people', and that he described himself as 'educated under a hedge for a few weeks' and as a 'sheep farmer, dock labourer, navvy, railwayman, draper, lawyer of a sort and all the time a poacher'. Veteran labour leader Tom Mann conducted the secular funeral proceedings, and he told the crowd Connell was 'no meek and mild platitudinarian' and that his songs 'inspired thousands -- possibly millions'. Connell departed to the strains of 'The Red Flag', sung to both his original and the adopted airs. In 1989 Gordon Brown MP unveiled a plaque in Stondon Park, Forest Hill, London -- Connell's last address -- as Lewisham borough council commemorated the sixtieth anniversary of Connell's death, and in 1997 a permanent memorial was erected in his birthplace under the aegis of the Kells Heritage Committee. 


@@@@@


doc= 38724


Gibson, (Susannah) Arethusa (1814-1885), society hostess and political activist, was born on 11 January 1814 at Southgate Green, Bury St Edmunds, the only child of Revd Sir Thomas Gery Cullum, eighth baronet (1777-1855), and his first wife, Mary Anne, 'nee' Eggers (died 1830). Much of her childhood was spent in Italy. On 23 February 1832 she married Thomas Milner Gibson (1806-1884), whose radicalism she shared, even when their opinions on specific issues differed. 
Witty and energetic, Gibson channelled her ability into conventional entertaining and charity work. She needed more stimulus, however, which she created in her eclectic salons, attended by diplomats, writers, politicians, and, after 1848, European exiles. Regular guests included Dickens, Thackeray, Hugo, Lady Morgan, the Disraelis, Cobden, and Louis Napoleon. Dickens in turn placed her, 'for Anti Corn Law Leaguality', among his own ideal guests ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 4.106). Her hectic public life was for twenty-five years (1833-57) complicated by pregnancies, despite her husband's lengthy absences on his yacht, although characteristically she resumed her activities as quickly as possible. The early deaths of four of her eight children deeply depressed her. Allegedly in 1838-9 she had an affair with Sir George Wombwell, third baronet (1792-1855). 
Gibson's rebelliousness and belief in individual freedom became focused after meeting Mazzini in 1844. Through her fund-raising skills, her many influential contacts, and her practical assistance with correspondence she helped for many years to promote Italian nationalism. She enlivened her frequent European travels with thrilling hints of conspiracies, and in 1857 dramatically appeared in a Genoa theatre wearing the Italian tricolour. In the 1850s she became an advocate of mesmerism and spiritualism, and in 1860 held an eventful seance for the spiritualist D. D. Home. Although she once described her latest child (1851) as 'This new enemy of the Pope' (Disraeli, 'Letters', 5.2084 n. 1), she later converted to Roman Catholicism. Her last years were spent mostly in Paris, which she found more stimulating than England. Her husband died (on board his yacht) in 1884. She outlived all but two of her children and died at her home, 11 avenue du Bois de Boulogne, Paris, on 23 February 1885; she was buried at Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, on 3 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 38725


Davidson, John Morrison (1843-1916), radical and journalist, was born in a roadside house in the parish of Old Deer, Aberdeenshire, the younger son of the unmarried Mary Warrender, farm labourer, and Thomas Davidson, farm labourer, of Hatton, Aberdeenshire. Thomas Davidson (1840-1900) was his elder brother. He was sickly as a child and unable to walk to school until he was nine, when his education began at the parish school at Deer. He then went to the grammar school of Old Aberdeen. He won a Campbell bursary to Aberdeen University, at which he matriculated in 1860, attending the art class; he felt that he learned little, and he quarrelled with his professors. In 1863 he left the university without a degree and made an abortive attempt to join the Polish revolution. At about that time he married Rose Fowlie, a former schoolmate, with whom he had eleven children. After teaching in Glasgow and Edinburgh he read for the bar in Edinburgh; in 1874 he transferred to London and was called to the English bar from the Middle Temple on 17 November 1877. He had chambers at 6 Pump Court in the Middle Temple from 1878 to 1887, but then ceased to practise. 
Davidson's real interest had always been in radical politics and journalism. In the 1860s he wrote for many Scottish newspapers, and was later the London editor of the 'Edinburgh Daily Review'. He was an uncompromising republican and democrat, and was secretary of the Advanced Liberal Association in Edinburgh, seceding from it as an opponent of all religious teaching in schools. He was corresponding secretary of the Edinburgh Republican Club from 1870. 
In London Davidson was correspondent for the 'Bradford Observer' and 'Leeds Mercury', and wrote for many other papers, including 'Reynolds News'. He met Henry George and quarrelled with him about usury. In 1885 he stood for election for Greenock, at very short notice, as the candidate of the Scottish Land Restoration League, receiving sixty-five votes. His journalism was amplified by many pamphlets and books, which show him as an energetic and individualistic socialist, but always writing within the British radical tradition and with a strong emphasis on the Norman yoke and Saxon freedoms and institutions. He took Gerrard Winstanley as his model, as evidenced by his 'Concerning four precursors of Henry George and the single tax, as also the land gospel according to Winstanley the Digger' (1899). Other characteristic works, from a large output, are 'The New Book of Kings' (1884), 'Scotia rediviva: Home Rule for Scotland' (1891?), 'The Annals of Toil' (4 pts, 1899) (dedicated to Michael Davitt and Prince Kropotkin), and 'The Book of Lords' (1884), which reflect a Saxon anti-feudalism. Less polemical is 'Eminent Radicals in and out of Parliament' (1879). The biography of him by Autolycus in Davidson's 'Politics for the People' is probably, in fact, his autobiography. Davidson was brought up as a Presbyterian but became an Arian, sometimes preaching in Unitarian churches. His anti-clericalism is recorded in 'That Great Lying Church of England' (1906), and his ethicalism in 'The Son of Man: Standard-Bearer of Humanity' (1906). Davidson died at 56 Marmora Road, Peckham, London, on 18 December 1916, a largely forgotten figure of the British radical tradition. 


@@@@@


doc= 38727


Lushington, Sir Godfrey (1832-1907), civil servant, was born at Westminster on 8 March 1832, the fifth son of Stephen Lushington (1782-1873), Admiralty judge and MP, and his wife, Sarah Grace Carr (died 1837). He had four brothers, including a twin, Vernon Lushington, and five sisters, two of whom, Alice and Fanny, later ran a school. His was a whig-Liberal family, strongly represented at the bar and in the public service. 
Educated at Rugby School, Lushington entered Balliol College, Oxford, in 1850, where he obtained a first in 'literae humaniores' and a fourth in mathematics (1854). He was president of the Oxford Union Society in 1854. Elected, as his father had been, to a fellowship of All Souls College (1854) Lushington, as a young turk in sympathy with the Oxford University reform movement, embarrassed many of the older fellows of the college by challenging the restrictive basis on which college fellowships were awarded. With two other former Balliol men, W. H. Fremantle and A. G. Watson, he took the case to the college visitor in 1859 and then to the court of queen's bench, before finally carrying the point in 1864. In 1858 he had been called to the bar at the Inner Temple. 
Lushington's reforming instincts were encouraged by his participation in Richard Congreve's Oxford coterie of followers of Auguste Comte, which included E. S. Beesly, J. H. Bridges, and Frederic Harrison. One of the earliest English converts to the religion of humanity, he wrote for the Positivist Society, to which he gave extensive financial support, in the 1860s and 1870s. He was latterly regarded by other positivists as a conservative figure, and he withdrew his subscription from the London Positivist Society in 1899 following a breach over the Dreyfus affair, on which Lushington had written at length in 'The Times'. 
One of the earliest teachers at the Working Men's College in London, founded in 1854, Lushington provided help for the embryonic labour movement as it struggled to make its case. He was a member of the Social Science Association's committee on trade societies and strikes, whose influential report was published in 1860. He contributed an essay, 'Workmen and trade unions', to the 1867 manifesto of academic liberalism, 'Questions for a Reformed Parliament'. Sharing his father's abhorrence of slavery, he was a member of the Emancipation Society, which in 1862 backed the North in the American Civil War. Always ready to challenge misguided authority, he was an active member of the Jamaica committee, established in 1866 to prosecute Governor Eyre for his handling of the Morant Bay rebellion; in 1867, using his expertise in prize law, he attacked what he perceived as the bullying of Spain in the case of the cargo ship 'Tornado'. 
On 3 June 1865 Lushington married Beatrice Anne Shore, daughter of Samuel Smith of Combe House, Surrey, and sister-in-law of A. H. Clough. They had no children. Between 1866 and 1869 he was secretary to the pollution of rivers commission and the digest of the law commission, and in 1868 unsuccessfully stood as Liberal candidate for Abingdon. In 1869 he was appointed by H. A. Bruce legal adviser at the Home Office. In 1876 he became legal assistant under-secretary and in 1885 permanent under-secretary. 
Lushington's legal expertise, zealous application, and high-mindedness made him an ideal support for successive home secretaries. His balanced advice during the preparation of legislation was set out in detailed, closely argued memoranda, written in a tiny, regular hand. His masters found the resource of what H. H. Asquith called 'a subtle and many-sided mind, and of a wide and generous culture' (letter to Henry Cunynghame, 3 Jan 1895, TNA: PRO, HO 45/9892/B17626/26) invaluable during a turbulent period when poverty, unemployment, and a lack of effective management within the Metropolitan Police exposed successive governments to major public-order crises in the capital and raised key issues about freedom of speech and of association. Despite this invaluable support Lord Salisbury's suspicion of his former 'socialist' leanings blocked several strong recommendations from Henry Matthews (home secretary 1886-92) for Lushington to be awarded the customary honours. He was finally made KCB in 1892 and GCMG in 1899. 
Yet, reformer that he was in his youth, Lushington did not always take advantage of the process of change inspired by Northcote and Trevelyan that swept through the civil service after 1870. While able young officials, recruited through open competition, were on their way up the hierarchy, Lushington found it difficult to delegate work and was against promoting them over the heads of their pedestrian seniors. A much-needed shake-up in the administration of factory and mining legislation was prevented by Lushington's conservative emphasis on the law and order aspect of the work, and led to a crisis in Home Office administration in the early 1890s. 
Lushington's retirement from the Home Office in 1895 provoked exceptionally warm tributes, especially from his Home Office colleagues who had appreciated Lushington's personal kindness and well understood that a certain austerity and lack of bonhomie were part of his impeccable standards and high moral principle. He thereafter took an active part in public life, serving as an alderman of the London county council until 1898. In 1903 he was appointed a member of the royal commission on trade disputes. Lushington died unexpectedly on 5 February 1907 at his London home, 34 Old Queen Street, Westminster, and was buried at St Katharine's Church, Savernake Forest. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 38729


Kipling, John Lockwood (1837-1911), artist and art school administrator, was born at Kirbymoorside, Pickering, Yorkshire, on 6 July 1837, the eldest child of the Revd Joseph Kipling (1805-1862), a Methodist minister, and his wife, Frances, 'nee' Lockwood, the daughter of a Cleveland builder and architect. He was educated at Woodhouse Grove near Bradford (the Wesleyan academy for the sons of the ministry) between 1845 and 1852. A visit to the Great Exhibition in 1851, aged thirteen, inspired him to become an artist and craftsman. He served as an apprentice, designer, and modeller at Pinder, Bourne & Co. a Wesleyan ceramics business at Burslem, Staffordshire, while taking evening classes at the Potteries School of Art, Stoke-on-Trent (1853-6) and then at Stoke and Fenton School of Art (1856-9). His teachers included Albert Carrier-Belleuse and Hugues Protat). 
In 1859 Kipling joined the architectural sculptor John Birnie Philip in London for two years, and assisted on the decoration of St Michael's, Cornhill, City of London, on the chapel of Exeter College, Oxford, and on All Souls, Hayley Hill, Halifax. He also worked for the sculptor John Thomas. He moved to the department of science and art at the South Kensington Museum in 1861 to assist Godfrey Sykes in modelling much of the exterior terracotta decoration of the new museum buildings (today the Victoria and Albert Museum), in liaison with the manufacturers in Burslem. Kipling's rise to prominence is commemorated by a mosaic panel, designed by Sykes (1868-9), showing a procession in which he follows immediately after the museum's director, its architect, and Sykes. 
Kipling added his mother's maiden name to his own in 1863. He married on 18 March 1865 Alice Macdonald ['see under 'Macdonald sisters], the eldest of four surviving daughters of John Browne Macdonald, a Wesleyan Methodist minister; wedding guests included Edward Burne-Jones, Ford Madox Brown, and Algernon Swinburne. In January 1865 Kipling had signed a three-year contract to teach ceramics and architectural sculpture at the Sir Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy School of Art in Bombay, and in April 1865 he sailed to India with Alice. Their son (Joseph) Rudyard Kipling was born in Bombay in December 1865. On his son's birth certificate he gave his occupation as 'architectural sculptor'; on his wedding certificate he had stated 'artist'. 
Kipling arrived in Bombay at the end of a period of prosperity caused by the export of cotton to Britain during the American Civil War. He contributed to the architectural decoration of many new public buildings, both directly and through his pupils and assistants, such as the reliefs and fountain in Crawford Market. When his contract at the art school expired in 1868 it was renewed through the support of the dowager Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy, but without the added income from private pupils. Kipling and his wife supplemented their income as journalists, writing for the 'Pioneer', the 'Bombay Builder', the 'Bombay Gazette', and the 'Civil and Military Gazette'. Their daughter, Alice, was born in June 1868. A second son, John, was born in 1870 but did not survive. 
Kipling secured commissions from the government of India to travel and make documentary drawings, suitable for exhibition and publication, of local craft industries. In 1870 he recorded craftsmen at work in the North-Western Provinces; in 1872 he documented cotton cultivation in Khamgaon and village crafts in the Deccan. His pen and ink studies (now Victoria and Albert Museum, British Library, and Sussex University) were first shown, with sample wares, at international exhibitions in London (1871, 1872), Vienna (1873), and Paris (1878); in 1880 they went on display in the new India section of the South Kensington Museum. Some were published in eleven articles in the 'Journal of Indian Art' (1884-8), the two pilot 'specimen numbers' of which (1883) Kipling prepared. Through his published drawings and accompanying articles Kipling became a champion of traditional Indian architecture, arts and crafts, and teaching methods at risk from British exports to India; soon he rivalled George Birdwood as a leader of the movement to preserve Indian arts, architecture, and design. 
From 1875 until his retirement in 1893 Kipling served as principal of the Mayo School of Art (today the National College of Arts, Pakistan) and curator of the Lahore Central Museum. He was immortalized in this role as the 'Keeper of the Images in the Wonder House' by Rudyard Kipling in 'Kim' (1901). As a reformer he developed a pioneering approach to art education, based on traditional crafts and methods of training. He designed banners and other decoration for Lord Lytton's imperial assemblage, the 'Delhi Durbar' (1877), where Victoria was proclaimed empress of India. As part of his art school duties he also became an exhibition curator, promoting Indian (especially Punjabi) art and crafts at international exhibitions (Vienna 1873, Paris 1878, Melbourne 1880, Amsterdam 1883, Calcutta 1883, London 1886, Glasgow 1888) while also undertaking private commissions, particularly for the local specialism of decorative woodcarving. A billiard room for the duke of Connaught at Bagshot Park, Surrey (1884-90), led directly to a commission from Queen Victoria for the Durbar Room at Osborne (1890-92). As well as his journalism he published a travelogue with T. H. Thornton, 'Lahore' (1876), published anonymously; 'Descriptive List of Photographic Negatives of Buddhist Sculptures in the Lahore Central Museum' (1889); and 'Beast and Man in India' (1891). He provided illustrations for Edward Emmerson Oliver, 'Across the Border' (1890), and Flora Annie Webster Steel and Richard Carnac Temple, 'Tales of the Punjab Told by the People' (1894). 
Kipling retired from Lahore in 1893 and settled in Tisbury, Wiltshire, where he illustrated several of his son's (and other) publications. He was made a fellow of the University of Bombay (1875) and CIE in 1887. He died from a heart attack at Clouds, the Wiltshire country house of his friend Percy Wyndham, on 26 January 1911, and was buried in the parish church at Tisbury alongside his wife, who had died a few weeks earlier. He was pleasant company ('shrewd, original, kindly, humorous' -- 'Pioneer Mail', 1893), and was especially close to his son, taking great pride in his literary success. 


@@@@@


doc= 38732


Page, William (bap. 1729, d. 1758), highwayman, was baptized on 22 October 1729 at the church of St Mary the Virgin, Hampton, Middlesex, the son of William Page (died 1740) and his wife, Mary. His father is said to have been a bargeman in the coal trade who drowned in the Thames above Putney Bridge in 1740. Page received a rudimentary education, apparently at a charity school in Hampton, and it was there that he met his future confederate William Darwell. Giving evidence at Page's trial at the Old Bailey in 1758, one who had known Page and Darwell as children at Hampton remembered that they were 'acquainted like brothers' ('Old Bailey Sessions Papers'). Page entered domestic service. According to his contemporary biographer, however, he was of too 'proud and haughty' a spirit to submit to orders and eventually resolved to become a highwayman in order to throw off 'that badge of slavery, a livery', and set himself 'on a level with gentlemen' ('A Genuine Narrative', 4). 
Page pursued his new trade with businesslike efficiency. He made a careful study of the roads around London and took pains to disguise and alter his appearance. It is said that he frequently drove out from London in a phaeton and pair, parking the carriage in a secluded spot, changing clothes, and saddling one of the horses in order to commit robberies. Afterwards he would return to the phaeton, resume his former disguise, and drive back to London. Page never drew attention to himself by speaking of his activities as a highwayman, and for many years he levied a toll upon travellers approaching or leaving the capital. Before his last arrest in 1757 he was brought to trial only once. This occurred at Hertford at the Lent assizes of 1753. Page was indicted for robbing a Mr Savile Cockayne Cust of his purse on the highway on 10 January 1753. An impressive array of witnesses was marshalled against him but Page was able to produce evidence that he was elsewhere at the time of the offence and he was acquitted. 
In 1755 Page teamed up with his old schoolfriend Darwell and, on and off, the two robbed together for the next two years. Strenuous efforts to hunt them down were made by the Bow Street magistrate John Fielding after their robbery of Laurence Shirley, fourth Earl Ferrers, on the Northern Road, Hertfordshire, on 16 February 1757. Typical of the many entries in Fielding's accounts is one dated 9 March 1757: 'Paid Phillipson & Jones for watching one week at the Red Lyon near Westminster Bridge... to apprehend Page, $3 10s. 6d.' The hunt became so intense that Page visited Scotland. In July he was back, working the Tonbridge Road in Kent with Darwell and robbing the post-chaise of the bishop of Bath and Wells in Maidenhead Thicket. It was his last major success. Darwell was taken near Sevenoaks and in order to save his own life divulged Page's regular haunts and agreed to give evidence against him. Page was arrested at the Golden Lion, near Grosvenor Square Gate, London, and committed to Newgate on 8 August 1757. In his possession were three loaded pistols, a wig, a cockade, and 'a curious plan of the roads round London in his own handwriting' ('Public Advertiser', 10 Aug 1757). Fielding was largely responsible for assembling the evidence against Page, and the importance he attached to the task is indicated by such entries in his accounts as: 'Paid to the Lord Provost of Edinburgh to bring an evidence against Page to town from thence, $8 8s. 0d.' (30 Sept 1757). 
In February 1758 Page was brought to trial at the Old Bailey for robbing John Webb in Bedfont Lane, Middlesex, in March 1757 of two pistols, a purse containing 9 guineas, and a gold watch. The only material evidence adduced against him was Darwell's and Page did much to undermine it by reminding the court that 'he [Darwell] would have given testimony against any person that he should happen to fix upon to save his own life' ('Old Bailey Sessions Papers'). Page was acquitted but detained in custody pending indictment in four other counties. The acquittal damaged Darwell's credibility as a witness, and when Page was next tried, at the Lent assizes at Hertford for the robbery of Earl Ferrers, he was again acquitted. He was then indicted at the Lent assizes for Kent at Rochester for robbing Thomas Farrington of a gold watch and 20 guineas in January 1757. On this occasion Darwell's testimony was supported by that of a witness who identified Page as the man who had pawned the watch, and he was convicted and sentenced to death. 
Page was about 5 feet 11 inches tall and of gentlemanly appearance and manner. He was hanged on Pennenden Heath, near Maidstone, on 6 April 1758, and was survived by his wife, about whom no details are known. With Darwell alone Page is said to have committed more than 300 robberies. Such claims are now impossible to substantiate or refute. He was, nevertheless, one of the most able and successful of all eighteenth-century highwaymen, and his success is the more remarkable in that it occurred at a time when improved communications and the police reforms of John and Henry Fielding were beginning to make the roads around London unsafe for highwaymen. 


@@@@@


doc= 38733


Mainwaring, Sir Henry (1586/7-1653), pirate and naval officer, was the second son of Sir George Mainwaring (died 1628) MP, of Ightfield, Shropshire, and Anne (died 1624), daughter of Sir William More MP, and his second wife, Margaret. The Mainwarings were well established in Shropshire and Cheshire. Mainwaring matriculated aged twelve at Brasenose College, Oxford, on 27 April 1599, graduated BA on 15 July 1602, and was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1604. He was granted (but did not take up) the reversion of the captaincy of St Andrew's Castle on 10 June 1611, was appointed to suppress piracy in the Bristol Channel in 1612, and was chosen to accompany Sir Thomas Sherley to Persia, though Spain, fearing that the real objective was the West Indies, blocked the mission. 
The rebuff incited Mainwaring to embark on a campaign of piracy, directed principally against Spain. He soon reigned supreme on the Barbary coast. Spain tried unsuccessfully to buy him off, and then took advantage of his absence on a voyage to Newfoundland in 1614 to seize his base at Marmora. Mainwaring transferred to Villefranca and defeated a Spanish fleet in 1615. Complaints from France and Spain reached such a pitch that James I gave him the choice of a pardon or of facing an expedition. Mainwaring would not fight his countrymen, accepted a pardon on 9 June 1616, and subsequently wrote his 'Discourse on Piracy', which is full of sound common sense. 
Although he hated pirates the king was attracted to Mainwaring, knighting him on 20 March 1618 and appointing him a gentleman of the bedchamber. Despite this post and the gains from piracy, however, Mainwaring had financial problems and he needed employment. In 1618-19 plans for him to enter the service of Venice fell through, but Lord Zouche, the lord warden of the Cinque Ports, although allegedly warned not to do so, appointed him lieutenant of Dover Castle early in 1620. He also joined the Virginia Company. Mainwaring undertook his duties as lieutenant seriously, which the corporation of Dover recognized in 1621 by electing him to parliament, where he spoke on issues which affected the Cinque Ports. At Dover he wrote his 'Seaman's Dictionary', the first authoritative treatise on seamanship, published eventually in 1644. But he made enemies in the Cinque Ports and, worse, alienated Zouche, who demanded his resignation on 17 March 1623. Prince Charles intervened on his behalf, but when Zouche surrendered his post to the duke of Buckingham, it was on condition that Mainwaring should not be given any post in the Cinque Ports. 
In 1623 Mainwaring was flag captain of the 'Prince Royal', which brought home Prince Charles and Buckingham from their escapade to Spain in pursuit of a bride for the prince. He failed to secure re-election as MP in 1624 but did, however, secure Buckingham as patron and became one of the group of seamen around Buckingham. He was involved in preparing the abortive naval expeditions of the later 1620s, proposed the development of Portsmouth Dockyard, served on a commission of inquiry into the navy in 1626-7, and was an elder brother of Trinity House by 1627. The assassination of Buckingham on 23 August 1628 deprived Mainwaring of his patron and ended a period of intense English naval activity. His father also died in 1628, leaving him nothing. 
Mainwaring was among the suitors in 1629 for the hand of Elizabeth Bennett, widow of a wealthy City merchant, but he failed to find favour. The grant of an island off Brazil was also unproductive. About 1630 he married Fortune Gardiner ('bap'. 1607, died 1633), but without the consent of her father, Sir Thomas Gardiner, who refused to allow him access to her portion until he settled $100 per annum in land on her. They had a daughter, Christian (1633-1639); Fortune died in December 1633 and Mainwaring's brother, Sir Arthur, became guardian of Christian until her death at the age of six. 
After performing tasks ashore for the navy in the early 1630s Mainwaring served as a senior captain in the ship money fleets in 1637-40, and was vice-admiral in 1639 in the 'Henrietta Maria'. He remained impecunious and is said to have been outlawed for debt in December 1635. Although he failed to become surveyor of the navy in 1638, he was elected master of Trinity House in 1642. Parliament, however, distrusted him, and removed him from all offices in the corporation in November 1642. 
Mainwaring went to the king's headquarters at Oxford and received the honorary degree of doctor of physic on 31 January 1643. Age and inexperience in land warfare must have kept him inactive in 1643-4, but early in 1645 he was appointed captain of a ship which lay at Pendennis, ready to transport Prince Charles to the Isles of Scilly if he had to leave England, though the prince eventually travelled in another ship. In dire financial straits, Mainwaring settled first in Scilly, then in Jersey in 1646-8, where he became a friend of Jean Chevalier, the chronicler of Jersey. He may have aroused there the interest of Prince Charles in ships and the sea. After the revolt of part of the parliamentary fleet to the king in the summer of 1648 Mainwaring was appointed captain of the 'Antelope', one of the rebel ships, but played no part in the subsequent operations under Rupert. He eventually made his peace with parliament in November 1651, when he was worth only $8, and returned to England. Mainwaring was buried on 15 May 1653 in St Giles, Camberwell, where his wife was already interred. 


@@@@@


doc= 38735


Veil, Sir Thomas de (1684-1746), magistrate, is a figure whose early life is obscure. According to his contemporary biographer ('Memoirs of the Life and Times of Sir Thomas Deveil', 5-6) he was born in St Paul's Churchyard, London, in 1684 and was the son of the Revd Dr Hans de Veil, a Church of England clergyman. This de Veil later became, thanks to the patronage of Bishop John Tillotson, librarian at Lambeth Palace. 
Only the place and date of birth may, however, be correct. For although the registers of St Augustine, Watling Street, London, record the birth of a Thomas de Veil in the parish on 21 November 1684, this man was the son of Lewis de Compiegne de Veil and his wife, Anne. De Veil is said to have been apprenticed to a mercer near Cheapside and then, when his master's business failed, to have become a soldier. Certainly, upon the outbreak of the War of the Spanish Succession, he enlisted as a volunteer and served with distinction. He fought at Cadiz and Vigo in 1702 and at Almanza in 1707, and by 1713, when the war ended and he was retired on half pay, had attained the rank of captain of dragoons. 
Little is known about de Veil's family life. He married his first wife, Anne Hancock, on 27 January 1704 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. After her death he married three times, but none of his wives survived him. His third wife was called Kingsman; the names of the others are not known. He is said to have fathered twenty-five children. De Veil was appointed to the commissions of the peace for Middlesex and Westminster in 1729, and opened his first office in Leicester Fields (Leicester Square). From there he moved to Thrift Street, Soho, and thence, in 1739 or 1740, to Bow Street. Ambitious, courageous, and active, he did much to prosecute crime and maintain public order in the metropolis. In 1735 he was instrumental in breaking the formidable gang of robbers led by William Wreathock, a Hatton Garden attorney; in 1736-7 he bravely attempted to enforce Sir Robert Walpole's ill-conceived 'Gin Act'; and in 1741 his efforts secured the conviction of James Hall, who murdered his master, John Penny, principal of Clement's Inn. Hall was executed. Such was his zeal that the government turned to de Veil whenever it needed a magistrate's services. In this capacity he acted as a 'court justice' and although this was not an official appointment he was rewarded by Treasury grants, by an appointment as inspector-general of exports and imports (with a salary of $500 per annum) in 1738, and by a knighthood in 1744. 
De Veil's stern enforcement of the penal code may not have endeared him to the poor, however, and his exertions in the interests of the powerful frequently incurred popular resentment. Thus, in 1744, at the behest of 'great people', de Veil attempted to prevent a meeting of footmen protesting at the employment of foreign servants. The footmen marched upon his house in Bow Street; he arrested three of their number, but the others stormed the house and released the men. By 1746 de Veil had become the leading metropolitan magistrate, was a colonel in the Westminster militia, and sat on the commissions of the peace for Essex, Surrey, and Hertfordshire. On 6 October 1746, after examining a prisoner at Bow Street, he suffered an apoplectic stroke. He died the next morning and was buried at Denham, Buckinghamshire, on the 11th. His treatise, 'Observations on the Practice of a Justice of the Peace' (1747), was published posthumously. 
De Veil is sometimes cited as a classic example of the venal trading justice, but this is an extreme view. No clear evidence of corruption has ever been adduced against him and, although he lived magnificently, he possessed income other than that derived from fees as a magistrate. His eminence established Bow Street as an important centre of magisterial activity. Two years after his death his house there was occupied by Henry Fielding and thus became the birthplace of the Bow Street runners. 


@@@@@


doc= 38736


Lightowller, Thomas (fl. 1741-1769), coiner, was the eldest son of Thomas Lightowller, joiner, and his wife, Mary, of Walton-le-Dale, near Preston, Lancashire. His date and place of birth are uncertain but the parish registers of Walton-le-Dale record the marriage of his parents in 1721 and the baptism of their second son, Timothy Lightoler, in 1727. The brothers trained as joiners and carvers with their father but Thomas turned early to coining. In 1745 he was acquitted in Cardiff on a charge of coining. About five years later, when Thomas and Timothy went to Warwick to work on the interior of the castle, the former settled in Warwickshire. By 1751 he was married and two years later he rented a house in Coventry with his wife, Margaret ('nee' Gill); a son, John, was baptized at Holy Trinity Church, Coventry, on 12 May 1755. 
Overtly Lightowller traded as a carver, snuff-box maker, and 'engine turner' but secretly he soon developed a thriving operation in the counterfeiting of gold and silver coins from mixed or base metals. Lightowller's contacts were extensive. His known customers for false coin, often food dealers whose trades were heavily dependent on cash transactions, included names from London, Banbury in Oxfordshire, and Stone in Staffordshire; in January 1755 Lightowller himself visited the Isle of Man to dispose of counterfeit coin. Both in the west midlands and Lancashire, furthermore, he trained others in the art of coining. Thus, when Abraham Healy the elder and Abraham Healy the younger were convicted of coining at Lancaster Lent assizes in 1756, the evidence given in court proved that Lightowller had not only counterfeited coin in the presence of the Healys but had supplied their equipment and instructed them in its use. Lightowller was apprehended in Coventry in May 1756 but he betrayed his accomplices and procured his youngest brother, Henry, to be admitted as an evidence against them. Partly on the strength of Henry's testimony Jonathan Tilley, a Coventry plumber, and Joseph Leigh of Bedworth were convicted of coining at Coventry summer assizes in 1756 and executed. Lightowller himself was tried at Lancaster summer assizes the same year on the indictment previously lodged against the Healys and, to the amazement of William Chamberlayne, the mint solicitor, acquitted. After being returned to Coventry to stand trial for coining there, he was discharged in 1757 because the attorney-general opined that 'the discoveries at Coventry having been made by means of Thomas Lightowller he ought not to be prosecuted' (mint solicitor's account, 1757, TNA: PRO, Tl/387/54). Lightowller subsequently went to Yorkshire, where he assisted his brother Timothy in the redecoration of Burton Constable Hall in the East Riding and then resumed his coining activities in the West Riding. In 1768, when several of his associates (notably Joseph Stell, executed at York) were apprehended, Lightowller fled the country and entered the service of Maria Theresa in Austria. There, by 1769, he had been granted 6 florins per day and a house in Vienna to set up flatting mills for the production of copper and iron plates and establish a variety of manufactures. 
Lightowller's subsequent activities, and the circumstances of his death, are unknown. Alderman John Hewitt, who investigated the Coventry coiners, considered Lightowller the 'greatest mechanical genius' of his time. He was, indeed, a fine carver and metalworker, but his talents were misapplied and his dissolute lifestyle and unscrupulous character rendered him untrustworthy even in his dealings with his business associates and accomplices. 


@@@@@


doc= 38737


Hartley, David (c.1731-1770), coiner, was born in the parish of Halifax in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the eldest of the three sons of William Hartley ('c'.1704-1789), a weaver and hill farmer of Erringden, Halifax. Both his mother's identity and the details of his early upbringing remain obscure, but he appears to have left his native Yorkshire during his youth to be apprenticed to an ironworker in the midlands. It was here that he was probably first introduced to the counterfeiting of currency, which had become endemic in the Birmingham area by the mid-eighteenth century. Indeed Hartley's involvement in illicit coining may have prompted his sudden decision to return to the security of his father's remote and inaccessible farmstead late in 1765 or early in 1766 so as to escape the attention of the increasingly vigilant authorities around Birmingham. 
There may also have been domestic reasons for Hartley's return since his young wife, Grace, 'nee' Sutcliffe ('c'.1742-1802), whom he had married at the parochial chapelry of Heptonstall in the parish of Halifax on 27 December 1764, was pregnant with their first child; Hartley's widowed father may well have offered accommodation to the couple at Bell House, a forest keeper's cottage, which William Hartley had leased since 1752. The first of the couple's three children, David, was born and baptized at Heptonstall on 17 March 1766, followed by a daughter, Mary, on 9 August 1767 and a second son, Isaac, on 2 April 1769. In the baptismal registers their father, David, is described as a weaver, living in the township of Erringden. Hartley continued to reside with his growing family at Bell House, a plain, millstone-grit, square-built farmhouse, until his arrest in 1769. The remote, moorland location of the property with its adjacent, concealed ravine and its abundant supply of wood for fuel offered an ideal base for a counterfeiter seeking to operate beyond the reach of the law. 
It is likely that even before Hartley's return to Yorkshire his father and his younger brothers, Isaac (1737-1815) and William ('b'. 'c'.1738), had already become engaged in the yellow trade, the clipping and remoulding of golden guineas into counterfeit Portuguese moidores, which were in widespread circulation in Yorkshire on account of the shortage and poor quality of the coin of the realm in the 1760s. Subsequently David's activities gained him the sobriquets the Chief of the Coiners and King David, since he had effectively usurped the authority of the Royal Mint in the upper Calder valley; through association with their brother, Isaac and William were designated the duke of York and the duke of Edinburgh. Although the coining activities in which they engaged were neither the first nor the last instances of illegal counterfeiting of currency in the West Riding, it was the vast scale of the operation masterminded by David Hartley that began to attract the attention of the authorities. At its height an estimated 100-200 coiners and their associates were thought to have been engaged in the extensive network for collecting, clipping, and counterfeiting gold coin and returning it into circulation. The operation was served by more than a dozen mints, including Bell Hole, where gold coins were reputedly being diminished by clipping at the rate of 100 guineas per day, and sustained not only by blackmail, protection rackets, violence, and intimidation but also by massive and active popular support. The predisposition of local clothiers to accept the diminished and counterfeit coin was a consequence of an exceptional demand for specie and of the vicissitudes suffered by the region's woollen and worsted industries in those decades. 
On 14 October 1769 David Hartley was arrested for clipping and defacing the king's coinage at the Old Cock inn in Halifax, on the evidence of James Broadbent, a charcoal burner and former associate, who was employed as an informer by William Dighton, the supervisor of excise for Halifax since 1759. Hartley's committal to York Castle on 16 October was widely held to have provoked the assassination of the 51-year-old excise officer on 9 November. The murder, which left his widow with five dependent children, prompted an investigation on behalf of the government by the marquess of Rockingham, the lord lieutenant of the West Riding. Though lack of evidence meant that he was never brought to justice David's younger brother Isaac was widely suspected of having recruited the assassins, Robert Thomas and Matthew Normanton, who were later hanged for their involvement in the crime. A contemporary proclamation issued after David Hartley's arrest includes a detailed description of his brother Isaac as a tall, dark, imposing figure, with black hair and a pock-marked countenance, usually clad in light-coloured clothes. However, no comparable physical description of David survives. Renowned for his conviviality and largess in local taverns, Hartley clearly had a considerable presence within the local community, but was also capable of striking fear into those who attempted to penetrate his clandestine organization. 
David Hartley and an accomplice were sentenced to death at the York assizes in early April 1770 for clipping and diminishing the gold coins of the realm. They were hanged at Tyburn near York on the afternoon of Saturday 28 April. 'At the fatal tree', the 'Leeds Mercury' reported, the convicted criminals 'behaved every way suitable to their unhappy circumstances, though we do not hear that they said anything by way of confession' (1 May 1770). Hartley's body was brought back for burial on 1 May in the churchyard of St Thomas a Becket at Heptonstall, where a surviving tombstone bears his initials and the year of his death, though the parish register records in Latin the details of his offence and his execution at York. In 1774 the solicitor to the mint, William Chamberlayne, who had visited Halifax in 1769, condemned 'King David' to a committee of the House of Commons as 'the principal master' of an illicit mint during whose 'reign' the clipping of coin had become so firmly established in the neighbourhood of Halifax as almost, in the view of one historian, 'to bid defiance to the civil power' (Marsh, 166; Styles, 214). 


@@@@@


doc= 38746


Adelaide Helen Calvert (bap. 1836, d. 1921), actress, was born in Loughborough, the eldest of the four daughters of James Biddles, then a tobacconist, soon to be an actor and entertainer, and his first wife, Ann Maria. Adelaide was baptized at All Saints' Church, Loughborough, on 1 April 1836. At the age of six she was established as 'an infant prodigy' in the stock company (that of Mr Harvey operating in Weymouth, Guernsey, and Exeter) of which her parents were members. She appeared with Henry Betty, son of the 'Infant Roscius', and Charles and Ellen Kean. Following the death of their mother, Adelaide and her sister Clara were sent to a boarding-school in Nottingham, but when their father took over the management of the Bower Saloon in October 1845 they rejoined him (and his second wife) and were soon appearing on stage. In a varied repertory Adelaide undertook roles in melodrama, Shakespeare, and pantomime; she also became the pupil of the celebrated clown Richard Flexmore, a neighbour in Hercules Buildings, Lambeth. In October 1851 her drama 'Amy Lawrence: a Tale of an Old Man's Love' (adapted from a story serialized in the 'London Journal of Science and Art') was successfully staged at the Bower with the author in the title role. 


@@@@@


doc= 38756


Florence Davenport Hill (1828/9-1919), who was also born in Chelsea, and 


@@@@@


doc= 38924


Bouverie, Jacob, first Viscount Folkestone (bap. 1694, d. 1761), patron of science and philanthropist, was baptized at St Katharine Cree church, London, on 14 October 1694, the second son of Sir William Des Bouverie, first baronet (1656-1717), and his second wife, Anne, 'nee' Urry (died 1739). Sir William was a well-known Turkey merchant who traced his descent from Laurens des Bouverie, a Flemish silk weaver who had escaped to Kent in 1568. The family motto 'Patria cara carior libertas' reflected these circumstances. Jacob Des Bouverie was educated first at the Middle Temple, where he was admitted on 24 March 1709, and then at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 20 October 1711. He inherited $18,000 from his father in 1717. In 1722 his uncle and namesake bequeathed him the honour and lordship of Folkestone and Terlingham in Kent, and in the same year he travelled to France and Flanders in search of his ancestors. On 31 January 1723, at St Paul's Cathedral, London, he married Mary Clarke ('c'.1701-1739), daughter of Bartholomew Clarke of Delapre Abbey, Northamptonshire; they had two sons and four daughters. His town residence was at this time in Red Lion Street, Holborn, and he rented country houses in Kent. In 1736 he succeeded his elder brother, Sir Edward Des Bouverie (1688-1736), as third baronet, and became possessed of Longford Castle in Wiltshire, a remarkable example of late Elizabethan 'fantasy' architecture which he enlarged and embellished over the years. He also leased a house in Clifford Street near Piccadilly, previously used by the earl of Burlington, of which he subsequently bought the freehold. 
Des Bouverie changed his surname to Bouverie by act of parliament in 1737 and in the same year became a trustee of the Georgia Society ['see 'Trustees for establishing the colony of Georgia in America], having donated $1000 to the society. He became a common councillor of the society in 1738. He sat as MP for Salisbury from 1741 to 1747, his political sympathies being tory. In spite of this and his alleged Jacobitism he remained recorder of Salisbury from 1743 until his death. He became a guardian of the Foundling Hospital in 1745 and was created Viscount Folkestone and Baron Longford in 1747, having, according to gossip, purchased his peerage from Lady Yarmouth, mistress of George II, for $12,000. He installed his son William as MP for Salisbury, who went on to support the government, perhaps indicating a change of loyalty on Folkestone's part. Folkestone's interest in philanthropy and public service was accompanied by an informed connoisseurship and a taste for display. He purchased examples of the Flemish and Italian schools of painting, notably two famous works by Nicolas Poussin and the portrait of Erasmus attributed to Hans Holbein the younger. He commissioned family portraits from Thomas Hudson, views of London Bridge by Samuel Scott, and genre pictures by John Wootton, and employed William Kent, Benjamin Goodison, and other native craftsmen and artists to work for him at Longford Castle. Around it he supervised the creation of a landscape park, planting many trees and flattening only recently formed water meadows. His interest in afforestation continued in the 1750s, when it became a major concern of the Society of Arts. His private account books written in his own hand record wages paid, pictures bought, expenses of journeys, and tailor's bills. He spent $25 on a waistcoat from Paris and $50 on the embroidery for his coat for his second marriage, which took place on 21 April 1741 at Swanscombe in Kent. His bride was Elizabeth Marsham (died 1782), daughter of Robert Marsham, first Baron Romney. A son, Jacob, died at the age of four but his younger brother Philip survived until 1828. Folkestone's new brother-in-law, Robert Marsham, second Baron Romney, was related to the eminent clergyman and scientist Stephen Hales, who in 1753 was encouraging William Shipley's scheme for a society of arts. Hales told Shipley that Romney and Folkestone had a similar scheme of their own, but after receiving Shipley in their town houses in Clifford Street, the two peers agreed to back the latter's plan ['see 'Founders of the Society of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce]. After three months of a largely fruitless canvas by Shipley, Folkestone and Romney held a meeting at Rawthmell's Coffee House in Covent Garden on 22 March 1754. With Folkestone in the chair and Romney, Hales, Shipley, and seven others present, premiums were approved for the discovery of cobalt, the cultivation of madder, and for the best drawings by boys and girls. A second meeting followed on 29 March when the two peers offered to make up any deficiencies in the premium fund and, after being absent until 15 January 1755, Folkestone accepted the position of president of the Society of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce, to which he was elected on 5 February 1755. He held the office until his death in 1761, during which time the membership of the society increased to 1000 and its premium list extended to over 100 items. 
Folkestone presided regularly at the society's new year meetings. He saw the society established in the magnificent great room designed for it by William Chambers in Denmark Court in The Strand, where the first exhibition of modern British art took place in 1760. During his presidency he recruited great noblemen, such as George Henry Lee, third earl of Lichfield, as members, and gave direct patronage to premium winners like the sculptor Thomas Scheemakers. He also worked with Lord Romney, his vice-president, in founding the Marine Society in 1756. Folkestone's work was recognized by the Society of Arts by the award of an honorary gold medal 'for eminent services' in 1758. He was, he told Shipley, 'a hearty... well-wisher' to the society, whose 'Transactions have given me pleasure more than once' (Folkestone to Shipley, 1755, Radnor, 'First president', 13). 
Folkestone last chaired a meeting of the Society of Arts on 4 February 1761, having the day before presented an address of congratulation to the new king, George III, at St James's Palace on behalf of the society. He died on 17 February 1761 at Britford, Wiltshire, and was buried there on 27 February. Folkestone's death was probably caused by aggravated gout. His account book shows numerous payments for wine and for medicines, doctors' fees, and gout shoes. He was succeeded by William Bouverie (1725-1776), the eldest surviving son of his first marriage, who was created earl of Radnor in 1765 and was elected a vice-president of the Society of Arts in 1773. Successive earls of Radnor were to be associated with the society during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 38925


Marsham, Robert, second Baron Romney (1712-1793), patron of science and philanthropist, was born on 22 August 1712 at Frith Street, Soho, Westminster, and baptized at St Anne's, Soho, on 2 September, the second and only surviving son of Sir Robert Marsham, fifth baronet and from 1716 first Baron Romney (1685-1724), and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Shovell (1692-1750), the elder daughter of Admiral Sir Cloudesley Shovell. The Marshams had been established in Kent from the 1630s and Robert (who succeeded to the peerage aged twelve) received an education appropriate to his social status. He entered Eton College in 1728 and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 10 July 1731. He graduated doctor of civil law by nobleman's privilege on 11 July 1733. He had taken his seat in the House of Lords in January 1733 and later that year travelled to Groningen, where he studied French and Italian. In 1736 Romney became engaged to Elizabeth Boteler, a fourteen-year-old Kentish heiress, but following her death in 1737 he remained a bachelor until 29 July 1742, when he married Priscilla Pym (1724-1771), only child of Charles Pym of St Kitts in the West Indies, who had sent her to be educated at West Farleigh, near the Marsham family seat of The Mote at Maidstone in Kent. The Romneys had ten children. The eldest, Robert Pym Marsham, was born in 1743 and died unmarried in 1762, but the second, Charles Marsham (1744-1811), succeeded his father as third baron and was created earl of Romney in 1801. The tenth child, Charlotte, was born in 1761 and died on 16 January 1794, some two months after her father. 
Politically independent, Romney disliked the luxury and formality of court life and 'Great Men's Tables' (letter to duke of Leeds, 8 Sept 1737, BL Add. MS 28051, fol. 316). He shared this attitude together with an interest in philanthropy and practical science with his relative the natural philosopher and clergyman Stephen Hales, one of whose ventilating machines was installed at St George's Hospital, where Romney was a governor. His sister Elizabeth's husband, Jacob Bouverie, first Viscount Folkestone, was also a benefactor of the hospital, and well known to Hales. Romney and Folkestone concocted a scheme to encourage arts, manufactures, and commerce by means of a public subscription, similar to that proposed by William Shipley, a drawing master. In 1753 Hales gave Shipley an introduction to Romney, who agreed to waive his and Folkestone's scheme and to draft and sign a declaration authorizing Shipley to canvass for subscriptions from the nobility and gentry to 'promote and establish' a society of arts. 
Romney was one of the nucleus of eleven foundation members who met at Rawthmell's Coffee House to establish a society for the encouragement of arts, manufactures, and commerce ['see 'Founders of the Society of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce]. A year later, when officers were chosen, he was elected 'First Vice-President' and in 1758 awarded the society's medal in gold 'for Eminent Services'. He succeeded Lord Folkestone as president on the latter's death in 1761, gaining a majority of 222 votes to two over his opponents, the earl of Lichfield and Lord Willoughby. Romney was re-elected each year until his death in 1793. Both as vice-president and as president Romney's chief responsibility was to take the chair at the sometimes turbulent meetings of the society. At these he displayed what Robert Dossie called a 'benign temper, unbiased judgement and patient attention' (Dossie, 2.vii). He was regular in attendance until old age and illness prevented it and from the earliest years he gave support to the institution in other ways. In 1754 he and Lord Folkestone offered to subsidize the society's premiums and in 1763 he contributed $100 to the society's building fund. In 1769 he sat for his portrait by Joshua Reynolds at the unanimous request of the membership and in the same year stood aloof from John Stewart's discreditable campaign to gain the secretaryship by packing the society with his allies, chiefly Rockingham whigs motivated by party interest. In 1778 he presented George III with a specially bound copy of the 'Register of Premiums'. 
In the wake of the foundation of the Society of Arts, Romney lent his name and presence to other philanthropic projects. He was the first chairman of the Marine Society, established in 1756 by the philanthropist Jonas Hanway to encourage poor men and boys to join the navy by offering food and clothing and some educational preparation. He held the office until 1772 when he was elected president under the provisions of the royal charter granted in that year. He remained president until his death. The Magdalen Society, of which Romney became first vice-president in 1758, grew out of a Society of Arts scheme to assist repentant prostitutes. He was also vice-president of the Troop Society, set up for the relief of the dependants of those who were killed or were incapacitated in the battles of Minden and Quebec in 1759. Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1757 he became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1762. In 1772 he was chosen president of the Society for the Discharge of Persons Imprisoned for Small Debts. In 1778 he wrote and spoke in favour of the earl of Chatham's plan to conciliate the North American colonies, yet he remained well regarded by the king and shared the sovereign's interest in agricultural improvements. In 1787 he became president of the Society for Promoting Useful Knowledge in the County of Kent, to which the leading agriculturist Arthur Young belonged. 
Romney's final illness and the cause of his death, which took place at The Mote, Maidstone, Kent, on 16 November 1793, were not reported in the newspapers, but he had been unwell since 1788 when he had gone to Bath in the hope of a cure. He was buried on 26 November 1793 at All Saints' Church, Maidstone. His obituary in the 'Maidstone Journal' praised his political independence, his strict religious observances 'from Youth to extreme age', and, most revealingly, the 'generous, mild and amiable' character of his private life ('Maidstone Journal', 19 November 1793). Although to some extent all were standard tropes of the nobleman's obituary, Romney's philanthropic achievements and the regard in which he was held by George III suggested they had some substance. Of the philanthropic organizations founded or supported by Romney, the Society of Arts, the Magdalen Society (as the Magdalen Trust), the Marine Society, and the Society for the Discharge of Persons Imprisoned for Small Debts (as the Debtors' Relief Fund) all endured into the twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 38927


Gregg, Hilda Caroline (1868-1933), novelist and short-story writer, was born at Badgington (Bagendon), North Cerney, Gloucestershire, on 20 June 1868, the eldest of the four daughters of Sarah Caroline Frances French (died 1913) and John Robert G. Gregg (died 1882), later vicar of Deptford. Hilda Gregg was brought up in a family with strong religious convictions and Irish protestant connections. Her father, descended from a long line of Ulster clergymen, was described by Gregg's cousin Winifred Peck in her autobiography, 'A Little Learning', as 'an Irish clergyman of, I imagine, the strictest sect of Ulster 'Old Testament' Protestants'. Her brother, John Allen Fitzgerald Gregg (1873-1961), became archbishop of Armagh, while her sister, Katherine ('b'. 1869), one of the first women doctors to qualify in Britain, undertook medical missionary work in Japan and India. Hilda Gregg was educated privately, her only academic distinction being an honorary MA from London University. Her first story was published in the 'Bristol Times' in 1886, the year in which she moved to 27 St Anne's Road, Eastbourne, to look after her widowed mother. She began writing for a living, spurred on by financial need as well as by a subsequent success in a short-story competition run by 'Cassell's Family Magazine'. Over the next three decades her short fiction and novels featured in a variety of genteel literary periodicals, including 'Cassell's', 'Argosy', the 'Lady's Realm', and the 'Girl's Own Paper'. In 1894 Gregg sent her first novel, 'In Furthest Ind', a fictional memoir of a seventeenth-century Englishman's adventures in India, on speculation to the Edinburgh firm of William Blackwood, who published it in 1895 under the pseudonym of Sydney C. Grier. Blackwood remained her publisher throughout her writing career. 'In Furthest Ind', praised for its seemingly first-hand knowledge of locale and its skilful dialogue, set the tone and style for Gregg's subsequent works, which she produced at a rate of one a year until 1925. Gregg followed 'In Furthest Ind' with 'His Excellency's English Governess' (1896), a historical romance set in Baghdad, and then with 'An Uncrowned King', serialized in 'Blackwood's Magazine' between December 1895 and September 1896, and 'A Crowned Queen' (1898), both historical romances set in the Balkans. Other locales featured in her thirty-three novels included Ethiopia ('Peace with Honour', 1897), Bengal ('Like another Helen', 1899), Afghanistan ('The Wardens of the Marches', 1901), and Sicily ('One Crowded Hour', 1912). Gregg died on 22 June 1933 at 48 St Leonards Road, Eastbourne, her home since 1926, leaving an estate valued at slightly over $4200. 


@@@@@


doc= 38928


Blackwood, William (1836-1912), literary editor and publisher, was born on 13 July 1836 at Lucknow, India, eldest son of Major William Blackwood (1810-1861) and Emma Moore. In 1842 he was sent back to the family home in Ainslie Place, Edinburgh, to begin his education at the Edinburgh Academy. After a stint at the University of Edinburgh William completed his education studying at the Sorbonne in Paris (1854-6), and at Heidelberg. In 1857 he entered the family publishing business started by his grandfather William Blackwood (1776-1834), then co-partnered by his father and his uncle John Blackwood. His father's death in 1861 led to a reorganization of the company, and in early 1862 William was made a partner in the business, in charge of the London office. As his uncle's right-hand man, William was intimately involved in negotiating with, and publishing, some of the most important writers of the period including George Eliot, Charles Lever, Margaret Oliphant, Anthony Trollope, and A. W. Kinglake. 
After John Blackwood's death in 1879 William assumed sole responsibility for the company and its magazine. Blackwood's publishing successes over the next two decades were few but included Anthony Trollope's posthumous 'An Autobiography' in 1883. The entrance of David Storr Meldrum as literary adviser in 1894, however, brought a renewed revival to the company's lists and to the magazine. His literary judgement influenced William Blackwood's decision to publish Stephen Crane, Henry Lawson, Miles Franklin, John Buchan, and Jack London. Perhaps most significant of all were William Blackwood's subsequent literary connections with Joseph Conrad. It was Blackwood who first encouraged and published Conrad, featuring some of his best-known works, such as 'Lord Jim' and 'Heart of Darkness', in 'Blackwood's Magazine' between 1898 and 1902. Despite later estrangement Conrad always credited Blackwood's 'encouraging and helpful kindness' as having been crucial to his initial development as a writer. 
Blackwood, who remained unmarried after an engagement to his second cousin Florence Moore was broken off by her family in 1866, continued to run the company until 1910, when ill health prompted him to hand over much of the daily management to his nephews George and James Blackwood. He died at his home in Gogar Mount, Ratho, just outside Edinburgh, on 10 November 1912, and was buried on 15 November in the city's Dean cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 38929


Scottish colourists (act. 1900-1935), painters, were a loose association of four painters, from Edinburgh and the west of Scotland, whose work during the first three decades of the twentieth century revitalized painting in Scotland through their awareness of new developments in painting in France before 1914. Their response to the innovative use of colour and painterly handling in paintings by Henri Matisse and his followers provided a conduit for such new work to reach Britain and, particularly, Scotland in the first half of the twentieth century. It was not a movement that produced leaders and followers, and although all four artists knew each other they rarely worked together in more than pairs, and never as a group of four. 

John Duncan Fergusson (1874-1961) was born in Leith, Edinburgh, on 9 March 1874, the son of John Ferguson and his wife, Christina Fergusson. He always maintained that he enrolled at Edinburgh University to study medicine, although there is no record of his enrolment there, and then transferred to art classes at the Trustees' Academy, Edinburgh 'c'.1893. The curriculum there did not suit him and he left, whereafter he was largely self-taught with occasional terms at various academies and ateliers in Paris. The work of the Glasgow Boys and James McNeill Whistler were major influences on his early paintings (see 'Dieppe, 14 July 1905: Night'; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh), as was the work of French artists seen on his regular visits to Paris and northern France between 1895 and 1906. After a successful exhibition in London, Fergusson decided to settle in Paris, where he lived until 1913, when he moved to the Mediterranean coast. In Paris he became part of the artistic cafe society of Montparnasse, meeting Picasso and other leading artists, becoming a societaire of the Salon d'Automne, and absorbing much of the excitement and advances in painting that characterized Paris before 1914. Paintings such as 'Rhythm' (1911; University of Stirling) and 'Les Eus' (1911-13; Hunterian Art Gallery, University of Glasgow) show his assimilation of French avant-garde artistic and philosophical alliances. 
The outbreak of war forced Fergusson's return to Edinburgh, where Peploe also was living, but by 1918 he was living in London, with the dancer Margaret Morris (1891-1980). He soon became an integral part of the Chelsea art world and also of the summer schools that Morris arranged for her growing number of pupils in the Margaret Morris Movement. He returned to France with Morris and her dance classes until forced, again by the outbreak of war, to return to Scotland, to Glasgow, in 1939. There, with Morris, he established an alternative artistic environment in the city, separate from the established worlds of the Glasgow School of Art and the Glasgow Art Club. He remained in the city until his death, at his home, 4 Clouston Street, on 30 January 1961. 

Samuel John Peploe (1871-1935) was born at 39 Manor Place, Edinburgh, on 27 January 1871, the son of Robert Luff Peploe, secretary of the Commercial Bank, Edinburgh, and his second wife, Anne Watson. After the death of his father in 1884 Peploe was encouraged by his guardians to follow a career in the army; his refusal led him to enter a law firm, but in 1893 he persuaded the guardians to allow him to enrol in the Trustees' Academy, in Edinburgh. Like Fergusson he was unhappy with the teaching and left for Paris, where he attended classes at various academies and ateliers. He was quick to absorb the influence of Manet, and on his return to Edinburgh 'c'.1897 he embarked on a successful career as a landscape, figure, and still life painter. He then met Fergusson, and the two painters formed an immediate rapport based as much on personal liking as on their mutual admiration for Whistler, the Glasgow Boys, and post-impressionist French painting. They were the first of the Scottish colourists to work together, and broadly formulated the principles on which all four artists would concentrate until the mid-1930s. In 1910, using the proceeds from a successful exhibition in 1909, and following his marriage in that year to Margaret MacKay (1874-1958), Peploe joined Fergusson in Paris, where his artistic education was completed and his mature style emerged. Together they began to explore Brittany and the west coast of France before Fergusson determined to follow in the footsteps of van Gogh and Gauguin by moving to Antibes. 
Peploe's innate conservatism and his devotion to his growing family prevented him from settling in the south of France with Fergusson, and he again returned to Edinburgh. Although his new paintings, such as 'Still Life' ('c'.1913; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art), did not meet with the approval of his dealer Peploe gradually achieved success and remained in Edinburgh for the rest of his life, with brief excursions to the south of France (see 'Landscape at Cassis', 1924; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art) and annual holidays in the Western Isles, principally Iona. In 1927 he was made a full member of the Royal Scottish Academy and in 1933 he began to teach part-time at Edinburgh College of Art. He died in Edinburgh, at 35 Drumsheugh Gardens, on 11 October 1935. 
Peploe was introduced to Iona by Francis Campbell Boileau Cadell (1883-1937), who was born in Edinburgh on 12 April 1883, the first child of Francis Cadell, a surgeon, and Mary Hamilton Boileau. His request to attend art school was supported by his liberal parents, encouraged by a family friend, Arthur Melville. He enrolled at the Royal Scottish Academy life school but, like Peploe and Fergusson at the Trustees' Academy, was disillusioned by the teaching. With his mother he moved to Paris in 1899, to enrol in the Academie Julian, and returned to Edinburgh in 1903; in 1906 his family moved to Munich, to return to Edinburgh in 1908. In his early life, therefore, he was well-travelled, and through family connections he met many of the future patrons who were to sustain him through the commercial vicissitudes of his career. One such figure was Sir Patrick Ford, who financed a visit to Venice in 1910, following Cadell's unsuccessful first solo show in Edinburgh in 1909. In Venice, Cadell began to paint in a manner similar to Peploe, whose work he had seen in Edinburgh, and he returned to Scotland with a group of paintings showing a clear grasp of impressionism and the effects of light on colour. He soon established a niche in Edinburgh, painting portraits, figure subjects, and still lifes that reflected the douce, middle-class milieu of the New Town. His studios at 130 George Street (1909-20) and 6 Ainslie Place (1920-32) were usually as much the subject of his paintings as the sitters themselves (see 'The Black Hat', 1914; Edinburgh City Art Centre, and 'The Orange Blind'; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries). 
In 1915 Cadell enlisted as a private soldier in the Royal Scots, 9th battalion, resisting a commission until 1918, when he was transferred to the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, 8th battalion, as a second lieutenant. Peace brought with it an uncertain future for him; changing social mores, his own extravagant lifestyle and personal life, and an unpredictable commercial demand for paintings brought an inexorable decline in his wealth, health, and output. He survived the 1920s with the support of consistent patrons such as W. G. Service and Ion Harrison, and with the friendship and encouragement of Peploe, with whom he holidayed frequently on Iona and occasionally in the south of France. Cadell had discovered Iona 'c'.1913 and it was to become an important subject for him. In 1935 he was elected a full member of the Royal Scottish Academy but he was by then in considerable financial and physical distress. He died, of cancer, in Edinburgh on 6 December 1937. He never married. 
The fourth member of the group, (George) Leslie Hunter (1877-1931), was not associated with Edinburgh. He was born on 7 August 1877 in Rothesay, on the island of Bute, the son of William Hunter, a pharmacist, and his wife, Jeannie, 'nee' Stewart. In 1892, after the deaths of two of his sons from tuberculosis, William Hunter took his family to California, where he bought an orange grove. In 1899 he and his wife returned to Scotland, but Leslie and an elder brother decided to stay in California, moving north from Los Angeles to San Francisco. Hunter enjoyed the cosmopolitan freedom of the city and taught himself to draw and paint, earning a living as a book and newspaper illustrator. He seems to have returned to Scotland some time between 1903 and 1905 and also visited Paris with a group of American artists. It is not known whether at this time he encountered the work of Fergusson and Peploe, which was regularly on show in dealers' galleries and public exhibitions in Scotland, or whether he saw any of the great exhibitions of the work of the post-impressionists. Hunter returned to San Francisco via New York in 1905. His association with authors such as Bret Harte and Jack London, for both of whom he illustrated novels, probably helped him to secure an exhibition in a San Francisco gallery. Unfortunately both the gallery and all Hunter's work in it were destroyed by the great earthquake of 1906. 
Hunter returned to Scotland to live with his mother in Glasgow, earning a living again from newspaper illustration. He moved to London and then to Paris, and began to paint more seriously, studying the work of Dutch and French still life painters of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. He returned to Scotland after the outbreak of war, and worked as a labourer on an uncle's farm in Lanarkshire. He continued to paint, and exhibited with Alexander Reid in Glasgow in 1916, as a result of which he acquired a nucleus of collectors who helped to sustain his erratic way of life over the next decade or so. He had further success with Reid after the war, and with the proceeds of these sales visited Paris, Florence, and Venice in 1922 and 1923. A friend, John Ressich, introduced him to Fergusson, through whom he met Peploe, and with Reid's involvement he exhibited with the other three painters in London and Paris in the mid-1920s. 
Hunter began to suffer from both mental and physical illness, and his unpredictable behaviour isolated him from fellow painters and from all but the most dedicated patrons. In 1926 he set out for the south of France, where he encountered both Fergusson and Peploe, but his paintings found no market in Scotland and Reid was forced to terminate the stipend that he had been paying him. Undeterred, Hunter arranged an exhibition in New York, which had some success, perhaps more in the renewal of old friendships than financially, and in 1929 he returned to France, where he settled in St Paul de Vence. Illness forced his return to Scotland, where he began to paint on the shores of Loch Lomond, followed by some months in London, where a new patron, the impresario C. B. Cochran, commissioned him to make sketches of one of his productions. He returned to Glasgow, where he again fell ill, and was admitted to hospital for emergency surgery. There it was found that he was beyond cure, and he died at 3 Claremont Terrace on 6 December 1931. He was unmarried. 
The consistent link between the Scottish colourists is a love of paint and its particular qualities, and an understanding of the power of colour and design in painting. From an early interest in 'plein-air' painting through to the immediacy of fauvist painting the colourists never lost sight of the painterly qualities that they inherited from their study of the Glasgow Boys. Scottish painters from the middle of the eighteenth century had expressed their fascination with fluid handling, bold compositions, and clear colour -- qualities that the four colourists reinforced through their association with French painting. 
The Scottish colourists brought to British painting an awareness, gained principally at first hand, of the developments made in Paris by Picasso and, particularly, Matisse and the Fauves in the first decade of the century. Roger Fry's post-impressionist exhibitions had sent English painting in search of 'significant form', and Fry had not included the work of the Scots in his shows. The four Scottish colourists responded more to the vitality, both painterly and emotional, of the gestural handling and brilliant colour of Gauguin, van Gogh, and Matisse. Despite their successes in showing in London in the 1920s they did little to divert avant-garde English painters from the impact of surrealism, constructivism, and the work of German refugees such as Naum Gabo, Antoine Pevsner, and Kurt Schwitters. Their success and influence lay with English painters such as Matthew Smith and David Bomberg, who shared their knowledge of, and interest in, French pre-war painting, and with a younger generation of artists in Scotland who, throughout the 1940s and 1950s, saw in the work of the colourists a direct link with Picasso and Matisse and all that had come to be seen as pivotal in the development of painting in the twentieth century. The work of the colourists epitomized that aspect of the Scottish character in which a sense of responsibility, caution, and respect for convention is balanced by an element of irresponsibility, rebelliousness, and even aggression. The colourists harnessed this underlying aspect of their nature, and through it involved British painting in the mainstream of European art of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 38930


Scottish colourists (act. 1900-1935), painters, were a loose association of four painters, from Edinburgh and the west of Scotland, whose work during the first three decades of the twentieth century revitalized painting in Scotland through their awareness of new developments in painting in France before 1914. Their response to the innovative use of colour and painterly handling in paintings by Henri Matisse and his followers provided a conduit for such new work to reach Britain and, particularly, Scotland in the first half of the twentieth century. It was not a movement that produced leaders and followers, and although all four artists knew each other they rarely worked together in more than pairs, and never as a group of four. 

John Duncan Fergusson (1874-1961) was born in Leith, Edinburgh, on 9 March 1874, the son of John Ferguson and his wife, Christina Fergusson. He always maintained that he enrolled at Edinburgh University to study medicine, although there is no record of his enrolment there, and then transferred to art classes at the Trustees' Academy, Edinburgh 'c'.1893. The curriculum there did not suit him and he left, whereafter he was largely self-taught with occasional terms at various academies and ateliers in Paris. The work of the Glasgow Boys and James McNeill Whistler were major influences on his early paintings (see 'Dieppe, 14 July 1905: Night'; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh), as was the work of French artists seen on his regular visits to Paris and northern France between 1895 and 1906. After a successful exhibition in London, Fergusson decided to settle in Paris, where he lived until 1913, when he moved to the Mediterranean coast. In Paris he became part of the artistic cafe society of Montparnasse, meeting Picasso and other leading artists, becoming a societaire of the Salon d'Automne, and absorbing much of the excitement and advances in painting that characterized Paris before 1914. Paintings such as 'Rhythm' (1911; University of Stirling) and 'Les Eus' (1911-13; Hunterian Art Gallery, University of Glasgow) show his assimilation of French avant-garde artistic and philosophical alliances. 
The outbreak of war forced Fergusson's return to Edinburgh, where Peploe also was living, but by 1918 he was living in London, with the dancer Margaret Morris (1891-1980). He soon became an integral part of the Chelsea art world and also of the summer schools that Morris arranged for her growing number of pupils in the Margaret Morris Movement. He returned to France with Morris and her dance classes until forced, again by the outbreak of war, to return to Scotland, to Glasgow, in 1939. There, with Morris, he established an alternative artistic environment in the city, separate from the established worlds of the Glasgow School of Art and the Glasgow Art Club. He remained in the city until his death, at his home, 4 Clouston Street, on 30 January 1961. 

Samuel John Peploe (1871-1935) was born at 39 Manor Place, Edinburgh, on 27 January 1871, the son of Robert Luff Peploe, secretary of the Commercial Bank, Edinburgh, and his second wife, Anne Watson. After the death of his father in 1884 Peploe was encouraged by his guardians to follow a career in the army; his refusal led him to enter a law firm, but in 1893 he persuaded the guardians to allow him to enrol in the Trustees' Academy, in Edinburgh. Like Fergusson he was unhappy with the teaching and left for Paris, where he attended classes at various academies and ateliers. He was quick to absorb the influence of Manet, and on his return to Edinburgh 'c'.1897 he embarked on a successful career as a landscape, figure, and still life painter. He then met Fergusson, and the two painters formed an immediate rapport based as much on personal liking as on their mutual admiration for Whistler, the Glasgow Boys, and post-impressionist French painting. They were the first of the Scottish colourists to work together, and broadly formulated the principles on which all four artists would concentrate until the mid-1930s. In 1910, using the proceeds from a successful exhibition in 1909, and following his marriage in that year to Margaret MacKay (1874-1958), Peploe joined Fergusson in Paris, where his artistic education was completed and his mature style emerged. Together they began to explore Brittany and the west coast of France before Fergusson determined to follow in the footsteps of van Gogh and Gauguin by moving to Antibes. 
Peploe's innate conservatism and his devotion to his growing family prevented him from settling in the south of France with Fergusson, and he again returned to Edinburgh. Although his new paintings, such as 'Still Life' ('c'.1913; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art), did not meet with the approval of his dealer Peploe gradually achieved success and remained in Edinburgh for the rest of his life, with brief excursions to the south of France (see 'Landscape at Cassis', 1924; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art) and annual holidays in the Western Isles, principally Iona. In 1927 he was made a full member of the Royal Scottish Academy and in 1933 he began to teach part-time at Edinburgh College of Art. He died in Edinburgh, at 35 Drumsheugh Gardens, on 11 October 1935. 
Peploe was introduced to Iona by Francis Campbell Boileau Cadell (1883-1937), who was born in Edinburgh on 12 April 1883, the first child of Francis Cadell, a surgeon, and Mary Hamilton Boileau. His request to attend art school was supported by his liberal parents, encouraged by a family friend, Arthur Melville. He enrolled at the Royal Scottish Academy life school but, like Peploe and Fergusson at the Trustees' Academy, was disillusioned by the teaching. With his mother he moved to Paris in 1899, to enrol in the Academie Julian, and returned to Edinburgh in 1903; in 1906 his family moved to Munich, to return to Edinburgh in 1908. In his early life, therefore, he was well-travelled, and through family connections he met many of the future patrons who were to sustain him through the commercial vicissitudes of his career. One such figure was Sir Patrick Ford, who financed a visit to Venice in 1910, following Cadell's unsuccessful first solo show in Edinburgh in 1909. In Venice, Cadell began to paint in a manner similar to Peploe, whose work he had seen in Edinburgh, and he returned to Scotland with a group of paintings showing a clear grasp of impressionism and the effects of light on colour. He soon established a niche in Edinburgh, painting portraits, figure subjects, and still lifes that reflected the douce, middle-class milieu of the New Town. His studios at 130 George Street (1909-20) and 6 Ainslie Place (1920-32) were usually as much the subject of his paintings as the sitters themselves (see 'The Black Hat', 1914; Edinburgh City Art Centre, and 'The Orange Blind'; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries). 
In 1915 Cadell enlisted as a private soldier in the Royal Scots, 9th battalion, resisting a commission until 1918, when he was transferred to the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, 8th battalion, as a second lieutenant. Peace brought with it an uncertain future for him; changing social mores, his own extravagant lifestyle and personal life, and an unpredictable commercial demand for paintings brought an inexorable decline in his wealth, health, and output. He survived the 1920s with the support of consistent patrons such as W. G. Service and Ion Harrison, and with the friendship and encouragement of Peploe, with whom he holidayed frequently on Iona and occasionally in the south of France. Cadell had discovered Iona 'c'.1913 and it was to become an important subject for him. In 1935 he was elected a full member of the Royal Scottish Academy but he was by then in considerable financial and physical distress. He died, of cancer, in Edinburgh on 6 December 1937. He never married. 
The fourth member of the group, (George) Leslie Hunter (1877-1931), was not associated with Edinburgh. He was born on 7 August 1877 in Rothesay, on the island of Bute, the son of William Hunter, a pharmacist, and his wife, Jeannie, 'nee' Stewart. In 1892, after the deaths of two of his sons from tuberculosis, William Hunter took his family to California, where he bought an orange grove. In 1899 he and his wife returned to Scotland, but Leslie and an elder brother decided to stay in California, moving north from Los Angeles to San Francisco. Hunter enjoyed the cosmopolitan freedom of the city and taught himself to draw and paint, earning a living as a book and newspaper illustrator. He seems to have returned to Scotland some time between 1903 and 1905 and also visited Paris with a group of American artists. It is not known whether at this time he encountered the work of Fergusson and Peploe, which was regularly on show in dealers' galleries and public exhibitions in Scotland, or whether he saw any of the great exhibitions of the work of the post-impressionists. Hunter returned to San Francisco via New York in 1905. His association with authors such as Bret Harte and Jack London, for both of whom he illustrated novels, probably helped him to secure an exhibition in a San Francisco gallery. Unfortunately both the gallery and all Hunter's work in it were destroyed by the great earthquake of 1906. 
Hunter returned to Scotland to live with his mother in Glasgow, earning a living again from newspaper illustration. He moved to London and then to Paris, and began to paint more seriously, studying the work of Dutch and French still life painters of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. He returned to Scotland after the outbreak of war, and worked as a labourer on an uncle's farm in Lanarkshire. He continued to paint, and exhibited with Alexander Reid in Glasgow in 1916, as a result of which he acquired a nucleus of collectors who helped to sustain his erratic way of life over the next decade or so. He had further success with Reid after the war, and with the proceeds of these sales visited Paris, Florence, and Venice in 1922 and 1923. A friend, John Ressich, introduced him to Fergusson, through whom he met Peploe, and with Reid's involvement he exhibited with the other three painters in London and Paris in the mid-1920s. 
Hunter began to suffer from both mental and physical illness, and his unpredictable behaviour isolated him from fellow painters and from all but the most dedicated patrons. In 1926 he set out for the south of France, where he encountered both Fergusson and Peploe, but his paintings found no market in Scotland and Reid was forced to terminate the stipend that he had been paying him. Undeterred, Hunter arranged an exhibition in New York, which had some success, perhaps more in the renewal of old friendships than financially, and in 1929 he returned to France, where he settled in St Paul de Vence. Illness forced his return to Scotland, where he began to paint on the shores of Loch Lomond, followed by some months in London, where a new patron, the impresario C. B. Cochran, commissioned him to make sketches of one of his productions. He returned to Glasgow, where he again fell ill, and was admitted to hospital for emergency surgery. There it was found that he was beyond cure, and he died at 3 Claremont Terrace on 6 December 1931. He was unmarried. 
The consistent link between the Scottish colourists is a love of paint and its particular qualities, and an understanding of the power of colour and design in painting. From an early interest in 'plein-air' painting through to the immediacy of fauvist painting the colourists never lost sight of the painterly qualities that they inherited from their study of the Glasgow Boys. Scottish painters from the middle of the eighteenth century had expressed their fascination with fluid handling, bold compositions, and clear colour -- qualities that the four colourists reinforced through their association with French painting. 
The Scottish colourists brought to British painting an awareness, gained principally at first hand, of the developments made in Paris by Picasso and, particularly, Matisse and the Fauves in the first decade of the century. Roger Fry's post-impressionist exhibitions had sent English painting in search of 'significant form', and Fry had not included the work of the Scots in his shows. The four Scottish colourists responded more to the vitality, both painterly and emotional, of the gestural handling and brilliant colour of Gauguin, van Gogh, and Matisse. Despite their successes in showing in London in the 1920s they did little to divert avant-garde English painters from the impact of surrealism, constructivism, and the work of German refugees such as Naum Gabo, Antoine Pevsner, and Kurt Schwitters. Their success and influence lay with English painters such as Matthew Smith and David Bomberg, who shared their knowledge of, and interest in, French pre-war painting, and with a younger generation of artists in Scotland who, throughout the 1940s and 1950s, saw in the work of the colourists a direct link with Picasso and Matisse and all that had come to be seen as pivotal in the development of painting in the twentieth century. The work of the colourists epitomized that aspect of the Scottish character in which a sense of responsibility, caution, and respect for convention is balanced by an element of irresponsibility, rebelliousness, and even aggression. The colourists harnessed this underlying aspect of their nature, and through it involved British painting in the mainstream of European art of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 38931


Richard, Timothy (1845-1919), missionary, was born on 10 October 1845 in Ffaldybrenin, Carmarthenshire, the ninth and last child of Timothy Richard, blacksmith and farmer, and his wife, Eleanor Lewis, who were devout Baptists. The family moved permanently to Tan-yr-esgair farm soon after his birth. Richard left the local Congregational school at the age of fourteen, and briefly attended a private school at Cross Inn near Llanelli and a grammar school at Llanybydder. He taught in the mining village of Pen-y-groes while completing a short course at the Swansea normal school, and at eighteen he became master of the 120 pupil endowed school at Cynwyl Elfed, where he remained for two years. 
Richard had experienced spiritual rejuvenation during the great revival that swept over northern Europe and the British Isles between 1858 and 1860, and as a twelve-year-old was baptized -- along with fifty others -- by the Revd John Davies in the River Caeo near his home, joining the Caeo Baptist Church. In 1865 he enrolled in Haverfordwest Theological College (Baptist) in Pembrokeshire; he distinguished himself academically and played a prominent role in the student-led reformation of the curriculum. An address in 1868 by Mrs Grattan Guinness on the work of the China Inland Mission moved Richard to pursue a missionary vocation. 
After graduating at Haverfordwest in 1869 Richard was accepted by the Baptist Missionary Society (BMS); he departed for China in November of the same year and arrived in Chefoo (Yantai) on 27 February 1870. He then commenced a missionary career of forty-five years which was remarkable enough to make 'Li T'i-mo-tai' a household name throughout China in his day; he also earned Chinese honours rarely, if ever, bestowed upon foreigners ('Mandarin with a red button', the highest grade, in 1903; member of the order of the Double Dragon -- second order, second grade -- in 1907), which ensured him a place in both contemporary Chinese and mission history. 
Disenchanted by traditional mission stratagems, Richard's role in combating the effects and discerning the causes of the great famine of 1876-9 convinced him of the need for a radical transformation of China's social and political infrastructures -- reform that could be best achieved by providing the Chinese 'thinking classes' with a modern education. Accordingly he began to concentrate on reaching Chinese literati and governing officials, reasoning that in their re-education lay the key to the transformation of China. 'Conversion by the Million' would, according to Richard, be accomplished by 'three radical reforms in mission methods': first by presenting Christianity 'as the kingdom of God to be established, not only in the hearts of men, but also in all institutions on earth'; second by preaching not merely or even primarily to the millions of poor and needy, but 'to the leaders of the millions (who made the law of the land and held the poor in bondage)'; and third by 'preaching to devout souls, the worthy... the born ambassadors of God' -- pious Confucianists, Buddhists, Taoists, and secret sect members -- 'the natural messengers of peace and salvation in all lands, [whom] the multitudes follow... as certainly as the swarming bees follow the queen bee' (Richard, 'Conversion by the Million', 13-15). 
Richard's scheme was regarded by the Baptist Missionary Society as rather larger than either their means or vision could accommodate. His more evangelical peers viewed his association with non-Christian religions with marked suspicion, and his dream of a Christian college for every Chinese province never materialized. Deeply disappointed he parted company with the BMS (though he continued to receive financial support from the society) and became editor of a Chinese daily newspaper, the 'Shibao' ('The Times') in 1890, before moving in 1891 to Shanghai to serve as secretary of the Society for the Diffusion of Christian and General Knowledge, later known as the Christian Literature Society, an association that continued until his retirement from active missionary service in 1915. 
Writing and translating numerous books and pamphlets, Richard gained a reputation among reform-minded Chinese leaders and intellectuals; this reached its apogee in 1898 when he was invited to become adviser to the emperor. While the empress dowager's bloody ascent to power, precipitating the Boxer uprising of 1900, brought a temporary halt to reform, Richard played a vital role in the establishment in 1901 of Shansi (Shanxi) University. The institution was modelled on Western lines, funded with indemnity moneys, and widely emulated throughout China, and Richard served as the school's chancellor, with jurisdiction over the curriculum. 
Internationally Richard exerted considerable influence as a consultant to statesmen, educators, and missionaries, and he is credited with creating and fostering seminal ideals that would eventually take form as the League of Nations. During the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-5 he was made secretary of the International Red Cross Society in Shanghai. 
Richard's marriage to Mary Martin ('b'. 1843) in October 1878 produced four daughters, Eleanor, Mary Celia, Florence, and Margaret, and lasted until his wife's death from cancer on 10 July 1903. Born in Edinburgh, Mary Martin was a person of marked musical and intellectual ability; she served the six years prior to her departure for China (where she arrived to work with the United Presbyterian Mission in Chefoo in 1877) as a teaching governess on the staff of the Merchant Company's College School in Edinburgh. After their marriage she made notable use of her gifts in publishing a considerable body of Chinese literature -- in some instances translations of existing works -- and in the training and supervision of 'Biblewomen'. 
Richard's second marriage, in August 1914, was to Dr Ethel Newton Tribe of the London Missionary Society (LMS). Ethel Tribe was born on 5 July 1860 at Bristol. She studied medicine at the London School of Medicine for Women, and at University College Hospital, London. From 1895 to 1912 she served as a medical missionary of the LMS -- in Amoy (Xiamen) until 1909, then in Shanghai, where she was director of the women's hospital and instrumental in founding the children's ward. She retired from active service with the LMS in 1912. 
In addition to his Chinese honours Richard received an honorary DD degree from Emory University in 1895, an honorary LittD degree from Brown University in 1901, and the LLD degree of the University of Wales in Aberystwyth in 1916. Having returned to Britain in 1915 because of illness, he died unexpectedly in London at Hendon Cottage Hospital on 17 April 1919, following surgery. He was cremated and his remains interred in Golders Green cemetery; he was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 38932


John, Griffith (1831-1912), missionary, was born on 14 December 1831 at Swansea in Wales, youngest of the four children and the only son of Griffith John and Ann, 'nee' Davies. His parents were deeply religious Welsh Congregationalists; his mother died before his first birthday. Having joined Ebenezer Chapel (Congregational) when he was only eight years old, what formal education John enjoyed was primarily church-related, and his precocity enabled him to memorize and often dramatically to recite large portions of scripture. At twelve years old he entered the employ of John Williams -- pious owner of extensive iron and coal mines and smelting furnaces -- as a clerk in the general store in Onllwyn. It was here that John, aged fourteen, preached his first sermon, successfully surmounting doubts concerning his youth; he was known throughout south Wales as the Boy Preacher by the time he was sixteen. 
Determined to enrol in college John returned in 1848 to Swansea, where he was privately tutored in preparation for entry to Memorial College, Brecon, in September 1850. He graduated with his credentials for the Congregational ministry in 1854. He was deeply influenced by Henry Griffiths, then principal of the college, and offered himself to the London Missionary Society (LMS) in 1853 for missionary service in Madagascar, the land in which David and Mary Griffiths (parents of his future wife) had served with distinction from 1821 to 1834. Madagascar being at the time closed to missionaries, he was persuaded by LMS directors to accept an appointment in China instead. 
John's brief attendance at Bedford Academy for missionaries in 1854 was followed by his ordination at Ebenezer Chapel in Swansea, and by his marriage to Margaret Jane Griffiths on 13 April 1855. The Johns set sail for China on 21 May 1855 and arrived at Shanghai on 24 September 1855. Margaret John was constantly plagued by ill health and died on 24 March 1873 on a voyage to England. On 23 October 1874 John married Jeannette Jenkins, widow of Dr Benjamin Jenkins, a missionary of the American Methodist Episcopal church; she was much admired and widely emulated for her work among foreign sailors. She died at Hangchow (Hangzhou) in China, on 29 December 1885. John's two sons, Griffith and David, were both born in China, as was his daughter, Mary Beatrice Louisa ('b'. 1863); she later became the wife of the LMS missionary Charles George Sparham. 
John manifested a lifelong penchant for adventure. An inveterate traveller, he became well known for his extensive missionary journeys into the Chinese interior, journeys which sometimes stretched to distances of 3000 miles or more. In July 1861 he moved to Hangchow, which remained his base until his final departure from China in 1912. It was here that John -- fluent in both spoken and written Chinese -- was to make his major contribution to the Chinese church as an author, translator, and preacher. A powerful and eloquent speaker, he was immensely popular with the Chinese, who would gather in great numbers to hear him preach, and he was notably successful in training and mentoring numerous Chinese evangelists. 
John was a prolific pamphleteer, writing numerous tracts and serving for many years as chairman of the Central China Tract Society. He was founder of the first protestant church in inland central China (in Wei-kya-wan), and is credited with a Mandarin translation of the 'New Testament', 'Psalms', and 'Proverbs', as well as a Wenli 'New Testament', published in 1885. Nominated as chair of the Congregational Union of England and Wales for 1889, he declined the honour, electing to remain in Hangchow. It was also in 1889 that the University of Edinburgh conferred on him the degree of DD. John was instrumental in establishing the London Missionary Society's theological college in Hangchow (formally opened on 18 April 1904) for the theological and medical training of Chinese preachers, evangelists, and pastors. 
Highly influential within the larger missionary community, initially because of his linguistic and oratorical skills, and later because of his seniority, John took an intense and outspoken interest in the Chinese political affairs of his day. Throughout his lengthy tenure as chaplain to the English community in Hangchow, he was deeply, though not uncritically, sympathetic to British interests in China. He was not averse to calling upon European gunboats for protection on occasion, and he was highly partisan in his sympathy for the 'Christian uprising', better known as the Taiping uprising. He played an active role in advocating the payment of indemnities to missions whose properties were damaged or destroyed in the uprising. Though critical of the opium trade and of other manifestations of unscrupulous commercial exploitation of the Chinese by Europeans, to his dying day John held firmly to the twin convictions that most of China's problems were directly attributable to the ineptitude and self-serving intransigence of its leaders, and that the Chinese masses yearned for freedom from what they perceived as the tyranny and oppression of their rulers. 
During a missionary career spanning sixty years, John left China only three times (1870-73, 1880-82, and 1906-7). He finally returned to England in January 1912, and died in London six months later, on 25 July; he was interred in Wales four days later, in Swansea cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 38933


Lorimer, John Gordon (1870-1914), administrator in India, was born at 6 Woodside Place, Glasgow, on 14 June 1870, the son of Robert Lorimer, a minister of the Free Church of Scotland, and his wife, Isabella Lockhart Cornish Robertson. David Lockhart Robertson Lorimer was his younger brother. While an undergraduate at Edinburgh University, Lorimer was selected for the Indian Civil Service, and subsequently spent a year at Christ Church, Oxford (1889-90), following the course for Indian Civil Service probationers. He served as assistant commissioner in various parts of the Punjab between 1891 and 1897, and held a number of other administrative positions, mostly on the north-west frontier until his appointment to the foreign department of the government of India in Simla, where he served briefly from 1899 to 1900 and then between 1904 and 1908. On 8 October 1903, while on leave in Edinburgh, he married Marian Agnes Maclean ('b'. 1875/6), daughter of George Campbell Maclean, secretary of the Scottish Amicable Assurance Society; they had two daughters. 
Lorimer is known principally for his massive compilation in six volumes entitled 'Gazetteer of the Persian Gulf, Oman and Central Arabia', published by the government of India in 1908 and 1915, based on 'personal enquiries carried out between 1902 and 1906' (Wilson, 79). The 'Gazetteer', republished in 1970, is part geographical and navigational handbook, part historical survey, and part detailed account of Britain's relations with the Ottomans and the other political authorities in Arabia and the Gulf. It is the fullest account of the state of knowledge of the region in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and as such is still an important tool for researchers. Its principal drawback, noted by a leading Russian scholar, is that Lorimer does not always quote his sources, so that it is not clear whether he is relying on the published work of travellers or on less publicly accessible reports from British consular and other agents (Vassiliev, 18). In that sense the 'Gazetteer' needs to be supplemented by the various works by his contemporary, J. A. Saldanha, such as 'Precis of Koweit Affairs, 1896-1904' (Simla, 1904) and 'Precis of Nejd Affairs, 1804-1904' (Simla, 1904). The 'Gazetteer' remained 'on the 'secret' list until 1930 when it was declassified, but marked 'for official use only'' (Winstone, 58). 
In 1909 the foreign department of the government of India appointed Lorimer political resident in Turkish Arabia, stationed at Baghdad; in April 1911 he became consul-general. Like his friend and contemporary Captain Shakespear, Lorimer felt that Britain should take due note of the weakening Ottoman position in northern Arabia and commit itself more firmly to the rising star of Ibn Sa'ud. 
On 9 February 1914 Lorimer died at Bushehr while cleaning a loaded gun: his colleague and contemporary Arnold Wilson noted that his death 'deprived the Government of India of one of its most brilliant servants' (Wilson, 79). In addition to the 'Gazetteer', Lorimer published 'Customary Law of the Main Tribes in the Peshawar District' (Lahore, 1899) and 'Grammar and Vocabulary of Waziri Pashto' (Calcutta, 1902). 


@@@@@


doc= 38935


Wight, (Robert James) Martin (1913-1972), historian and expert on international affairs, was born on 26 November 1913 at 9 Bath Square, Brighton, Sussex, the second of the three children, all sons, of Edward Wight (1879-1959), general medical practitioner, and his wife, Margaretta, 'nee' Scott (1880-1942). From Prestonville House School, Hove, and Bradfield College (1927-32), Martin, as he was known, went on to take a first in modern history at Hertford College, Oxford, in 1935. He then joined the Royal Institute of International Affairs at Chatham House, London, to work under A. J. Toynbee, for many years a strong influence. A baptized Anglican, he now became a Christian pacifist and worked with the Revd Dick Shepphard. In 1938 he succeeded J. Hampden Jackson as senior history master at Haileybury College, Hertford, where he at once showed a flair for teaching. His pupils, with whom he had a strong mutual rapport, had considerable successes, winning Oxbridge college scholarships. In 1941 he was granted exemption from military service on condition that he abandoned teaching. His objections to serving were personal: the war was a divine judgement on a backsliding world for whose sins all were responsible. Pacifism was a vocation to which he felt a calling. (He later ignored the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, which he regarded as a political campaign.) 
From 1941, until he returned to Chatham House in 1946, Wight worked under Margery Perham on the evolution of British African colonial constitutions. The resulting three books were of lasting importance to their subject. When the war ended, he was one of several Christian historians (Herbert Butterfield and Reinhold Niebuhr were others) from whom the experiences of the time drew out eschatological reflections and a prophetic interest in the divine indications of secular history: he was to remain impressed by St Augustine's 'City of God'. By 1949, when he moved to the London School of Economics (LSE) as reader in international affairs, his religious beliefs no longer obtruded into his academic work. But his conviction that the true understanding of history lay outside the boundaries of secular experience gave him a magisterial authority with students happy to have their horizons extended beyond the intricacies of post-war international institutions. He continuously refined a course of lectures on what he called international theory, an attempt to categorize the ideas which had influenced the conduct of states in relation to each other. He found three traditions: realist (from Machiavelli to E. H. Carr), rationalist (Grotius and the natural law jurists of the seventeenth century to Gladstone, Lincoln, and F. D. Roosevelt), and revolutionist (from Kant to Lenin and Hitler). The elaboration of his ideas in a wide chronological and geographical sweep was illuminated by anecdotal evidence deftly drawn from a prodigious learning, from Thucydides to 'Mein Kampf'. His pupils included Hedley Bull, who edited and published Wight's two unfinished works: 'Systems of States' (1977) and, with Carsten Holbrad, 'Power Politics' (1978), which was expanded from a 1946 pamphlet with that title which had immediately established Wight's authority. In these books Wight examined historically how sovereign states sought to protect their security and forward their interests by diplomacy, alliance, intervention, war, and, most successfully, by manipulation of the balance of power. The original LSE lectures, edited by his widow and Brian Porter, were published as 'International Theory: the Three Traditions' (1991). This now substantial 'oeuvre' drew from Adam Roberts, Bull's successor in the Montague Burton chair of international relations at Oxford, the comment that Wight was 'perhaps the most profound thinker on international relations of his generation of British academics' (foreword to 'International Theory', xxiv). 
In 1958 Butterfield and Wight convened at Cambridge a small body of academics and diplomats, under Rockefeller Foundation patronage, as the British committee on the theory of international politics. From its periodic meetings came, in 1966, 'Diplomatic Investigations', which contained Wight's two most influential essays, 'Why is there no international theory?' and 'Western values in international relations'. 
Wight's ideas ran directly against the rising transatlantic tide of behaviourism, systems analysis, and games theory which constructed value- and history-free models from the social sciences to provide techniques for crisis management and the avoidance of war. Wight's concern was with understanding ('Verstehen'), not with predictions or solutions. He believed that this could only be found historically by considering the interplay between ideas (including morals) and events (Wight was an admirer of R. G. Collingwood). In the anarchical world of sovereign states, theory followed rather than determined events and morality was often defined, and monopolized, by sated powers. The most the student or statesman could hope for was intelligent rumination and reflection on the evidence. Though he had a natural propensity for model building, he was always the first to cast doubt on his own findings: 'Classification becomes valuable in humane studies only at the point at which it breaks down' ('International Theory', 259). Ideal types and paradigms were at best artificial constructs. 
In 1961 Wight was appointed, as one of the nine original members of the academic faculty, to the new University of Sussex, as professor of history and founding dean of the school of European studies (the first in Britain). He pioneered an ambitious course, taught in tutorials, involving a language, philosophy, literature, social studies, and thematic history. The rapid proliferation of languages and options may, over time, have given the school a looser intellectual coherence than Wight had intended, but his enthusiasm and dedication ensured that it fulfilled his aim: 'if half of a liberal education in the twentieth century is to gain an understanding of the world we live in, the other half consists in breaking its influence and finding deliverance from the tyranny of the immediate, the novel and the transitory' (D. Daiches, ed., 'The Idea of a New University', 1964, 105). 
Wight was a tall, handsome man, with an air of gentle authority (and a strong sense of the ridiculous). He married, on 23 December 1952, Gabriele, 'nee' Ritzen ('b'. 6 December 1928 in Ulm, Germany), a recent graduate of Reading University. They had six children and lived first in Caterham, Surrey, and from 1960 in Speldhurst in Kent. Wight was not naturally gregarious, but formed lasting close friendships maintained by frequent correspondence in a beautiful hand. He died suddenly at his home at Harwarton, Speldhurst, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 15 July 1972 from heart failure following an attack of his chronic asthma, and was buried at Speldhurst. He is commemorated by an annual lecture given, in rotation, at Chatham House, the London School of Economics, and Sussex University. 


@@@@@


doc= 38936


Bull, Hedley Norman (1932-1985), scholar of international relations, was born on 10 June 1932 in Englewood Hospital, Burwood, Sydney, New South Wales, the third and youngest child of (Joseph) Norman Bull (1891-1972), insurance broker, and his wife, Doris Annie, 'nee' Hordern (1893-1967), whose family had developed a chain of department stores in Australia. He had a stable childhood in Sydney, attending Burwood primary school ('c'.1937-43) and Fort Street high school, Petersham ('c'.1944-8), one of the most prominent in the New South Wales state system. 
At Sydney University (1949-52) Bull read history and philosophy, took an active part in student journalism and societies, and had a busy social life. Exceptionally, he completed both honours courses in four calendar years, gaining a first in philosophy and a second in history. The most important influence on his thinking was John Anderson, Challis professor of philosophy: his iconoclasm, tough realism, devotion to teaching, and love of grappling with statements of a contrary position in their strongest form, all left their mark on him. Bull later wrote: 'My greatest intellectual debt is to John Anderson... the impact of his mind and his example have been the deepest factors in shaping the outlook of many of us whom he taught' ('The Anarchical Society: a Study of Order in World Politics', 1977, x). While at Sydney, he became engaged to a fellow history student, Frances Mary Lawes ('b'. 1930). On 13 March 1954 they married at Oxford. Mary Bull developed an expertise in Commonwealth history, becoming a research assistant to Margery Perham. They had three adopted children. 
Bull arrived at University College, Oxford, in 1953 with the help of a Woolley travelling fellowship. He had intended to do the BPhil in philosophy, but was discouraged by the emphasis on linguistic analysis. Instead he did the BPhil in politics under a galaxy of teachers, including Herbert Hart, Isaiah Berlin, Kenneth Wheare, John Plamenatz, and Norman Chester. He showed no interest in the academic field of international relations, not well developed at Oxford at the time. After Oxford he intended to teach in Britain for some years before returning to Australia. About to take up a post in political philosophy at Aberdeen, he was unexpectedly offered an assistant lectureship in international relations at the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE) by Charles Manning, Montague Burton professor of international relations there since 1930. The future shape of Bull's career and intellectual interests was settled. 
At the LSE, learning his trade while practising it, Bull was particularly influenced by his colleague Martin Wight, whose lectures on international theory he attended. As Bull wrote in 1976: 'Ever since that time I have felt in the shadow of Martin Wight's thought -- humbled by it, a constant borrower from it, always hoping to transcend it but never able to escape from it' ('Martin Wight and the theory of international relations', 'British Journal of International Studies', 2/2, July 1976, 101). He was impressed by Wight's exposition of three distinctive traditions of thought (labelled realist, rationalist, and revolutionist) in terms of which debates about international relations in any era could be understood. 
Bull's first published academic work was on disarmament, on which he was critical but also constructive. In 1957-8 he was reinforced in this approach when, with the help of a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation, he visited the main centres in the USA of new thinking about arms control. In 1959-60 he acted as rapporteur for a study group on arms control of the newly formed Institute for Strategic Studies in London. The resulting book, 'The Control of the Arms Race' (1961), quickly gained worldwide recognition as a rigorous exposition of the view that selective measures of arms limitation had a better chance of contributing to international order than did the utopian pursuit of general and complete disarmament. 
Much of Bull's subsequent writing was on the nature of international society and the appropriate means of studying it. In a celebrated article in 'World Politics' in April 1966, under the deceptively mild title 'International theory: the case for a classical approach', he attacked certain aspirants to the 'scientific' study of international relations with characteristic gusto. Although his controversialism could occasionally hurt, it was never vicious or mean-spirited, but rather reflected a love of intellectual combat. Tall, well built, and self-assured, he assaulted political cant and academic folly with a twinkle in the eye, a smile, and a real appreciation of outlandish viewpoints. 
The remarkable course of his sadly brief career reflected the quality of Bull's published work. After being promoted to a readership at LSE in 1963, in 1965-7 he was appointed the first director of the newly formed arms control and disarmament unit at the Foreign Office in London. In May 1965 he took up UK citizenship. 
In 1967 Bull was tempted back to Australia, to the professorship of international relations at the Australian National University, Canberra. It was there, helped by study visits to India, the USA, and Oxford, that he wrote his major work, 'The Anarchical Society: a Study of Order in World Politics' (1977). This is a magisterially clear statement of the view that the system of sovereign states, although lacking a strong central authority, constitutes a society with common norms and institutions. Force, law, revolutionary and conservative perspectives all have a part to play. The book displayed an understanding of 'third-world' criticisms of Western dominance that was to be the theme of later studies, including 'The Expansion of International Society', which he edited with Adam Watson (1984). 
In 1977 Bull returned to Oxford, taking up the Montague Burton professorship of international relations and a fellowship at Balliol College. In both Canberra and Oxford he played a key part in building up departments of international relations: his evident intellectual distinction helped make the subject academically respectable, he gained a formidable reputation as a supervisor of graduate students, and he managed to continue with his own research and writing. In 1984 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. He died at his home at 5 Warnborough Road, Oxford, on 18 May 1985 after a long fight against cancer, and was cremated four days later at Oxford crematorium. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 38939


Cropper, James (1823-1900), paper manufacturer and politician, was born on 22 February 1823 in Duke Street, Liverpool, the eldest of the three surviving sons and six daughters of John Cropper (1797-1874), merchant of Liverpool, and his wife, Anne (1797-1876), daughter of John and Mary Wakefield of Sedgwick, Kendal. His grandfather was James Cropper (1773-1840), philanthropist and slavery abolitionist. The family were of Lancashire Quaker yeoman stock from Bickerstaffe from at least the early seventeenth century. 
Cropper passed his boyhood at the family home of Dingle Bank on the Mersey where he was introduced early to the world of letters through family connections with Lord Macaulay, whose sister Margaret (died 1834) was the second wife of Cropper's uncle Edward Cropper (1799-1877). After school in Liverpool he went on to Edinburgh University, where he decided against going into the family business in Liverpool in favour of paper manufacture, which he learned first with Alex Cowan & Sons at Penicuik, near Edinburgh. 
At the same time Cropper made the other important decision of his career: to leave the Society of Friends and enter the Church of England. Both actions, in business and in religion, were not entirely uninfluenced by his devotion to his cousin Fanny Alison Wakefield (1825-1868), whom he had known since childhood and to whom he was formally engaged in 1843. At her wish he was baptized and they were married at Heversham parish church, near Kendal, on 25 November 1845. Fanny was the second of four daughters and two sons of John Wakefield (1794-1866) of Sedgwick House, Kendal, and was born at Broughton Lodge, Cartmel, on 10 April 1825. The marriage consolidated the close links with the leading banking and manufacturing family in Westmorland. 
The Croppers lived near Kendal, first at the mill house adjoining the Cowen Head paper mill until after the birth of their elder daughter, Frances Anne (1846-1934), when they moved to a new house, Ellergreen, they had built in 1847 at Burneside; there a second daughter, Mary Wakefield (1849-1943), and a son, Charles James (1852-1924), were born. The marriage was close and happy but cut short by the early death of Fanny on 3 February 1868. Cropper filled the gap left by this loss largely by devoting himself to a prodigious range of public service in education, religion, and politics. He built and endowed a new hospital in Kendal in her memory in 1870, later the Westmorland County Hospital. 
The basis of Cropper's power and influence lay in his paper-making business, which he entered in July 1845 by leasing the Cowen Head and Burneside mills from Cornelius Nicholson. He did not gain full control until 1854, but had formed a private company in 1852 and set about expanding and modernizing the mills, aided by an increase in demand for paper and by improved transport links (the Kendal to Windermere line opened in 1847 alongside the Burneside mill and he was an influential director of the Lancaster and Carlisle Railway Company). Despite heavy losses when a fire destroyed the Burneside mill in 1886, production reached 3000 tons by the time the limited company was established in 1889 and had doubled to 6000 tons by 1900 when the firm was established as a leading paper manufacturer in the north of England. 
Cropper came to exert great influence in the community, but as an 'arriviste' in local gentry terms, though well connected, he felt it necessary to build up a landed estate to give greater substance to his social position and political interests. Over 2000 acres had been acquired by 1900, centred on Ellergreen. Under his energetic leadership he dominated every aspect of social life in the locality, providing housing for his workforce, building the new school, and influencing moral standards through the temperance movement, the Mutual Improvement Society, and the church. His strong sense of social duty was based on Christian principles, but he did not care for his leadership to be questioned. He was strongly opposed to disestablishment. 
Cropper had long wished to enter parliament. His public service began early with the chairmanship of the Kendal board of guardians (1853) and as JP (1863), but as an active Liberal of great organizational ability he was an obvious potential candidate. Following the death of John Whitwell shortly after the 1880 general election, he served as the last MP for the borough of Kendal (1880-85), but although he contested the new county division of South Westmorland in December 1885 he lost to the Conservative, Lord Bective, by 277 votes. His political position shifted in 1886 when hostility to home rule pushed him into the Liberal Unionist camp, although his respect for established authority did not sit easily with Liberal demands for change. However, his appetite for public service was undimmed when in 1889 the first Westmorland county council was elected and he became its chairman (1889-1900) and threw himself indefatigably into the work of its committees. He also served as high sheriff of Westmorland in 1875-6 and was a deputy lieutenant. 
Cropper was ever hopeful of improving the human condition and was a tireless pamphleteer and lecturer for education and the church. Among many benefactions he founded an open scholarship at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford. He was taken ill while visiting the Paris Exhibition and died at 157 rue de la Pompe, Paris, of acute pneumonia after four days on 16 October 1900. He was buried in Burneside churchyard beside his wife on 20 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 38940


Bliss, Douglas Percy (1900-1984), painter and printmaker, was born on 28 January 1900 at Karachi, then part of British India, the son of Joseph Bliss (1868-1936), pharmacist, and Isabel Douglas Percy (1868-1966). He was educated in Scotland, where he attended George Watson's College in Edinburgh from 1906 to 1917. After military service in the Highland light infantry, he studied English, history, and art history at Edinburgh University from 1919 to 1922. He moved to London to study painting from 1922 to 1925 at the Royal College of Art, where he knew the graphic artists and painters Eric Ravilious and Edward Bawden. 
Bliss held printmaking in high regard alongside painting. He produced fantastic woodcut illustrations to his selection 'Border Ballads', published by Oxford University Press in 1925. His imagination was populated by flying devils and grotesque hags in vertiginous and stormy perspectives. Further dramatic illustrations followed. In 1926 J. M. Dent in London published Dr Johnson's 'The History of Rasselas', in which Bliss provided intense drama in small-scale wood-engravings. In 1927 he exhibited at the St George's Gallery, London, with Bawden and Ravilious, and his wood-engravings were published by Oxford University Press as illustrations to Cervantes' 'The Spanish Lady' in 1928. That year he exhibited prints in Paris and Buenos Aires and wrote 'A History of Wood Engraving', published by J. M. Dent. He provided coloured wood-engravings to 'The Palace of Pleasure' by William Painter, published by Cresset Press, London, in 1929, and he again exhibited at the St George's Gallery. He illustrated, and introduced, 'The Devil in Scotland', published by Maclehose, London, in 1934. A career in illustration seemed assured. 
After Bliss married the portrait painter Phyllis Dodd (1899-1995) on 18 April 1928, they settled in Lambeth, London. His fearsome subjects mellowed and painting dominated his work. In 1934 he exhibited drawings at the Lefevre Gallery, London, and in 1937 he showed paintings there in a joint exhibition with Barbara Hepworth. He moved to Blackheath, London, in 1932 and taught at Blackheath School of Art and Hornsey College of Art. He also wrote for 'The Scotsman' newspaper and illustrated Edgar Allan Poe's 'Some Tales of Mystery and Imagination' for Penguin Books in 1938. His paintings frequently depicted gardens seen from a window, contrasted against wilder landscape beyond. Home was a secure base separated by the garden from the vicissitudes of the world beyond. These landscapes could be both intimate and panoramic in their balance of man and nature, even in the city gardens of Blackheath. Bliss was committed to conservation in the face of development and war. In 1937 he was a founder of the Blackheath Society for Amenity Conservation. But his house at Blackheath was bombed early in the war and in 1940 he and his family were evacuated to Shottle in Derbyshire. Here the landscape was certainly a refuge. He painted its image as an idyll of domestic peace and natural plenty where rural craftsmen worked with nature to produce their crops. He found industrialized agriculture as menacing as invasion. His direct contribution to the war effort was in the department of concealment and decoy of the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve from 1941 to 1945. 
After the war Bliss returned to teaching at Hornsey College of Art and also taught at Harrow School of Art in 1945-6. He held a joint exhibition with Phyllis Dodd in Derby City Art Gallery in 1946. His appointment as director of the Glasgow School of Art took him back to Scotland until his retirement in 1964. His work and opinions were increasingly recognized. He exhibited watercolours at the Lefevre Gallery in 1948, wrote for 'The Scotsman' and the 'Glasgow Herald' newspapers, and in 1952 'Memoirs of Prince Alexy Haimatoff' by T. J. Hogg, with illustrations by Bliss, was published by the Folio Society, London. Bliss became a member of the Scottish Council of Industrial Design and in 1954 visited the USSR. He was invited by the Swedish and Danish governments to make official visits in 1956. In 1957 the Leverhulme Foundation funded a tour of northern Italy and the Italian government presented him with a medal for promoting Italian culture. A study tour of West Germany followed in 1963. Throughout this period Bliss tirelessly produced paintings. On his retirement in 1964 he was appointed governor of the Derby College of Art and was awarded an honorary DA (diploma in art and design) at Manchester College of Art. 
In 1978 Bliss was commissioned to write a biography of Edward Bawden which was published in 1979 by the Pendomer Press, Godalming, Surrey. That year he suffered a slight stroke after the visit of a BBC film unit to record his garden in Derbyshire, which was populated by his grotesque and imaginative sculptures. Yet the following year two exhibitions were held in London at which the Tate Gallery acquired examples of his work. A retrospective exhibition followed at the Hatton Gallery of the University of Newcastle upon Tyne in 1981, and a further exhibition was held in Derby that year. A second stroke led to Bliss's death at the hospital in Ashbourne, Derbyshire, on 11 March 1984. He was buried on 17 March in Turnditch parish church, near Belper, Derbyshire. A further retrospective exhibition was held at the Museum and Art Gallery, Derby, in 1996. 
In both his art and his writing Bliss was an outspoken defender of the British cultural heritage, especially in Scotland where he was instrumental in preserving the designs and furniture of Charles Rennie Mackintosh, whose most celebrated building he occupied during his directorship of the Glasgow School of Art. The Ingram Street tea-rooms in Glasgow, designed by Mackintosh, owe their survival at least in part to Bliss. He was a sharp critic of artists, both past and present, who made their own importance a priority, and he lampooned their styles and self-esteem in a long series of watercolours. He was also charming in day-to-day life, however, and his articulate criticisms, when they came, found their recipients unguarded and defenceless. Public collections of Bliss's works are in the National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff; the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh; Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum; Royal Leamington Spa Art Gallery and Museum; Perth Museum and Art Gallery; the Tate collection; and the British Museum and Victoria and Albert Museum, London. His work was also acquired by the National Art Collections Fund and the Contemporary Art Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 38941


Cursiter, Stanley (1887-1976), painter, museum director, and cartographer, was born on 29 April 1887 at Kirkwall, Orkney, the fourth of four children of John Scott Cursiter (1850-1896), baker and spirit merchant, and his wife, Mary Johan, daughter of John Thomson of Newark in Sanday. Educated at Kirkwall grammar school (1893-1904), at the age of thirteen Cursiter gained a certificate in advanced building construction. 
Cursiter moved to Edinburgh in 1904, where, unable to afford training as an architect, he undertook a five-year apprenticeship with McLagen and Cumming, chromolithographers. Encouraged by the firm to attend classes at Edinburgh School of Art, Cursiter also received tuition from the Scottish designer W. S. Black in 1904, and, during a brief period at the Royal College of Art, London, from the printmaker W. R. Lethaby in 1908. After 1909 he worked successfully as a designer and began to paint. He was elected a member of the Society of Scottish Artists (SSA) while still a student; his early paintings were of models dressed in costumes he had made for them, for example 'Woman in White' (Fleming-Wyfold Art Foundation, London), or nude, which found a ready market. 
In 1914 Cursiter joined the 1st battalion of the Scottish Rifles (Cameronians). On 14 October 1916 he married a fellow Orcadian, the violinist Phyllis Eda Hourston (1888-1975); they had one daughter, Margaret. A week later he was in the front line on the Somme. Ill health prevailed and he was eventually transferred to the field survey battalion to print maps. There Cursiter developed a revolutionary way of transferring vital information from aerial photographs of enemy troop movements to maps, cutting crucial production time from six weeks to twenty-four hours. He subsequently designed a portable printing press to run from a lorry motor. Demobilized in 1919, he left the army with two mentions in dispatches and was made a military OBE. 
Cursiter continued to paint, dividing his time between Edinburgh and Orkney. In 1920, on account of continuing poor health, he moved to Cassis in the south of France for six months, producing a fine series of landscapes. His love of geology and antiquities, his passion for architecture, combined with his extensive knowledge and experience of printing techniques and cartography, bestowed a unique textural, structural quality to his work such as in 'Red Lacquer' (1922; Pier Arts Centre, Stromness, Orkney). 
In 1925 Cursiter became keeper of the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, under the directorship of Sir James Caw. He continued to paint, and was elected associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1927 and member in 1937. As ever, Cursiter's keen intellect, commitment, and problem-solving skills had far-reaching results. Picture conservation became an early preoccupation. He completely redesigned heating, humidity control, hanging space, and lighting to minimize the risk of fire in the very awkward Victorian Gothic building. As director of the National Gallery of Scotland from 1930, his collaboration with restorer Martin de Wild of Haarlem and the Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam, led to the development of a significant new and advanced method of wax relining technique. Cursiter also established a restoration department, redesigned lighting, and designed interior pillars modelled on the famed ancient Greek monument of Lysicrates. He made a working scale-model of the galleries, including scale copies of every picture, and designed and made sliding metal screens for easy storage and retrieval of pictures. In short, he revolutionized the traditional time-consuming way of rehanging a collection. 
In 1938 Cursiter drew up plans for a new art centre, incorporating a gallery for modern and contemporary art, craft, industrial design, and a historical collection of Scottish art. He also envisaged that this centre would, had it been built, include facilities for film, performance, and sound, with a travelling exhibitions department. During the Second World War he first secured the dispersal of the national collection and for a short time returned to military cartography as a trainer at the Ordnance Survey, Southampton. The deterioration of the national collection in storage hastened his return to Edinburgh. For the remainder of the war he organized over eighty ground-breaking exhibitions in the empty galleries: 'Art of the Allies'; the Scottish colourists, S. J. Peploe and F. C. B. Cadell; 'Women's Work', which showed peacetime paintings and embroideries alongside their wartime activities; and over twenty exhibitions of children's art which raised the profile of art teaching in Scotland. 
In 1948 Cursiter resigned as director and from his various committees and returned to painting. He received many honours that year, including appointment as CBE. On the strength of one portrait commission, 'Robert Wilson, Chairman of Heriot Watt College' (1948; Heriot Watt University), Cursiter found himself launched on a successful portrait career. As royal painter and limner in Scotland (1948) he subsequently painted 'The Queen Receiving the Honours of Scotland in St Giles Cathedral' and a portrait of the queen mother. An art historian, he wrote two notable books: in 1947, a tribute to Samuel John Peploe (1871-1935), 'An Intimate Memoir of an Artist and of his Work', and in 1949 'Scottish Art at the Close of the Nineteenth Century'. An autobiography, 'Looking back: a Book of Reminiscences', was published privately in 1974. 
An intelligent, articulate, well-read but modest man, Cursiter viewed his achievements as a series of fortuitous coincidences of whom he met and of opportunities presented. In 1911 Cursiter visited Roger Fry's first, controversial post-impressionist exhibition at the Grafton Galleries; he recalled, 'I got the shock of my life. Here was painting and colour as I had never imagined it' (Cursiter, 44). Returning the next day, Cursiter was introduced to Roger Fry and Clive Bell, and promptly arranged to borrow some twenty pictures for the next SSA exhibition in Edinburgh. The exhibition was a cultural landmark, bringing the work of Cezanne, Van Gogh, and Gauguin to Scotland for the first time. The effect of these works on Cursiter was decisive. He painted a series of seven radically modern paintings of which 'The Sensation of Crossing the Street -- the West End, Edinburgh' (1913; priv. coll.) is the most far-reaching. Close in style to Italian futurism, Cursiter comments only that the paintings 'were not modelled on the work of any individual artist, but just grew out of the search for new methods of expression prompted by contact with the new form of art' ('Stanley Cursiter: Centenary Exhibition', 11). 
Orkney, its people and culture, played a deep and influential part throughout Cursiter's life, immortalized in his paintings such as in 'Linklater and Greig' (1930; Stromness Museum, Orkney), and enriched by his lifelong friendships with Orcadians, the writers Neil Gunn and Eric Linklater, the poet Edwin Muir, and the playwright James Bridie (O. H. Mavor). Retired in Orkney, by 1975 he could no longer paint. Typically his energies went into the preservation of St Magnus's Cathedral and latterly, in collaboration with sculptor Reynold Eunson, the new development of St Rognvald's Chapel. He died of bronchopneumonia on 22 April 1976 at his home, 70 Victoria Street, Stromness, Orkney. 


@@@@@


doc= 38944


King, Jessie Marion (1875-1949), illustrator and designer, was born on 20 March 1875 at the manse, New Kilpatrick, Dunbartonshire, the third daughter of the Revd James Waters King (1836-1898), Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Mary Ann (1846-1896), daughter of James(?) Anderson, baker and miller, of Lanark; a younger brother was born a year later. Educated at the parish school in New Kilpatrick until 1891, she took a course at Queen Margaret College, Glasgow, before studying at Glasgow School of Art from 1892 to 1899, under F. H. (Fra) Newbery, who led the school into a golden era. Fellow students included Helen Paxton Brown, Annie French, Ann Macbeth, and Katherine Cameron as well as Margaret and Frances Macdonald, who in 1896 with Charles Rennie Mackintosh and Herbert MacNair launched the influential 'Glasgow style' allied to European art nouveau. 
As a student King developed her mannered mode of outline drawing, combining delicately patterned surfaces with nervous, elongated lines and arabesque forms within grid-like frames often containing lettering, influenced by Aubrey Beardsley, Jan Toorop, and the late graphic style of Burne-Jones. Early successes included a national silver medal (1898) for illustrations to Edwin Arnold's 'The Light of Asia' (1879), despite the 'excessive attenuation' of her figures, a gold medal at the international exhibition of 'Modern decorative art' in Turin (1902), and a commission from the Berlin publishing firm Globus Verlag. Work for British publishers established her as a leading illustrator alongside Arthur Rackham, Kate Greenaway, and Laurence Housman. A checklist of items reveals nearly 300 design projects in sixty years, ranging from art books to advertising cards. Her preferred medium was pen and ink, with watercolour, on vellum, and favourite motifs included ships with billowing sails, fairy maidens with billowing skirts, and intricate skeins of petals or birds composed of tiny dots, like a dew-drenched spider's web. Influenced by a Gaelic-speaking nursemaid with a fund of folklore, Jessie believed herself gifted with 'second sight' and her art was inspired by fantasy, while its minuteness derived from close, myopic vision. From 1899 to 1907 she taught book design at the Glasgow School of Art and from about 1905 she also designed fabrics and jewellery. Solo shows included ones at the Bruton Street Gallery, London (1905), and the Annans' Gallery, Glasgow (1907). From 1905 she was an active member of the Glasgow Society of Lady Artists. 
On 29 September 1908, after a ten-year engagement, King married Ernest Archibald Taylor (1874-1951), furniture designer and artist. The couple lived briefly in Salford, where their only child, Merle Elspeth, was born in 1909, before moving in 1910 to Paris, where Taylor ran a teaching atelier and King continued with illustration, also exhibiting at the Salon and the 1914 'Arts decoratifs' exhibition. Friends and acquaintances included Henri Matisse, Marie Laurencin, T.-A. Steinlen, J. D. Fergusson, and S. J. Peploe, and King's graphic style was subtly influenced by post-impressionist colour and Leon Bakst's Ballets Russes designs, becoming simpler and bolder. Later landscapes in coloured inks were particularly successful. She also learned the technique of batik printing, which became her forte. Each summer, the Taylors ran painting courses at High Corrie, Isle of Arran, and applied arts courses in Kirkcudbright, an artistic colony, where they settled in 1915. According to Robert Burns, of Edinburgh College of Art, no student's training was complete without a stay in one of the cottages at their home, Greengate. Wearing wide-brimmed hats and buckled shoes like a nursery-rhyme character, King (familiarly known as Jake) became a notable figure in Kirkcudbright, where she organized and designed community pageants. She decorated ceramic ware, designed wooden toys, and with Taylor produced murals for several Lanarkshire schools -- a public art commission cut short by economic depression. 
An encouraging mentor to younger artists like Marion Harvey, Anna Hotchkis, and Cecile Walton, King's whimsical illustrative style attracted no followers, however, with the exception of Ronald Searle, whose angular figures recall King's. When she died at home on 3 August 1949, her work was not highly regarded, and the first retrospective shows only took place in the 1970s including one at the National Library of Scotland, Edinburgh, since when her idiosyncratic art has steadily risen in critical and commercial favour. She was cremated at Kirkcudbright and her ashes were scattered at the church of Minard, Argyll, where her devoted nurse and housekeeper, Mary McNab (died 1938), was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 38945


Pringle, John Quinton (1864-1925), painter, was born in Glasgow on 13 December 1864, the second son and second child in the family of seven sons and one daughter of James Christie Pringle (1837-1896), a railway employee, and his wife, Jane Bowie, 'nee' Davidson (1840-1893). He lived in Glasgow all his life except during the years 1869 to 1874 when the family lived at Langbank on the River Clyde, near Port Glasgow, where his father was stationmaster. He left school in 1876 and was apprenticed to an optician until 1878. In 1896 he set up his own business as an optician and repairer of small items of domestic equipment at 90 Saltmarket, Glasgow. 
In 1883-5 Pringle attended evening classes in art organized by the Glasgow schools board and was awarded a bursary to attend evening classes at the Glasgow School of Art, which he did from 1885 to 1895, supplemented by some early morning classes. Among his fellow students was Charles Rennie Mackintosh. His final session at the school was in 1899-1900. He won the South Kensington national competition gold medal for life drawing in 1901. 
As the subjects for his oils and watercolours Pringle took themes from his home and near by, his family and one or two friends, old buildings and back courts, and the street near the tenement where he lived; his portraits at that period have an intensity rare in Scottish painting and recall the work of William Dyce and the Pre-Raphaelites. He was a pioneer in depicting townscapes and back courts seen unromantically, rendering them with a detached viewpoint and restrained affection. He adopted the technique of applying paint using the square brushstroke which derived from the French 'plein-air' painter Jules Bastien-Lepage, whose work was shown at the Glasgow Institute of the Fine Arts in 1883 and 1886. For the rest of his life he used the square brushstroke, later diluting the oil paint with turpentine to get a consistency almost like watercolour. 
Pringle began to paint fanciful pictures in the late 1880s. 'Children at the Burn' (1889, Tate collection), for example, is a landscape painting to which figures of children were later added. Girls and young women featured frequently in his landscapes. In the mid-1890s he began to paint miniatures, usually commissioned portraits. Some paintings of the period 1895 to 1905 have something of the flavour of Glasgow art nouveau. After opening his own shop he seems to have painted less, though his keenness to make pictorial experiments increased. From about 1906 he heightened his palette and his brushstrokes became looser and sometimes smaller, akin to the technique of the French neo-impressionists: he would not have seen work by Georges Seurat or Paul Signac but probably saw examples of Henri Le Sidaner's paintings, similar to neo-impressionism, shown at the Glasgow Institute between 1903 and 1906. 
In 1910 Pringle made his only visit to the continent, staying at Caudebec in Normandy for ten days painting landscapes. His output was probably less than 100 oils, mainly small in scale. On only three occasions was his work shown outside Scotland during his lifetime: some miniatures were on view at the fifteenth secessionist exhibition in Vienna in 1902 and three works were shown in 'Twentieth century art: a review of modern movements', an exhibition at the Whitechapel Art Gallery, London, in 1914, probably on the initiative of Fra Newbery, director of the Glasgow School of Art, who had a high regard for Pringle's art and greatly regretted that he did not paint full-time. Pringle's sister died in 1911 and he did not paint again in oils until 1921. In 1922 sixty-eight of his works were shown in an exhibition which was highly praised at the Glasgow School of Art, and one, 'Muslin Street' (1895-6, City Art Centre, Edinburgh), was bought for presentation to a public gallery. Later, also in his lifetime, a landscape, 'Caudebec', was presented to the Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum. His other notable paintings include 'Back Court (Bartholomew Street), Glasgow' (watercolour, 1887, British Museum, London), 'Two Figures at a Fence' (1904, Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum), 'Poultry Yard Gartcosh' (1906, Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh), 'Children at Play' (1906) and 'Tollcross, Glasgow' (1908, both Hunterian Art Gallery, University of Glasgow), and 'The Window' (1924, Tate collection). There is a miniature by him in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 
Pringle gave up his optician's business in 1923 but had only a short time left to paint, as he died, unmarried, in East Kilbride, near Glasgow, of liver cancer on 21 April 1925. He was buried in Sandymount cemetery, Shettleston, Glasgow. The Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum has a large collection of his works, and there are works by him in most major art galleries in Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 38946


Joseph Crawhall (1861-1913). Guthrie and Walton painted together from the late 1870s, developing a strong interest in Bastien-Lepage's work, which they encountered not just at the Glasgow Institute but also in a series of exhibitions in London in 1882 and 1883. Bastien-Lepage strongly recommended that a painter become part of a local community, as he had at Damvillers, painting its daily life without resorting to the great set pieces which formed so many of the exhibits at the Paris Salon and its British equivalents. Peasants in the fields and tradesmen in the street seen going about their daily tasks became Bastien-Lepage's standard subject matter, which he painted without the symbolism with which Jean-Francois Millet had imbued his similar paintings a generation before. The Scots took to spending summers in single locations in emulation of Bastien-Lepage, such as Crowland, Lincolnshire, and Cockburnspath, Berwickshire (where Guthrie lived and worked for almost three years, 1883-5). Their paintings of these rural locations were seen to best advantage in 1885 at the Glasgow Institute and they were recognized as the virtual leaders of an identifiable new school. Crawhall was related to Walton through marriage and began to paint alongside him and Guthrie from about 1879. He was born on 20 August 1861 at Wansbeck House, Newgate Street, Morpeth, Northumberland, the son of Joseph Crawhall (1821-1896), a wood-engraver and arts promoter, and his wife, Margaret, formerly Boyd ('c'.1833-1928). The young Crawhall attended King's College School in London from 1877 to 1879 but he had no formal art training other than two months in the studio of Aimee Morot in Paris in 1882. He developed his own natural and considerable talents through the example of both Guthrie and Walton, who had each received a varied formal training. He became one of the most accomplished watercolourists of his generation, specializing in horses, birds, and other animals, in preference to purely figurative subjects. A close friend of Lavery, he spent much of his time from 1884 to 1893 in Morocco, where many of his best watercolours were produced. The Glasgow shipowner and collector William Burrell became his chief patron, acquiring over 140 of his pictures, including masterpieces such as 'The Aviary, Clifton' (1888) and 'The Flower Shop'. From 1907 he lived in Yorkshire and died at 92 Redcliffe Gardens, South Kensington, London, on 24 May 1913, following an operation for emphysema. He was buried at St Mary's, Morpeth. 

Arthur Melville (1855-1904) was another outsider, born and brought up in the east of Scotland, but at an early stage in his career he left Edinburgh to study in the ateliers of Paris, where he adopted the pursuit of tonal values which became an integral part of the style of the Glasgow Boys. He also visited Grez-sur-Loing but then travelled on through Spain and Morocco to the Middle East. His earlier, more naturalist works had a considerable influence on Guthrie, Walton, Lavery, and Crawhall but his watercolours of Spain and of Arab life (for example, 'A Mediterranean Port', 1892; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries), with their strong colours and bold technique, had a greater appeal to a younger generation of painters associated with the Boys, particularly George Henry and Edward Atkinson Hornel ['see below']. 



@@@@@


doc= 38947


Flight, (Walter) Claude (1881-1955), linocut artist and art teacher, was born on 16 February 1881 at 12 Clairville Grove in South Kensington, London, son of Dr Walter Flight FRS (1841-1885), mineralogist and authority on meteorites at the British Museum, and his wife, Katherine Fell (1847-1942), daughter of Dr Fell of Ambleside. Flight's interest in art was a relatively late development; after he left school he worked in an engineer's office for two years, took up librarianship for eighteen months, and then spent seven years farming and bee-keeping in Sussex at Little Bines, Burwash, as a neighbour of Rudyard Kipling. In 1912, aged thirty-one, Flight enrolled as a full-time student at the Heatherley School of Fine Art in London, where he met (Helena) Clare James, whom he married on 20 May 1915 in the parish church of St John, Hampstead; they had two daughters. At the outbreak of the First World War he volunteered as a farrier and subsequently became a captain in the Army Service Corps in France, being awarded the Merit Agricole medal by the French government for his three and a half years' service. After demobilization he spent a year at the Paris art schools and purchased for 300 francs a neolithic chalk cave by the Seine at Chantemesle, 40 miles from Paris. He made the cave his regular summer retreat, declaring in an interview: 'it is here that I cook, sail my canoe, sketch and dream' (Flight, 'Golders Green artist's life', 1). 
Following his marriage break-up Flight met in 1922 
Although Flight's geometrically constructed oil paintings and watercolours were regularly shown at the progressive Seven & Five Society (1922-8) and were widely reproduced during this period in the leading art magazines, including 'The Studio', 'Colour', and 'Artwork', his importance rests on his championship of the colour linocut as the modern medium for the modern age. Inspired by the machine-age aesthetic of F. T. Marinetti and the Italian futurists (whose work he knew from their well-publicized visit to London in 1912), Flight sought to express the vitality, speed, and movement of modern life through the twentieth-century linocut, which, he claimed, 'has no tradition of technique behind it, so that the student can go forward without thinking of what Bewick or Rembrandt did before' (Flight, 'Art and Craft', 63). From 1926 to 1930 Flight gave weekly instruction in linocut technique at the Grosvenor School of Modern Art, founded at 33 Warwick Square, Pimlico, London, in 1925 by the enlightened teacher and wood-engraver Iain Macnab. Among Flight's numerous students were Cyril E. Power and Sybil Andrews, Eileen Mayo, the Swiss Lill Tschudi, and the Australians Dorrit Black, Ethel Spowers, and Eveline Syme, all of whom helped to disseminate his ideas abroad. Syme wrote at the time of his success as a teacher: 'Sometimes in his classes it is hard to remember that he is teaching so complete is the camaraderie between him and his students. He treats them as fellow-artists rather than pupils, discusses with them and suggests to them, never dictates or enforces. At the same time he is so full of enthusiasm for his subject, and his ideas are so clear and reasoned, that it is impossible for his students not to be influenced by them. (Syme, 3)' Flight's book 'Lino-cuts' (1927) was the first monograph on the subject and became the standard manual for artists and teachers; it was illustrated with examples of his prints that showed the combined influence of futurism and art deco. His second textbook, 'The Art and Craft of Lino Cutting and Printing' (1934), expressed many of his ideas on art education, particularly for children. He wrote several children's books illustrated with his linocuts, including three with Edith Lawrence written in Basic English in 1938: 'A Little about Art'; 'A Little about Geography'; 'A Little about History'. In 1929 Flight organized the first exhibition devoted exclusively to the linocut in Britain; its success at the Redfern Gallery, London, led to a series of eight annual exhibitions which he arranged, initially at the Redfern and then at the Ward Gallery, London, until 1937. Flight also introduced the linocut to a diverse international audience through exhibitions toured by the Redfern to the United States (1929 and 1934), China (1931), Australia (1932 and 1937), and Canada (1935-6). Flight viewed the modern linocut, with its bold colour, geometric design, and rhythmic expression, as the new democratic art medium that would furnish homes with contemporary decorative designs at affordable prices. With utopian fervour he looked forward to the day when this 'art of the people for their homes' (Flight, 'Lino-cuts', 12) might sell 'at a price... paid by the average man for his daily beer or his cinema ticket' (ibid., 4). 
Until the late 1930s Flight conducted regular classes at his cave in France during the summer as well as occasional sketching tours in Dorset. In June 1940 Flight and Lawrence, to escape the threat of aerial attack, moved to a small cottage in Donhead St Andrew, Wiltshire, taking with them their prints and watercolours; the studio at Rodmarton Mews was destroyed during the blitz in 1941, with the loss of all their lino printing blocks and larger oil paintings and screens. In April 1947 Flight suffered a stroke, which left him paralysed. He was nursed by Lawrence at Donhead St Andrew until his death on 10 October 1955. By this date his reputation had declined, with little interest after the war being shown in his work and in that of the linocut movement he represented; it was not until the 1970s that his achievements as an artist and teacher began to receive their proper due. Principal holdings of his prints are in the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the National Gallery of Australia, Canberra. 
Flight's pupil Dorrit Black described him as: 'a small man with very bright eyes, little bits of side-curls, and one feels instantly at one's ease with him. During the summer he lives in a cave in France... and in the winter he comes out of his cave to teach lino-cutting to students of the Grosvenor School. (Black)' This light-hearted vignette encapsulates the paradoxical qualities of Flight's character: as an artist he openly embraced metropolitan life with its speed and complexity and yet felt compelled to return each year to a caveman simplicity. 
In 1955 Lawrence, who had become almost blind during Flight's last years, was able to paint again after a cataract operation. In 1961 she moved to Worth Matravers, Dorset, where she continued to work with the use of one eye for the next twelve years. An exhibition of her work was held at the University of Hull a few months before her death on 2 October 1973, at the Maristow Nursing Home, Bourne Avenue, Salisbury. A joint memorial exhibition of the work of Flight and Lawrence was held at the Parkin Gallery, London, in November 1973, a show which marked the start of their artistic rehabilitation. 


@@@@@


doc= 38948


Power, Cyril Edward Mary (1872-1951), architect and linocut artist, was born on 17 December 1872 at 14 Redcliffe Street, Chelsea, London, the son of Edward William Power, architect and grandson of Edward Power, architect, of Bristol, and his wife, Amelia Poole Berry. Educated in Kensington and encouraged to draw from a young age, he followed the family tradition by joining his father's architectural practice. His early abilities were recognized in 1900 with the award of the Soane medallion by the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) for his design of an art school. In 1902 he was elected an associate member of the RIBA and for the next twenty years he pursued a career in architecture. On 27 August 1904 he married Dorothy Mary Margaret ('b'. 1882/3), daughter of George Frederic Roper Nunn, agent, of Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, with whom he had three sons and one daughter. From 1905, among other public works, he worked on designing and building the General Post Office King Edward VII Building in King Edward Street, central London, with Sir Richard Allington in the Ministry of Works. During this period Power was a part-time lecturer in architectural history and design in the school of architecture at University College, London, under Professor Simpson, and also at Goldsmiths' College. Academically minded, he published 'English Mediaeval Architecture' (1912), a two-volume history largely illustrated with his pen-and-ink sketches. 
In 1916 Power was commissioned into the Royal Flying Corps, where he supervised the repair workshops at Lympne aerodrome, near Folkestone. On demobilization he moved with his family to Bury St Edmunds, where he resumed his architectural practice, in 1920 designing the library extensions at Bradwell Manor, near Mistley, Essex, for his patron Lord Iveagh. In 1922 when nearly fifty, Power suddenly abandoned architecture, his wife, and four children (the youngest of whom was born in December 1921) and returned to London, with the idea of becoming an artist. He took with him a 24-year-old art student, 
In 1922 Power and Andrews enrolled at Heatherley School of Fine Art, where Iain Macnab was co-principal. Here they declared their artistic beliefs in a joint unpublished paper 'Aims of the art of to-day'; inspired by the rhetoric of the Italian futurists, they called for an art of the modern age that was expressed through dynamism and movement. In October 1925 Macnab appointed Power to teach the principles of perspective for artists and to provide courses on architectural history at his newly opened Grosvenor School of Modern Art at 33 Warwick Square, Pimlico, London; Andrews was appointed as the school secretary. When Claude Flight joined the staff in the following year, Power and Andrews were among the most gifted students in his popular linocut classes. They participated in Flight's 'First Exhibition of British Lino-Cuts' at the Redfern Gallery, London, in 1929; thereafter they regularly exhibited their dynamic linocuts of modern speed and movement in group shows during the 1930s. Power and Andrews achieved wider critical recognition with their joint exhibition of monotypes and linocuts at the Redfern in 1933; under the pseudonym Andrew-Power, they also collaborated on several lithographic posters for sports venues commissioned by the London Passenger Transport Board. 
Andrews established her studio at 2 Brook Green, Hammersmith, London, which she shared with Power from 1928 until their partnership came to an end in July 1938. At Brook Green they closely collaborated on the themes, colours, and designs of their linocuts; in 1934, a critic for the 'Morning Post' observed, 'They are co-workers in the same studio, each inspiring the other in the conception of ideas and their pictorial realisation' (12 July 1934, 15). By virtue of his wider experience and maturity Power was perhaps the more creative force of the partnership in the development of ideas while Andrews was technically superior in the cutting and registering of the printing blocks. A romantic about the medieval past, Power was equally at home in expressing the modernity of his own age. He took to heart the dynamism of the metropolitan rush; among his most striking images were those inspired by the London underground, where his architectural training informed the bold, architectonic forms and sweeping rhythms. By contrast Andrews's themes, drawn mainly from her native Suffolk, expressed the agricultural cycle and the rhythms of seasonal change. Musically gifted and intensely interested in all things medieval, Power learned to play the viola da gamba and the recorder; he also spent many hours transcribing early music manuscripts in the British Museum Library. The Brook Green studio became a meeting place for the Recorder Society and for those interested in early music, including the Dolmetsch family. 
When their artistic partnership broke up in 1938, Andrews moved to Norley Wood near Lymington in the New Forest to a cottage that Power had renovated for her. Power, then aged almost sixty-six, returned to his family at New Malden, Surrey, for the final thirteen years of his life. Although he lectured to local art societies and continued to paint in oils and watercolours until his death, he ceased to make linocuts. A highly cultivated dilettante without the income, Power perhaps dissipated his energies over too wide a field. On 20 May 1951 Power died at his home, 24 Howard Road, New Malden, aged seventy-eight. His obituary in the 'Surrey Comet' (26 May 1951) was entitled 'Artist, architect and musician. Death of Mr C. E. Power'. 
In 1943 Andrews married Walter Morgan, a shipyard worker whom she had met in the shipyards near Southampton while doing war work; in 1947 they emigrated to Canada, settling in Campbell River, a remote logging township on Vancouver Island, British Columbia. After initial years of hardship she built a studio and eventually resumed her career as a linocut artist. In 1980 a solo exhibition of her prints was held at the Michael Parkin Gallery, London. A major travelling retrospective organized in 1982-3 by the Glenbow Museum, Calgary, brought her national recognition in Canada. Her notes and thoughts on art gained from her private teaching at Campbell River since 1960 were published in London as 'Artist's Kitchen' ('c'.1986). Andrews died at Campbell River on 21 December 1992. A few months before her death she donated a large collection of her linocuts to the British Museum; the Glenbow Museum holds a complete representation of her work in all media. 


@@@@@


doc= 38949


Traquair, Phoebe Anna (1852-1936), artist, was born on 24 May 1852 in Kilternan, co. Dublin, the sixth of the seven children of William Moss, surgeon, of Dublin and his wife, Teresa, daughter of John and Jane Richardson of Kilgobbin, co. Dublin. From 1869 to 1872 she studied at the School of Design of the Royal Dublin Society. On 5 June 1873 she married in Dublin the Scottish palaeontologist Ramsay Heatley Traquair (1840-1912), whose research papers she had illustrated. On his appointment to the Museum of Science and Art, they moved in early 1874 to Edinburgh, where their three children, Ramsay ('b'. 1874), Harry ('b'. 1875), and Hilda ('b'. 1879), were born. 
Traquair's earliest surviving works, produced in the late 1870s, are landscape watercolours and embroidered domestic textiles; examples of both are in private collections and in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. By the mid-1880s her expanding social circle included the biologist and sociologist Patrick Geddes, whose Edinburgh Social Union in 1885 engaged her to decorate the tiny new mortuary chapel of the Royal Hospital for Sick Children. Completed in 1886, the chapel was demolished in 1894 but wall sections survive in a new building. She restored these transferred walls within a new scheme of 1896-8 painted in the simpler style of a child's picture book. 
In the later 1880s Traquair worked figural embroidered panels for draughtscreens. The finest is her triptych 'The Salvation of Mankind' (1887-93; City Art Centre, Edinburgh). Her style was initially close to the symbolist work of Edward Burne-Jones and D. G. Rossetti, which had been promoted in reviews by Geddes and was also supported by another friend, John Miller Gray, first curator of the Scottish National Portrait Gallery. Gray and Ruskin, with whom she corresponded in 1887, encouraged Traquair to illuminate manuscripts. She also began to work on commercial book design and illustration for Walter Scott of London and T. and A. Constable of Edinburgh. 
Traquair's decoration of the song school of St Mary's Episcopal Cathedral, Edinburgh (1888-92), won her national recognition. Illustrating the 'Benedicite' and combining portraiture with a skilful use of colour and decorative pattern, the scheme showed both technical innovation and stylistic independence. Together with the range of her crafts (which now included book cover tooling), her third Edinburgh decoration, at the Catholic Apostolic church (1893-1901), demonstrated a reintegration of art with craft. This major mural scheme turned a neo-Norman church into a 'jewelled crown' and, like her outstanding quartet of silk-embroidered panels 'The Progress of a Soul' (1893-1902; National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh), it illustrated the journey of the human spirit through life. Her illuminated manuscripts of the 1890s, many of which illustrated Rossetti, Tennyson, the Brownings, and Dante (and some of which are in the National Library of Scotland and priv. coll.), share with them an intensity of colour and tactile values. She was now Scotland's leading arts and crafts artist. 
After 1900 Traquair's diverse studio crafts included the fashionable art of enamelling alongside book cover tooling and art embroidery. She produced hundreds of pieces of jewellery and ornamental work. As she had exhibited by invitation at the world fair in Chicago in 1893, so in 1904 she showed 'The Progress of a Soul' in St Louis. Her mural work, now on a reduced level, included the chancel of the church of St Peter at Clayworth, Nottinghamshire (1904-5), and the Manners chapel at Thorney Hill in the New Forest, Hampshire (1920-22). 
In 1906, on her husband's retirement, the Traquairs moved to the village of Colinton, then developing as an 'arts and crafts' suburb of Edinburgh. In 1920 she was elected an honorary member of the Royal Scottish Academy. Phoebe Traquair died in Edinburgh on 4 August 1936 and was buried at Colinton parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 38950


Johnstone, William (1897-1981), painter and art educationist, was born on 8 June 1897 at his parents' house above their butcher's shop in Main Street, Denholm, Roxburghshire, the only son and youngest of the three children of William Johnstone (1855-1938), farmer and butcher, and his wife, Jane Maria Greenwood (1853-1942), daughter of Robert Greenwood, textile designer and founder of the Art Gallery, Hawick, Roxburghshire. His father moved to Greenhead Farm, Selkirk, in 1902 and until Johnstone entered Selkirk high school in 1911, farm work took priority over his schooling. At school, authoritarian teaching methods proved beyond his endurance and he left to farm full-time. He had been painting since 1907 and some oils survive of only a slightly later date (priv. coll.). The guiding principles of Johnstone's life were established early: from his mother's family he learned respect for the vocation of the artist; at school he acquired a contempt for conventional educational methods; and through his father he developed a regard for the independence of the self-employed man, epitomized by the farmer, and also a love for farming technology and the land. 
Saved from the First World War until its last months by his work on the family farm, Johnstone was conscripted in the spring of 1918 only to be posted back to the farm on 11 November. By the time of his discharge in 1919 he had decided on an artistic career and entered Edinburgh College of Art with an ex-service grant in October of that year. A successful, if somewhat difficult, student, he was refused the college travelling scholarship when he graduated in 1923, despite a recommendation from George Clausen. Awarded the Stuart prize, MacLaine Walters medal, and Keith award by the Royal Scottish Academy in 1924, its award of the Carnegie travelling scholarship in 1925 enabled him to settle that autumn in Paris. There he studied under Andre Lhote and came under the freer influence of the surrealist movement. During 1926 he spent a month in Madrid in the Museo del Prado, where the paintings of El Greco had a major impact on his work and were the source of inspiration for his major surrealist painting 'A Point in Time' (1929, Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh). Along with other works of this period, the painting is composed of complex patterns of organic forms and spatial voids, often with an implicit sexual content. In February 1927 in Paris he married a talented American sculpture student, Flora Macdonald (1903-1976). She was at the time studying with Emile-Antoine Bourdelle but later abandoned art. Johnstone and his wife returned to Scotland but left in August 1928 for California, where they briefly established an art school. A year later they returned to Scotland. 
In March 1931 Johnstone settled in London, where he worked as a secondary school teacher and began to formulate educational theories regarding the importance of children's art for the adult artist, and the connections between art, design, and technology. His theories rest on belief in the creativity of all children and in automatic drawing, as developed by the surrealists Andre Masson and Joan Miro. He encouraged children to make random marks which were then refined by a process of tracing selected elements into what he termed 'developments', ultimately becoming finished drawings, elaborate figural compositions, or even portraits. Many others had expressed faith in the creative abilities of children but few had demonstrated how a teacher might encourage the development of a child's early efforts. The results were published in his book 'Child Art to Man Art' (1941), which was later translated into Japanese. Johnstone differed from other educationists in his conviction that children's artistic efforts should be developed, with a teacher's involvement, into adult art and should not be shielded from adult influence. He used this method with older students, working with three-dimensional objects, and further encouraged them to be creative in all areas of art and design. 
In the early 1930s Johnstone's painting was influenced by the vorticists, as in, for example, the portraits of his friends the poet Christopher Murray Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid) and the musician Francis George Scott (both Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh). He had known them since 1921-2 and shared their desire to stimulate a 'Scottish Renaissance'. Johnstone destroyed or reworked many of his paintings but a surviving landscape of the mid-1930s shows a reinvigoration of this traditional genre in a modern idiom. While 'The Eildon Hills' (reproduced in 'Paintings, Drawings and Sculpture', sale catalogue, lot 1) also reveals his knowledge of European Romanticism, the thinly applied washes of oil allowed to flow down the canvas in an uninhibited, almost random manner are clearly from the hand of a twentieth-century painter. 
Following his post as head of Hackney School of Art in 1936, in 1938 Johnstone was made principal of Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts and there he employed professional artists to teach part-time, insisting on them working in disciplines far beyond their normal areas of practice. In 1940 his wife and daughter Elizabeth Jane ('b'. 1931) were evacuated to the United States; the marriage ended and Johnstone's physical and mental health suffered. At this time his painting recapitulated his earlier styles, making the dating of these works difficult. He set up home with a former student, Mary Joan Bonning (1918-1988), an embroiderer whom he married in 1947 and with whom he had a daughter, Sarah. That year Johnstone was made principal of the Central School of Arts and Crafts in London, where he employed many successful artists including Patrick Heron, Eduardo Paolozzi, and Victor Pasmore. Of his students, Terence Conran made a distinctive impact on the design of British household goods in the latter part of the twentieth century. Johnstone made several teaching and study trips to the United States during 1948-50 and was made an OBE in 1954. This period of success was also a time of conflict with his staff, whom he ruled autocratically. In the 1950s he painted a number of large canvases whose colouristic complexity and bold, almost violent handling vividly express his thrusting, self-confident personality and have something in common with the abstract expressionist painters of New York. 
Suffering from exhaustion Johnstone retired to farm in the Scottish borders in 1960, but gradually he returned to painting. In 1970 he retired from farming and settled at Crailing, near Jedburgh, where an extraordinary late flowering of his art took place and where he received the enlightened patronage of a wealthy widow, Hope Montagu Douglas Scott. In the last decade of his life he worked with great ease and on a large scale. His numerous large abstract drawings in black ink of this period were executed with extraordinary technical delicacy. Together with the series of plaster reliefs he made with his assistant, George Turnbull, a local plasterer, the drawings illustrate his long-standing interest in chance, the immediacy of the creative gesture, and a concern with placing a time-limit on the creative act which had first influenced him during his days in Paris. His assistant placed wet plaster on a board and in the few minutes before solidification, Johnstone, armed with a trowel in each hand, manipulated the plaster in much the same way as he plied his ink-loaded brush when making the large drawings. A series of these reliefs was exhibited at the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art in Edinburgh in 1973. Two films were made of his life and art and Edinburgh University awarded him an honorary doctorate in 1980. 
William Johnstone died at the Cottage Hospital, Hawick, Roxburghshire, on 5 December 1981, aged eighty-four, and was buried in the cemetery in nearby Denholm. He was survived by his second wife. Johnstone is considered by many to be one of the finest Scottish painters of the twentieth century. In addition to the National Galleries of Scotland his works are in the Tate collection; the National Portrait Gallery, London; the University of Edinburgh; the Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum, and the Hunterian Art Gallery, Glasgow; Nuffield College, Oxford; the Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto; and Colorado Springs Fine Art Center, Colorado, USA. 


@@@@@


doc= 38951


Kauffer, Edward McKnight (1890-1954), artist and graphic designer, was born Edward Kauffer in Great Falls, Cascade county, Montana, USA, on 14 December 1890, the only son of John and Anna Kauffer. His parents were first- and second-generation immigrants to the United States, his father of Hanseatic German stock, his mother of Swedish origin. John Kauffer, a violinist and trap-drummer, was away from home with touring bands for long periods. The marriage ended in divorce when Edward was three and he was sent to an orphanage for two years. He grew up in the small brewing town of Evansville on the Ohio River in Indiana. In 1899 Anna Kauffer married John M. Rees and Edward enjoyed a settled family life and encouragement for his youthful artistic aspirations. 
At the age of twelve or thirteen Kauffer left school to become a helper to the scene painter at Evansville's grand opera. From the age of seventeen he was listed as a painter in the city directory and, in the same year, 1907, he left home to tour with a company of travelling players. The character actor Frank Bacon took Kauffer up and in 1910 found him a position with the San Francisco bookseller and art dealer Paul Elder. Here Kauffer contracted a lifelong love of books -- of which he became a distinguished illustrator -- and received his first formal training as a painter at the Mark Hopkins Institute of Art. Maria Zimmern Petrie, who met Kauffer in his early twenties, remembered him as 'a very tall, lanky, good-looking man, with a slightly curved nose, blue eyes, a shock of red hair and the very light complexion that often goes with red hair' (private information). Kauffer was befriended by a regular customer of the bookshop, Professor Joseph E. McKnight, who offered to help him to study in Paris. In gratitude Kauffer adopted his patron's name: as Edward McKnight Kauffer he became well known as a painter in avant-garde circles in London during the First World War and famous afterwards in poster art, the field he made his own. Having arrived in Paris in autumn 1913, Kauffer studied in the afternoon sketch schools and at the Academie Moderne, painting under the spell of Van Gogh. On 7 July 1914 he married Grace Ehrlich, a gifted American concert pianist. A month later the onset of the First World War forced them to leave for England. 
'I do not know how he came to England', wrote Sir Francis Meynell in the catalogue of the memorial exhibition of Kauffer's work held at the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1955, 'but when he came he was already the exquisite, the son of a hundred kings.' The attraction was mutual; Kauffer came to love England, its sense of tranquillity and tradition. He was welcomed into disparate and often warring artistic factions -- including the London Group, Roger Fry's Omega Workshops, and Wyndham Lewis's X Group -- and in 1915 he was commissioned to design posters by the Underground Electric Railways Company of London. Here his patron was Frank Pick. Over the next twenty-five years Kauffer became Pick's most prolific and innovative designer. Kauffer began in 1915 with a poster titled 'In Watford' which displayed his interest in the Japanese woodblock print and the work of Van Gogh. Soon Kauffer added fauve touches to his designs and then forceful imagery in the vorticist style. His single most important and widely reproduced poster design was initially published, under the title 'Flight', in 'Colour' magazine in June 1917. This design presented, as Francis Meynell wrote, 'a flight of birds that might almost be a flight of aeroplanes; a symbol, in those days of hope, of the unity of useful invention and natural things'. The composition was based on the sketches Kauffer had made the previous year at Blewbury in Berkshire. However, the design was also informed by Kauffer's knowledge of Japanese art, futurism, and vorticism. 'Flight' was used by Meynell in March 1919 to launch the 'Daily Herald', captioned 'Soaring to Success! DAILY HERALD -- the Early Bird'. 
Until 1921 Kauffer regarded himself as a painter and always kept his art practice alive, sometimes in the medium of watercolour. As well as the Underground Electric Railways, Kauffer's clients included Eastman & Co., the drycleaners, Eno's Fruit Salts, Derry and Toms, the Kensington department store, Steinthal & Co. in Manchester, for whom he devised eye-catching labels for cotton bales, Vigil Silk, and Pomeroy Day Cream. However, Kauffer took on a variety of commissions during the 1920s, such as a cubist-inspired street sign for the Poetry Bookshop, titles for Alfred Hitchcock's film 'The Lodger', graphics for the British Empire Exhibition of 1924, posters for the Empire Marketing Board, books vividly illustrated by the pochoir process for Curwen Press, and rugs woven by the Wilton Royal Carpet Factory. For Meynell, Kauffer also provided 150 witty illustrations for the Nonesuch Press edition of 'The Anatomy of Melancholy' (1925). Kauffer's sprightly, jazzy, designs were part of the social fabric of progressive, forward-looking Britain in his time. In Evelyn Waugh's 'Brideshead Revisited' (1945) the fictional Charles Ryder recalls how he had displayed a Kauffer poster in his Oxford college rooms in the early 1920s. 
Kauffer's dominance continued, in the more sober guise of greys, beiges, and aluminium inks, into the late 1920s and 1930s. Between 1927 and 1929 he worked as a designer at the W. S. Crawford advertising agency. His colleague Ashley Havinden remembered Kauffer's impact: while other designers sat hunched over work tables, Kauffer stood at an adjustable architect's desk imported from Germany. Clients during the 1930s included the Orient Line and Shell-Mex, for whom he designed striking lorry-bills. For Embassy Court, the apartment block in Brighton by Welles Coates, Kauffer designed a photo-mural on the theme of leisure. He provided the sets and costumes for many theatre productions, culminating with the Arthur Bliss ballet 'Checkmate', premiered at Sadler's Wells in 1937 (and revised by Kauffer for its revival at Covent Garden in 1947). For his friend T. S. Eliot he made illustrations to accompany the 'Ariel' poems. Kauffer was a man of many friendships. Other friends included his fellow artists Roger Fry and Man Ray, the writers Aldous Huxley and Marianne Moore, and enlightened clients like Jack Beddington of Shell and Eric Gregory of Lund Humphries. Kauffer's triumph in his English years was signalled by his appointment as an honorary (being American) royal designer for industry in the first awards made in 1936. The next year Kauffer received the accolade of a retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art, New York. 
A daughter, Ann, had been born to the Kauffers on 6 October 1920; however, their marriage had failed by the 1920s. From 1923 Kauffer lived with the American textile designer Marion Dorn, at 17 John Street, The Adelphi, London (to 1931), and then at Swan Court, Chelsea, until July 1940. They eventually married at City Hall, New York, in 1950. In 1940 Kauffer and Dorn had, at the urging of the American embassy in London, reluctantly left England. Although he continued to produce distinguished work -- inventive posters for American Airlines, haunting illustrations to Poe for Alfred A. Knopf, and numerous thoughtful book jackets for Random House -- Kauffer never fully rebuilt his career in his native land. He died in New York City on 22 October 1954, and was buried at Woodlawn cemetery. He was survived by his first wife, Grace, by Marion Dorn, and by his daughter, Ann, who died in 1996. 
T. S. Eliot summed up Kauffer's contribution: 'He did something for modern art with the public and something for the public with modern art' (notes for BBC talk on Kauffer, King's College Archive Centre, Cambridge). Kauffer brought finesse to the uninspiring world of 'commercial art' and became a leader in the new profession of graphic design. 


@@@@@


doc= 38954


Walton, Edward Arthur (1860-1922), painter, was born at Glanderston House, Neilston, Renfrewshire, on 15 April 1860, the sixth son and ninth child of Jackson Walton ('c'.1808-1873), variously merchant, commission agent, engineer, and amateur artist, and his second wife, Eliza Anne (1826-1902), daughter of Thomas Balfour Nicholson. Walton was brought up in Glasgow from 1862; nothing is known of his early education but in 1876-7 he studied at the Staatliche Kunstakademie, Dusseldorf. From 1877 to 1879 he also studied at Glasgow School of Art. In 1879 his brother Richard married Judith Crawhall of Morpeth and at the wedding Walton met her brother Joseph Crawhall and his friend James Guthrie. For the next ten years these three men spent much of their spare time in each other's company, at first taking summer holidays together painting (Crawhall and Guthrie being apprenticed to John Pettie until 1881) but from 1882 making longer and more sustained contact in Lincolnshire, Glasgow, Berwickshire, and Kirkcudbrightshire. Like Guthrie, Walton fell under the influence of Jules Bastien-Lepage, a French naturalist painter, and Walton also adopted his manner of 'plein-air' painting with an emphasis on scenes from rural life. Together, Walton, Crawhall, and Guthrie formed the most important of the various coteries of artists who made up the Glasgow Boys in the 1880s. His work, alongside that of Guthrie, George Henry, and John Lavery, defined this particular branch of naturalist painting and identified him with the Glasgow school of painting in its many international exhibitions between 1885 and 1914. 
From 1880 Walton had a studio in Glasgow, first at 134 Bath Street. Walton and Guthrie began to exhibit at the Glasgow (later Royal Glasgow) Institute of the Fine Arts, where their reputation grew, and also, in Walton's case, at the Royal Scottish Society of Painters in Watercolour. Walton was a fine watercolourist, as were several of his siblings, and his earliest important works of this period, including 'Winchelsea' (priv. coll.), 'At Rosneath' (Glasgow Museums), 'Grandfather's Garden' (priv. coll.), and 'The Herd Boy' (priv. coll.), are often watercolours. Although all of these were painted in a naturalist manner, Walton was not committed just to painting working-class rural life; several of his best works of the period, again in watercolour, depict the daily lives of the ladies of middle-class society in Helensburgh, such as 'Victoria Road, Helensburgh' (priv. coll.) and 'En plein air' (priv. coll.). 
Walton also painted in oils and produced a striking portrait of Joseph Crawhall (1884; NG Scot.) and several paintings at Cockburnspath, where he worked with Guthrie in the summers of 1883-5. 'A Daydream' (1885; NG Scot.) is his masterpiece of this period, first shown at the Glasgow Institute in 1887 and later that year at the New English Art Club, London, when Walton was elected a member. It stands alongside key works by Guthrie in defining the particular qualities of the success of the Glasgow Boys in the 1880s. In 1889 he was elected associate of the Royal Scottish Academy and a full academician in 1905. Walton also took part in an exhibition of Glasgow school painting at the Grosvenor Gallery, London, in 1890, which received much press attention, and which led to the Glasgow Boys being shown in the major cities of Europe and the eastern United States of America. 
On 2 June 1890 Walton married Helen Law (1859-1945), widow of Thomas Law and daughter of James Henderson. Their eldest child was the painter and illustrator Cecile Walton, and their second son was the physiologist Arthur Walton. Also in 1890 Walton took a leading part in the initiative organized by the Glasgow Art Club to persuade Glasgow corporation to purchase James McNeill Whistler's portrait of Thomas Carlyle. Having secured Whistler's agreement to the sale, the Art Club then petitioned Glasgow corporation to acquire the painting for its civic collection. The corporation agreed and the painting was purchased, not without some typical bluster by Whistler, in April 1891, the first painting by Whistler to enter any public collection, predating the purchase of the portrait of Whistler's mother by the Musee du Luxembourg. Walton was instrumental in the negotiations with Whistler and the contacts he made were no doubt a factor in Walton's decision to leave Glasgow in 1893 and settle in London. Several of the leading members of the Glasgow Boys had already left, or were considering it, all of them spurred on by the opportunities for new portrait commissions in London, and by the waning market for paintings in Glasgow. 
Walton moved first to 22 Cromwell Road, London, later commissioning a house from C. R. Ashbee at 73 Cheyne Walk. His immediate neighbours there were Whistler and Philip Wilson Steer. Walton's career was thriving and he continued to receive portrait commissions and to sell his paintings to collectors and museums in Europe and America. He was also at work on a large mural panel, '15th Century Glasgow Fair', commissioned in 1889 by Glasgow corporation for the Banqueting Hall of the new City Chambers, which he delivered in 1901. Through his friendship with Whistler, Walton was instrumental in persuading him to accept the role of president of the newly formed International Society of Sculptors, Painters, and Gravers, founded in London in 1897. On Whistler's death in 1903, Walton was one of the pallbearers at his funeral. 
In 1902 James Guthrie became president of the Royal Scottish Academy. After years of rivalry between Scottish painters of the east and west coasts a Glasgow artist had finally become president, but Guthrie felt exposed and insecure. He asked Walton to return to Scotland to give him practical and spiritual support and in July 1904 Walton moved to Edinburgh, settling at 7 Belford Park. Walton and Guthrie resumed their close friendship and Guthrie diverted to his old friend many of the portrait commissions that academy business prevented him from accepting. His list of sitters began to rival Guthrie's, including Andrew Carnegie (1911; University of St Andrews) and J. G. Bartholomew (NG Scot.). At the same time he resumed his painting of landscape, particularly of Galloway, and he held several exhibitions of these paintings, usually at Alexander Reid's gallery in Glasgow. These later paintings, although usually made 'en plein air', have little of the realist brushwork or palette of the paintings of the 1880s and show a move towards a more impressionist manner. 
In 1922 Walton contracted influenza and, although seeming to make a good recovery, died suddenly of heart failure at his home in Edinburgh on 18 March 1922. Guthrie was a pallbearer at his funeral and two years later organized a memorial exhibition, shown in both Glasgow and Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 38956


George Henry (1858-1943) was born on 14 March 1858 at Irvine, Ayrshire, the son of William Hendry, brewer, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Fisher. Though his name was recorded at his birth as Hendry, he used the name Henry. Hardly anything is known of his early life. By the early 1880s he was employed as a clerk in Glasgow but he also enrolled for classes at Glasgow School of Art in 1882 and 1883. He was working at Brig o'Turk in 1882, probably alongside Guthrie and Walton, and his early works show a clear interest in tonal values and are much influenced by the work of the older men. When Guthrie settled in Cockburnspath in 1883 Henry joined him and rapidly adopted a naturalist manner. It was probably in Cockburnspath that he met Arthur Melville, whose use of strong, clear colour was to divert Henry away from naturalism. He showed a fascination with the symbolic use of colour and with his friend Hornel began to experiment with looser and more emotional compositions. This culminated in 'The Galloway Landscape' (1889; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries), a painting which seems to owe much to the Pont-Aven painters centred on Paul Gauguin. Henry was certainly in France in the late 1880s and Scottish painters such as Charles Mackie were in touch with Gauguin. An interest in Japan and 'japonaiserie' took over, however, encouraged by Hornel, and in 1893 Henry travelled with Hornel to Japan, where he stayed for eighteen months. By the time he returned to Glasgow many of the Boys had left the city and Henry followed several of them to London, where he established himself as a successful portrait and landscape painter. He died on 23 December 1943 at 132 Fulham Road, London, and was buried in Cathcart cemetery, Glasgow. 



@@@@@


doc= 38957


Edward Atkinson Hornel (1864-1933) was born on 17 July 1864 at Bacchus Marsh, Australia, the son of William Lidderdale Hornel ('b'. 1822), a bootmaker, and Ann Elizabeth Habbishaw ('b'. 'c'.1832), who had recently emigrated there from Kirkcudbright. The family returned to Kirkcudbright in 1866 and Hornel made the town his home for the rest of his life. He studied at the Trustees' Academy, Edinburgh (1880-83), and then at the Academie Royale des Beaux Arts in Antwerp under Charles Verlat (1883-5). He appears to have met Guthrie, who was visiting Kirkcudbright, in 1885 and almost immediately adopted a naturalist manner in his painting. Guthrie may have introduced him to Henry but however they met, the two became close friends, sharing ideas and even canvases for the next decade. Hornel was keenly interested in folklore and local history, which began to appear in his paintings in a change of subject matter, rural peasantry giving way to druids, as in 'The Druids: Bringing Home the Mistletoe' (1890, with George Henry; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries), and goblins. Melville's intense colours were a profound influence but the heavily worked impastoed surface of his paintings was a unique aspect of Glasgow school painting. His fascination with Japan, inspired by J. A. M. Whistler, was reflected in the changing subject matter of his paintings. The Galloway milkmaids were now dressed in kimonos and chased butterflies with silk bandannas (for example 'Midsummer', 1892; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool). Eventually, aided by funds from William Burrell and Alexander Reid, Hornel set out with Henry to visit Japan. His Japanese paintings are more a record of life in Japan than an assimilation of Japanese art; their bright colours and sometimes crude impasto seem the antithesis of Japanese art. Hornel remained in Kirkcudbright, refusing to move to London, and certainly not to Edinburgh (he refused membership of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1901). His later paintings concentrate on a repetitive formula (sustained by the use of photographs) of groups of young girls playing in bluebell woods or on the shores of the Solway Firth. They were extremely successful and he was able to afford the life of a country gentleman, indulging his interests in foreign travel and rare books. He died, unmarried, on 30 June 1933 at his home, Broughton House, 12 High Street, Kirkcudbright. 
The exhibition at the Glasgow Institute in 1885 brought together all of the different aspects of the Glasgow school, and the painters were recognized as having common aims (the sobriquet Glasgow Boys was preferred by the artists themselves as they found the use of the term Glasgow school pretentious and stuffy). Just as soon as they came together, however, they began to drift apart. By the time their work was shown at the Grosvenor Gallery, London, in 1890 several of the artists had left Glasgow or were busy developing new styles. Their exhibition was the final show at the Grosvenor Gallery and so attracted much press attention. This in turn caught the eyes of several of the new exhibiting bodies in Europe, principally secessionist, where naturalism was becoming accepted as a logical compromise between academic painting and the avant-garde work of the Impressionists. The Grosvenor Gallery exhibition was taken to Munich and from there the Boys began to exhibit throughout Europe and beyond -- Berlin, Vienna, Venice, Rome, Barcelona, Budapest, Turin, Moscow, St Petersburg -- and then in America -- in Pittsburgh, St Louis, Chicago, Cincinnati, and New York. The Boys also began individually to send their work to the Paris Salon and similar institutions in Europe. Gradually they were assimilated into the establishment which they had railed against in 1880. 
There were other naturalist movements in Britain, principally in Newlyn, Cornwall, but most of these painters were simply dressing up high Victorian sentimentality in modernistic clothes (as, of course, was John Lavery). Guthrie, Henry, Walton, Paterson, and Kennedy (and several other artists associated with the Boys) more fully understood the motives and aspirations of Bastien-Lepage. Their paintings were by no means social realism on the scale of Courbet, but they painted everyday life in its uneventfulness, without social or political comment and without trivializing the sometimes mean existences of their subjects. In this they echoed the work of Sir George Clausen and his circle in London and East Anglia, but their achievement was more than just pictorial or artistic. In 1875 the visual arts in Scotland were dominated by the Royal Scottish Academy and social institutions such as Glasgow Art Club. The Boys were ambitious enough to want to join these bodies, but not on the terms laid down to them: 'paint as we do, don't rock the boat'. The academy even went so far as to exclude from membership any artist who did not take up residence in Edinburgh. By 1890 the Boys had broken all of these barriers and had shown that Glasgow was a major artistic centre, which had been concealed by the 'status quo' of the academy for fifty years. Glasgow could not, however, sustain the Boys, or at least not satisfy their growing success, and gradually they left, usually retaining some formal link with the city such as teaching at the Glasgow School of Art or retaining a portrait practice there. They brought Glasgow to national and international attention, extended the boundaries of contemporary British painting, and gave an encouraging example to the coming generations of young Scottish painters such as the Scottish colourists. More immediately, their fame within the European Secessionist movement eased the path of Charles Rennie Mackintosh and his contemporaries, who began to exhibit in Europe in the late 1890s. Their star waned after 1918 and by the 1950s their paintings had been consigned to the basements of museums before being reappraised by a new generation of art historians and curators who recognized the power of the contribution they had made. 


@@@@@


doc= 38958


Menpes, Mortimer Luddington (1855-1938), painter, was born 'inartisticly', as he put it himself, on 22 February 1855 in Port Adelaide in South Australia. There he was educated at the grammar school and for a time attended classes at the school of design under John Hood. He was nineteen in 1875 when he arrived in England to continue his studies at the National Art Training School, South Kensington, under Sir Edward Poynter. He took up etching and in 1880 exhibited two drypoints at the Royal Academy exhibition where, over the next twenty years, he exhibited over thirty-five etchings and paintings. 
Like Walter Sickert who had enrolled at the same time at the Slade School of Fine Art, London, Menpes was bowled over by his first meeting with James McNeill Whistler: 'If you want to see some fun Menpes, come with me.' Completely falling under his spell, Sickert and Menpes by 1881 had become Whistler's studio assistants, and were permitted under his strict guidance to print up a number of etchings. Menpes's own work at this time closely imitated Whistler and together with Sickert they would record a now vanished Chelsea. Whistler was a judge of the Crystal Palace exhibition, so not unnaturally he said, 'You have the Gold Medal, Menpes and Du Maurier the Silver' (Menpes, 29). In 1883-4 Menpes and Sickert travelled with Whistler to St Ives in Cornwall, and Menpes later recorded that invariably Sickert would paint alone whereas Menpes stuck to the master (ibid., 140). He found himself part of an inner circle whose sole duty was to fight for and protect the master. However, by 1888 Menpes was becoming increasingly critical of Whistler and the relationship began to disintegrate. Menpes, who hated quarrels, recorded, 'For Whistler when he forgave at all, forgave completely. All was happiness and sunshine' (ibid., 153). On 27 April 1875 Menpes had married, at All Souls, Marylebone, Rosa Mary Grosse (died 1936), and when their youngest child was born in 1887, Whistler, as a gesture of friendship, agreed to be godfather; she was christened Dorothy Whistler Menpes. However, a year later Menpes committed an unpardonable act when he announced he was going to Japan -- 'Japan was reserved for the 'master'' (ibid., 39). When he returned in 1888 with an exhibition of his drypoints from his Japanese tour at Dowdswell's Gallery, London, Menpes refused to sign himself 'Pupil of Whistler'. Whistler, in turn, ignored Menpes completely and resigned from the Royal Society of British Artists after the exhibition. 
Outside the Whistler circle, Menpes would have been forgotten but for an article in the 'Pall Mall Gazette' (1 December 1888) entitled 'The home of taste' focusing on Menpes's decoration of his new house at 25 Cadogan Gardens in Kensington which had been built for him by the architect Arthur Heygate Mackmurdo (1851-1942). (Photographs of the interior of the house were included in an article in volume 17 of 'The Studio', 1894.) Whistler immediately hammered the final nail into Menpes's professional coffin by referring to him as an 'Australian immigrant of Fulham who like the kangaroo of his country is born with a pocket and puts everything in it' (Menpes, xxiii). The International Society of Sculptors, Painters and Gravers was formed in February 1898 with Whistler elected president. Sickert's and Menpes's names were put forward and answered by a firm 'no' from Whistler. Whistler died on 17 July 1903; the funeral took place on 23 July at Chelsea Old Church and Menpes, who had long since been cast in the role of 'enemy', was gracious enough to attend and pay his respects. After all his rejections Menpes repeated plaintively, 'Whistler did not mean to hurt me -- he was really very fond of me' (Pocock, 130) and produced as a memorial to their friendship 'Whistler as I Knew Him' (1904), a long and affectionate memoir, and a series of etched portraits of the stinging butterfly. The Leicester Gallery also gave an exhibition, by way of memorial, of Menpes's personal collection of Whistler drypoints. 
Three years before Whistler's death Menpes went out as a war artist to South Africa for the British periodical 'Black and White'. In 1901 he published 'War Impressions', the first of a series of books illustrated in colour from his sketches, with, in most cases, a text written by his daughter Dorothy. The series included 'Japan, a Record in Colour' (1888, 1901), 'France, Spain and Morocco' (1893), 'World's Children' (1903), 'The Durbar' (1903), 'Venice' (1904), 'India' (text by F. A. Steel, 1905), 'The Thames' (text by G. E. Mitton, 1906), 'Paris' (1907), 'China' (text by Sir H. A. Blake, 1909), 'The People of India' (text by G. E. Mitton, 1910), 'Lord Kitchener' (1915), and 'Lord Roberts' (1915). Of his five children, Claude, Walter, Toby, Maudie Rose, and Dorothy, the last married into the Flowers Brewery family and had a son, Richard, born in 1910. A pastel portrait of Richard was drawn by Menpes in 1916. 
During 1907 Menpes founded the Menpes Fruit Farm Co. at Pangbourne in Berkshire where he lived in his house, Iris Court, until his death there on 1 April 1938. 
Menpes's obituary refers to him as a 'painter, etcher, raconteur and rifle shot' ('The Times', 5 April 1938). He described his early life as that of a 'rolling stone, travelling all over the world in record time, being unsurpassed even by Jules Verne and that as a result of meeting Whistler he had cultivated some of his mannerisms'. 


@@@@@


doc= 38961


Scottish colourists (act. 1900-1935), painters, were a loose association of four painters, from Edinburgh and the west of Scotland, whose work during the first three decades of the twentieth century revitalized painting in Scotland through their awareness of new developments in painting in France before 1914. Their response to the innovative use of colour and painterly handling in paintings by Henri Matisse and his followers provided a conduit for such new work to reach Britain and, particularly, Scotland in the first half of the twentieth century. It was not a movement that produced leaders and followers, and although all four artists knew each other they rarely worked together in more than pairs, and never as a group of four. 

John Duncan Fergusson (1874-1961) was born in Leith, Edinburgh, on 9 March 1874, the son of John Ferguson and his wife, Christina Fergusson. He always maintained that he enrolled at Edinburgh University to study medicine, although there is no record of his enrolment there, and then transferred to art classes at the Trustees' Academy, Edinburgh 'c'.1893. The curriculum there did not suit him and he left, whereafter he was largely self-taught with occasional terms at various academies and ateliers in Paris. The work of the Glasgow Boys and James McNeill Whistler were major influences on his early paintings (see 'Dieppe, 14 July 1905: Night'; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh), as was the work of French artists seen on his regular visits to Paris and northern France between 1895 and 1906. After a successful exhibition in London, Fergusson decided to settle in Paris, where he lived until 1913, when he moved to the Mediterranean coast. In Paris he became part of the artistic cafe society of Montparnasse, meeting Picasso and other leading artists, becoming a societaire of the Salon d'Automne, and absorbing much of the excitement and advances in painting that characterized Paris before 1914. Paintings such as 'Rhythm' (1911; University of Stirling) and 'Les Eus' (1911-13; Hunterian Art Gallery, University of Glasgow) show his assimilation of French avant-garde artistic and philosophical alliances. 
The outbreak of war forced Fergusson's return to Edinburgh, where Peploe also was living, but by 1918 he was living in London, with the dancer Margaret Morris (1891-1980). He soon became an integral part of the Chelsea art world and also of the summer schools that Morris arranged for her growing number of pupils in the Margaret Morris Movement. He returned to France with Morris and her dance classes until forced, again by the outbreak of war, to return to Scotland, to Glasgow, in 1939. There, with Morris, he established an alternative artistic environment in the city, separate from the established worlds of the Glasgow School of Art and the Glasgow Art Club. He remained in the city until his death, at his home, 4 Clouston Street, on 30 January 1961. 

Samuel John Peploe (1871-1935) was born at 39 Manor Place, Edinburgh, on 27 January 1871, the son of Robert Luff Peploe, secretary of the Commercial Bank, Edinburgh, and his second wife, Anne Watson. After the death of his father in 1884 Peploe was encouraged by his guardians to follow a career in the army; his refusal led him to enter a law firm, but in 1893 he persuaded the guardians to allow him to enrol in the Trustees' Academy, in Edinburgh. Like Fergusson he was unhappy with the teaching and left for Paris, where he attended classes at various academies and ateliers. He was quick to absorb the influence of Manet, and on his return to Edinburgh 'c'.1897 he embarked on a successful career as a landscape, figure, and still life painter. He then met Fergusson, and the two painters formed an immediate rapport based as much on personal liking as on their mutual admiration for Whistler, the Glasgow Boys, and post-impressionist French painting. They were the first of the Scottish colourists to work together, and broadly formulated the principles on which all four artists would concentrate until the mid-1930s. In 1910, using the proceeds from a successful exhibition in 1909, and following his marriage in that year to Margaret MacKay (1874-1958), Peploe joined Fergusson in Paris, where his artistic education was completed and his mature style emerged. Together they began to explore Brittany and the west coast of France before Fergusson determined to follow in the footsteps of van Gogh and Gauguin by moving to Antibes. 
Peploe's innate conservatism and his devotion to his growing family prevented him from settling in the south of France with Fergusson, and he again returned to Edinburgh. Although his new paintings, such as 'Still Life' ('c'.1913; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art), did not meet with the approval of his dealer Peploe gradually achieved success and remained in Edinburgh for the rest of his life, with brief excursions to the south of France (see 'Landscape at Cassis', 1924; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art) and annual holidays in the Western Isles, principally Iona. In 1927 he was made a full member of the Royal Scottish Academy and in 1933 he began to teach part-time at Edinburgh College of Art. He died in Edinburgh, at 35 Drumsheugh Gardens, on 11 October 1935. 
Peploe was introduced to Iona by Francis Campbell Boileau Cadell (1883-1937), who was born in Edinburgh on 12 April 1883, the first child of Francis Cadell, a surgeon, and Mary Hamilton Boileau. His request to attend art school was supported by his liberal parents, encouraged by a family friend, Arthur Melville. He enrolled at the Royal Scottish Academy life school but, like Peploe and Fergusson at the Trustees' Academy, was disillusioned by the teaching. With his mother he moved to Paris in 1899, to enrol in the Academie Julian, and returned to Edinburgh in 1903; in 1906 his family moved to Munich, to return to Edinburgh in 1908. In his early life, therefore, he was well-travelled, and through family connections he met many of the future patrons who were to sustain him through the commercial vicissitudes of his career. One such figure was Sir Patrick Ford, who financed a visit to Venice in 1910, following Cadell's unsuccessful first solo show in Edinburgh in 1909. In Venice, Cadell began to paint in a manner similar to Peploe, whose work he had seen in Edinburgh, and he returned to Scotland with a group of paintings showing a clear grasp of impressionism and the effects of light on colour. He soon established a niche in Edinburgh, painting portraits, figure subjects, and still lifes that reflected the douce, middle-class milieu of the New Town. His studios at 130 George Street (1909-20) and 6 Ainslie Place (1920-32) were usually as much the subject of his paintings as the sitters themselves (see 'The Black Hat', 1914; Edinburgh City Art Centre, and 'The Orange Blind'; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries). 
In 1915 Cadell enlisted as a private soldier in the Royal Scots, 9th battalion, resisting a commission until 1918, when he was transferred to the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, 8th battalion, as a second lieutenant. Peace brought with it an uncertain future for him; changing social mores, his own extravagant lifestyle and personal life, and an unpredictable commercial demand for paintings brought an inexorable decline in his wealth, health, and output. He survived the 1920s with the support of consistent patrons such as W. G. Service and Ion Harrison, and with the friendship and encouragement of Peploe, with whom he holidayed frequently on Iona and occasionally in the south of France. Cadell had discovered Iona 'c'.1913 and it was to become an important subject for him. In 1935 he was elected a full member of the Royal Scottish Academy but he was by then in considerable financial and physical distress. He died, of cancer, in Edinburgh on 6 December 1937. He never married. 
The fourth member of the group, (George) Leslie Hunter (1877-1931), was not associated with Edinburgh. He was born on 7 August 1877 in Rothesay, on the island of Bute, the son of William Hunter, a pharmacist, and his wife, Jeannie, 'nee' Stewart. In 1892, after the deaths of two of his sons from tuberculosis, William Hunter took his family to California, where he bought an orange grove. In 1899 he and his wife returned to Scotland, but Leslie and an elder brother decided to stay in California, moving north from Los Angeles to San Francisco. Hunter enjoyed the cosmopolitan freedom of the city and taught himself to draw and paint, earning a living as a book and newspaper illustrator. He seems to have returned to Scotland some time between 1903 and 1905 and also visited Paris with a group of American artists. It is not known whether at this time he encountered the work of Fergusson and Peploe, which was regularly on show in dealers' galleries and public exhibitions in Scotland, or whether he saw any of the great exhibitions of the work of the post-impressionists. Hunter returned to San Francisco via New York in 1905. His association with authors such as Bret Harte and Jack London, for both of whom he illustrated novels, probably helped him to secure an exhibition in a San Francisco gallery. Unfortunately both the gallery and all Hunter's work in it were destroyed by the great earthquake of 1906. 
Hunter returned to Scotland to live with his mother in Glasgow, earning a living again from newspaper illustration. He moved to London and then to Paris, and began to paint more seriously, studying the work of Dutch and French still life painters of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. He returned to Scotland after the outbreak of war, and worked as a labourer on an uncle's farm in Lanarkshire. He continued to paint, and exhibited with Alexander Reid in Glasgow in 1916, as a result of which he acquired a nucleus of collectors who helped to sustain his erratic way of life over the next decade or so. He had further success with Reid after the war, and with the proceeds of these sales visited Paris, Florence, and Venice in 1922 and 1923. A friend, John Ressich, introduced him to Fergusson, through whom he met Peploe, and with Reid's involvement he exhibited with the other three painters in London and Paris in the mid-1920s. 
Hunter began to suffer from both mental and physical illness, and his unpredictable behaviour isolated him from fellow painters and from all but the most dedicated patrons. In 1926 he set out for the south of France, where he encountered both Fergusson and Peploe, but his paintings found no market in Scotland and Reid was forced to terminate the stipend that he had been paying him. Undeterred, Hunter arranged an exhibition in New York, which had some success, perhaps more in the renewal of old friendships than financially, and in 1929 he returned to France, where he settled in St Paul de Vence. Illness forced his return to Scotland, where he began to paint on the shores of Loch Lomond, followed by some months in London, where a new patron, the impresario C. B. Cochran, commissioned him to make sketches of one of his productions. He returned to Glasgow, where he again fell ill, and was admitted to hospital for emergency surgery. There it was found that he was beyond cure, and he died at 3 Claremont Terrace on 6 December 1931. He was unmarried. 
The consistent link between the Scottish colourists is a love of paint and its particular qualities, and an understanding of the power of colour and design in painting. From an early interest in 'plein-air' painting through to the immediacy of fauvist painting the colourists never lost sight of the painterly qualities that they inherited from their study of the Glasgow Boys. Scottish painters from the middle of the eighteenth century had expressed their fascination with fluid handling, bold compositions, and clear colour -- qualities that the four colourists reinforced through their association with French painting. 
The Scottish colourists brought to British painting an awareness, gained principally at first hand, of the developments made in Paris by Picasso and, particularly, Matisse and the Fauves in the first decade of the century. Roger Fry's post-impressionist exhibitions had sent English painting in search of 'significant form', and Fry had not included the work of the Scots in his shows. The four Scottish colourists responded more to the vitality, both painterly and emotional, of the gestural handling and brilliant colour of Gauguin, van Gogh, and Matisse. Despite their successes in showing in London in the 1920s they did little to divert avant-garde English painters from the impact of surrealism, constructivism, and the work of German refugees such as Naum Gabo, Antoine Pevsner, and Kurt Schwitters. Their success and influence lay with English painters such as Matthew Smith and David Bomberg, who shared their knowledge of, and interest in, French pre-war painting, and with a younger generation of artists in Scotland who, throughout the 1940s and 1950s, saw in the work of the colourists a direct link with Picasso and Matisse and all that had come to be seen as pivotal in the development of painting in the twentieth century. The work of the colourists epitomized that aspect of the Scottish character in which a sense of responsibility, caution, and respect for convention is balanced by an element of irresponsibility, rebelliousness, and even aggression. The colourists harnessed this underlying aspect of their nature, and through it involved British painting in the mainstream of European art of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 38962


Scottish colourists (act. 1900-1935), painters, were a loose association of four painters, from Edinburgh and the west of Scotland, whose work during the first three decades of the twentieth century revitalized painting in Scotland through their awareness of new developments in painting in France before 1914. Their response to the innovative use of colour and painterly handling in paintings by Henri Matisse and his followers provided a conduit for such new work to reach Britain and, particularly, Scotland in the first half of the twentieth century. It was not a movement that produced leaders and followers, and although all four artists knew each other they rarely worked together in more than pairs, and never as a group of four. 

John Duncan Fergusson (1874-1961) was born in Leith, Edinburgh, on 9 March 1874, the son of John Ferguson and his wife, Christina Fergusson. He always maintained that he enrolled at Edinburgh University to study medicine, although there is no record of his enrolment there, and then transferred to art classes at the Trustees' Academy, Edinburgh 'c'.1893. The curriculum there did not suit him and he left, whereafter he was largely self-taught with occasional terms at various academies and ateliers in Paris. The work of the Glasgow Boys and James McNeill Whistler were major influences on his early paintings (see 'Dieppe, 14 July 1905: Night'; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh), as was the work of French artists seen on his regular visits to Paris and northern France between 1895 and 1906. After a successful exhibition in London, Fergusson decided to settle in Paris, where he lived until 1913, when he moved to the Mediterranean coast. In Paris he became part of the artistic cafe society of Montparnasse, meeting Picasso and other leading artists, becoming a societaire of the Salon d'Automne, and absorbing much of the excitement and advances in painting that characterized Paris before 1914. Paintings such as 'Rhythm' (1911; University of Stirling) and 'Les Eus' (1911-13; Hunterian Art Gallery, University of Glasgow) show his assimilation of French avant-garde artistic and philosophical alliances. 
The outbreak of war forced Fergusson's return to Edinburgh, where Peploe also was living, but by 1918 he was living in London, with the dancer Margaret Morris (1891-1980). He soon became an integral part of the Chelsea art world and also of the summer schools that Morris arranged for her growing number of pupils in the Margaret Morris Movement. He returned to France with Morris and her dance classes until forced, again by the outbreak of war, to return to Scotland, to Glasgow, in 1939. There, with Morris, he established an alternative artistic environment in the city, separate from the established worlds of the Glasgow School of Art and the Glasgow Art Club. He remained in the city until his death, at his home, 4 Clouston Street, on 30 January 1961. 

Samuel John Peploe (1871-1935) was born at 39 Manor Place, Edinburgh, on 27 January 1871, the son of Robert Luff Peploe, secretary of the Commercial Bank, Edinburgh, and his second wife, Anne Watson. After the death of his father in 1884 Peploe was encouraged by his guardians to follow a career in the army; his refusal led him to enter a law firm, but in 1893 he persuaded the guardians to allow him to enrol in the Trustees' Academy, in Edinburgh. Like Fergusson he was unhappy with the teaching and left for Paris, where he attended classes at various academies and ateliers. He was quick to absorb the influence of Manet, and on his return to Edinburgh 'c'.1897 he embarked on a successful career as a landscape, figure, and still life painter. He then met Fergusson, and the two painters formed an immediate rapport based as much on personal liking as on their mutual admiration for Whistler, the Glasgow Boys, and post-impressionist French painting. They were the first of the Scottish colourists to work together, and broadly formulated the principles on which all four artists would concentrate until the mid-1930s. In 1910, using the proceeds from a successful exhibition in 1909, and following his marriage in that year to Margaret MacKay (1874-1958), Peploe joined Fergusson in Paris, where his artistic education was completed and his mature style emerged. Together they began to explore Brittany and the west coast of France before Fergusson determined to follow in the footsteps of van Gogh and Gauguin by moving to Antibes. 
Peploe's innate conservatism and his devotion to his growing family prevented him from settling in the south of France with Fergusson, and he again returned to Edinburgh. Although his new paintings, such as 'Still Life' ('c'.1913; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art), did not meet with the approval of his dealer Peploe gradually achieved success and remained in Edinburgh for the rest of his life, with brief excursions to the south of France (see 'Landscape at Cassis', 1924; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art) and annual holidays in the Western Isles, principally Iona. In 1927 he was made a full member of the Royal Scottish Academy and in 1933 he began to teach part-time at Edinburgh College of Art. He died in Edinburgh, at 35 Drumsheugh Gardens, on 11 October 1935. 
Peploe was introduced to Iona by Francis Campbell Boileau Cadell (1883-1937), who was born in Edinburgh on 12 April 1883, the first child of Francis Cadell, a surgeon, and Mary Hamilton Boileau. His request to attend art school was supported by his liberal parents, encouraged by a family friend, Arthur Melville. He enrolled at the Royal Scottish Academy life school but, like Peploe and Fergusson at the Trustees' Academy, was disillusioned by the teaching. With his mother he moved to Paris in 1899, to enrol in the Academie Julian, and returned to Edinburgh in 1903; in 1906 his family moved to Munich, to return to Edinburgh in 1908. In his early life, therefore, he was well-travelled, and through family connections he met many of the future patrons who were to sustain him through the commercial vicissitudes of his career. One such figure was Sir Patrick Ford, who financed a visit to Venice in 1910, following Cadell's unsuccessful first solo show in Edinburgh in 1909. In Venice, Cadell began to paint in a manner similar to Peploe, whose work he had seen in Edinburgh, and he returned to Scotland with a group of paintings showing a clear grasp of impressionism and the effects of light on colour. He soon established a niche in Edinburgh, painting portraits, figure subjects, and still lifes that reflected the douce, middle-class milieu of the New Town. His studios at 130 George Street (1909-20) and 6 Ainslie Place (1920-32) were usually as much the subject of his paintings as the sitters themselves (see 'The Black Hat', 1914; Edinburgh City Art Centre, and 'The Orange Blind'; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries). 
In 1915 Cadell enlisted as a private soldier in the Royal Scots, 9th battalion, resisting a commission until 1918, when he was transferred to the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, 8th battalion, as a second lieutenant. Peace brought with it an uncertain future for him; changing social mores, his own extravagant lifestyle and personal life, and an unpredictable commercial demand for paintings brought an inexorable decline in his wealth, health, and output. He survived the 1920s with the support of consistent patrons such as W. G. Service and Ion Harrison, and with the friendship and encouragement of Peploe, with whom he holidayed frequently on Iona and occasionally in the south of France. Cadell had discovered Iona 'c'.1913 and it was to become an important subject for him. In 1935 he was elected a full member of the Royal Scottish Academy but he was by then in considerable financial and physical distress. He died, of cancer, in Edinburgh on 6 December 1937. He never married. 
The fourth member of the group, (George) Leslie Hunter (1877-1931), was not associated with Edinburgh. He was born on 7 August 1877 in Rothesay, on the island of Bute, the son of William Hunter, a pharmacist, and his wife, Jeannie, 'nee' Stewart. In 1892, after the deaths of two of his sons from tuberculosis, William Hunter took his family to California, where he bought an orange grove. In 1899 he and his wife returned to Scotland, but Leslie and an elder brother decided to stay in California, moving north from Los Angeles to San Francisco. Hunter enjoyed the cosmopolitan freedom of the city and taught himself to draw and paint, earning a living as a book and newspaper illustrator. He seems to have returned to Scotland some time between 1903 and 1905 and also visited Paris with a group of American artists. It is not known whether at this time he encountered the work of Fergusson and Peploe, which was regularly on show in dealers' galleries and public exhibitions in Scotland, or whether he saw any of the great exhibitions of the work of the post-impressionists. Hunter returned to San Francisco via New York in 1905. His association with authors such as Bret Harte and Jack London, for both of whom he illustrated novels, probably helped him to secure an exhibition in a San Francisco gallery. Unfortunately both the gallery and all Hunter's work in it were destroyed by the great earthquake of 1906. 
Hunter returned to Scotland to live with his mother in Glasgow, earning a living again from newspaper illustration. He moved to London and then to Paris, and began to paint more seriously, studying the work of Dutch and French still life painters of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. He returned to Scotland after the outbreak of war, and worked as a labourer on an uncle's farm in Lanarkshire. He continued to paint, and exhibited with Alexander Reid in Glasgow in 1916, as a result of which he acquired a nucleus of collectors who helped to sustain his erratic way of life over the next decade or so. He had further success with Reid after the war, and with the proceeds of these sales visited Paris, Florence, and Venice in 1922 and 1923. A friend, John Ressich, introduced him to Fergusson, through whom he met Peploe, and with Reid's involvement he exhibited with the other three painters in London and Paris in the mid-1920s. 
Hunter began to suffer from both mental and physical illness, and his unpredictable behaviour isolated him from fellow painters and from all but the most dedicated patrons. In 1926 he set out for the south of France, where he encountered both Fergusson and Peploe, but his paintings found no market in Scotland and Reid was forced to terminate the stipend that he had been paying him. Undeterred, Hunter arranged an exhibition in New York, which had some success, perhaps more in the renewal of old friendships than financially, and in 1929 he returned to France, where he settled in St Paul de Vence. Illness forced his return to Scotland, where he began to paint on the shores of Loch Lomond, followed by some months in London, where a new patron, the impresario C. B. Cochran, commissioned him to make sketches of one of his productions. He returned to Glasgow, where he again fell ill, and was admitted to hospital for emergency surgery. There it was found that he was beyond cure, and he died at 3 Claremont Terrace on 6 December 1931. He was unmarried. 
The consistent link between the Scottish colourists is a love of paint and its particular qualities, and an understanding of the power of colour and design in painting. From an early interest in 'plein-air' painting through to the immediacy of fauvist painting the colourists never lost sight of the painterly qualities that they inherited from their study of the Glasgow Boys. Scottish painters from the middle of the eighteenth century had expressed their fascination with fluid handling, bold compositions, and clear colour -- qualities that the four colourists reinforced through their association with French painting. 
The Scottish colourists brought to British painting an awareness, gained principally at first hand, of the developments made in Paris by Picasso and, particularly, Matisse and the Fauves in the first decade of the century. Roger Fry's post-impressionist exhibitions had sent English painting in search of 'significant form', and Fry had not included the work of the Scots in his shows. The four Scottish colourists responded more to the vitality, both painterly and emotional, of the gestural handling and brilliant colour of Gauguin, van Gogh, and Matisse. Despite their successes in showing in London in the 1920s they did little to divert avant-garde English painters from the impact of surrealism, constructivism, and the work of German refugees such as Naum Gabo, Antoine Pevsner, and Kurt Schwitters. Their success and influence lay with English painters such as Matthew Smith and David Bomberg, who shared their knowledge of, and interest in, French pre-war painting, and with a younger generation of artists in Scotland who, throughout the 1940s and 1950s, saw in the work of the colourists a direct link with Picasso and Matisse and all that had come to be seen as pivotal in the development of painting in the twentieth century. The work of the colourists epitomized that aspect of the Scottish character in which a sense of responsibility, caution, and respect for convention is balanced by an element of irresponsibility, rebelliousness, and even aggression. The colourists harnessed this underlying aspect of their nature, and through it involved British painting in the mainstream of European art of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 38963


Way, Thomas (1837-1915), printer, was born at Carpenter's Coffee House, Covent Garden, London, on 1 May 1837, the eighth and youngest child of George Way ('bap'. 1794), a market victualler, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Clewett ('bap'. 1796). He was baptized in St Paul's Church, Covent Garden, on 24 May 1837, not far from Carpenter's Coffee House, where his father was the licensee. He married Louisa Mary (1834-1911), the daughter of John Chapman, an auctioneer, on 16 June 1859, and the couple had seven children, one of whom died in infancy. Thomas Way first appears in trade directories in 1859 as a 'lithographer, engraver and general printer' at 32 Brydges Street, Covent Garden, but not long afterwards he acquired the well-established lithographic business of George Edward Madeley (died 1858) at 3 Wellington Street. Madeley (initially in partnership with Ingrey) was one of the most important early lithographers in London and one of the very few to survive in business into the second half of the century. Way worked as a commercial lithographer for over fifty years, for most of this time from Wellington Street, though the building he shared with Sothebys at this address was destroyed by a disastrous fire in 1865, which led to the loss of his equipment, stock, and records. He continued to print much the same kind of commercial jobbing work as his predecessor, specializing in lithographed plans and views for the sale particulars of property auctioneers. Other surviving commercial work of his includes art gallery catalogues, fashion plates for the monthly 'West End Gazette', and illustrations for other publications. 
Way's principal contribution to lithography was his encouragement of artists -- the most important being James McNeill Whistler -- to turn to what was then a rather unfashionable method of making prints. Though his background was in the printing trade, he took a lively interest in the arts and had several artist friends. His tireless efforts to encourage British artists to take up lithography led to a revival of the process in Britain as a means of making prints, which began with a portfolio of twelve lithographs drawn by fellow members of the Hogarth Club on 15 December 1874. Three years later he was introduced to Whistler and printed a pamphlet describing the Peacock Room decorations that Whistler had painted for Frederick Leyland. Over the following twenty years Way printed nearly 200 of Whistler's lithographs, including lithotints, and many lithographs that were drawn on transfer paper in Paris and printed in London. Way was responsible for reviving both these branches of lithography, the second of which was widely used by artists because of its convenience. Fulsome praise from Whistler resulted in Way becoming the chosen printer of most artists in the country who practised lithography on a regular basis, including William Rothenstein, Joseph Pennell, Charles Shannon, and Theodore Roussel. At Whistler's bankruptcy in 1879 he was one of the main creditors and consequently suffered directly from the artist's deliberate destruction of saleable works of art. None the less, he remained one of Whistler's staunchest supporters and provided him with financial and material assistance. According to Rothenstein, Way 'was a cross-grained old man, with an uncertain temper, but where Whistler was concerned, a willing slave' (Rothenstein, 131). By 1902 financial pressures forced him to start selling his outstanding collection of Whistler's prints, drawings, and paintings, most of which were bought by the American collector Charles Lang Freer, though Way gave several of the finest proofs to the British Museum. About the same time the firm moved to 6/7 Gough Square. 
In 1914, following the death of his son, Way sold his business to Estates Gazette, the publisher of a journal that undertook lithographic printing for property auctioneers. He died of bronchitis on 6 April 1915 at his home, 14 Eton Villas, Hampstead, London. 
Thomas Way's son, 
The younger Way is usually distinguished from his father by being called T. R. Way. In 1880 he worked as an assistant to Whistler, helping to print the latter's etchings of Venice. In his early twenties he regularly exhibited oil paintings and watercolours at the Royal Academy and other leading galleries, but by 1895 had turned his attention almost exclusively to lithography. Later he produced many pastel drawings, some of which were shown at solo exhibitions at the Baillie Gallery. He was not financially successful as an artist and was dependent on an income from employment in his father's business, where he worked until his death. Rothenstein wrote that his father kept him 'in rigid subservience' (Rothenstein, 131), though he was vital for the survival of the firm and shouldered the burden of dealing with the outside world. 
Way carried on his father's crusade to encourage the best artists of the day to use lithography: he was a member of the Art-Workers' Guild, serving on its committee from 1902 to 1904, lectured on lithography, and gave demonstrations of it to guild members and to others, including the Royal Society of Arts. He was also a member of the Senefelder Club, which was dedicated to the advancement of lithography. In 1896 he published the first catalogue of Whistler's lithographs, which is still used to identify and number the works. Later he wrote one of the best biographies of Whistler, 'Memories of James McNeill Whistler the Artist' (1912), was co-author of another, and contributed numerous articles on lithography. He was an accomplished lithographic draughtsman and tried to supplement his income by publishing his own lithographs, many of which were drawn on transfer paper. He is best-known for a series of eight limited-edition books on London, illustrated with his lithographs and with text by several different authors, culminating in the one (with text by W. G. Bell) that includes some of his finest work, 'The Thames from Chelsea to the Nore' (1907). He illustrated other books, produced many individual prints, drew about forty lithographic posters for the London Underground, and published some 200 lithographic postcards of London under the imprint of the Pastel Publishing Company. His usual signature was 'T. R. Way' or 'T. R. W.'. He died from heart failure, following bronchitis, on 28 February 1913 at his home, 110 Regent's Park Road, and was buried in Highgate cemetery on 4 March. He and his family were active members of the church, and the rood beam in St Mary's, Primrose Hill, was commissioned by his family as a memorial to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 38964


Mackintosh, Margaret Macdonald (1864-1933), watercolour painter and designer, was born on 5 November 1864 in Tipton, Staffordshire, the second of the five children of John Macdonald (1825-1895), engineer and colliery manager, and his wife, Frances Grove Hardeman (1838-1912), daughter of Joseph Hardeman, counting house clerk, and his wife, Harriet Moore. Her father was from Glasgow, her mother from Cradley Heath, Staffordshire. Her younger sister 
Macdonald's watercolour drawings and designs attracted attention in Glasgow in 1894, the year she completed her studies, because of her tendency to distort and elongate the human form. A poster advertising a Glasgow Institute of the Fine Arts Exhibition (1895) made with her sister Frances and the architect and designer (James) Herbert McNair (1868-1955) signalled Macdonald's appreciation for a collaborative art-making practice. After 1896 she established her reputation as a metalworker. The clock she designed and made with Frances Macdonald and her own beaten metal panel 'The Annunciation' (exh. London Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society, 1896) received accolades from London's prestigious art journal 'The Studio' while, at the same time, the journal acknowledged the 'eccentricity' of the work that deserved its nickname 'the spooky school' ('The Studio', 9, 1896, 202). The Macdonald sisters along with their future husbands, Charles Rennie Mackintosh (1868-1928) and (James) Herbert McNair (who married Frances on 14 June 1899 at the Scottish Episcopal church in Dumbarton), would come to be called the Glasgow Four by later critics and art historians; the art they made became part of the regionally defined Glasgow style. Frances Macdonald's work featured in several art journals including 'The Studio' and the 'Yellow Book'. She died on 12 December 1921 aged forty-eight at 50 Gibson Street, Glasgow. Most of her work was destroyed by her husband, together with his own. 
In 1898 Margaret was elected a member of the Royal Scottish Society of Painters in Watercolour. She exhibited intermittently with them until 1922, becoming a member of their council from 1907 to 1909 and again from 1911 to 1913, and remaining a member of the society until 1924. Her watercolour pictures, for example 'Mysterious Garden' (1911; priv. coll.), most frequently represent aloof or mysterious women either with elongated, emaciated bodies or with bodies hidden by diaphanous garments which resemble flowers in full bloom. However, Margaret made her most exciting and well-known work for interiors designed by Charles Rennie Mackintosh. It is this work that is now most frequently seen in exhibitions, for example, in the highly praised ''Glasgow Girls': Women in Art and Design, 1880-1920' (Glasgow, 1990) and 'Charles Rennie Mackintosh' (Glasgow, New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, 1996 and 1997), and is on permanent display in the reconstructed Mackintosh-Macdonald house in the Hunterian Art Gallery, Glasgow. 
On 22 August 1900 Macdonald married the architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh in the Scottish Episcopal church at Dumbarton near Glasgow. The couple lived at 120 Mains Street, Glasgow, until 1906 when they moved into their personally decorated flat at 6 Florentine Terrace. While the couple lived in Glasgow, Margaret designed a number of gesso panels for Mackintosh interiors including 'The May Queen' for the Ingram Street tea-rooms (1900; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries), 'O ye who Walk in Willowwood' (1903; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries) for the Willow Tea Rooms in Sauchiehall Street, and the 'Seven Princesses' ('c'.1906; Osterreichisches Museum fur Angewandte Kunst, Vienna) for the home of the Viennese financier Fritz Warndorfer. All the panels, like the watercolour paintings, depict women. They demonstrate Macdonald Mackintosh's ability to introduce an exquisitely sophisticated linear design into the sumptuous texture so characteristic of gesso work. 
During the summer of 1914 the couple holidayed in Walberswick, Suffolk; then, rather than returning to Glasgow, the Mackintoshes moved to London where both kept studios in Chelsea. In 1923 the Mackintoshes left for France, staying first in Collioure then in Port Vendres, where they were able to live on their modest income. They returned to London in 1927, when Charles Rennie Mackintosh received treatment for cancer. When her husband died in 1928, Margaret stayed for a time at 12 Porchester Square, London, returned briefly to France, and then based herself in her Glebe Place studio in Chelsea. She died at 39 Royal Avenue, Chelsea, London, on 7 January 1933 and was cremated at Golders Green on 10 January. Much of her work can be viewed in the Hunterian Art Gallery, Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 38965


McCance, William (1894-1970), artist and writer on art, was born on 6 August 1894 at 69 Westburn Rows, Newton, parish of Cambuslang, near Glasgow, the seventh child and youngest son of the eight children of James McCance (died 1911), a coalminer who originally came from Ulster, and Elizabeth MacBride, from an Ayrshire weaving family. He was educated at Hamilton Academy and then attended the Glasgow School of Art (1911-15), where he studied under Fra Newbery; he won the Haldane travelling scholarship in his last year. Following a year's teacher training at Kennedy Street School, he was imprisoned in 1917 for refusing to go on parade when serving with the Scottish Rifles. He was subsequently incarcerated in Wormwood Scrubs, Knutsford, Dartmoor, and Warwick prisons before being discharged from the army in 1920, though he married, on 6 July 1918, a former student at the Glasgow School of Art, Agnes Miller Parker (1895-1980), the daughter of William McCall Parker, an analytical chemist. She became one of the most distinguished wood-engravers of her generation. 
In 1919 or 1920 McCance moved to London, and he immediately adopted the style he retained for the rest of his life; derived in part from foreign artists such as Fernand Leger, Francis Picabia, and Albert Gleizes, it also owed much to the English vorticists of the pre-war era. (The vorticist William Roberts rented a room in the McCances' apartment at this period.) McCance began to make sculptures, such as his blocky, faceted 'Cat' (1921-2, priv. coll.), and became art critic of 'The Spectator' (1923-6). His friends included the sculptor Eric Kennington, and in 1925 his work was the subject of an article in the 'Scottish Educational Journal' by Hugh MacDiarmid (writing under the name C. M. Grieve), with whom his friendship lasted forty years. In 1928 he first exhibited his work in London, in a group show with Agnes Miller Parker, Blair Hughes-Stanton, and Gertrude Hermes, at the St George's Gallery. The Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art in Edinburgh houses a number of his works from this period, such as his 'Study for a Colossal Steel Head' (1926). 
Appointed controller of the Gregynog Press in 1930, McCance moved to Newtown, Montgomeryshire. Despite his lack of previous experience of publishing fine books, he was responsible for some magnificent productions, and himself designed a number of very successful initial letters, such as those for 'The Fables of Esope' which was illustrated with woodcuts by Agnes Miller Parker. Some abstract experiments, such as 'Speed Doodle' (1930), were executed with lettering pens as a result of his new interest in calligraphy and letter-forms. A passionate Scottish nationalist, he contributed an article entitled 'Idea in art' to the 'Modern Scot' (2, 1930), and cartoons in favour of social credit to the 'Free Man', such as 'Scots! Unite!' which appeared on 4 February 1933. 
After three successful years at the Gregynog Press McCance and his wife moved to Albrighton, near Wolverhampton, Staffordshire, to live in a windmill where he made terracotta portraits, masks, reclining figures, and cats, as well as paintings, monotypes, and linocuts. In 1936 they moved again, to Hambleden, near Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, where McCance became friendly with John Piper. He continued to write art criticism, and powerful articles by him on Jacob Epstein in the 'News Chronicle' (1937) and 'Picture Post' (1939) so pleased the sculptor that he reprinted them in his autobiography 'Let there be Sculpture' (1942). McCance also worked on an 85,000-word treatise on art, which he finished in 1941 but which remains unpublished. In 1943 he took over from Robert Gibbings as lecturer in typography and book production at the University of Reading; his first, belated, one-man exhibition was at the Reading Art Gallery in 1960. He and Agnes Miller Parker separated in 1955, and on his retirement in 1963 he returned to Scotland, settling in Girvan, Ayrshire, following his marriage on 6 April to Dr Margaret Eva Chislett ('b'. 1926/7), a microbiologist who had also lectured at Reading; she was the daughter of Stuckey Wesley Chislett, a retired farmer. McCance's 'Self-Portrait' (oils, 1916, Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh) depicts a strong, angular face, and later photographs show him bearded, with thick, wiry, upstanding hair on his vigorous head. He died at Girvan on 19 November 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 38966


Cowie, James (1886-1956), painter, was born on 16 May 1886 at Netherton of Dalgety, a small upland farm near the village of Cuminestown in Aberdeenshire, the second of three sons of Peter Smart Cowie (1858-1919) and his wife, Katherine Tennant (1859-1926). With many generations of nonconformist farming folk in his ancestry, James was expected to carry on the family tradition, but he had other ideas. A clever, indeed an intellectual, youth, he finished his years at the local village school as a pupil teacher before commencing (but for some reason never completing) a degree course in English at Aberdeen University. Instead he enrolled in 1906 at the United Free Church Training College in Aberdeen, where his talent as a visual artist was encouraged by the art teacher, James Hector. In 1909 Cowie accepted the post of art master at Fraserburgh Academy, but in 1912, having decided to become a painter, he enrolled at the Glasgow School of Art which was then, under its young English director, Francis Newbery, acknowledged as one of the leading art schools in Britain. Newbery recognized Cowie's ability and agreed to allow him to complete the diploma course in two years instead of the usual three. Because he gained his diploma in 1914 just as war with Germany was declared, Cowie's strict conscientious scruples led to four years of uncreative labour with a pioneer corps. Afterwards, from 1918 to 1935, he worked as art master in a small Lanarkshire mining town not far from Glasgow. It was there, at Bellshill Academy, that he began to develop his primary gift of expression through drawing, using the art room as though it were his own studio, working along with his pupils, drawing the children, singly and in groups as they themselves worked, studying and recording details of their physiognomy, clothes, and attitudes, and thus generating ideas which might be developed later in his Glasgow studio. In 1918 Cowie married Nancy Buchanan, who had been a fellow student; her death in 1923 left him with a baby daughter, Ruth. Three years later he married Alice Graham, a teacher; the couple had a daughter, Barbara. 
All his life Cowie looked to the early Renaissance for stimulation. He tended to despise work painted 'au premier coup' and his own major paintings were invariably created after many careful drawings and preliminary studies. In this he was out of step with most of the Scottish painting of his day. Yet he did not despise the activity, or the importance, of the Royal Scottish Academy of which he became an associate member in 1936, full academician in 1943, and honorary secretary in 1948. 
Cowie was appointed head of drawing and painting at Gray's School of Art, Aberdeen, in 1935 but he found the restrictions of art school routine distasteful and after only one session resigned in order to accept the more congenial post of warden at the Hospitalfield College of Art in Arbroath, Angus. He remained at Arbroath from 1937 until 1948; this was his most productive period both as a painter and as a teacher. Hospitalfield was then a residential summer school for a limited number of post-diploma students from the four Scottish art schools, and it was there, in the large mock-baronial mansion built in the early nineteenth century over a medieval original and set in rich farmlands near the wide River Tay, that Cowie's work as an artist came to full fruition. In his paintings of the schoolchildren at Bellshill he had succeeded in developing a kind of realism which, to the perceptive viewer, was beginning to be rich in suggestion of what seemed to the artist the pitiful brevity of youth. Even at that early stage in his career his drawings and paintings had been full of references to the inexorable passing of time and to the ephemerality of existence: his sketchbooks and notebooks contain several fragmentary jottings and half-finished poems on this theme. Later, at Hospitalfield, he began to explore and develop a kind of metaphysical still life in which elements with a personal appeal for him -- tanagra figurines and classical statuettes, prints from the old masters, sea shells, a leaf, an apple -- would be married with fragments of mirror-reflected landscape to offer a sometimes puzzling wealth of associative meaning. Cowie was not so much a realist as a surrealist, but in a delicate, subtle manner which had little in common with Dali or even Magritte. His landscapes, too, were almost invariably charged with mystery: in 'Evening Star' (1944, Aberdeen Art Gallery), for example, an ambitious, life-size painting, he placed three female nudes in the mouth of a cave in sandstone rocks, a natural setting conveying a sense of menace. Yet for all the evidence of preconception and extreme care in composition in his finished works, his notebooks occasionally contain direct sketches in watercolour, including attempts to capture fleeting effects of light. 
Cowie was in no sense a professional portrait painter, but to the few he did paint, such as the official portrait of his friend Sir Frank Mears, president of the Royal Scottish Academy (1944, Royal Scottish Academy, Edinburgh), and the earlier full-length studies of his daughters Ruth Cowie (1933, priv. coll.) and Barbara Graham Cowie (1938, Royal Scottish Academy, Edinburgh), he brought unusual insight. When he retired in 1948 he moved permanently to Edinburgh, where in 1952 he was awarded the honorary degree of LLD at the university. Later that year he was disabled by a severe stroke. James Cowie died at his home, 11 Rothesay Place, Edinburgh, on 18 April 1956 and was buried on 20 April in the churchyard of Kirkton of Auchterless, Monquitter, Aberdeenshire, under a headstone which he himself had designed for his parents and elder brother. He was survived by his second wife. His profound knowledge and understanding of the Italian quattrocento (a period beloved by him), his wide reading, and, above all, his sensitive draughtsmanship (perhaps the finest in Scotland in his day) combined to make his work exceptional. Collections of Cowie's work are in the Aberdeen Art Gallery and the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 38968


Walton, George Henry (1867-1933), designer and architect, was born on 3 June 1867 at 58 Buccleuch Street, Glasgow, the youngest of the twelve children of Jackson Walton ('c'.1808-1873) and his second wife, Eliza Anne Nicholson (1826-1902), daughter of Thomas Balfour Nicholson and his wife, Hughina. His parents were both Scottish. Son of a wealthy cotton importer, Walton's father inherited a flourishing commission agency in 1838, which subsequently foundered. Later, he made a number of unsuccessful excursions into manufacturing while his fortune dwindled. At home he was a keen amateur painter and photographer. He died in 1873, when George was six, leaving the family with limited means. The family was close, however, and Walton's childhood was not unhappy. 
Walton was educated at Sutherlands School, Hillhead, from 1874 to 1876 and at Partick Academy from about 1876 to 1881. At fourteen he was obliged to start work, and found employment at the British linen bank, Glasgow. At home he was surrounded by artists: his sisters Helen and Hannah taught painting and decorated china and glass, while Constance excelled in watercolours. His brother Edward Arthur Walton (1860-1922) was a leading member of the painting group the Glasgow Boys, and a friend of the artist James McNeill Whistler; George often accompanied him on painting trips. Before 1888, when he abandoned finance to start his career as a decorator, he had attended classes at the Glasgow Atelier Fine Arts (1887-9) and the Glasgow School of Art. Walton launched his new company, George Walton & Co., ecclesiastical and house decorators, of 152 Wellington Street, Glasgow, on the strength of a commission from Catherine Cranston. His work at her 114 Argyle Street tea-room included stencil designs in a style influenced by William Morris. Over the next few years Walton's workshops took on glass staining, picture-frame making, cabinet-making, and metalwork. Commissions included the decoration of a church, several residential and shop interiors, and a large stained-glass window for the shipowner William Burrell. Walton married Kate Gall on 3 June 1891; their only daughter, Marguerite, was born the following year. 
By the mid-1890s the reputation of Walton's company was spreading further afield. A large redecoration job was completed at Drumalis, Larne, Northern Ireland (1893), and the company's first Yorkshire job was carried out in Scarborough for the Rowntree family in 1896. An office was opened in York in 1898. Elm Bank, York, now a hotel, has the largest collection of surviving decorative work in the area. In Glasgow, Walton decorated and furnished 91-3 Buchanan Street (1896-7) for Miss Cranston. This and the refurbishment of the 114 Argyle Street tea-room (1899), on which he had worked at the outset of his career, were shared with the young architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh. Walton's style of work was distinctive: his simplification of form and pattern parallels the work of the English designer C. F. A. Voysey -- a lifelong friend -- while the decorative details and colour schemes show the influence of Whistler and the Glasgow Boys. Elongation of uprights, extension of cornice mouldings, and the inclusion of beaten copper and leaded glass panels characterize his work, which was an early influence on the development of the Glasgow style -- a Scottish response to the English arts and crafts movement. 
In 1896 George Walton & Co. became a limited company. Continuing as managing director, Walton moved to London the following year. Through the Glaswegian photographer James Craig Annan he met J. B. B. Wellington and George Davison, members of the Linked Ring photographic society. Davison, working for the Eastman Photographic Company (later Kodak Ltd), commissioned Walton to design a series of shops, including sites in Brussels, Milan, Vienna, and Moscow, which contributed to a growing interest in his work on the continent. Walton had gained credibility as an architect and Wellington commissioned him to design a house in 1901: The Leys, Elstree, a very individual building in the arts and crafts tradition, was decorated and furnished throughout by Walton. 
Living from 1901 at 44 Holland Street, Walton concentrated on his London-based practice. In 1903 he resigned the directorship of George Walton & Co., which closed in 1905. Davison became Walton's major client, commissioning a houseboat (1902-3), two completely furnished residences -- the White House, Shiplake (1908), and Wern Fawr, Harlech ('c'.1908-11) -- and the St David's Hotel, Harlech (1909-10). These buildings show the inspiration of Georgian architecture. Other notable projects of this period were St John's, Ryde, Isle of Wight, and the interiors of Alma House, Cheltenham. Walton was elected a licentiate member of the RIBA in 1911. During the First World War he worked with Harry Redfern and C. F. A. Voysey for the central control board (liquor traffic). His first wife having died, he met his second wife, Dorothy Anne Jeram ('b'. 1889/90), at the board; they were married on 20 August 1918 and a son, Edward, was born in 1920. 
After the war, when building work was scarce, Walton was supported by commissions from old friends -- Wellington, Davison, and James Morton, a Scottish textile manufacturer; he nevertheless suffered increasing financial difficulty. His later work included an addition to The Leys, the chapel of St George, Cap d'Antibes, stained glass, and textile designs. Walton was reserved in his manner but warm and loyal in his friendships. He died on 10 December 1933 at home at 70 Seabrook Road, Hythe, and was buried on 13 December at Marylebone cemetery, East Finchley. His second wife survived him. In 1933, when the 'Architectural Review' was planning an exhibition on architects of Walton's generation, Nikolaus Pevsner and John Betjeman hailed Walton as a pioneer of the Modern Movement. Thomas Howarth's 1952 monograph on Mackintosh also drew attention to Walton and in 1993 Glasgow museums mounted a major exhibition of his work. His designs and other works are held by the George Walton archive, a private collection, the Glasgow museums and art galleries, and the RIBA drawings collection; photographs of his work for Kodak are to be found in the National Museum of Photography, Film, and Television, at Bradford. 


@@@@@


doc= 38971


Barber, Margaret Fairless (1869-1901), religious writer, was born on 7 May 1869 at Castle Hill House, Rastrick, West Riding of Yorkshire, the youngest of three daughters of Fairless Barber (1835-1881), solicitor and archaeologist, and his wife, Maria Louisa, 'nee' Musgrave (1831-1890). Margaret, who called herself Marjorie from about the age of four, was at first educated at home by her mother and elder sisters. She read omnivorously, finishing the complete works of Dickens and much of Scott before she was twelve. When her father died in 1881 her mother was prostrated by the loss; unable to cope, she sent Margaret for a few months to relatives in Torquay, Devon, where she attended a local school. It was at this time that she began to suffer from the spinal condition that resulted in her tragically early death. With one of her sisters now married and the other away, her mother decided that the family house at Castle Hill was too large to manage and sought a home elsewhere, eventually settling in Bungay, Suffolk. 
In 1884 Margaret went to London to train as a nurse at a small children's hospital, but regularly returned to Torquay, where she helped to nurse an ailing relative. In London she also worked for a brief period among the East End sick, notably in the slum district known as the Jago, and earned there the title 'the fighting sister'. Her mother died unexpectedly at the age of fifty-nine in 1890. From that time on Margaret lived a varied existence, staying at different places in England and visiting Germany, where she and a female friend lodged in an old tower by the Rhine. It was while she was there that problems with her sight began, requiring treatment in Wiesbaden. Her generally poor health also necessitated nursing from a sister of charity. Margaret recovered sufficiently to return to London and resume her philanthropic work. She was financially independent and had no immediate claims on any of her relatives. It was through one of her missions that she met the Dowsons, a family with great literary, artistic, and scientific interests. They offered her a home in their Georgian house by the Thames and effectively adopted her. This upset many of Margaret's relatives, but her eldest sister approved of the arrangement, relieved that Margaret would now receive the care and attention she constantly required. 
Margaret's increasing weakness and frequent painful spells now obliged her to give up her charitable work, and she took up writing under the name of Michael Fairless. The surname was from her father, while the first name, retaining her original initial, was that of a childhood friend, Michael McDonnell (1882-1956), later chief justice of Palestine, who as a young boy had often spent his summer holidays with her family. Writing was physically difficult, and was done sitting in bed, or, if that was too tiring, lying down. When her right hand failed her, she changed to the left, and when growing weakness made writing altogether impossible, she dictated. Her first completed book was 'The Gathering of Brother Hilarius' (1901), a religious romance centring on the black death, with Bungay serving as the goal of the blind friar's journey. But for some months Margaret had also been drafting pages for the work that brought her fame, 'The Roadmender' (1902), a series of meditations on the road to heaven, of which she was the 'roadmender'. This extraordinarily popular book was reprinted thirty-one times in ten years. 
Margaret Fairless Barber died on 24 August 1901 at Mock Bridge near Henfield, Sussex, in the farmhouse where the Dowsons spent their summers. She was buried at Ashurst, near Steyning. A complete edition of her works, including a selection of letters, was published in one volume in 1931, with 'The Roadmender''s dedication: 'To my mother: and to earth, my mother, whom I love'. 


@@@@@


doc= 38972


Weekley, Ernest (1865-1954), linguist and writer, was born on 27 April 1865 at New End, Hampstead, London, the second of the nine children of Charles Weekley ('b'. 1834), a relieving officer for the Hampstead board of guardians, and Agnes ('b'. 1840), daughter of George McCowen, a schoolmaster and parish clerk of Uxbridge. 
Weekley began his education at Dane Hill House, Margate, Kent, a private boarding-school run by the Revd Alfred Boulden, a cousin of his father. He achieved a number of spectacular results in the local examinations conducted by the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and left at seventeen to take up schoolmastering at Colchester. This apprenticeship was brief, however, and he soon returned to become a member of Dane Hill's teaching staff, using his scanty leisure and school holidays for intensive study. His true bent was always towards languages and philology, but he also did well at mathematics, and was able to offer it among the group of subjects in which he passed the examination for the ordinary bachelor of arts degree of University College, London. 
In 1892, following a year at the University of Bern, where he learned to speak German fluently, Weekley obtained a London master of arts degree in French and German, and so created the prospect of a Cambridge career. This began when William Briggs, founder of the University Tutorial Correspondence College, based at Cambridge, offered him a part-time post on his staff. The arrangement enabled Weekley to combine his work for Briggs with reading for the medieval and modern languages tripos as a student of Trinity College from the autumn of 1893. In 1896 he secured a major scholarship at this college and obtained a brilliant first-class degree, with special distinctions in French and German, and a notation indicating proficiency in the pronunciation of modern German. 
Weekley spent the next year in Paris, and the one following in Germany, at Freiburg im Breisgau. He attended the lectures of Gaston Paris (1839-1903) at the Sorbonne, narrowly supporting himself by writing one of his series of French textbooks for Briggs and by private tutoring. At Freiburg he held the university post of 'Lektor' in English, devoting his free time to studying under Friedrich Kluge (1856-1926), author of the monumental 'Etymologisches Worterbuch der deutschen Sprache'. 
In 1898 Weekley was appointed professor of French and head of the modern languages department at University College, Nottingham. When in Freiburg he had met and fallen in love with Emma Maria Frieda Johanna, Baroness von Richthofen (1879-1956), second daughter of Baron Friedrich von Richthofen (1846-1915), a Silesian-born engineer, and they were married in that city on 29 August 1899. They would have three children: Montague Karl Richthofen (Monty), born on 12 June 1900; Elsa Agnes Frieda, born on 13 September 1902; and Barbara Joy (Barby), born on 20 October 1904. The Weekleys made their home at 9 Goldswong Terrace, Nottingham, where Ernest's university lecturing frequently kept him away from his wife and growing family. The latter necessitated a move in 1904 to a larger house, at 8 Vickers Street, and in 1910 to an even bigger one, Cowley, in Victoria Crescent. 
It was at Cowley on 3 March 1912, at a time when Weekley was preoccupied with the publication of his first popular book on etymology, 'The Romance of Words' (1912), that Frieda first met the budding novelist D. H. Lawrence (1885-1930), a former French student of Weekley's, who had come to discuss a possible job as a lecturer in Germany. The acquaintanceship rapidly developed into a passionate affair, and a mere eight weeks later the two eloped to Frieda's parents' home in Metz, eastern France. Frieda took her two daughters with her as far as London and left them with Weekley's parents at their house in Hampstead. Montague remained with his father at Cowley. 
Weekley was devastated, but despite writing incessantly to Frieda, and even hiring detectives to trace her movements when she and Lawrence moved on to Mayrhofen, near Innsbruck in Austria, he was unable to persuade her to return. His parents insisted that he and Montague come to live with them as well. Their arrival meant that the Hampstead house was now home to nine: Ernest's parents, Ernest himself, his three children, his two sisters, Kit and Maude, and his bachelor brother, George. The number was too great for comfort, and in September 1912 the combined families moved to a larger house at 49 Harvard Road, Chiswick, Middlesex, conveniently close to St Paul's School, which Montague would soon attend. (The girls went to a local dame-school before entering St Paul's Girls' School.) Having initially denied Frieda the right to visit her children, on 11 February 1913 Weekley filed a petition for divorce on the grounds of adultery. That summer Frieda and Lawrence were back in England and managed a secret meeting with the children on 1 July in London. The divorce became absolute on 27 April 1914, and on 13 July that year Frieda and Lawrence were married at Kensington register office, London. 
Having sold Cowley to a surgeon, Weekley now commuted every week between London and Nottingham, spending his nights in the latter city at 30 Clarendon Street, a bedsit near the college. Frieda visited him there in November 1914 with the aim of obtaining access to the children, but was met with a refusal and verbal abuse. He relented, however, after consulting his London solicitor, and Frieda and her offspring were officially reunited for half an hour at the solicitor's office on 11 August 1915. She was soon allowed to see them more regularly, subject to Ernest's approval. His sole provision was that Lawrence should not be with her. 
Weekley continued to write and research, and he is best remembered for his popular books on words and names, almost all published by John Murray. 'The Romance of Words' was the most successful, running into four editions. A further edition, with an introduction by Ivor Brown, appeared posthumously in 1961. The more substantial 'An Etymological Dictionary of Modern English' (1921), with its succinct origins, wide-ranging citations, and diverting discursions, also did well. An American edition in two volumes, published in 1967, was still in print thirty years later. 'A Concise Etymological Dictionary of Modern English', also published in 1921, was issued in a revised edition in 1953. Other titles, no less interesting and informative, included 'The Romance of Names' (1914), 'Words Ancient and Modern' (1926), 'The English Language' (1928), 'Adjectives and other Words' (1930, a selection of past articles and lectures), and 'Jack and Jill: a Study in our Christian Names' (1939). A curiosity is 'Saxo Grammaticus, or, First Aid for the Best-Seller' (1930), published by Kegan Paul Trench Trubner in their 'To-day and To-morrow' series, in which each author assumed the name of an appropriate mythological or historical character. (Saxo Grammaticus was a twelfth-century Danish historian.) This slim volume is devoted to 'the linguistic absurdities perpetrated by contemporary authors', and is essentially a critique, with many examples, of the various errors and infelicities rife in contemporary English writing, in the spirit of Fowler's 'Modern English Usage' (1926). The tone is sometimes tetchy, but sensible guidance is offered to the would-be writer in the contentious matter of split infinitives and other solecisms. 
Weekley's regular home remained that of his parents in Chiswick until 1938, when the house was compulsorily demolished to make way for a new road to the airport. Weekley was thus obliged to make another move, although this time without the children, who were now grown up and with families of their own. He rented a house in Richmond, Surrey, but it was bombed in the autumn of 1940, and he spent the rest of the war years at Cricieth, Caernarvonshire, renting a flat near old friends who had a holiday residence there. After the war, Weekley finally settled at 446 Upper Richmond Road, Putney, London, the home of his elder daughter, Elsa, her naval officer husband, Bernal Edward (Teddy) de Martelly Seaman, and their two boys, Geoffrey and Richard. 
In 1952 Frieda paid a last visit to England to see her children and their families, but could not be invited to Elsa's home because of Ernest's presence there. She wished to see the garden, however, and Elsa deputed Teddy to show her the flowers from a distance. As they drove past, Frieda spotted the back of Ernest's head through the window of his study. Now nearly blind, he sat at his desk, apparently peering at a book. She was moved enough to propose a meeting, if the children approved, but Elsa and Montague rejected the offer, without mentioning it to Barbara, who later recalled her disappointment on learning of the incident. 
Within three days of taking to his bed at his home in Putney, Weekley died of lung cancer in his ninetieth year on 7 May 1954. The character of the Revd Arthur Saywell, a country parson in Lawrence's 'The Virgin and the Gypsy' (1930), is based on Weekley, as in part at least is John Beavis, a sarcastic sociologist in Aldous Huxley's 'Eyeless in Gaza' (1936). 


@@@@@


doc= 38973


Macnutt, Derrick Somerset (1902-1971), crossword compiler and schoolmaster, was born on 29 March 1902 at Coomrith, Carlisle Road, Eastbourne, Sussex, the elder child and only son of Frederic Brodie Macnutt (1873-1949), curate-in-charge of Christ Church, Wimbledon, and his first wife, Hettie Sina (died 1945), daughter of the Revd Charles Bullock of Worcester and his second wife, Hester, 'nee' Savory. His education began at Shrewsbury House preparatory school in Surbiton. In 1915 he gained a scholarship to Marlborough College and in 1920 passed on a classical scholarship to Jesus College, Cambridge, where he won three prizes and graduated with a double first in classics. In 1925 he took up a post teaching classics at St Edmund's School, Canterbury, and in 1928 was appointed senior classics master and housemaster at Christ's Hospital, Horsham. On 30 July 1936 he married the nineteen-year-old Mary Long, daughter of Guy Stephenson Long, rector of Aldington, Kent, the marriage taking place in her father's church. There were three children. 
Macnutt had always enjoyed crosswords, especially those set by E. P. Mathers (Torquemada) in 'The Observer'. When Mathers died in 1939 Macnutt composed a puzzle in his style by way of a tribute and sent it to the paper. It was published, and he and two others, F. R. Burrow, a Wimbledon tennis referee, and B. G. Whitfield, a master at Eton College, were asked to take over and provide puzzles in a rota. In 1942 Macnutt assumed full charge for all the puzzles and adopted the pseudonym Ximenes, taking it from Francisco Jimenez de Cisneros (1436-1517), the Spanish prelate who was appointed grand inquisitor of Castile following the death of Tomas de Torquemada (1420-1498), the first grand inquisitor. The name was appropriate for one who sought to rack the brains of his victims, and the X was a bonus as a symbol of his means of torture. In all he composed 1200 Ximenes puzzles, the last published posthumously on 30 January 1972. He also compiled some of the Everyman puzzles in 'The Observer' as well as more challenging ones for 'The Listener' under the name of Tesremos, his middle name reversed. 
As a classics teacher, Macnutt had a formidable record. Many of his pupils won Oxbridge scholarships, and he himself was the author of a highly successful Latin course and grammar, written with H. L. O. Flecker and published in 1939. Macnutt's teaching methods in some respects matched those of his cruciverbal eponym. He imposed strict mental discipline on his pupils and coupled it with corporal chastisement in the more recalcitrant cases. The study itself was lined with dictionaries kippered by the 5 ounces a week of the flake that Macnutt had smoked since his undergraduate days. With his plus fours, pebble glasses, booming voice, and extrovert personality, Macnutt remained a force to be reckoned with until his retirement from teaching in 1963. 
Macnutt's crossword compilation continued, however, and he was already a cult figure among his loyal solvers. In his final years, about 500 devotees were sending in solutions to his monthly competitions, complete with their own clues. In return they would receive his privately circulated notes. There was a Ximenes tie for the men, a scarf for the women, and a book-plate for merit. At regular intervals there were dinners, the last, in 1968, marking the 1000th Ximenes crossword. The puzzles were always cryptic, in the manner lovingly described by Macnutt in his classic study, 'Ximenes on the Art of the Crossword' (1966). 
Macnutt died, survived by his wife, of a myocardial infarction on 29 June 1971 at his home, Buckmans, Five Oaks, Billingshurst, Sussex, and was buried at St Peter's Church, Slinfold, Sussex. His mantle as 'Observer' compiler passed to Jonathan Crowther (Azed), as he had wished. 


@@@@@


doc= 38974


Barbour, John (1849-1918), clothing manufacturer, was born on 9 March 1849 at Bogue Farm, Dalry, Kirkcudbrightshire, formerly part of the Lochinvar estate, one of twin sons of James Barbour (died in or after 1871), a prosperous farmer, and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Milroy (died in or before 1871); his brother's name was James. Both his parents were Scottish, with ancestry traceable to the fourteenth century. Rejecting a career in farming Barbour left the south-west of Scotland at twenty to seek a living in the world of business, and within a year he and a cousin had established themselves as travelling drapers based in Newcastle upon Tyne. On 10 October 1871, at the Free Church manse in Dalry, he married Margaret ('b'. 1850/51), daughter of John Haining, minister. She was born on the island of Gigha, near the Mull of Kintyre, and had known Barbour since childhood; they settled in Newcastle. They had ten children, two of whom eventually followed their father into the family business. Suffering from poor health, Margaret was confined to bed for much of her married life. 
While in Newcastle, Barbour established a mercantile enterprise and opened a shop in partnership with two other drapers. By 1890 he had amassed sufficient capital to establish his own firm, and moved to South Shields, where he began a tailoring business, aiming to establish an enduring enterprise in the town. Within two years his business had both expanded and become specialized in marketing protective oilskins and waxed wet-weather wear. In this Barbour not only drew upon his particular experience and expertise but also had identified an untapped segment of the clothing market. In 1894 his business, trading as J. Barbour & Co. -- rather misleadingly described as 'Tailors and Drapers' -- operated from premises in the town's market place. From the outset the garments sold by the business were unique, and have remained so. Durable, expensive, and carefully handmade, mainly by outside contractors in the early years, Barbour's products quickly established a reputation among the local fishing and sailing community for their effective protective qualities. It was the mail-order business, which Barbour's son Malcolm created in 1908, that generated booming business in the years before the First World War. The early catalogues reveal the diversity of the company's products, which included fashionable garments for both men and women as well as protective sporting and working clothes. 
Barbour died on 9 July 1918, in Linden Avenue, Darlington, survived by his wife. Gradually the firm moved more extensively into manufacture, most rapidly after his death. His two eldest sons, John and Malcolm, carried on the business, though during the depressed years of the 1920s it faltered, and John resigned. Malcolm, who in any case had been responsible for much of the enterprise's early expansion, took the business to a period of renewed success. The profitability of J. Barbour & Sons Ltd was sustained during the remainder of the twentieth century and into the next, under the leadership of successive generations of Barbours, as its traditional market among outdoor workers was supplemented by demand from the wealthier social groups for robust yet attractive outdoor country wear. The dark-green Barbour wax jacket with its characteristic large toothed metal zip -- as well as a range of accoutrements -- achieved symbolic status as it became standard garb for the rich at play. 


@@@@@


doc= 38975


Barker, Sir John (1840-1914), department store owner, was born at Loose, Kent, on 6 April 1840, the son of Joseph Barker, a carpenter and brewer, and his wife, Ann Sells. He was educated privately and in 1853 began a three-year apprenticeship to a draper in Maidstone. Further experience in drapery shops followed in Folkestone and Dover until 1858, when he moved to London to join Messrs Spencer, Turner, and Boldero, a firm of furnishers and drapers in Marylebone. 
After a few years in London, Barker was offered a position at William Whiteley's new emporium in Westbourne Grove. He proved a gifted salesman and was promoted to department manager with an annual salary of $300. Within a year he succeeded in doubling sales at the store and his salary was similarly doubled. He had hoped for a partnership, but Whiteley was reluctant to relinquish sole control. He did, however, offer Barker $1000 a year in compensation. 
Meanwhile on 7 January 1865 Barker had married 28-year-old Sarah Waspe, daughter of William Waspe, 'gentleman', of Tuddenham, Suffolk, the ceremony being held at St Matthew's parish church, Bayswater. They had a daughter, Ann Sarah, and a son, John. The latter died young in a riding accident in 1914. 
In 1870 Barker left Whiteleys to open a small drapery shop in Kensington High Street, and this was the germ from which sprang the famous department store Barkers of Kensington. His partner, James Whitehead, was already a wealthy merchant and provided capital and credit without interfering in the running of the business. As managing partner Barker drew an annual salary of $250 and lived over the shop with his family. As part owner, he was now able to exploit the modes of retailing that had proved so successful at Whiteleys. By dealing directly with manufacturers and selling for cash he was able to keep prices down and realize a rapid turnover. 
Barker had long envisaged a vast store that, unlike most shops of the day, would carry diverse stock. To this end he bought up new premises whenever he could and by 1880 was trading in fifteen shops in Kensington High Street and Ball Street, selling not only drapery goods but also groceries, furnishings, and ironmongery. In 1893 he acquired Whitehead's share in the business. The business now boasted sixty departments and a staff of 1400. Barker continued to expand and in 1907 acquired Ponting Brothers, a fashion store specializing in art needlework in Kensington High Street that was in liquidation. Business continued to boom and in 1908 Barker was awarded a baronetcy in Edward VII's birthday honours list. 
John Barker's interests were not restricted to retailing. In the 1890s he had bought a 300-acre estate in Bishop's Stortford which he farmed using the latest methods. He was a breeder of livestock and was famed for his polo ponies and flock of Syrian sheep. He also embarked on a political career, and in 1889 was one of the first aldermen to be elected to the new London county council. He was president of Hammersmith Liberal Association, councillor for Chelsea Liberal Association, and founder president of Bishop's Stortford District Liberal Association. He contested Maidstone three times, in 1888, 1898, and 1900, and although elected on the third attempt was unseated on petition by the Conservatives. From 1906 to 1910 he sat as MP for Penrhyn and Falmouth. He was also a member of the Reform and National Liberal clubs, and after the South African War was a prominent supporter of the Territorial Movement. 
John Barker died of cerebral thrombosis and heart failure on 16 December 1914 at his home, The Grange, Bishop's Stortford, leaving no heir. 


@@@@@


doc= 38976


Batsford, Bradley Thomas (1821-1904), bookseller and publisher, was born in Hertford, the fifth of the nine children of James Batsford (1791-1835), a tailor, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Bradley. When his father died he left for London, where he lived with his cousins above their Leicester Square bookshop and bindery. In 1837 he was apprenticed to one of those cousins, the bookseller Henry Bickers. When he came of age in 1842 he inherited $325 from his grandfather, Roger Bradley, which enabled him to set up his own business. On 2 April 1843 he married Letitia Josephine (1821/2-1906), daughter of Raphael Turner, carver and gilder, and opened a bookshop at 30 High Holborn. The shop moved a few years later to 52 High Holborn, then to 94 High Holborn in 1893. 
Batsford's sons Bradley Batsford (1846-1906), Henry George Batsford (1851-1882), and Herbert Batsford (1861-1917) all followed him into the business. During the manpower shortage of the First World War, his youngest daughter Florence worked briefly for the firm as a travelling saleswoman -- perhaps the first in the British book trade, though she found the job distasteful. 
B. T. Batsford began as a medical and general bookseller. In 1862 the death of a competitor, John Weale, who specialized in architectural and engineering books, allowed Batsford to move into that market and out of general bookselling. With his son Bradley taking the initiative, the firm then ventured into publishing. Their first known title was J. K. Colling's 'Examples of English Medieval Foliage and Coloured Decoration' (1874). 
By the end of the century, Batsford had built up an international clientele and a reputation for publishing finely illustrated volumes on architectural history and the decorative arts. In the early 1890s he pioneered the use of photographs in architecture books. He also produced practical handbooks for builders, notably Charles F. Mitchell's 'Building Construction and Drawing': first published in 1888, it went through numerous editions and was still selling briskly more than a century later. The firm and its authors were remarkably loyal to each other: J. Alfred Gotch published with Batsford for fifty-six years, including his magisterial 'Architecture of the Renaissance in England' (1891-4) and 'Early Renaissance Architecture in England' (1901). 
A fire in 1874 destroyed most of the early records of the firm and much of the stock. B. T. Batsford handed the business over to his sons Bradley and Herbert in 1902. He died at his home, 128 Abbey Road, St John's Wood, London, on 3 November 1904. He had published mainly for professional architects, but Herbert would appeal to general readers with beautifully illustrated books on English villages and country houses. 


@@@@@


doc= 38977


Bird, Alfred (bap. 1811, d. 1878), chemist and food manufacturer, the fourth son of John Bird (1780-1846), astronomer and lecturer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Bland, was baptized at Nympsfield, Gloucestershire, on 25 August 1811. According to family tradition, he was the great-grandson of John Bird (1709-1776), instrument maker, but there is no evidence to substantiate this. Of Alfred's four brothers, the eldest, John (1805-1848), became an astronomer, schoolteacher, and Baptist minister. Two others, Henry and William, served in the 4th light dragoons in Afghanistan and Ireland, and the youngest, Frederick Bird FRAS (1816-1876), developed unique new processes for polishing telescope mirrors, and became chaplain of Birmingham general cemetery. 
Little is known of Alfred Bird's early education, but he was apprenticed to Philip Harris & Co., the well-known Birmingham druggists and chemists. In 1837 he set up his own shop in Bell Street, Birmingham, under the title 'Alfred Bird, experimental chemist'. On 23 October 1835 he had married Elizabeth Lavinia Ragg (1810-1888) in Nottingham; because of her digestive problems, her intolerance of live-yeast products, and her allergy to eggs, he embarked upon extensive research into alternatives. In 1843 he succeeded by producing 'Bird's Fermenting Powder' which later became better known as baking powder. This could be used as a live-yeast substitute in baking bread, buns, and cakes, and instantly overcame his wife's problems, and those of many other similar sufferers. There was an immediate demand for the product, and he went on to produce another innovation, custard powder, which contained no eggs, was simple to use, tasted very good, and yet was both nutritious and inexpensive. 
Bird's friends persuaded him to develop these products commercially, and there was a rapidly increasing demand for them; this necessitated a move to larger premises at 69 Worcester Street, Birmingham. Production greatly increased, and distribution became nationwide. In 1855 the duke of Newcastle, the war minister, was persuaded, after carefully regulated trials, that the baking powder would facilitate the production of fresh bread for the British army in the Crimean War. Large quantities were shipped out, and in later years Bird claimed that his product had been useful not only to front line troops, but also to Florence Nightingale at Scutari. It was also claimed to have been used in the Franklin Arctic expedition. An early pioneer of advertising, Bird advertised his baking powder in 1855, and in the press from 1860. In the shop in Worcester Street, the company motto was prominently displayed: '
Early to bed, Early to rise, 

Stick to your work, and Advertise. 

' While development of the business, together with increased production, efficient marketing, and good distribution, always remained his top priority, Bird also carried out investigations in the fields of physics, meteorology, electricity, and magnetism. He constructed a water barometer described in the 'Philosophical Magazine' (1865). He also devised a plan for demonstrating wind direction and air movements. He lectured extensively on electricity, on electric storage batteries, and electromagnetism. On a lighter note he invented a night-light which could be refuelled while still alight, and he perfected a device to keep a ball suspended on a jet of water, which he placed in his shop window as a deliberate ploy to attract passers-by to his business. It was later modified for fairground shooting booths. 
In the course of investigations into the laws of sound, Bird, a competent musician, constructed a set of harmonized glass bowls which, encouraged by his friend, Sir Michael Costa, the eminent conductor, he demonstrated before the Royal Institution, and later, by royal command, played before Queen Victoria at Buckingham Palace. Family records note his playing 'Isle of Beauty Fare thee Well' on the glasses when his eldest daughter, Jessie Martha Lowcock, departed on her honeymoon in 1870. Always devoted to his family, he raised two daughters and two sons. Five other children did not survive beyond infancy. 
Bird was a practising Christian and an earnest student of the 'Bible'. He was elected a fellow of the Chemical Society on 20 January 1870, and was a founding member of the Philosophical Society. Following a long illness arising from congestion of the lung, he died on 15 December 1878 at his home at 366 Bristol Road, Birmingham. He was buried on the 21st at Key Hill cemetery, Birmingham. Pioneering work in developing convenience foods by the firm of Alfred Bird & Sons was continued by his eldest son, Sir Alfred Frederick Bird, first baronet, of Tudor Grange, Solihull. Three later generations of the family served with the firm, which was bought in 1947 by the General Food Corporation, which in turn merged with the Philip Morris Company in 1985. Bird's custard, first of the convenience foods, remains a household name throughout the world. 


@@@@@


doc= 38978


Brooke, Arthur (1845-1918), tea merchant, was born in George Street, Ashton under Lyne, Lancashire, on 30 October 1845 to Charles Brooke, tea dealer, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Howard. After an early career in textiles was terminated in 1864 by the 'Cotton Famine', he trained in the wholesale tea firm Peek Brothers and Winch, initially in Liverpool and later in London. 
After briefly returning home Brooke opened his first shop at 29 Market Street, Manchester, selling packeted, blended tea, sugar, and coffee, and trading under the name of Brooke, Bond & Co. The name Bond was entirely fictional, being added purely for alliterative effect. He adopted what were then viewed as innovative sales techniques: strictly cash sales, sale weight net of paper wrapping, and aggressive newspaper advertising. Within three years he had opened shops in Liverpool, Leeds, and Bradford, but in 1872 he left these in the hands of a manager and moved to London, opening an office and blending warehouse in Whitechapel High Street, his recently widowed father selling up in Ashton to help him run the business. 
Although trade faltered in the late 1870s, leading Brooke to consider emigrating to New Zealand, the following decade witnessed dramatic growth based on supplying packaged, blended tea wholesale to retail grocers. By 1892, when Brooke Bond was converted to a limited liability company with a share capital of $150,000, it was the pace-setter in wholesale packet tea business, although it still retained three retail shops in the north of England. Brooke married Alice Catherine, daughter of William Young, Royal Navy paymaster at Plymouth, on 25 November 1875. They honeymooned in Paris, with Arthur taking the opportunity to visit colour printers to order display cards for his business. The couple lived initially in Stonebridge Park but by 1887 resided in Kensington and had a country house and estate, Leylands, at Wotton near Dorking. They had two daughters and two sons. 
Brooke secured his market dominance by becoming 'a careful student of American business methods' ('The Grocer', 20 April 1918), visiting America to study distribution methods and sales techniques and appointing an American advertising consultant, John E. Powers, in 1903 at a fee in excess of a director's annual salary. In 1901 'Assam Brooke', as he was sometimes known, established an agency in Calcutta to purchase and blend tea in India which was to develop into a separate company in 1912. By this time his firm was one of the largest tea distributing firms in the world with an extensive domestic and export trade, operating from new premises in Goulston Street, Aldgate, after 1910, and with its own printing and bag-making works in Reading (opened 1902). 
Although he retired as director of the company in 1904 and as chairman in 1910 (to be succeeded by his eldest son, Gerald), Brooke continued to retain an active interest in the business, being rumoured to have replied to a request to slow down in his old age, 'Where else could I get eight hours of pleasure so cheaply?' ('The Grocer', 20 April 1918). Brooke was also an early advocate of good working conditions, his 'Times' obituary (16 April 1918) describing him as 'a model employer'. He introduced an eight-hour day and bonuses for his employees and supported the principles of co-partnership; his workers were reported to have looked upon him more as a colleague than employer. Brooke was an ardent admirer of W. E. Gladstone, and was regarded as a generous supporter of philanthropic and benevolent institutions, although he did not court publicity. 
Brooke died on 13 April 1918 at 61 Hampstead Way, Golders Green, where his daughter Alice lived; the cause of death was recorded as acute tuberculosis and pneumonia. His funeral was at Golders Green on 16 April 1918. 


@@@@@


doc= 38979


Bulmer, Henry Percival (1867-1919), cider maker, was born on 28 January 1867 at the rectory, Credenhill, Herefordshire, the second son of Charles Henry Bulmer (1833-1918), rector of Credenhill, and his wife, Mary Grace Parnel Bulmer ('nee' Cockrem). The rector was the son and grandson of Hereford wine merchants and cider makers, and himself won prizes for his bottled cider and perry. Bulmer, who was usually known as Percy, suffered from asthma as a child, and his interrupted education at Hereford Cathedral school between 1880 and 1886 gave him no chance of going to university. In 1887, at the age of twenty, he began to make cider out of the apples grown in his father's glebe orchard, borrowing the family pony and a neighbour's cider-mill for the purpose. 
At that time most cider was made by farmers with ancient and primitive equipment out of any apples that came to hand, to be drunk as payment in kind by their thirsty but undiscriminating labourers. Bottled cider, carefully made from selected apples, for sale in hotels, public houses, and off-licences, was a rarity. It was this select market that Bulmer meant to supply. In the autumn of 1887 he moved to Hereford, where in his first full year of business he made forty casks (4000 gallons) of cider, that sold for a mere $157. His elder brother, 
There was an informal division of labour between the two brothers: Percy Bulmer concentrated on production, organizing the factory, reading Pasteur on yeasts, visiting Rheims to learn the techniques of champagne making (transferable to cider), and Germany to study the handling of sugar beet (what was good for beet was good for apples). He also studied bottling at the works where the Apollinaris mineral water was produced. The firm consulted analytical chemists from time to time, and from 1905 had a small laboratory of its own, where important discoveries were made by H. E. Durham. Fred Bulmer undertook purchase and marketing, and was, 'inter alia', the commercial traveller. Affable and outgoing, he was equal to most situations. Confronted with a blunt Yorkshireman, who asked him who the hell he thought he was staring at, Fred replied 'The rudest bugger I ever saw' (Bulmer, 'Early Days', 10). The riposte won him a good order and a firm friendship. Nevertheless, he was happy to give up touting for orders when in 1896, with output not far short of 200,000 gallons a year, the firm appointed a full-time commercial traveller. The Bulmers owed their success not only to hard work, access to adequate funds, and a little science, but also to a flair for publicity. In an age well aware of the uses of advertising, they were skilful practitioners of the art: in brochures, by poster, and by the choice of such evocative brand names as Pomagne, Woodpecker, and Strongbow. The firm ran its business on advanced paternalist lines, instituting a superannuation scheme in 1898, and family allowances in 1938. It also built some workers' housing. The housing schemes and charitable trusts continue to benefit the people of Hereford. 
Percy Bulmer was chairman and managing director, and also the more single-minded businessman. He was secretary of the short-lived National Association of English Cider Makers, founded in 1894. Fred, as head of the largest firm of cider makers, was the natural choice as chairman when the association was refounded in 1920. Percy had doubted the power of government to effect much social improvement, whereas Fred Bulmer was an ardent 'new Liberal', active in local politics. He was a local and a county councillor, and was twice mayor of Hereford. In later years, he moved to the right and in 1931 supported the National Government. 
Percy Bulmer married a cousin, Susan Mildred Ball (1870/71-1968), in 1894, and they had four sons, and a daughter who died in infancy. Fred Bulmer married, in 1899, Sophie Rittner (1874-1968), the daughter of a Liverpool merchant of German origin. They had three sons and three daughters. 
The brothers ran the business as a partnership until 1918, when H. P. Bulmer & Co. was turned into a private company, as a result of Percy Bulmer's developing cancer; he died at the early age of fifty-two at his home, Longmeadow, Hereford, on 2 December 1919. His brother succeeded him as chairman. By then the firm was a soundly established concern with 200 employees, and produced some three-quarters of a million gallons of cider a year. When Fred Bulmer retired in 1938, the workforce had quadrupled, output was approaching 4 million gallons, and the firm was by far the largest cider maker in the country. Fred died on 2 September 1941 at his home, Adams Hill, Breinton, Herefordshire, at the age of seventy-six. Of contrasting characters and complementary talents, H. P. and E. F. Bulmer can fairly be regarded as joint creators of the firm that bears the younger brother's name. It became a public limited company in 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 38980


Burberry, Thomas (1835-1926), men's outfitter, was born on 27 August 1835 at Brockham Green, near Dorking, Surrey, the son of Thomas Burberry, farmer and nonconformist. Following an elementary education at Brockham Green village school, Burberry was apprenticed to a local draper's shop before opening his own outfitting business in 1856 in Westminster Street, Basingstoke. The shop expanded rapidly, benefiting from Burberry's knowledge of the retail trade and the requirements of the local farming community. He was particularly concerned with adapting the practical and watertight qualities of traditional linen farmers' smocks to a broader range of clothing products. With that aim in mind Burberry entered into experimental trials with British cotton manufacturers in order to produce a cheaper alternative weatherproof textile that would hold a strong appeal for the growing ranks of upper middle-class sportsmen and those following country pursuits, who made up the bulk of bespoke menswear consumers in the latter half of the nineteenth century. 
In 1858 Burberry married Catherine Hannah, daughter of John Newman, currier, at the Salem Chapel, Strand, London. His second wife, named Mary, outlived him. The Basingstoke shop continued to prosper, employing eighty staff by 1871. These were later joined by Burberry's two sons, Thomas and Arthur, and in 1885 by R. B. Rolls who took on the position of marketing and retail manager. Experimentation with the design of wind- and rainproof textiles and garments continued into the 1880s, coinciding with a popular interest in rational and artistic dress reform. In 1884 Burberry's new 'gabardine', a hard-wearing cloth waterproofed in the yarn before weaving and then closely woven and proofed again without the use of rubber, attracted approval at the International Health Exhibition in South Kensington, and in 1888 Burberry took out a patent for a new lighter material adapted for the garments of athletes. 
From 1889 Burberry commissioned his youngest son, Arthur, to consolidate metropolitan patronage through giving fittings and taking orders from wealthy visitors at the Jermyn Street Hotel, Piccadilly. This led to the opening of a flagship London store at 30 Haymarket under the management of R. B. Rolls in 1891, a mill and workrooms in the East End in 1892, and a wholesale warehouse in Golden Square in 1900. All of these concerns were run under paternal principles, inspired by Burberry's strong Baptist beliefs. Development of the business also incorporated the fostering of overseas and colonial clients, and between 1900 and 1914 branches of the shop were opened in New York, Buenos Aires, Paris, and Montevideo. 
In common with other clothing retailers, Burberry recognized the importance of promotion and publicity and ensured through R. B. Rolls, a partner in the firm by 1901, that the Burberry trade mark was associated in advertising and media coverage with specific 'heroic' personalities. Lord Kitchener and Lord Baden Powell both adopted Burberry weatherproofs from the time of the South African War, leading to commissions for uniforms from the army and the Royal Marines by 1906. Sir E. H. Shackleton, Captain Scott, and Roald Amundsen all proved high-profile customers in choosing Burberry textiles for kits and tents on their polar expeditions, and the pioneer aviator Claude Grahame-White provided a precedent for the Royal Flying Corps in its decision to use Burberry as a clothing supplier during the First World War. 
Burberry retired to Abbots Court near Weymouth in 1917 and devoted his time to personal religious and humanitarian causes. His adherence to the principles of healthy living which had underpinned the philosophy of his clothing and textile design found outlets in sport, teetotal and anti-smoking campaigns, and support for the Sunday closing movement. Burberry's achievement lay in the marrying of these ethics to an astute understanding of the sartorial demands of the English gentleman. Individual items of Burberry clothing thus incorporated many concessions to the radical dress reform movement, such as the prioritizing of ease of movement and comfort, quality of manufacture, and the use of natural materials, while retaining the appearance of British traditionalism which Burberry clothes came to epitomize. Having witnessed the transition of the firm to a public company in 1920, Burberry died at Crossways, his home in Hook, near Basingstoke, on 4 April 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 38981


Carr, Jonathan Dodgson (1806-1884), biscuit manufacturer, was born in Stricklandgate, Kendal, on 9 December 1806, the second in a family of four sons and five daughters of Jonathan Carr, a Quaker wholesale grocer and tea dealer of Yorkshire weaving stock, and his wife, Jane Dodgson, daughter of another Kendal grocer. He was apprenticed to a baker in Stockton from 1822 to 1828. Finding the commercial opportunities in his home town to be distinctly limited, in 1831 he tramped the 50 miles to the city of Carlisle, where he opened a bakery and mealman's shop. Two years later, he felt well enough established to marry Jane, daughter of Thomas and Mary Nicholson of Whitehaven. They were to have two daughters and four sons, three of whom later became partners in the family business. 
For much of the 1830s Carr was energetically building up an integrated business which ranged from corn merchanting and flour milling to baking, biscuit manufacture, and retailing. He subsequently added a fleet of ships to transport his requirements of wheat. Biscuits soon became the leading product group and in 1841, with the help of his local MP, he was granted the royal warrant for them. In 1846 he produced 400 tons of biscuits, employing 90 staff. He installed steam-powered machines for mixing the ingredients, though the manually operated cutting machine, adapted by the Carlisle printer Hudson Scott, fell short of the continuously running biscuit machinery evolved in Reading by George Palmer. By 1860 Carr was offering seventy-two varieties of fancy biscuit. The steady expansion of the business led to three of his brothers joining the firm of Carr & Co.; the youngest, John, departed in 1860 to Peek Frean & Co., the London biscuit firm, to be succeeded there by his son Arthur. 
Carr was a giant of a man, with a benevolent expression and a full white beard in his riper years. To demonstrate his strength, he once carried three sacks of flour, each weighing 280 lb (127 kg), the length of the mill and back. His treatment of the workforce was humane, the factory being clean and airy; he ensured personal cleanliness by providing a bath which was 14 feet square, with hot water from the steam engine. He had a schoolroom, library, and reading room close by, and he gave religious instruction in his house on Sunday afternoons. Annual outings took place to the Lake District, and once there was an excursion to Edinburgh; one of the Carrs attended the weekly employees' meeting, at which matters to do with conditions in the firm could be raised. 
Although Carr never became a local councillor, he took a lively part in public affairs. As a secretary of the Carlisle Anti-Cornlaw Association, he placed in his shop window both a taxed and an untaxed (much larger) loaf. When the corn laws were repealed in 1846, he presented every inmate in Carlisle gaol with a fruit loaf, and had a silk waistcoat made, decorated with ears of corn marked 'FREE'. He helped to promote gas and water undertakings in the city; as a founder of the Cumberland Co-operative Benefit Building Society, he spoke on housing conditions at its meetings, and he actively supported the Cumberland Infirmary. He took the initiative in developing the docks and railway in Silloth, whither the firm later transferred its flour milling operations. 
As a businessman Carr showed abundant energy and vision, and a rigid adherence to the Quaker principles of offering good-quality products at fair and fixed prices. However, his strong-minded individualism caused some friction in the Quaker community. Having become used to taking his 'Bible' into meeting, he was censured on the grounds that reading any book during meeting weakened worshippers' dependence on the promptings of the Holy Spirit. After his two eldest sons were disowned, he and his wife resigned from the society, and soon afterwards they joined the Brethren Assembly in Carlisle and became prominent members. Carr died at his home, Coldale Hall in Carlisle, on 6 April 1884. 


@@@@@


doc= 38982


Cash, John (1822-1880), ribbon manufacturer, was born on 16 February 1822 at Sherbourne House, Coventry, the eldest son of Joseph Cash, a Quaker stuff merchant and leading businessman. John's younger brother 
In 1846 John and Joseph Cash built a factory at West Orchard, Coventry, equipping it mainly with steam-powered Jacquard looms and taking on French designers to create their ribbons. In 1852 John Cash married Mary Sibree, the daughter of an Independent minister. Joseph married Sarah Iliffe in 1851, and, like his brother, raised a large family. By 1856, they employed 200 weavers in the factory, and expressed their Quaker ideals by operating a sickness benefit club and organizing outings for their employees' holidays. The brothers paid some of the highest wages in the local ribbon trade until 1857, when they were obliged to adopt the lower wage standard imposed by Coventry masters. 
Following wage disputes among the outworkers, however, and under the guidance of their philosopher friend Charles Bray, as well as being prompted by their Quaker principles, the Cash brothers drew up plans to build a factory which combined the old outwork method of weaving with modern factory organization. They bought a 7 acre field a mile from the city centre and planned to build 100 'top shops', or cottage factories, arranged round a square. Capital for their project came mainly from relatives and fellow Quaker businessmen. In the event, only forty-eight houses were built at Kingfield, starting in 1857. Even so, the Cashes set up a dramatic society, sports clubs, and evening classes for their workers. 
In 1860 the Anglo-French trade treaty brought an influx of high-quality, low-priced ribbons, and many Coventry firms collapsed, unable to compete. J. and J. Cash, as it now was, suffered severe losses, and the brothers were obliged radically to restructure their partnership. They reorganized the top shops on factory lines and set up a departmental structure to embark on diversification. Their first new line was narrow frillings, for which they took out a patent in September 1860. Thanks to the Cash brothers' prudent management, as well as the guarantee of capital from relatively safe sources, the business survived, with diversification into other fabric lines an important factor in its continuing viability. 
The brothers preserved their reputation as benevolent employers, and during a strike in 1860 refused to lock out their employees. By 1862, however, the general collapse of trade appears to have made them somewhat more exacting and harsher. 
John and Joseph Cash were known throughout Coventry for their philanthropy, and Joseph founded St Thomas's infant school. Both brothers made handsome contributions to local charities. Additionally, John served as a Liberal on Coventry city council, 1868-76. John Cash became increasingly drawn to the Independent nonconformists, and established an Independent chapel in Vicar Lane. His work for the Independents caused him to be disowned by the Quakers in 1844. 
John Cash was in poor health for the last two years of his life, but kept up his daily routine and his regular visits to business acquaintances. On one occasion he injured his leg at Cheltenham railway station, but was determined to fulfil his day's engagement. On returning home, he had to have the boot cut off the swollen limb, which was found to be broken. 
John Cash was reserved in character, but inclined to be abrupt in manner in business discussions, as a result of which he was sometimes misunderstood. Although keen to support local causes dear to his heart, such as education, he was never one to court popularity. In private life, among family and friends, he was generally frank and genial, and eager to hear the views of others as well as (sometimes forcibly) express his own. 
Both brothers died in 1880, John on 9 September at Rosehill, his Coventry residence, leaving a personal estate of less than $60,000, and Joseph on 14 October at his home, Bird Grove, Coventry, leaving an estate of under $45,000. John was buried at Coventry cemetery on 14 September; the chief mourners included his five sons and three nephews. The partnership was taken over by John's eldest son, Sidney (1856-1931), and his cousin Joseph (1853-1927). The well-known Cash's name-tapes were introduced only in the early twentieth century, originally as labels for manufacturers who wished to identify their products. 


@@@@@


doc= 38983


Joseph Cash (1826-1880), ribbon manufacturer, was born on 28 October 1826 at the same address. After serving seven-year apprenticeships with stuff merchants and so becoming entitled to become freemen of the city, the brothers operated a silk ribbon-making business from a warehouse in Hertford Street, Coventry, in the early 1840s. 


@@@@@


doc= 38988


Cow, Peter Brusey (1815-1890), rubber manufacturer, was born at Deptford on 25 September 1815, the younger son of John Cow, a master boat builder at Woolwich Dockyard. In 1830, at the age of fifteen, he was apprenticed to Charles Gower Collins, a linen draper of Lower Sloane Street, Chelsea. After completing his apprenticeship in 1835 he stayed with Collins until 1837, when he worked for Gainsford and Goods for a year. In 1838 he went to Swan and Edgar at Waterloo House, where he lived in, but was meantime in touch with Samuel Matthews, superintendent of the three London branches of Charles Macintosh & Co., rubber manufacturers, at 46 Cheapside, 66 Broad Street, and 58 Charing Cross. The firm's main activity was the manufacture of waterproof garments made of double-texture cloth. In 1842 Cow opened his own shop in Bishopsgate, selling lace and baby linen. 
Cow was made a member of the Loriners' Company in 1843, and on 11 November that year married Sarah Hatfull, a doctor's daughter from Deptford. Matthews had meanwhile bought the Charing Cross branch of Macintosh & Co. and in 1846 offered Cow a joint share in the Cheapside business with his son George, which he accepted. The Cows lived at the Cheapside premises and their first son, Peter Brusey (II), was born there in 1847. A second son, Douglas, followed in 1849, and there were also three daughters of the marriage: Sarah Elizabeth, later wife of Edward Spencer Alexander, Mary Billing, who married Richard Osmond Hearson, and Kate. 
In 1850 Matthews took George out of the business and sold his share to Cow for $4000. The firm was now styled P. B. Cow, Rubber Manufacturer. In 1851 a factory was opened at Deptford Creek, and the Cows moved there. That same year, when it was the first to introduce waterproof tweed commercially, the firm won an award at the Great Exhibition at the Crystal Palace. 
In 1852, with William G. Forster, Cow founded the Lonestone Chemical Works at Streatham, and in 1857 moved the manufacturing activity from the Deptford factory, which had become too small, to a former crepe factory at Streatham. The firm still traded as P. B. Cow, and retained this name in 1861 when Cow took a partner, John Hill, to help at the Cheapside premises. The renamed firm of Cow and Forster resulted when Cow took Thomas Forster as partner in 1863, but when the partnership was renewed in 1868 the old name was reintroduced, in the style P. B. Cow, Hill & Co. 
Cow's elder son had now joined the Streatham side of the business and became partner there in 1871. In 1874 Cow senior purchased the Cheapside property and soon after acquired the adjacent premises at no. 47 for the expanding business. In 1874 Cow's grandson, Peter Brusey (III), was born, and that same year his second son, Douglas, became a partner, sharing the management of the Cheapside business with Hill. In 1881 the Cheapside premises were destroyed by fire, and a new building was erected on the site. When Hill retired in 1887, to be succeeded by James Crump, the firm's cashier, the firm once again became P. B. Cow & Co. 
Cow senior retired in 1888, by which time his already indifferent health was fast deteriorating. A winter stay in Hastings from November 1889 had no beneficial effect, and he returned gravely ill to Streatham, where he died of heart failure at his home, 15 Streatham Common on 27 March 1890. Cow was actively involved in church work throughout his life, and was on the building committee of St James's, Hatcham. While at Streatham he was churchwarden of Emmanuel Church, Streatham Common, and he donated generously to the building of St Andrew's Church, Lower Streatham. 


@@@@@


doc= 38989


Crittall, Francis Henry (1860-1935), metal window manufacturer, was born on 27 July 1860 at 27 Bank Street, Braintree, Essex, the eighth of the eleven children of Francis Berrington Crittall (died 1879), an ironmonger, and Fanny Morris, 'nee' Godfrey (died 1879). His parents, from Kent and Rutland respectively, had settled in Braintree in 1849. 
Crittall was brought up in a strict nonconformist household and attended private schools in Braintree and Witham. His scholastic achievements were undistinguished, and in 1876 he joined his father and elder brother, Richard, in the family business in metal working and retailing. In 1881, two years after both his parents died, Francis Henry left for Birmingham where he found employment at a manufacturer of metal bedsteads. He attended evening classes in drawing at Birmingham School of Art while there. After a year he started an ironmonger's shop in Chester but in 1883, when his brother decided to give up the family business, Crittall returned to Braintree. In the same year he married Ellen Laura Carter (died 1934), daughter of a middle-class Baptist family from Birmingham; they had five children. With financial help from a local grocer, Crittall then began to rebuild the Bank Street firm. 
Crittall was mainly interested in the practical side of the business, and he concentrated his efforts on the manufacturing of metal products for engineering and architectural purposes from a workshop on the premises. The company's professionalism and the quality of its work established its reputation, and by the late 1880s substantial commissions were being obtained from as far away as Lancashire. Realizing that the future lay in specialized production he persuaded his partners to form a second company, the Crittall Manufacturing Company Ltd, in 1889, specifically for the manufacture of windows and doors. In 1894 this activity moved to a purpose-built factory, the Manor Works, in Braintree. 
Under Crittall's energetic leadership, and with an enhanced production capacity, the company prospered, winning several prestigious contracts for specialist metalwork. By the turn of the century a nationwide sales network had been established and in 1904 Crittalls opened an office and showroom in Finsbury Square, London. Three years later the company ventured abroad and started the Detroit Steel Products Company, which first introduced steel windows to the United States. Crittall's two eldest sons, Valentine George (1884-1961) and Walter Francis (1887-1956), were elected to the board at this time. 
The firm steadily expanded, and the formation of a casting company in 1911, which by the following year employed 500 people, consolidated Crittall's manufacturing base. With annual sales of $100,000 the company had secured a leading position in the British metal window industry but, despite considerable technical progress, its products were still confined to the luxury market. Crittall was keen to produce domestic windows for mass consumption, but the development was interrupted by the First World War. In 1915 Crittall helped form the East Anglia Munitions Company, comprising forty-two private manufacturing companies, which successfully challenged the monopoly of the official 'armaments ring', with considerable efficiency gains in armaments production. He remained its joint manager for the duration of the war and had the Crittall factories converted for the mass production of munitions components, employing up to 2000 personnel. 
The experience thus gained of large-scale production techniques proved useful to the company during the post-war redevelopment phase, as did the Crittall family's many links with progressive architectural and planning circles. The firm played a key role in the campaign to have standardized metal windows accepted in the general domestic market and government housing schemes: Crittall was co-founder and chairman of the Steel Window Association, a combination of twenty-one manufacturers, which from 1919 to 1921 promoted this cause. Some of the company's individual efforts to find practical application for the new technology were also significant, notably the prefabricated houses erected through its subsidiary, the Unit Construction Company (1919-20), and Silver End, the self-sufficient garden village built 1926-32 for its employees. 
The 1920s brought rapid growth. Two new Essex factories were added to the expanding Braintree works and in 1924, when Crittalls was floated as a public company, its workforce totalled nearly 2000. It was double that before the end of the decade. In 1922 Crittall stepped down as managing director, a position he had held since 1898, in order to direct the company's overseas development programme. Accompanied by his wife he undertook several world tours between 1921 and 1933 to promote Crittalls' interests, which are described in their joint publication, 'Fifty Years of Work and Play' (1934). By the time of his death the firm had a global export trade, subsidiaries in eight countries and an authorized share capital of $1.5 million. 
Crittall maintained an active involvement in the management of the firm until 1933 but the last years of his life were devoted increasingly to the development of Silver End (where he moved in 1927) and welfare schemes for the Crittall workers. In the latter, as in other matters, he was a progressive, yet he showed little inclination for active political service during his life. He died of heart failure on board ship returning from the Caribbean on 9 March 1935 and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. The family connection with the company he founded lasted until 1980. 


@@@@@


doc= 38991


Lord, Cyril (1911-1984), carpet manufacturer, was born on 12 July 1911 at 129 Moorside Street, Droylsden, Manchester, the son of Richard Lund Lord and his wife, Kate, 'nee' Hackney. His family had impeccable textile connections linking Macclesfield and Saddleworth hand-loom weavers, and his was a Wesleyan Methodist upbringing within a close mill community. In later life he rebelled against many of his early associations, was educated at the central school in Manchester, and defied his father, a worker in the co-operative movement, by taking an apprenticeship with a local textile firm. Working in the expanding rayon industry, he studied at the Manchester College of Technology and in 1935 moved to a London firm of wholesalers and merchant converters. During the Second World War he was an adviser to the Cotton Board and an instructor in the weaving of 'cotton' from utility fibres in Northern Ireland. 
By 1945 the basis of Lord's remarkable post-war rise had been laid. A specialist in man-made fibres and their applications, he had connections with both producers and those in merchandising, and was a remarkable salesman. A short but strong man, intolerant of bureaucracy and compromise, he showed bravery verging on recklessness in business. With the support of the Irish banks, and in association with William McMillan, the assemblage of his company began with the purchase of two mills in Chorley. Its partial flotation in 1954 was oversubscribed twelvefold. Following a world tour in 1953, Lord was to the forefront of the campaign for trade protection, culminating in the 'Cotton Industry Act' (1959). He gained much publicity when he sent 1200 members of the political and economic establishment spindles of cotton and wallets stuffed with Japanese money. Specializing in 'from the factory' sales, and the Taiho fabric, his mills made good profits, making him a millionaire by the early 1960s. 
Lord responded to the further contraction of the cotton industry with an ill-fated enterprise in South Africa, and by diversifying into carpet production. Backed by government funds, he established a large factory at Donaghadee, co. Down, Northern Ireland, in 1956. His greatest venture, this plant could produce 5 yards of carpet per minute, and employed 800 people in a town of only 3700. Relentless sales campaigns, in which Lord, with his jingle 'This is luxury you can afford by Cyril Lord', was much to the fore, fed the consumer boom of the 1960s. The pace of expansion could not be maintained, new product lines failed, and, amid increasing difficulties, Lord's health broke down in September 1967, and he retired to the West Indies. The collapse of his firm in October 1968 was one of the spectacular failures of the period. The firm's prospects, trumpeted in a second share issue in 1965, were revealed to have been unfounded, and directors had much reduced their holdings. The collapse was the subject of a libel action in 1974, and a final payment to creditors was made only in 1987. 
Lord was a colourful personality who played the part of the millionaire to the full: a character based on him appeared in a 1967 episode of the American television series 'Batman' in the shape of 'Mat Man, the Karpet King of Europe'. Though principally remembered for the spectacular demise of his company, Lord was a genuine innovator, whose career, up to a point, represented a logical, if individualistic, business response in a declining industry. 
Lord was married three times: on 26 December 1936 to Bessie Greenwood ('b'. 1913/14), whom he divorced in 1959 and with whom he had two sons and two daughters; on 17 January 1960 to the journalist and novelist Shirley Florence Hussey, 'nee' Stringer ('b'. 1932/3), whom he divorced in 1973; and in 1974 to Aileen Parnell, widow of impresario Val Parnell. Lord died after a long illness at his home in Barbados on 29 May 1984. 


@@@@@


doc= 38992


Dunhill, Alfred (1872-1959), manufacturer of pipes and tobacco, was born on 30 September 1872 at 2 Church Path, Hornsey, Middlesex, the second son of five children of Henry Dunhill (1842-1901), a master blind-maker, and his wife and cousin, Jane, 'nee' Styles (1843-1922). Henry Dunhill ran his business from the Euston Road, making among other things, accessories for horse-drawn vehicles. The young Alfred joined the firm when he was fifteen, following his formal education at a private Hampstead school and by tutors. In 1893 he acquired the business and quickly demonstrated his perspicacity and eye for the main chance by switching emphasis to the needs of the fledgeling motor industry. By the time of his first marriage, to Alice Stapleton (1873/4-1945) on 15 June 1895, he had established a separate business, Dunhill's Motorities, selling everything but the motor to early enthusiasts of the sport. Five years later he set up the Discount Motor Car Company, selling his accessories through mail order. However, Dunhill was determined to capture a good corner of the market and made the decision to tap its top end by forgoing mail order and entering the world of retail sales. In 1902 he opened his first shop in Conduit Street, Mayfair, selling clothing and accessories to both chauffeurs and their employers. The days of draughty driving offered wide scope for Dunhill's creative talents and indeed it was the chance idea of a 'windshield pipe', designed to protect sportsmen from the dangers of flying sparks, that was to herald his entry into the crowded world of the tobacco trade. The patent application for this unique pipe in 1904 prompted him to open his first tobacconist shop in Duke Street, St James's, in 1907. It was evident from the choice of location that Dunhill was intent on offering the very best to a select clientele. His shop, more redolent of a gentleman's club, offered all manner of pleasures for the discerning smoker: individual blends of exotic tobaccos and a whole array of smokers' requisites combined to create a heady mix of opulence and preserve. 
By 1910 Dunhill had taken additional premises in Duke Street to accommodate more comfortably the thirteen employees engaged in cigarette manufacturing. The expansion of the business was enhanced further when Dunhill's youngest brother, Herbert, and his eldest son, Alfred, joined him in 1912, followed by his second son, Vernon, in the following year. The war provided the company with its real opportunity to prosper -- not only to exploit the mail-order business but to change the image of the smoker, from simperer to decent, home-loving soldier, evoking memories of home and hearth with a flick of the match. 
However, it is the pipe that has enjoyed the closest and most enduring association with the name Dunhill. His 1924 monograph, 'The Pipe Book', reveals an encyclopaedic knowledge of the history of the pipe as well as claims to its long-standing appeal. The self-seasoned briar root, used for the manufacture of all top-rate pipes, was hailed by Dunhill as the ideal pipe material, and although briar pipes sold by the company were nearly twice as expensive as any others available there was never a shortage of customers. 
The post-war period witnessed both expansion and the commissioning of fresh products. The company always ensured its products were covered by patent and trade mark, a policy prosecuted with vigour from the outset. The early 1920s saw the wholesale and export side of the business move to Notting Hill Gate, close to the pipe and cigarette division located at Campden Hill Road. In 1921 the firm received its first royal warrant, as tobacconist to Edward, prince of Wales; it enjoyed his loyal custom even during his years in exile. The 1920s also saw the opening of shops in New York, Toronto, and Paris as well as a branch in the City of London to serve the appreciative businessman. 
The inter-war years were also a time for innovation and invention. The Unique lighter, a product that Dunhill and his brother had much interest in developing, proved a vast improvement on the undependable match and sold in thousands. This pocket version was followed by a variety of table models and joined a long list of other original ideas, including the somewhat bizarre Lite-up handbag for ladies who needed to see its contents in the dark. 
Dunhill's decision to chair his final meeting of the company on 5 February 1929 was precipitated by personal circumstances. Having placed the firm on a steady course, he felt able to leave his son Alfred in charge. He left his wife and journeyed to Worthing to join his mistress of long standing, Vera Mildred Wright ('b'. 1902/3), who changed her name to his by deed poll. Together they enjoyed their autumnal years, yachting, fishing, and motoring around the south coast. He married Vera on 28 March 1945, shortly after the death of his wife. He died at Hopedene Nursing Home, Wordsworth Road, Worthing on 2 January 1959, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 38994


Cooper, Frank (1844-1927), marmalade manufacturer, was born on 12 November 1844 over his father's shop at 46 High Street, Oxford, the eldest surviving son of Francis Thomas Cooper (1811-1862), hatter and tea dealer, and his wife, Decima (1819-1857), daughter of Isaac Stone. Both parents came from the market town of Thame, 13 miles east of Oxford, where Francis's father had been an innkeeper and Decima's a builder. Encouraged by his brother Henry, who worked for the London tea-importing firm of Ridgways, Francis had for several years combined his hatter's business with an agency for Ridgways' teas; but in 1845 he abandoned the hatter's trade to become a grocer and dealer in tea and coffee. In 1856, after the decline and near closure of Oxford's former main coaching inn, the Angel, Francis Cooper moved his family and business across the road into two adjacent properties, formerly belonging to the Angel, at 83-4 High Street, with his shop in the spacious, pillared former coffee room of the hotel at no. 84. 
Following his father's death in 1862, the seventeen-year-old Frank Cooper and a widowed aunt were left in charge of the grocery shop. His mother had died five years earlier, and the family was cared for by a resident cousin from Thame. In 1872 Frank married Sarah Jane Gill (1848-1932), daughter of John Gill, a Worcestershire farmer; she was connected on her father's side with the Gills and Wards, prominent Oxford coal-dealing and ironmongering families. Frank and Sarah had five children, one of whom died in 1903. Sarah Jane Cooper is traditionally credited with the manufacture of the first batch of Seville orange marmalade, which went on sale in the shop, in stoneware jars, in the spring of 1874. 'Her insistence on using Seville oranges... and her method of presenting the coarse-cut, chunky but well-macerated peel, produced a high-quality and excitingly bitter-tasting marmalade' (Allen, 33). Popular among undergraduates as a feature of the new, lighter breakfasts and as a source of energy for athletes in training, the distinctive 'Oxford' marmalade became something of a late-Victorian cult food. Other Oxford grocers, and some of the colleges, followed the Coopers' example in manufacturing and selling their own marmalade; but the Coopers remained well ahead, adding jam to their output in the early 1880s, and mounting an extensive advertising campaign which stressed the purity of their marmalade and included sending samples to the smarter military messes, London clubs, and leading department stores. By 1884 Frank was displaying the royal arms, as a purveyor of marmalade to the prince of Wales, the future Edward VII; and in 1911-12 tins of Oxford marmalade accompanied Captain Scott on his Antarctic expedition. A miniature jar of Frank Cooper's Oxford marmalade later found a place in Queen Mary's dolls' house at Windsor Castle. 
Despite the increasing success of his marmalade business, Frank Cooper continued as a grocer and wine merchant until 1919, living on the premises of his shop in the High Street, until 1907, when he moved with Sarah Jane to a newly built Edwardian house, 155 Woodstock Road, Oxford. The jam and marmalade continued to be made on the shop premises, under Sarah Jane's supervision, until early in 1903, when (probably as a result of strictures on manufacturing conditions in the 1901 'Factory Act') their production moved to a purpose-built factory in Park End Street, Oxford. 
In 1913 Frank Cooper sold his personal interest in the manufacturing business for $26,559 15's.' 6'd.' to a newly constituted limited company, Frank Cooper Ltd, directed by himself, his sons, and his son-in-law. All the ordinary and preference shares were held by Cooper and members of his family. The eldest son, William Frank Cooper (1874-1952), manager of the factory, became managing director; the youngest, Maurice, became company secretary; and the second son, Arthur, an engineer, sat on the board. This eventually included a few non-family members, but the business remained for the most part family-owned. Frank Cooper, as governing chairman, attended every board meeting of the company during the remaining fourteen years of his life, and regularly appeared at the factory in his chauffeur-driven Daimler car. Always careful, he was renowned among the workforce during his last years for his thriftiness, and had few obvious interests outside the business. He died at home in Oxford on 26 July 1927, leaving an estate valued at $47,848 3's.' 11'd.' He was survived by his wife. The company remained independent until the early 1960s, when it merged with Brown and Polson Ltd, part of the American-owned CPC group of companies. A purpose-built factory, which was opened at Wantage, Berkshire, at this time, finally severed the manufacturing link between Cooper's marmalade and Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 38995


Eno, James Crossley (1827/8-1915), manufacturer of patent medicine, was born in Newcastle, the son of James Eno ('c'.1793-1829), a general shopkeeper, and his wife, Elizabeth (1792/3-1874), daughter of John Jackson. After leaving school, he was apprenticed to a Newcastle retail chemist, and in 1846 became a dispenser at the infirmary there at $60 a year. In his spare time, he practised as a dentist. In 1852 he was able to buy a local chemist's business. He continued his dentistry work and sold some of his own products, among them a hair restorer. That year on 20 June he married Elizabeth Ann (died 1907), daughter of John Edward Cooke, gardener, of Winlaton, co. Durham. They had two daughters and also a son, Crossley, who died of typhoid before reaching adulthood. 
Eno was one of several Newcastle chemists, such as Joseph Wilson Swan, who at that time were striving to break out of the dull dispensing routine. Using a by-product of the area's burgeoning alkali industry, he began, probably in the late 1850s, to make a saline preparation comprising a mixture of tartaric and citric acid with sodium bicarbonate, which created an effervescent drink when water was added. As this proved a palatable remedy for hangovers and digestive troubles, Eno advertised it by giving free samples to the captains of vessels in Newcastle docks. Consequently overseas sales soon outstripped those at home, the ranks of dyspeptic seafaring customers being joined by British expatriates, especially in the tropics. As Eno's advertisements constantly stressed, excessive drinking could lead only to biliousness and attacks of dysentery; while advocating moderation in food and drink, plentiful exercise, and so on, he urged the use of his preparation to help secrete healthy bile and hence purify the blood. 
In the early 1870s demand began to soar. According to his own testimony, Eno invented the title of Eno's Fruit Salt in 1873; it was later registered under the 'Trade Marks Registration Act' of 1875, but it was never patented, as he was wont to claim. When his elder daughter married in 1874, her husband, John Nicholson Fleming MD (died 1889), joined the firm as manager. That year Eno published a puffing 'Treatise on the Stomach and its Trials'. In 1876 the firm was transferred to London, where a factory was opened at New Cross. Eno acquired Wood Hall, a mansion with large grounds, in nearby Dulwich. 
Eno sold only to wholesalers, in quantities not under a gross, charged them outward carriage, and required cash with orders. The firm grew on a tide of change in tastes among digestive sufferers. Although sales of old-fashioned pills, such as those of Thomas Beecham, remained buoyant, demand was mounting for remedies that were more palatable. Eno exploited the trend with plentiful advertising, on which he was spending between $14,000 and $16,000 annually by the early 1890s; in 1914 profits were $128,000 on $260,000 turnover. So far from emulating the Beechams with catchy and amusing advertisements, he preferred to disseminate his views on many topics: in half-page spreads inserted in prestige weeklies such as the 'Illustrated London News' he would cram up to a thousand words, headed by barely penetrable aphorisms such as 'contemplation is the only lasting pleasure'. At one stage he ran a campaign about the poor sanitary condition of Britain's inner cities. 
While Eno's wordy offerings must have been the despair of his London advertising agents, Gordon and Gotch, few people were put off his rather agreeable product. With branches in Australia and South Africa, the agency doubtless helped to make the business truly international. At home, Eno's claim that the product was a fruit salt was challenged in several high-profile legal cases. After the second, in 1889, which was fought up to the House of Lords, the description 'fruit salt' was struck from the register, not to be restored until an amending act of 1907. 
In 1897 J. C. Eno was registered as a private limited company, with a capital of $100,000 and Eno as governing director. He continued to take an active part until 1905, thereafter dividing his time between his home and the National Liberal Club. He was generous to his old infirmary in Newcastle, donating over $10,000 in 1899 and a further $40,000 in his will. He also left $50,000 to Guy's Hospital, London. Tall and of singularly handsome appearance when young, in old age he kept his spare frame, with a shock of white hair and a white beard. He was afflicted with total deafness and was entirely indifferent to everything at his club except the newspapers; the club secretary could recall no member who had ever had the slightest contact with him. Eno died of pneumonia at his home, Wood Hall, College Road, Dulwich, on 11 May 1915 and was cremated at Golders Green four days later. A granddaughter was Dame Isobel Cripps, wife of Sir Stafford Cripps who wrote a legal opinion on how to retain exclusive rights to the words 'fruit salt' by playing down the name of Eno; this remained a doctrine of the Eno company even after it was taken over by Beechams in 1938. 


@@@@@


doc= 38996


McKendrick, John Gray (1841-1926), physiologist, was born on 12 August 1841 in the Hardgate, Aberdeen, the only son of James MacKendrick, a silk merchant, of Braco, Perthshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Smith, of Laurencekirk. The key elements in his life were his fascination with natural processes, humanity, and the Christian faith. It is remarkable that a long struggle with poverty should have produced a man so driven by idealism. His mother contracted tuberculosis and could look after him for only his first three or four months. His father died aged twenty-nine after his business in Aberdeen failed; he entrusted his son to a Mrs Gray, a milliner, who became the guiding spirit of McKendrick's early years. For a while she looked after the boy in Aberdeen, but he liked the country, so she left him with his grandparents in Braco. The summer of 1854 was a formative one. Long days in the countryside employed as a 'herd laddie' made a deep impression, and, as McKendrick later explained, 'My mind awoke about this time' (McKendrick, 'Story of my Life', 11). Meanwhile, Mrs Gray obtained an apprenticeship for him with a firm of advocates in Aberdeen. Through the kindness of friends he was introduced to the possibilities of education, and to his future wife, Mary Souttar. His interest in natural history, especially marine zoology, was encouraged by an anatomist, Peter Redfern, who arranged for McKendrick to exhibit an aquarium at the British Association meeting of 1859, attended by John Gould, Richard Owen, T. H. Huxley, and Roderick Murchison. Redfern suggested that McKendrick should study medicine, and in 1861, aged twenty, he passed the examinations to enter the medical faculty of Aberdeen University. 
McKendrick's first year went well, bringing him the comparative anatomy prize, and honours in chemistry, but then disaster struck. His employer asked him to return for work one Saturday afternoon, but he stayed too long at a concert to hear Jenny Lind sing, and was dismissed for being almost thirty minutes late. He found work in Edinburgh in a newspaper office, learnt anatomy from John Goodsir, whom he regarded as the father of British physiology, and won Goodsir's gold medal. But he suffered another frightening setback when he coughed blood. W. T. Gairdner, later a pioneer in public health, diagnosed tuberculosis and advised rest in the country. McKendrick soon recovered, and with further training in Aberdeen and Edinburgh graduated MD, ChB in 1864. After posts in Chester and Whitechapel, London, he got a well-paid position as house surgeon in Belford Hospital, Fort William, and on 21 August 1867 was able to marry Mary Souttar (1842-1896), daughter of William Souttar, a railway clerk, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Mearns. They had two daughters and three sons, including Anderson Gray McKendrick (1876-1943), medical statistician. 
In 1869 McKendrick by chance met Hughes Bennett, professor of physiology in Edinburgh University, who offered him an assistantship. Acceptance reduced his salary, but opened the door to science as a profession. Bennett's frail health gave McKendrick the opportunity to stand in for the professor during the winter sessions, lecturing also to some formidable women pioneers, such as Sophia Jex-Blake. McKendrick also began research. From observing the effects of removing portions of the brains of pigeons he concluded that the deeper parts of the corpora striata are concerned with movement. He was intrigued to know what part of the brain gave these birds their individual characters; for this reason, years later, he set up a lectureship in experimental psychology in Glasgow University. His most significant research was with the physical chemist James Dewar. They discovered that light falling on the retina elicited an electric signal in the retina and optic nerve; the same effect was demonstrated in many species. Light shining on one retina affected optic lobes on both sides of the head. Unhappily, unknown to them, Holmgren of Uppsala had already published similar findings. McKendrick and Dewar also collaborated in pharmacological experiments; their work on chinoline and piridine bases laid the foundations for antipyrine therapy. These experiments made McKendrick's reputation. He later made observations on many subjects -- measurements of the cochlea, improvements to apparatus, anaesthetics, respiration -- but none had the impact of these earlier studies in Edinburgh. In 1873 Bennett resigned, but William Rutherford, not McKendrick, was elected to succeed him. Initially this was another setback -- Lister called round to sympathize -- but McKendrick quickly recovered financially by extramural teaching, and in 1876 became professor of physiology in Glasgow University. 
McKendrick's predecessor, Andrew Buchanan, who discovered fibrinogen, left a department seriously behind the times. McKendrick bought equipment from the continent, initially at his own expense. By the time of his retirement he had raised about $20,000 for the department and provided his successor with spacious accommodation. He wrote textbooks for medical students, first a single volume, then two volumes, and a biography of Hermann von Helmholtz (1899). Although McKendrick was a founder member of the Physiological Society, his research activities focused on the Royal Institution, where Dewar was now director. As Fullerian professor there (a post held conjointly with his regius chair), he gave public lectures, including Christmas lectures to children. The text of the 1892 series survives, confirming his reputation as one of the best popular lecturers of his time. In addition, he was in demand to lecture on the relation between science and religion (he was a strong Congregationalist). The Combe lectures drew audiences of a thousand. McKendrick later expressed remorse that he had allowed all this intense activity to direct his attention away from original research. However, in his favourite topic, acoustics, experimental methods were still too primitive for real progress. 
In 1906 McKendrick retired to Stonehaven, Aberdeenshire, and was elected provost in 1910. He was elected FRSE and FRCP Edin. (1871) and FRS (1884), and received an honorary LLD from Aberdeen (1882), and Glasgow (1907). He died at his home, 10 Rosslyn Terrace, Glasgow, on 2 January 1926, and was buried at the chapel of St Mary's between Muchalls and Stonehaven. 


@@@@@


doc= 38997


Foden, Edwin (1841-1911), vehicle manufacturer, was born on 5 August 1841 in Smallwood, near Sandbach, Cheshire, the son of William Foden, a grocer, and his wife, Martha, 'nee' Goodall. He left school at thirteen, and after two years as a village post-boy he took up an apprenticeship with the agricultural engineering firm of Platt and Hancock, at Elworth, near Sandbach, walking the 3 miles from Smallwood daily. He then widened his experience at Crewe railway workshops and at another workshop in nearby Kidsgrove before returning to Elworth, where by the age of nineteen he was shop foreman. 
By 1866, when he was twenty-five, Foden had risen to be a partner in the firm, now Hancock and Foden. He worked closely with his staff, readily sharing his engineering expertise. He earned their respect and loyalty, despite his tendency to criticize what he regarded as poor workmanship. He was known to peer over the shoulder of an employee, then take the tool from the man's hand and do the job himself, saying, 'Do it this way, lad, then tha'lt do it reet' (Kennet, 33). 
In the mid-1860s Foden married Sophia Scragg (1841-1893); they had two sons and two surviving daughters. In 1868 their first son, William Foden, was born. In 1870 Foden's partner, George Hancock, retired from Foden and Hancock, as it now was, though remaining as adviser. In 1876 Foden took sole control and renamed the firm Edwin Foden & Sons, anticipating a family concern. At first he built mainly traction engines and mechanical threshers powered by horse-drawn 'portable' steam engines. Such machines were cumbersome and costly, however, and he sought to improve them. Most traction engines were then of the single-cylinder type and designed for agricultural use, since the legislation of the day severely limited the haulage of freight by road. When restrictions on the use of engines on roads began to be lifted from the 1870s, Foden saw that the way lay ahead for a much more efficient engine, and that it could attract a healthy market. However, it would need to economize on fuel, since all the coal would have to be carried by the vehicle instead of being left in a heap at the worksite. 
Foden's answer was a traction engine powered by a twin-cylinder, compound steam engine. It took him three years to develop this and early trials were not always successful. Finally, he produced a reliable, marketable engine and was so pleased with its performance that he entered it for the Royal Agricultural Society trials at Newcastle in 1887. Driven by his second son, Edwin Richard Foden (b. 1870) ['see under 'Foden, William], it won a gold medal, thanks to its low fuel consumption (only 1.84 lb of coal per horsepower per hour) and versatility. Even so, it was still designed for agricultural use, and it was only in 1896, when the 'Locomotives on Highways Act' was passed, allowing heavy machines to travel on the road, that Foden was finally free to develop his road engines. 
Building on the success of his agricultural model, Foden and his sons concentrated their efforts on the production of a road steamer. The first four prototypes were built by 1900, the last of which, a 3 ton vehicle with horizontal boiler, defeated ten other engines in trials by the War Office in 1901, again gaining praise for its performance and manoeuvrability. 
Despite such acclaim Foden was aware that his family business was inadequate to cope with the necessary expansion and modernization. To raise capital, in 1901 he formed a new company, Fodens Ltd, with himself as managing director and a business colleague, Cecil Brunner, as chairman. His two sons were joined on the board by two more brothers, former Elworth customers. Over the next ten years the firm's profits rose fivefold. Foden's first wife died in 1893, and the following year he married Annie Cowap (1868-1939). There were two daughters and one surviving son from the second marriage. 
By 1910 Edwin Foden's health was in steady decline, and he died from cancer on 31 August 1911 at his home, Elworth House, Bradwall, near Sandbach, Cheshire. His cortege was led by the Foden Motor Works Band, which he had helped to found, playing his favourite Methodist hymns. His younger son, Edwin Richard Foden, founded ERF, the truck manufacturers, in 1933. 


@@@@@


doc= 38998


Fyffe, Edward Wathen (1853-1935), tea and fruit importer, was born on 31 December 1853 in Woodchester, Gloucestershire, the younger son of Ebenezer Wathen Fyffe and his wife, Martha, 'nee' Dunn. His father was head of a long established tea trading business in London, which became E. W. Fyffe, Son & Co. Fyffe was brought up in the Gloucestershire village of Box, near Minchinhampton. After an attempt at farming, he entered the family firm and on his father's death was left in sole charge, his elder brother having taken holy orders. 
Fyffe appears to have been reasonably successful, undertaking a trip to Ceylon to establish personal contacts with the growers at the start of his career. He married Ida Stanton Brown (1859-1911), daughter of a Baptist minister, in 1884. They had two daughters within a very short time of each other, which led to a sharp deterioration in Ida's health, diagnosed as tuberculosis. As was customary in those days, a sojourn in a warmer climate such as that of the Canary Islands was advised. The family spent most of 1887 there with the result that Ida recovered completely, becoming well enough to enjoy social life and travel. In that way Edward became acquainted with the recent traumatic downturns in the islands' economy and was able to assess its potential. 
Sir Alfred Jones, of the Elder Dempster Line, had already been encouraging the growing and export of bananas and tomatoes, to replace the islands' former main export, cochineal, now obsolete owing to the invention of aniline dyes. Elder Dempster's coal-carrying vessels picked up the fruit as cheap deck cargo on their return journey to Liverpool, but there was no organized distribution network in the UK for bananas and in the London fruit market they were regarded as an expensive luxury. Fyffe investigated the possibility of shipping the fruit directly to London himself. The problem, of which Elder Dempster and other shippers were equally aware, was the difficulty of bringing the fruit to Britain in good condition. Fyffe decided to confine himself to providing an import agency in London. It was a skilfully negotiated arrangement, in which the responsibility for the provision of fruit in reasonable condition fell on the grower. Evidence is lacking regarding its precise terms, but it is clear that Fyffe's long stay in the Canaries secured for him the confidence of a number of expatriate Britons who had become large landowners there. They agreed to back his venture and he sold their consignments on a commission basis. The first cargo of fruit arrived in September 1888, realized a reasonable profit, and from then on regular shipments were made. Most was sold in Covent Garden, with a small quantity being sold directly to the better class of London fruiterer. He met little competition in London until 1892, when Elder Dempster extended its activities from Liverpool. 
By 1897 the growers' 'syndicate' decided to buy Fyffe out, even though they had enjoyed great prosperity on his account. The reasons for this are obscure. Fyffe had taken a partner, James Hudson, in 1896 and the firm had changed its name to Fyffe, Hudson & Co. This now became a private limited company in which the Canary Island expatriate growers held all the preference and ordinary shares. 
After he was bought out, Fyffe retired from business altogether, apart from a brief period as chairman of Hilliers Bacon Curing Factory, whose founder was related to his wife. During his brief involvement with the trade, he had seen banana imports grow from 10,000 to nearly a million hands a year. He left the company in sound enough shape to induce Elder Dempster to merge its fruit department with it in 1901 under the style of Elders and Fyffes Ltd. By that time Jamaica had become a major source of supply. 
Fyffe enjoyed a long retirement. He lived at Trullwell, Box, until his death, indulging his golfing interests and working for the National Trust. He does not appear to have been a man of great business ambitions. He took an opportunity that came his way quite fortuitously and built on it as far as he could, but was quite happy to retire gracefully at the age of forty-four. After his wife died in 1911 his daughters, both unmarried, continued to live with him. He died at Trullwell on 17 October 1935, leaving an estate of $38,493, which, in its time, and considering his long retirement, represented a considerable amount of wealth. 


@@@@@


doc= 38999


Gamage, Albert Walter (1855-1930), retail entrepreneur and department store owner, was born on 14 July 1855 at Hereford, the seventeenth child of Henry Gamage, a plumber and glazier, and his wife, Tryphina Carr. After leaving the local school he was apprenticed to a draper at Winslow, Buckinghamshire. At the age of nineteen he went to London, finding work initially with the drapery firm of Spencer Turner and Boldero of Lisson Grove, and then at the wholesale drapery warehouse of Hitchcock, Williams & Co. at St Paul's Churchyard. As was usual at that time he lived in at both his early jobs. 
After gaining some experience in the drapery business Gamage joined with a young colleague Frank Spain, and in 1878 the pair used their savings of $150 to lease a small hosiery shop, with a tiny frontage of just 5 feet, at 128 Holborn. Years later Gamage told how his career as a shop owner and the location of his business were both determined by a chance remark from a local trader who told him that Holborn needed a good hosiery shop. The pair's first success came with the sale of special hairbrushes, which they sold far more cheaply than any of their competitors. This gave Gamage the idea of bulk buying goods of reasonable quality and then lowering profit margins to undersell rival shopkeepers. Gamage was ambitious and by 1881 he had bought out his partner and set about reorganizing the small but highly competitive business for further growth. Gamage brought about this expansion by widening his merchandise and selling new products. He left no stone unturned in his search for new products, travelling extensively throughout Europe and North America. In later years his travels to seek out new goods became legendary: tales were told of how he battled through blizzards in the wilds of Michigan in search of a new toy gun for his store. He became the largest importer of Steiff toys, including the now famous Steiff bear, after visiting Frau Steiff's toy factory in the Black Forest. Gamage was always quick to spot new products and related consumer booms. He was quick, for instance, to exploit the popularity of cycling following the introduction of the new safety bicycle in 1885: he promptly made arrangements for cycles to be manufactured under the Gamage label, and because of his direct bulk purchasing, was able to undercut all competitors. His business maxim was 'Always be satisfied with small profits.' 
The increased range of goods sold by Gamage necessitated changes in the size and arrangement of the store. Both were achieved in something of a piecemeal fashion as Gamage spread his business by buying up adjoining premises, creating by the turn of the century a department store which covered almost 2 acres of floorspace housed behind an impressive neo-Gothic facade. Unlike many of London's other department stores, Gamage's was oriented less toward the female shopper and more at the men working in the nearby City. But of course many of these office workers were family men who at weekends came on shopping trips to Gamages with their wives and children. Indeed the store's Christmas bazaar was a children's dream, always presenting new toys often searched out by Gamage himself. 
Gamage was always a retail innovator. He developed strong links with his suppliers, often using small manufacturers, who produced exclusively for him, in a bid to bypass those firms that disapproved of his price cutting. When cars started to become more widely available he sold cars manufactured under the Gamage name and opened a new motoring department in the store. His thousand-page mail-order catalogue was one of the first of its kind and the range of products on offer provides an interesting insight into Edwardian consumer society. Gamage's penchant for advertising was strong, and although not a showman like his rival William Whiteley, he originated many ideas. He was the first to take out full-page newspaper advertisements, using the whole front page of the 'Daily Mail' on 12 July 1904 to announce enlargements to his store, which he named the People's Popular Emporium. 
The store's development of sporting goods strongly reflected Gamage's own love of games. He became president of many athletic clubs, as well as the donor of a large number of challenge cups and shields. He was also a strong supporter of working men's clubs. In 1888 Gamage married the second daughter of J. G. Murdoch. There were two sons and one daughter from the marriage. One of Gamage's other passions was his home at Grange Farm, Charteridge, Buckinghamshire, which he acquired during the 1920s. Despite such diversions he never neglected the store, which grew from strength to strength, having a turnover in 1930 of over $1 million per year and employing some 2000 people. The business was a family-run affair, with Gamage's son Eric becoming managing director. The firm was closed in 1972 and the building demolished. 
Gamage died at Charteridge after a long illness, on 5 April 1930. He was 'laid in state' in the store's motor department with his staff standing guard, encouraged to do so by the unprecedented offer of a Saturday afternoon holiday. 


@@@@@


doc= 39001


Fraser, Gordon (1911-1981), greetings card publisher, was born (lame in one leg) on 26 February 1911 at Ben Wyvis, North Park Grove, Roundhay, Leeds, the son of Kenneth Fraser, managing director of the Yorkshire Copper Works, and his wife, Alice Gertrude Fraser, 'nee' Woodall. His father was of Scottish descent. 
Fraser was educated at Oundle School and St John's College, Cambridge, with some 'topping up' at Munich University, the London School of Economics, and Pitman's College. In 1930, while still an undergraduate, he published six pamphlets at Cambridge under his own Minority Press imprint, including two written by F. R. Leavis, and went on to publish further works by Leavis and others, under the same imprint, between 1931 and 1933. In 1935 he set up as a bookseller in Portugal Place, Cambridge. On 9 April the following year, four days before Easter, he married a merchant's daughter, Nancy Katharine Jones, at the Presbyterian church, Downing Street, Cambridge. The couple had two children: a daughter, Margaret Alice Fraser (later Moss) ('b'. 1938), and a son, Ian Gordon Fraser ('b'. 1948). 
Fraser combined his bookshop with a small gallery of fine art prints, and in 1938 he introduced his first Christmas greetings cards, blending good design with high-quality printing and a price that would not deter customers. 
The Second World War caused Fraser's career to take a new turn. On its outbreak, he became a full-time member of the Cambridgeshire civil defence, and a year later joined the army and trained at Sandhurst. This prepared him for a wartime role as an officer in the intelligence corps, using his knowledge of French and German. His assignments took him first to Palestine, then to the western desert. Stationed in Cairo and later the Adriatic, he planned missions to support the partisans in Yugoslavia, and became a link between allied forces and such high-ranking partisan leaders as Velebit and even Tito himself. 
After the war Fraser was appointed director of UNESCO's radio division in Paris, and it was not until 1954 that he was able to return and resume full control of his business. It was then that he broadened his range of greetings cards. His first birthday cards appeared in 1955 and he subsequently added Easter, Valentine, mother's day, father's day, and other cards appropriate for a wide range of occasions. A further development was fine art cards, with reproductions of old masters, themselves followed by postcards, notepaper, stationery, and gift wrapping. 
Throughout this period and up to his death Fraser personally selected his gallery designs, opening a London office as a base to interview artists and overseas buyers. The Gordon Fraser Gallery's administration and warehousing moved to Bedford, where it remained thereafter, with Ian Fraser succeeding his father as art editor. In 1978 the company acquired the Roundwood Press in Warwickshire to meet its printing requirements. Latterly he resumed book publishing, producing in 1970 a selection of classics with the Fraser Press imprint, followed by 'Vorticism' (1976) and the 'Treasures of the Bodleian Library' (1976) under the Gordon Fraser imprint. 
On 27 June 1981 Fraser was killed in a car accident while driving on the M6 south of Preston, Lancashire. His Jaguar sports car exploded in flames, and he died instantly. The cause of the accident was never established, and a subsequent coroner's inquest recorded a verdict of death by misadventure. He was survived by his wife. 
Fraser undoubtedly revolutionized greetings card design and quality, and he maintained a house style that was widely imitated. By the time of his death his cards were selling at a rate of over 100 million a year in eighty-five countries, with associated companies in France, Switzerland, Canada, Australia, and the United States. The Gordon Fraser Gallery's annual turnover at this time was running equally impressively, around $10 million. Fraser was a colourful personality who made his mark wherever he went. Practically his sole methods of relaxation were books -- he was a discriminating reader and a devoted follower of F. R. Leavis -- and an annual skiing holiday at Davos, Switzerland. 


@@@@@


doc= 39002


Grant, William (1839-1923), distiller, was born on 19 December 1839 in Conval Street, Dufftown, the son of William Grant, master tailor (known as Old Waterloo), and his second wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Reid. At the age of seven, Grant was receiving payment as a cattle herder, and combined his work with attendance at the village school at Mortlach, near Dufftown. He was then apprenticed to a shoemaker and, aged twenty, married Elizabeth, daughter of John Duncan, a cattle dealer in Dufftown, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Grant, a labourer. After a period as a clerk to the Tininver lime works at Crachie, Grant in September 1866 became bookkeeper at Mortlach distillery near Dufftown. An active volunteer and freemason, and precentor in the Dufftown Free Church, Grant became a person of standing in the locality. For thirty years he saved to start his own distillery, which he eventually began building in 1886 at Glenfiddich, near Dufftown, using water from Dubh's Well. Initially, old equipment was used, cheaply bought from the nearby Cardow distillery, and labour was mainly provided by Grant's wife and their eight children. The temporary destruction (by fire) of the nearby Glenlivet distillery gave Grant the break he needed. He soon built a second distillery at Balvenie. In north-east Scotland, Glenfiddich was widely sold as a five-year-old whisky. Grant took advantage of the bankruptcy in 1898 of the Pattison family (the largest whisky wholesalers) to establish a base in Glasgow, sending his son Charles and his son-in-law Charles Gordon to sell a rapidly expanding number of blends (including Grant's Standfast). 
In 1900 Grant suffered a severe stroke; in 1907 he began to lose his sight, and soon he was blind -- his unmarried daughter, Meta, acting as his amanuensis. In 1903 he established the limited liability company of William Grant & Sons. With the Glasgow office showing a loss, Grant decided to export. His son John opened the Canadian business; Lord Strathcona, the governor-general and a distant relative, assisted with letters of introduction. By 1914 the company was trading in most countries of the British empire, and in Japan, the Philippines, and the USA, with over sixty agencies in thirty countries. From 1964 Glenfiddich was sold in its famous triangular bottle -- the archetype of modern single-malt whiskies. Grant died from senile decay on 5 January 1923 at Balvenie House, Mortlach, and was buried in Mortlach churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 39006


Harrap, George Godfrey (1868-1938), publisher, was born on 18 January 1868 at 11 Woodville Grove, Islington, London, the son of Frederick James Harrap, a former warehouseman, and his wife, Jemima, 'nee' Godfrey. He was educated at West Ham model school, leaving at the age of fourteen with an already keen love of reading. His first post, which would endure for nineteen years, was an appointment as an assistant with the publishing house of Isbister & Co. in Tavistock Street, Covent Garden, London, the office of 'Good Words' and the 'Sunday Magazine'. Here Harrap neglected no opportunity for improving on his somewhat scanty formal education, and secured early advancement into a field that provided opportunities for him to capitalize on his gifts as a lover of literature and as an enterprising businessman. Progress, however, did not keep pace with his ambition, and he was obliged to seek other outlets for his talents. He developed a particular interest in the educational publications of D. C. Heath & Co. of Boston, Massachusetts, for whom Isbister were the London agents, and a personal friendship with Heath himself followed. This association enabled him to introduce Heath's books to English teachers. It was at about this time that Harrap also became London representative for the publishing house of Thomas Y. Crowell, New York. 
On 6 September 1890 Harrap had married his first wife, Christine Mary Steward (1869-1923), the daughter of the late Walter Steward, a timber merchant. The marriage took place at Stepney parish church, and the couple lived at 126 Carr Street, off Salmon Lane, Stepney, London. They had four children: George Steward Harrap, Walter Godfrey Harrap, Violet Christina Harrap, and Heath Stanley Harrap, this last named by way of compliment to D. C. Heath. 
In 1901 Harrap started his own publishing business, concentrating at first on the production of modern language and other textbooks. The publication that year of Heath's 'Practical French Grammar' gave a new direction to the teaching of French in Britain, and a general success in this field led to Harrap's decision to produce 'Harrap's Standard French Dictionary', the first volume of which, however, appeared only in 1934, fifteen years after its inception. The firm that subsequently bore his name, George G. Harrap & Co. Ltd, came formally into being in 1905, when Harrap brought G. Oliver Anderson into partnership. 
Christine Harrap died on 3 June 1923, and on 10 September 1935, at the church of All Souls, Langham Place, London, Harrap married his second wife, Jessie Marguerite Pittman, the widow of J. J. Pittman and daughter of the late Benjamin Addley Bourne. There were no children of this marriage. Harrap himself was now living at 29 Langham Street, in the West End of London, but the couple made their home at his new wife's house, Corner Cottage, Tadworth, Surrey. 
Harrap retired from his now flourishing publishing business in the year of his second marriage, leaving an account of his venture in an autobiographical account, 'Some Memories, 1901-1935'. Another publication was 'Love Lyrics from Five Centuries', testifying to his fondness for foreign travel. Other interests, apart from books, which played as large a part in his domestic life as in his professional, were motoring and golf, the latter on a mostly modest scale. Harrap's convivial nature also brought him a wide circle of friends. He was a member of the Stationers' Company and the City Livery Club. 
Following an operation to remove gallstones, George Harrap died on 29 October 1938 of bronchopneumonia at 20 Devonshire Place, London, apparently survived by his second wife. The publishing house founded by him was directed by the Harrap and Anderson families until 1971. Harrap's second son, Walter Godfrey Harrap (1894-1967), joined his father's business in 1913 and became the firm's managing director in 1950. His grandson, Paull Harrap (1917-1985), son of George's eldest son, George Steward Harrap, entered the family business in 1936 and became its chairman in 1971, on the retirement of Olaf Anderson. 


@@@@@


doc= 39007


Harrod, Charles Henry (1799-1885), tea dealer and grocer, was born on 16 April 1799, at Lexden, Essex, the son of William Harrod and his wife, Thamar, but little else is known about his early life. However, as he became a grocer and tea merchant, it can be presumed he had at least a rudimentary education. 
By 1834 Harrod had a business at 4 Cable Street, Whitechapel. The East India Company had just lost its monopoly on the control of tea pricing and individual grocers were able to move into this lucrative trade. Harrod opened new wholesale premises at 38 Eastcheap in 1849, the same year he is thought to have become involved in a small retail grocery shop at 8 Middle Queen's Buildings, Knightsbridge. He ran this one-room shop in conjunction with his city business. He retired from the shop in 1864, having sold it to his son Charles Digby Harrod in 1861. He ran another grocery at 40 Old Compton Street from 1866, which another son, Henry Digby Harrod, took over. 
Harrod married Elizabeth Digby (1810-1860), daughter of a pork butcher from Birch, Essex, in 1830. They had four sons, the youngest of whom died in infancy, and a daughter, who died of measles, aged four. Harrod subsequently moved his family into the house behind the little shop at 8 Middle Queen's Buildings in 1853, as conditions there were better for the children than the City. Scrupulously fair with his sons, Harrod gave each equal help during his life, and equal shares in his estate on death. The Harrods were a close-knit family and when Elizabeth died in 1860, a niece from Birch helped Harrod with the household. After he retired another member of his wife's family cared for him. Harrod died of old age on 3 March 1885 at 2 Oxford Terrace, Wellesley Road, Chiswick, Middlesex, and was buried at Brompton cemetery. 
His son, Henry Digby Harrod, later wrote that 'I should like my Father's name... honoured before all other things as he was the person... the principal factor in the making of success, for without his Father's help my brother could have done nothing' (H. D. Harrod to W. Kibble, Harrods archives). Harrod's hard work laid the groundwork for Charles Digby Harrod to build a world-renowned grocery and department store business. 


@@@@@


doc= 39008


Hartley, Sir William Pickles (1846-1922), jam manufacturer and philanthropist, was born on 23 February 1846 at Colne, Lancashire, the only surviving child of John Hartley, a whitesmith, and his wife, Margaret Pickles. He attended a local British and Foreign School Society school, and then Colne grammar school for a year before leaving at fourteen. Prevented from training as a chemist, he threw his energies into developing his mother's grocery business. Within two years he was running the shop himself and had begun to hawk grocers' sundries round adjoining towns and villages. He soon controlled one of the largest wholesale enterprises in Lancashire. 
In 1866 Hartley married Martha O'Connor, the youngest daughter of Henry Horsfield, grocer, of Colne. They had a son and eight daughters, one of whom died in infancy. He valued, but did not always follow, her common-sense advice, grounded on a thorough knowledge of grocery. He was led into manufacturing when a local grocer failed to fulfil a contract for supplying jam; having won the subsequent arbitration case, Hartley decided to take up jam making himself. In 1874 he opened a factory at Bootle, near Liverpool, almost bankrupting himself as for some years the cost of his borrowings exceeded profits. Then in 1885, after the factory had been enlarged twice and profits had reached $18,000 a year, he registered William Hartley & Sons Ltd with nominal capital of $100,000. 
In 1886 Hartley decided to move operations to Aintree, which was better served by the railway network. The high quality of his ingredients, the absence of preservatives, and the reasonable prices of his products secured him a substantial market in the north of England and the midlands. To supply the steadily growing demand further south, in 1901 he opened a factory at Southwark in London. The two works had a joint capacity of 1000 tons a week, with storage space for 5-6 million jars. 
Hartley, a Primitive Methodist, consistently applied Christian principles to business. In 1888 he built a model village at Aintree; the following year he introduced a profit-sharing scheme, the results each year being announced at a special ceremony, with music and speeches. He claimed that the wages he paid to women and girls -- four-fifths of the workforce -- were appreciably higher than those of his competitors; he also provided free medical treatment. He personally chose his managers and trained them, sending them on advanced chemistry courses at his own expense. 
From 1877 onwards Hartley devoted a tenth of his income to philanthropy, later raised to one-third; his benefactions totalled nearly $300,000. He preferred to donate part of any sum requested, so as to encourage others to give. He endowed a number of hospitals in Colne, Liverpool, and London, and financed departments at Liverpool and Manchester universities. Equally generous to Primitive Methodism, he supported an organization for building chapels, acted as treasurer of its missionary society, and converted the old Holborn Town Hall into its national headquarters. In 1906 the Manchester theological college for training Primitive Methodist ministers was renamed Hartley College, Manchester (later Hartley Victoria College, in recognition of his benefactions. He propagated his ideas in his only published work, 'The Use of Wealth' (n.d.). Uniquely for a layman, he was elected president of the Primitive Methodist conference in 1909. 
Hartley was apt to undertake himself tasks which others could have done equally effectively. Until more scientific methods were introduced, after each boiling at the Aintree factory he used his delicacy of touch on the paper covers to test the consistency of selected samples. Likewise, he is said personally to have scrutinized each employee's work record annually, together with the head of department, to fix the profit-sharing bonus. His public services were thus necessarily limited. In 1893 he became JP for Lancashire, and he served as a Liberal on Liverpool city council from 1895 to 1898. He was also vice-president of the British Temperance League. Appropriately, he gave his recreations in 'Who's Who' as 'none except driving'. 
Knighted in 1908, Hartley was one of those who were consulted on financial policy in the opening days of the First World War by the chancellor of the exchequer, Lloyd George. Hartley generously supported war charities, but chafed at the official demands and restrictions during the conflict. As the post-war years brought further problems to the company, he suffered increasing attacks of angina, from which he died at his home, Horsfield Cottage, 11 Oxford Road, Birkdale, Lancashire, on 25 October 1922. He was buried at Trawden, near Colne. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 39009


Hepworth, Joseph (1834-1911), clothing manufacturer and retailer, was born on 12 May 1834 at Lindley, Huddersfield, the son of George Hepworth, shoemaker. He left school and entered the textile trade at the age of ten, working at Joseph Walker's woollen mill in Lindley as a half-timer, converting to full-time work two years later. In 1850 he was engaged as a teasel setter in George Walker's Wellington mill, a job that disappeared in 1860 as the Walkers went out of business. He then acquired an overlooker's position in another local mill, before spending twelve arduous months as a travelling salesman for a woollen manufacturer. In 1855 he married Sarah Rhodes; they had three sons and four daughters. 
Hepworth's career assumed a new and significant direction in 1864 as he and James Rhodes, his wife's brother, established a small woollen drapers' business in Briggate in central Leeds. The partners were also practical tailors, owning nine sewing machines, and their business included the making-up of garments for the wholesale clothing trade. Small though the enterprise was, it provided the basis on which after twelve months both men, separately, moved into wholesale clothing manufacture. They both achieved long term success, but Hepworth's progress was particularly impressive. 
In 1865, in the context of the early period of expansion of the Leeds clothing industry, Hepworth's first sole tailoring enterprise, located in Bishopsgate Street, employed twelve people. Several changes of premises accompanied regular and sound expansion through the 1870s. By 1881 Hepworth's Wellington Street factory employed 500 and, as Joseph was joined by his son Norris, a strategic change was made to the business, which became a retail as well as a manufacturing enterprise. The Hepworths, wishing to distance themselves from the financial vagaries of those retailers with whom they conducted business, decided to sell their clothes direct to the public. While this was a significant departure from the normal practices of the Leeds trade, it was not only a striking and immediate success, but it became a practice developed by other clothing manufacturers in the town and elsewhere. Although Hepworth is typically credited with the idea, which is seen as his particular contribution to the Leeds industry, William Blackburn, also a prominent Leeds clothing manufacturer, simultaneously, and quite possibly independently, set up shops for the sale of his factory manufactured goods. 
The 1880s saw the most expansive period in the history of the Leeds clothing industry, the largest proportion of which was assigned to the making of men's tailored garments, to which Hepworth made a significant contribution. It was common practice among Leeds wholesale clothiers for the factories to make trousers and vests while subcontracting to Jewish workshops the making of coats and jackets. Hepworth, however, deviated from this pattern and rarely engaged the services of Jewish subcontractors. The firm also depended more heavily than many Leeds clothing manufacturers on the export trade. By the end of the decade Joseph Hepworth & Son employed 2000 operatives producing garments for the company's 107 retail outlets, and for the South African and Australian export markets where Hepworth's subsidiary plants were located. By this stage Hepworth was sufficiently wealthy to purchase the grand Headingley House, vacated by the Marshall family in 1888. The firm continued to add to productive and retailing capacity. The conversion to private company status in 1891, with a capital of $360,000, coincided with the erection of a new factory in Claypit Lane. By 1907, when a further factory was added, and with 145 shops, Joseph Hepworth & Son had become one of the largest concerns in the clothing industry. Ten years later with 160 retail outlets, it headed the list of British companies engaged in the sale of men's clothing and headwear. 
Joseph Hepworth was a paternalistic employer, introducing paid holiday entitlement, an eight-hour day, and a clean working environment before these became standard. His political and religious activities, however, gradually overshadowed his work for the company. Hepworth became a Liberal councillor in 1888, and alderman and magistrate in 1892; and his work for party and community was rewarded by his appointment as lord mayor in 1906. During this year his nonconformist leanings and teetotalism influenced civic life, as he banned alcohol from all municipal functions. As a leading member of the Methodist New Connexion he provided financial support for the United Methodist church founded in 1907. The value he placed on technical education was reflected in his involvement in the Leeds Mechanics' Institute, the Yorkshire College, and as governor of Leeds University. 
Joseph Hepworth died at Comber House, 19 Park Drive, Harrogate, on 17 October 1911, survived by his wife. The business was initially carried on by Norris who himself died in 1914, and thereafter by later generations of the family. 


@@@@@


doc= 39010


Hodder, Matthew Henry (1830?-1911), publisher, was baptized on 5 January 1831 at Providence Independent Chapel, Uxbridge, Middlesex, the fourth among the ten children of Thomas Henry Hodder ('b'. 1803), a chemist and druggist, and Jane Elizabeth Rayner ('bap'. 1809). His younger brother, Edwin, became an author. Matthew Hodder's schooling was elementary, and on 5 August 1844 he arrived in London to be apprenticed to Jackson and Walford, publishers to the Congregational Union. At sixteen he experienced religious conversion at the King's Weigh House Chapel, and there he met his future wife, Frances Ann Biddulph ('bap'. 1830, died 1917). Hodder married Frances on 5 July 1855 at Denmark Place Baptist Chapel, Camberwell, London. Before marriage he lived near Tower Hill and Frances lodged at Rotherhithe. Their only child, Mary Frances, was born on 22 April 1856 at Camberwell, where the family lived until 1869. 
In 1861 with savings of $6335 Hodder bought a third share in the Jackson and Walford business, which traded as Jackson, Walford, and Hodder until 1868. To buy out his ageing partners Hodder sought a congenial partner with funds. He found him in Thomas Wilberforce Stoughton. Various occasions have been suggested for Hodder's acquaintance with Stoughton: both were in the orbit of the Congregationalist Dr Thomas Binney; both had fathers who had lived in Windsor; Jackson, Walford, and Hodder were publishers to Thomas's father, Dr John Stoughton. Hodder and Stoughton established their publishing partnership on 16 June 1868 at 27 Paternoster Row, London. In June 1869 Hodder sailed to the USA and Canada, promoting his publishing business and speaking at religious meetings as delegate for the YMCA. According to his diary of this journey he never lost an opportunity to convert a soul to Christianity. He returned in September to a new house, Gothic Lodge, on Bromley Common, Kent. Hodder's frequent profitable journeys to North America, the last in 1899, kept the firm solvent; he also travelled the north of England and London. In 1871 G. A. Sala was awarded $500 damages in a libel action against the firm, based on its publication of a work by J. H. Friswell (1870). 
Publishing was an aspect of Hodder's evangelism. He was a connoisseur of sermons, and this devotion resulted in many titles: Joseph Parker's 'Ecce Deus' (1868), his series 'The City Temple Pulpit', and Paxton Hood's 'Life of Dr Binney' (1874). In its second year the firm published J. J. van Osterzee's 'Theology of the New Testament' (1870), the first of several of his works translated from the Dutch. The scientific theology of Henry Drummond's 'Natural Law in the Spiritual World' (1883) challenged traditional belief and was published only on commission. In 1887 the first of forty-eight volumes of 'The Expositor's Bible' was published. Theology and devotional works dominated the list, and secular titles had to meet a strict evangelical morality. Hodder's salesmanship and his luck, as in his purchase of the text of William Thayer's 'From Log Cabin to White House' (1881) just before the murder of President Garfield, supported publication of expensive theological works in English and Greek. 
Hodder conducted a mission on Bromley Common, was chairman of the General Committee of the YMCA, and led its $160,000 building appeal. In maturity he had the appearance of a benevolent patriarch with a long white beard and soft voice. He was active in publishing until a few weeks before his death at Carisbrooke, his home on Bromley Common, on 18 October 1911. After a funeral service at St Luke's Church, Bromley Common, he was buried in St Luke's cemetery on 21 October. 


In 1906 Ernest Williams negotiated a joint venture with Oxford University Press, and in 1908 the firm bought into George Doran Company, New York, designating Williams vice-chairman. He became a best-selling author with 'Where's Master?' (1910), written on the death of Edward VII about the royal dog. After Hodder's death in 1911 Williams led the firm until the death in 1917 of the surviving founding partner, Thomas W. Stoughton, when he became senior partner. He was unfit to enlist in the 1914-18 war but was close to its political conduct. He wrote, edited, and published propaganda for the government and produced fund-raising books such as 'Princess Mary's Gift Book' (1914) and 'King Albert's Book' (1914). In 1915 Williams was made liveryman of the Stationers' Company and co-opted to the City of London corporation; in 1918 he was elected chairman of its county purposes committee. 
Ethel Williams died of cancer on 15 June 1918, and Ernest sold their home at Bickley, Kent, where they had entertained wounded soldiers, and took a flat in town. On 6 June 1919 he adopted by deed poll the surname Hodder-Williams. That month he went to Paris for the signing of the peace treaty, and in December he registered the firm as a limited company, with Cecil Stoughton and Percy Hodder Williams as the other two directors. Under Hodder-Williams's direction the firm launched cheap fiction reprints known as 'Yellow Jackets' (price 2's'.), entered a joint venture as University of London Press Ltd (1920), acquired Wakley & Son, publishers of 'The Lancet' (1920), and joined with Liverpool University Press. He was chairman of the Royal Female Orphanage at Beddington, Surrey, and introduced reforms consistent with his support for female suffrage. On 4 August 1920 he married Lilian (died 1959), daughter of John R. Pakeman, at St George's, Hanover Square, London. They had no children. Knighted in 1919, he received other British and European honours for his war efforts: he was appointed CVO (1921) and a knight of grace of the order of St John of Jerusalem (1921), was awarded the Medaille du roi (Albert I of Belgium) (1920), and was made ufficiale della corona d'Italia (1920) and commendatore (1921). 
Hodder-Williams's leadership of the firm was enterprising though not unfailingly meticulous or successful; he took life intensely and sometimes suffered physically; his personality was magnetic, inspiring loyalty in family and employees. In January 1927 he suffered an internal haemorrhage and died of heart failure on 8 April 1927 at his home, 23 Cadogan Place, London SW1. On 12 April a City memorial service was held at Christ Church, Greyfriars, followed by the funeral at Westminster Chapel, Buckingham Gate, and burial in St Luke's cemetery, Bromley Common. His widow gave $1000 to St Thomas's Hospital to endow a bed. 


@@@@@


doc= 39011


Horlick, Sir James, first baronet (1844-1921), health drink manufacturer, was born at Ruardean, near Cinderford, Gloucestershire, on 30 April 1844, the third of four sons born to James Horlick, saddler, and his wife, Priscilla Griffiths. He was educated in Andover, Hampshire, and, having to look outside the small family concern for a career, in 1862 became an assistant to a homoeopathic chemist in London, qualifying as a pharmacist seven years later. In 1873 he married Margaret Adelaide (died 1925), eldest daughter of William Burford, a builder of Leicester; they had three sons, the youngest of whom died in the First World War. 
Horlick and his wife soon emigrated to the United States, where his younger brother William had been an accountant since 1869. While working for the Mellin Company in Chicago, makers of a powdered malt and bran baby food, Horlick devised an improved version; in 1874 he and William patented this as a 'new food' for infants and invalids (especially dyspeptics). Two years later they built a factory in Racine, Wisconsin. William oversaw production and the accounting side, while James took charge of marketing. 
Their preparation rapidly became popular throughout North America and was exported to Britain. By 1882, when the brothers enlarged the factory, William was developing a new variety of the product, a malt extract with a milk base. Although it secured a number of strong medical recommendations, James was dubious and William patented the process on his own. In fact, it was such a triumph that in 1885 the Horlicks Food Company was incorporated, with James as president and William as the company secretary. 
James returned to England in 1890, to open up the market in Europe and also in the British empire. He soon saw the advantages of producing in England, but William -- a naturalized American citizen since the late 1880s -- proved hesitant. It was not until 1905 that a Horlicks factory opened, in Slough, Buckinghamshire, technical help being provided from Wisconsin. James had to agree to meet any losses. In the event, success followed, thanks partly to publicity about the use of Horlicks on polar expeditions such as that headed by Roald Amundsen. During the First World War it was supplied in quantity to the armed forces. 
Meanwhile Horlick was achieving recognition in British society, most notably in agricultural circles. In 1898 he bought an extensive property at Cowley, Gloucestershire, becoming lord of the manor there. He was appointed a justice of the peace for the county in 1900 and high sheriff and a deputy lieutenant in 1902. At Cowley Manor and on his Sussex estate, at Forest Row, he bred shorthorn cattle and Oxford Down sheep. These he exhibited both at the Gloucestershire Agricultural Society, of which he was president, and at the Royal Agricultural Society of England's shows, where he was awarded prizes or commendations every year between 1903 and 1914. He was an active patron of many of the county's rural associations. 
These agricultural pursuits were intended partly to provide the company with the milk it required; the product's main ingredient came from maltings Horlick owned in Norfolk. They also gained him a baronetcy for public services in 1914. By then he was an establishment figure, an Anglican, a true Conservative, albeit on the tariff reform wing, who in 1920 had the organ of Gloucester Cathedral restored in memory of his dead son. However, his outside activities clearly hampered the company's development. It now relied wholly on the malted milk product, vulnerable because it was twice as expensive as its main rival Ovaltine, recently brought over from Switzerland where it had been invented. Neither James nor William took steps to diversify into other food products as a form of insurance. After a decade or more of expansion, therefore, the English branch began to lose its momentum after 1918. The septuagenarian Horlick's health was by then rapidly deteriorating, and he died at his London home, 2 Carlton House Terrace, on 7 May 1921. He was succeeded as second baronet by his son, Sir Ernest Burford Horlick. 


@@@@@


doc= 39014


Browne, John Collis (1819-1884), physician and manufacturer of patent medicine, was born on 18 June 1819 at Maidstone in Kent, and baptized at the church of All Saints with St Philip in that town. His parents were Captain William Browne of the 13th light dragoons and Clara ('nee' Collis). 'Chlorodyne Browne', as he came to be known in later life -- or 'J. C. B.' for short -- was educated from 1834 to 1836 at Bromsgrove School in Worcestershire. With him were his two brothers, one of whom became dean of Worcester College, Oxford. 
Browne began his career by 'walking the hospitals' in London, and in 1842 qualified as a member of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, while living at the new resort of Weston-super-Mare, Somerset. In 1845 he became an extra-licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians of London and then joined the Army Medical Service as an assistant surgeon. He was posted to the 98th regiment of foot, then stationed under Sir Colin Campbell at the port of Chushan in China. Soon after his arrival the 98th were transferred to Calcutta and in 1847 to Dinapore, near Patna, at a time when there was a 'desperate visitation of cholera'. They then marched north-westwards to Meerut (where the Sepoy mutiny began nine years later) and to Ambala on the confines of the Punjab. It was here, in 1848, that Browne 'realized' the compound of chloroform and morphine which, under the name of 'J. Collis Browne's mixture', was still being stocked in chemists' shops 150 years later (in a modified form) as a palliative for diarrhoea and other stomach disorders. 
Following the end of the Second Anglo-Sikh War in 1849, the 98th moved against the Afridi tribesmen of the Kohat Pass, where two men were wounded. Browne, therefore, became one of the first regimental surgeons to practise his skills on the north-west frontier of India. In October 1851, he left for six months in Cape Colony as assistant staff surgeon, but then returned to England on half-pay. He was asked to go to the village of Trimdon in co. Durham to fight an outbreak of cholera. So successful was he in treating his patients that the villagers presented him with a gold medal inscribed 'As a Testimonial to his Humanity, Skills and Ability, during the Visitation of Cholera, 1854'. Further praise came from the General Board of Health in London: 'we cannot too forcibly urge the necessity of generally adopting it [Browne's mixture] in all cases of cholera'; and from Earl Russell (addressing the College of Physicians in 1864): 'the only remedy of any service [in Manila] was 'Chlorodyne''. During the Crimean War, Browne returned to full pay at Fort Pitt, Chatham. In 1856 he left the army and went into partnership with John Thistlewood Davenport, chemist, of 33 Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, whose firm was to manufacture Browne's remedy until the 1980s when the licence was released to another company. 
Apart from medicine, which brought him a fortune, Browne had an inventive turn of mind in many other directions, as shown by patents he took out between 1852 and 1879. These ranged from improvements in building ships to magazines for storing explosives and 'means and apparatus for raising vessels and other sunken bodies'. He was also an advocate of beards for reasons of health, publishing a pamphlet on the subject and wearing one himself. Having retired to Ramsgate, Browne spent his remaining years as the proud owner of a 36 ton schooner, the 'Kalafish'. 
Browne died of hepatitis on 30 August 1884, at Mount Albion House, 22 Victoria Road, Ramsgate, and was interred at the church of St Laurence in Thanet. 
Browne left his entire estate of $4789 to his widow, Harriet, with the request that his friend, Captain Berkeley, would 'aid and assist her in the development of my several patents'. He was also survived by a stepson, Ernest E. B. Skinner. In 1973 a mural tablet in his memory was erected on Mount Albion House. Although he was often referred to as Dr Browne, and the inscription on his gravestone included the letters MD, it is unlikely that he was so qualified. 


@@@@@


doc= 39016


Jeyes, John (bap. 1817, d. 1892), chemical manufacturer, was baptized on 10 June 1817 at Wootton, near Northampton, the second son and third child of Philadelphus Jeyes (1780-1828), a retail pharmacist, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Ward, daughter of a local landowner. On his father's death, the family business in Northampton was taken over by John's elder brother, also Philadelphus, who had been educated at a school in Moulton, his mother's village, before being apprenticed to a local pharmacist. It seems likely that John's own upbringing followed a similar course, although it is not known to whom he was apprenticed or to what extent he received formal training in chemistry. Unlike Philadelphus, however, he did not become a member of the Pharmaceutical Society. 
Evidence suggests that Jeyes abandoned a course in pharmacy to pursue an interest in botany, which brought him a partnership with James Atkins, a local nurseryman. Philadelphus also became financially involved, so that by 1845 the joint business as seedsmen and florists, originally styled Atkins and Jeyes, had become Jeyes & Co. Little is known about Jeyes's years as a nurseryman, but it was during this period, on 10 March 1846, that he married Sarah Frances Weldon (died 1888), the daughter of a 'subdistributor of stamps'. The marriage took place at St Mary's Church in her home town of Stamford, Lincolnshire. They had nine children: Oliver Weldon, Jeanne Frances, Edith, Mary Alice, Samuel Henry, Walter, Gertrude, Charles, and Robert, the last dying in infancy. 
The family initially lived at Holly Lodge, Northampton, a house built by the younger Philadelphus. Following the birth of Walter in 1859, Jeyes and his family moved to London. The reason for the move is uncertain. It may simply have been to broaden his business interests, since after the birth of Charles in 1863, when the family was living in Finsbury, Jeyes's occupation is entered in local trade directories as 'hearth rug manufacturer, boot and shoe factor, importer and purifier of bed feathers, horse hair, wool, etc.' In 1871, in Plaistow, Essex, Jeyes, now styling himself as a manufacturing chemist, set up his first major business venture, the Jeyesine Oil and Paint Company Ltd. The enterprise was a failure and closed in 1873. 
Meanwhile, Jeyes had become increasingly interested in the 'sanitary debate' then current among the medical and allied professions. Sanitary conditions in towns and cities at that time were often rudimentary, especially in the poorer quarters, and there was a constant threat of disease. There was an active medical and commercial concern to develop a product that would effectively combat the widespread filth and pollution. Until then it had traditionally been the practice to treat any disagreeable stench or insanitary conditions by using deodorizers or antiseptics. Jeyes saw that this was not enough. The deodorizer might replace an unpleasant smell by a sweeter one, and the antiseptic prevent decomposition or the breeding of germs, but what was also needed was a disinfectant, to kill bacteria; this could be achieved by means of a carbolic-based solution. On 7 December 1877 Jeyes patented Jeyes' Fluid, a preparation that was chemically a saponified solution of phenols, with added resins and other compounds. Although Jeyes' Fluid was not the only disinfectant, and had rivals in such products as Izal and Condy's Fluid, it had the edge over them in many respects. It was less caustic and generally safer than neat carbolic acid, had a pleasanter yet distinctive smell, and was marketed at a price that suited the public. Jeyes's popular advertising stressed the fact that his fluid was not simply a deodorizer but also an effective disinfectant and antiseptic. 
In 1879 Jeyes and his son Walter established Jeyes' Sanitary Compounds Company Ltd, and built a factory to manufacture the fluid in the grounds of Richmond House, Plaistow, his home since 1874. Although initial sales were good, Jeyes was a poor businessman, and rising debts resulting from fraud and mismanagement obliged the firm to go into voluntary liquidation in 1884. Its assets were sold in 1885 to a successor company, of the same name but with a new board of directors. Although Jeyes remained an employee of the reconstituted company that bore his name, he was poorly treated by its directors, to whom he had signed away all his rights. A financial statement of 1888, the year of his wife's death, describes him simply as 'works manager' and gives his annual salary as $260, as compared to the $300 received by the company secretary. 
On 12 January 1892, at his home, 5 Windsor Road, Forest Gate, West Ham, Essex, John Jeyes died of 'senile decay' at the age of seventy-five. He was buried in the same grave as his wife in the East London cemetery, Plaistow. He left only $585, as against the $24,000 in the will of his brother, Philadelphus, who died in 1893, and the $12,000 left by his son, Oliver, who died in the same year and whose business (paint manufacturing in Birmingham) was nothing like the size of his father's. 
John Jeyes was a large, amiable, and kindly man, who became a household name more through his inventive mind and sound chemical knowledge than from any business acumen or entrepreneurial shrewdness. 


@@@@@


doc= 39017


Menzies, John (1808-1879), wholesale distributor and newsagent, was born in Edinburgh, the son of John Menzies, merchant, and his wife, Catherine Lindsay. He was educated at the Royal High School, Edinburgh. After a stiff and joyless apprenticeship (1823-30) to an Edinburgh bookseller named Sutherland, he moved to London, where he worked (December 1831 until February 1833) for Charles Tilt, a Fleet Street publisher of a famous 'Miniature Library'. In consequence of his father's sudden death he returned to Edinburgh, and in 1833 opened a small shop at 61 Princes Street selling books, stationery, and prints. London life had given him a taste for innovation. He made a daring experiment in selling 'The Scotsman' across his counter at a time when newspapers were customarily sold direct by their publishers to subscribers. In 1845 Menzies married Rossie Marr, daughter of a Leith merchant; they had two sons and three daughters. 
At that time a retail bookseller acted as agent for a few publishers, whose books he exclusively displayed and sold; there were only loose connections between London publishers and Edinburgh retailers owing to the difficulties of travel. To remedy this situation Menzies inaugurated a wholesale book department, his chief business being on behalf of Tilt and (from 1837) Chapman and Hall. He secured the agency for 'Punch' magazine (1841). He built up a prosperous business, although he never showed great ambitions and received some of his finest satisfactions from meeting or corresponding with literary figures like Charles Dickens. He was Edinburgh agent for the sale of 'Mr Humphrey's Clock', and for all of Dickens's works in east Scotland. 
In 1835 Menzies issued his first trade stocklist, and from 1845 circulated a monthly catalogue to country buyers and other interested parties. He was irritable with customers who delayed settling their accounts, and implacable in pursuing small debts. He enjoyed publishing as a sideline of his business, and issued a series of Scottish guidebooks and books of Scottish views. His most lavish production was 'The Costumes of the Clans' (1845) by the troublesome John Carter Allen, written in the name of John Sobieski Stolberg Stuart, soi-disant Count d'Albanie. 
For a time Menzies ran an export department, but his most lucrative business was in railway bookstalls, of which he opened his first in 1857. These bookstalls proliferated, and he also recruited boys carrying baskets of reading matter to stand on platforms to service the passengers of through trains. Such were the rewards of railway station business that he abandoned his shop and moved to new warehouse premises on Hanover Street, Edinburgh, in 1859. John Menzies & Co. was formed as a partnership in 1867. A Glasgow wholesale branch was opened in 1868, and branches were set up in other Scottish towns during 1872-3. John Menzies died of heart failure on 6 December 1879 at his home, 3 Grosvenor Crescent, Edinburgh. 
Menzies' elder son, 
The Menzies brothers worked long hours and preferred to eat sandwiches rather than leave their desks for lunch. They were patriarchal, sternly benevolent employers who devised incentives for their staff, including the payment of quarterly commissions. They started a rambling club in 1886, and were proud of their social and sports clubs. The most junior staff could rise through the management to the board of directors. 
When young, John Ross Menzies yachted on the Clyde; later he was a devoted golfer. He had a craggy, forbidding appearance, shunned the limelight, and never married. He died of arteriosclerosis on 5 March 1935 at West Links House, North Berwick. The firm continued to be a family concern, under the direction of the children of his brother Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 39020


Wishart, Ernest Edward (1902-1987), publisher, was born on 11 August 1902, at 25 Alleyn Park, Dulwich, London, the only son of Sir Sidney Wishart (1854-1935), then an insurance broker, and his wife, Alice Maud, daughter of William Heseltine. His father became sheriff and a lieutenant of the City of London and commander of the 6th London brigade of the Royal Field Artillery. He had a country house at Binsted, near Arundel, Sussex. Wishart had one sister. He was educated at Rugby School, and in 1920 went up to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he was awarded a third in part one of the history tripos in 1922, and a third in part two of the law tripos in 1923. 
After leaving Cambridge, instead of following his father into the City, in 1925 Ernest Wishart provided the financial backing for a new publishing house, Wishart & Co., at 19 Buckingham Street, London, which he founded with a Cambridge friend, the poet Douglas Garman. On 11 June 1927 Wishart married Garman's sister Lorna ['see below']. The first publication of Wishart & Co. was the 'Calendar of Modern Letters', the project of a group of young writers including Garman. A literary review, which appeared monthly from March 1925 for the first year, and then quarterly after the circulation dropped from over 7000 to under 3000, it was edited by the left-wing poet and critic Edgell Rickword, with the help of Douglas Garman. It was intended as a rival to T. S. Eliot's 'Criterion' magazine, and contributions included critical re-evaluations of earlier twentieth-century writers including Sir James Barrie and Bernard Shaw, by Rickword, and of Walter de la Mare, by Garman. It also included poetry by Robert Graves and Siegfried Sassoon, a short story, 'The Princess', by D. H. Lawrence, reviews by Bertrand Russell, and 'The Zeit Geist', an essay by Edwin Muir. Although publication ceased after circulation had dropped to 1000, the 'Calendar of Modern Letters' inspired F. R. Leavis to start 'Scrutiny' in 1932. 
Although Wishart had Marxist sympathies, he never joined the Communist Party, unlike Rickword, who did so in 1934, and Garman, Wishart & Co. continued to publish work by left-wing writers. After Jonathan Cape and Victor Gollancz had turned down 'Negro', an anthology of pieces by 150 writers on black politics and culture, collected and edited by Nancy Cunard, Wishart agreed to publish it in 1934 on the understanding that she would pay all the expenses. In her introduction, Nancy Cunard supported the claim of the Communist Party to be the champion of the black race. Wishart & Co. also published Geoffrey Gorer's 'The Revolutionary Ideas of the Marquis de Sade' (1934), with an introduction by the Marxist intellectual J. B. S. Haldane. 
In 1935 Wishart & Co. merged with the publishing house of Martin Lawrence, becoming Lawrence and Wishart, and moved to Red Lion Square, London. It became the press of the Communist Party of Great Britain, with a list after the Second World War that included the Marxist historians Eric Hobsbawm, Christopher Hill, and E. P. Thompson. In co-operation with the Institute of Marxism-Leninism and Progress Publishers in Moscow, it began to publish the definitive English-language edition of the complete works of Marx and Engels: by 2002 forty-eight of the fifty volumes had been published. In 1941-2 the first six volumes of the 'Little Stalin Library' appeared. In 1955 Lawrence and Wishart published the first unabridged version of Robert Tressell's novel 'The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists' (1914). They also published the official history of the Communist Party of Great Britain, whose first four volumes appeared between 1969 and 1997. 
In 1936 Lawrence and Wishart took over the publication of 'New Writing', the literary series started and edited by John Lehmann, when the Bodley Head severed its connection after the first two numbers. Wishart published numbers 3, 4, and 5, offering copies at a discount to members of Victor Gollancz's Left Book Club, but after the appearance of volume 5 in the spring of 1938, he lost interest, possibly because he disapproved of Lehmann's attitude to the Spanish Civil War. The Hogarth Press took over the publication of 'New Writing' until 1940, when it became 'Penguin New Writing'. In December 1937 Lawrence and Wishart joined Gollancz in launching another journal, the 'Modern Quarterly', which merged with the 'Communist Review' in 1954 to become the 'Marxist Quarterly'. They continued to publish it until 1957. 
Although Wishart did not give up his stake in Lawrence and Wishart, he took little part in the business after the beginning of the Second World War. He lent his London house to the Czech government in exile, and moved to his estate at Binsted. He spent the rest of his life managing his farms, and pursuing his interest in architecture and local history. He gave a medieval round house to the Museum of Agricultural History in West Dean, Sussex, and became patron of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings. Wishart died on 16 September 1987 at Yew Tree House, North End Road, Yapton, Sussex. 
Wishart's wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 39021


Marx, Karl Heinrich (1818-1883), revolutionary and thinker, known from student days to his intimates as Mohr (the Moor), was born on 5 May 1818 at Bruckengasse 664, in Trier, a recent addition to the kingdom of Prussia, the third of nine children and only surviving son of the lawyer Heinrich Marx (1781/2-1838) and his wife, Henriette, 'nee' Pressburg. As was then not unusual, four of his siblings died in infancy or youth. 
Marx's parents both came from rabbinical families, which had customarily tended to intermarry. Both his grandfather Meier Halevi Marx, the descendant of a priestly line, and his uncle Samuel became rabbis of the Jewish community in Trier, then a small but ancient country town, proud of its Roman heritage. Meier's wife, Chaje Lwow, Karl Marx's grandmother, came from an even more distinguished rabbinical lineage descended from, as the name implies, the scholar Moses Lwow of the then Polish, and subsequently Austrian, Polish, Soviet, and Ukrainian, city. Her father, grandfather, and great-grandfather had been rabbis of Trier and elsewhere in Franconia and Alsace since the later seventeenth century. Another line led from the Minz family which emigrated, presumably from Mainz, in the mid-fifteenth century to Padua, where its members were rabbis and heads of the Talmudic college. On his mother's side, as the name Pressburg implies, the family came from Hungary, whence they had migrated to the Netherlands, where Henriette's grandfather became rabbi of Nijmegen. Her sister broke the rabbinical chain by marrying the banker Lion Philips, grandfather of the founder of the well-known Dutch and international industrial concern, who after Heinrich's death acted as trustee for Karl Marx's mother. 
Given this family background, it seems at first surprising that Heinrich Marx decided to be baptized at the age of thirty-five -- in the evangelical rather than the locally prevalent Roman Catholic faith -- in 1816 or 1817, and had Karl and all his surviving siblings baptized in 1824, followed in 1825 by Marx's mother. The immediate reasons were almost certainly practical. After Trier became Prussian in 1815 Jews were excluded from all public posts, the practice of law being classified as a public post on 4 May 1816. Even so, the decision to abandon the religion of his forefathers can be understood only if we bear in mind the extent to which the culture of the eighteenth-century Enlightenment had penetrated the world of the educated professional strata in the Rhineland and the experience of the first generation of Jewish emancipation under the French. Marx's father was a deist who found his God in Locke, Newton, and Leibniz and not in the 'Torah'. His son already grew up in something close to an emancipated and assimilated German household, steeped in secular literary and philosophical culture of the ancient and modern European classics, although Marx's mother, brought up in the old ways, was never at ease either in writing or in speaking the High German language. Nevertheless, Heinrich Marx's conversion meant a complete break with his family. There appears to have been no further contact with any other Marxes. Karl's only known relation with his Jewish kin in later life appears to have been with his mother's relatives, the Dutch Philipses, with whom he continued to be on close terms. Lion Philips was also the only known correspondent to whom he wrote as one Jew to another -- an identity he was elsewhere at pains to disclaim. 
The young Karl Marx's five years at the Friedrich-Wilhelm Gymnasium in Trier (1830-35) were uneventful and not strikingly distinguished. Only hindsight can read more into the seventeen-year-old's essay 'Considerations of a young man on choosing his career' than the adolescent's idealist desire to serve humanity: 'If he is working only for himself, he can become a famous scholar, a sage, a distinguished writer, but never a complete, a truly great, man.' He appears to have formed no lasting friendships except with the brother of his future bride, Jenny 
(Johanna Bertha Julie Jenny von Westphalen; 1814-1881)
, to whom he became engaged at the age of eighteen, at the end of his first academic year at the University of Bonn. Intellectually, the major influences in his school years appear to have come from his father and his future father-in-law, privy councillor ('geheimer Regierungsrat') Johann Ludwig von Westphalen, son of an official of the duke of Brunswick, who was distinguished in the Seven Years War, ennobled, and married into the Wishart family, kin to the earls and later dukes of Argyll, a connection which Mrs Marx did nothing to conceal during her years in England. 
Westphalen, who served, in turn, the Guelphs, the French kingdom of Westphalia, and Prussia, shared his enthusiasm for the Greek poets and Shakespeare with the young Marx, and, more surprisingly, introduced him to Saint-Simon; his ideas were clearly more advanced than those of his eldest son, who was to become Prussian minister of the interior in the 1850s. His daughter Jenny, four years older than Karl, was the beauty of Trier, and was still remembered in the town as such even in the early 1860s, as Marx noted with satisfaction when he revisited his birthplace in 1863. That a man of this background and standing should have consented to the marriage of his daughter to a young, even if converted, Jew without visible prospects is convincing evidence that, even as a schoolboy, he must have deeply impressed at least one good judge. 
That the brilliant, sarcastic, darkly handsome youth also deeply impressed both contemporaries and seniors became clear at the universities in Bonn (1835-6) and especially Berlin (1836-41), where Marx gradually shifted from his original subject of law to philosophy, though also tempted by Romantic poetry, for which his surviving verses show no great aptitude. The student was father to the man. A number of what proved to be Marx's permanent characteristics emerged during his university years, finally completed by a doctoral dissertation, 'Die Differenz der Demokritischen und Epikurischen Naturphilosophie' ('The difference between Democritus' and Epicurus' philosophy of nature'), at the philosophical faculty of Jena (April 1841): a tendency to indulge in Herculean bouts of overwork (at the expense of his health); an inability to finish his projects, except under extreme pressure; and -- not least -- a cavalier attitude to the problems of earning a living and to the relation between income and expenditure. These darkened his relations with his father, a conflict which can be followed in a moving exchange of letters that ended with Heinrich Marx's premature death in 1838, after which relations with Marx's mother also deteriorated. Perhaps the father, though complaining about Karl's extravagant debts, would have been more tolerant of the nineteen-year-old's impassioned but ill-defined struggles to reunite art, science, and philosophy single-handed had he not, by his engagement to the daughter of an established Trier family, undertaken commitments, by the standards of contemporary reason and convention, which he showed no sign of recognizing. Indeed, for the rest of his life Marx was never to succeed by his own efforts in solving his economic problems, or acquiring any regular or predictable income. 
In Berlin, the home of Hegelian thought, the undergraduate Marx was quickly accepted by his seniors in the so-called 'postgraduate club' ('Doktorklub') of Young Hegelian philosophers, representing the philosophical and political avant-garde, that is to say the critique of state and religion. There was no prospect of an academic career for a brilliant but philosophically (though by no means yet socially) subversive young intellectual inclined to activism. However, he had made a sufficiently strong impression to be asked to contribute to a new journal, the 'Rheinische Zeitung', financed by a group of wealthy Cologne men in business and the professions and representing the moderate but loyal liberalism of the (non-clerical) Rhineland bourgeoisie. After six months and a number of articles, which were almost his first excursions into real politics and his first into economic questions, he became its editorial director and remained so until the paper was closed down by the censor in early 1843, though evidently without hard feelings, for shortly after he resigned from the editorship the Prussian government appears to have offered him a post as editor in the state service. Indeed his posture as editor of the 'Rheinische Zeitung' had been militant but politically moderate. In any case, until then, in spite of its urgency and prominence in the early 1840s, he had as yet shown no interest in the much discussed 'social question', nor did he as yet sympathize with what he regarded as the superficial communism which was already attracting the paper's young Berlin contributors. It was not, he felt, based on serious thought. Proud, abrasive, and confident of his gifts, he had begun to make a name. Nevertheless, it was clear that no serious opposition writing would be tolerated in Germany. 
Marx therefore accepted the offer (by Arnold Ruge, one of the most prominent voices of liberal opposition) of a salaried joint editorship of a proposed journal to be published abroad, the 'Deutsche-Franzosische Jahrbucher'. This brought him to Paris in late 1843 as a literary emigrant and, after April 1844, when the Prussian government issued an arrest warrant against its editors on the grounds of high treason and 'lese-majeste', as a permanent, and soon stateless, political refugee. He surrendered his Prussian citizenship in December 1845, a fact which was later used to disqualify his application for naturalization in Britain on the grounds that he had 'behaved disloyally to his King' ('Collected Works', 24.564), although actually he tried unsuccessfully to reclaim his Prussian citizenship in 1862. In Paris he set up his first married household -- he had married on 12 June 1843 -- and had his first child, Jenny Caroline (1844-1883). Here also the household was joined by its lifelong member Helene (Lenchen) Demuth, a young servant of the Westphalen family who was transferred, in a somewhat feudal manner, from Trier to Jenny Marx by her mother. Under Prussian pressure Marx was expelled from Paris by the French government in January 1845 and moved to Brussels, which remained his base of operations until the 1848 revolutions. Two further children were born in Brussels, (Jenny) Laura (1845-1911) -- all his daughters were named Jenny, after his wife -- and the short-lived Henry Edgar, who died in Soho (1846-1855). The rest of the Marxes' children, Henry Edward Guy (1849-1850), (Jenny Eveline) Frances (1851-1852), and (Jenny Julia) Eleanor Marx (1855-1898), were born and died in England. 
The Karl Marx we know was born in the months between his marriage and his expulsion from Paris. He thought his way through to communism by means of an intensive critique of Hegel's philosophy of law and the state, via the 'Vorlaufige Thesen zur Reform der Philosophie' (1843) ('Preliminary Theses on the Reform of Philosophy') of the radical philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach and an impassioned study of the history of the French Revolution. By the end of 1843, when Marx wrote 'Zur Kritik der Hegel'schen Rechtsphilosophie' ('Introduction to the critique of Hegel's philosophy of law') for the 'Jahrbucher' (published in 1844), he had concluded that the proletariat alone was the necessary agency for the emancipation of humanity. In Paris he found himself in the capital of both revolution and socialism, and in the midst of an international community of the political avant-garde, most of whom were soon to become victims of his critique -- Bakunin, Proudhon, Ruge and the German emigration, Leroux, Louis Blanc, and the other French socialists, but not the sceptical poet and temporary communist sympathizer Heinrich Heine, for whom, all his life, Marx retained 'a sincere affection' (Prawer, 66). He was already known as both the ablest and least tolerant of the revolutionary intellectuals. 
Stimulated by his study of the French Revolution and by a 'Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie' ('Outlines of a critique of national economy') submitted in 1844 to the magazine by Frederick Engels (1820-1895) on the basis of his British experience, Marx began, with his usual titanic energy, to plunge into the literature of economics. The two young men found they had converged on the same point by different routes: the one via politics and the French Revolution, the other via the experience of Britain's industrial revolution in his family's Manchester cotton business. By the late summer of 1844, when Engels spent ten days in Paris with Marx on his way back from Manchester, the two young men found themselves 'in agreement in all theoretical areas' and about to begin their lifelong co-operation. With Engels, Marx made his first visit to Britain -- London and Manchester -- a few months later (July-August 1845). 
The partnership with Engels, never broken on either side, was so central to the remainder of Marx's life that a brief comment on it is relevant. For Marx, Engels was to be the permanent intellectual collaborator and partner, the ever reliable source of information, notably about the actual operations of capitalist industry, the constant, unconditional (if not uncritical) backer, and the fount of intellectual, and especially material, support. Without Engels he could not have survived his years in Britain. For Engels, Marx, in his own graveside words, was 'the greatest living thinker', the Darwin of the law of human historical evolution, the pathbreaker for humanity's future, a genius to whom he, a mere man of talent and intelligence, was justified in devoting his mind and money -- even at the cost of continuing in the hated family cotton business to provide him with an income. 
With and without Engels, Marx now launched himself into a series of writings in which he tried to elaborate his new theory, and which form the basis of what later came to be called Marxism -- a term from which he took his distance when it came into use at the end of his life. However, although he actually received in 1845 a publisher's advance for a two-volume critique of politics and national economy, his major work -- or that part of it which was actually completed under the title 'Das Kapital: Kritik der politischen Oekonomie' -- was not published until 1867. As Ruge had observed: 'He never finishes anything; he is always breaking off, and then plunges again into an infinite ocean of books' (Blumenberg, 55). Only ideological disagreement and personal polemic seemed to spur him into publication -- with Engels against various Germans ('Die heilige Familie, oder, Kritik der kritischen Kritik', Frankfurt, 1845), alone against Proudhon ('La misere de la philosophie', Brussels and Paris, 1847). Major texts, such as the so-called 'Paris manuscripts' of 1844, the 'Theses on Feuerbach' (1845), and the enormous 'Die deutsche Ideologie' ('German ideology') of 1845-6, written in collaboration with Engels, in which his 'materialist conception of history' was first elaborated, were to be published posthumously between 1888 and 1932. 
Of more immediate significance was the conversion of the most important secret German revolutionary fraternity, the League of the Just, renamed the Communist League, with whom both had had increasingly close contacts for some years, to the views of Marx and Engels. This body, an offshoot of French secret societies of the 1830s, was primarily composed of militant expatriate German craftsmen, but also attracted some young intellectuals, among them the future leaders of Germany's major working-class parties, Ferdinand Lassalle and Wilhelm Liebknecht. Marx visited Britain for the second time (27 November to 13 December 1847) to take part in the Second Congress of the now reformed organization at the Communistischer Arbeiterbildungsverein ('Communist Workers' Educational Club'), then in Soho, just off Shaftesbury Avenue. Here he and Engels were commissioned to draw up a manifesto, which he completed -- not without a deadline and ultimatum from the league -- for publication at the end of February, a nose ahead of the 1848 revolutions. It presented communism as the necessary and inevitable product of the historical development of capitalism. As the 'Communist Manifesto', this irresistible combination of utopian confidence, moral passion, hard-edged analysis, and -- not least -- a dark literary eloquence was eventually to become perhaps the best-known and certainly the most widely translated pamphlet of the nineteenth century. Its publication went almost unnoticed. The Communist League and its network remained Marx's main political resource during the ensuing years of revolution. 
The 1848 revolution gave Marx a political role adequate to his talents. Expelled from Belgium shortly after the outbreak of the February revolution in France, he returned to Paris by invitation of the new republican government and prepared for the now certain German revolutions which triumphed in March. Within weeks, and on a temporary French passport, he was back in Cologne with Engels, who raised most of the money to found the daily 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung: Organ der Democratie', of which Marx was editor-in-chief, assisted -- for the paper was run, in Engels's words, 'simply as the dictatorship of Marx' -- by Engels and a team of communists. It has been described as 'the best newspaper of that year of revolution' (Blumenberg, 87). Certainly it was the most coherent voice of the democratic left, which believed that 'the domination of the bourgeoisie cannot be reached by compromise with the feudal powers', recommended a revolutionary war against Russia, and held that 'German unity, like the German Constitution, can only emerge as the result of a movement in which both the inner conflicts and the war with the East are brought to resolution' ('Neue Rheinische Zeitung', 7 June 1848). Fortunately Marx's pen felt the discipline of the need for daily comment. He had to write rapidly, and the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung' gave him practice in the genre of instant analytical history he was to make his own and which he perfected after 1848, notably in the masterly 'Der 18te Brumaire des Louis Napoleon' ('The eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon') ('Die Revolution', 1, 1852), written within weeks of the French 'coup d'etat' of December 1851. 
Though Marx and his friends did not recognize that the defeat of the revolution was irreversible until 1850, the increasingly radical paper closed down as Marx was expelled from Prussia at twenty-four hours' notice in May 1849. The family made its way to Paris by various routes. In France he was, once again, a suspect subversive, offered permission to reside only if he remained far from Paris in southern Brittany. Instead, planning a revived expatriate 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung', he chose exile in Britain, where he arrived at the end of August, to be joined by his family on 15 September. From then on to the end of his life Marx had his domicile in London at -- omitting temporary lodgings -- 4 Anderson Street, Chelsea (October 1849 - April 1850), then at two addresses in Dean Street, Soho (December 1850 - September 1856), in Grafton Terrace, Kentish Town (October 1856 - March 1864), at 1 Modena Villas (1864-75), and finally, further up Maitland Park Road at 41 (1875-83), where both Jenny Marx and he died. 
The next few years were the hardest and most frustrating in Marx's life, although the British Museum Library, to which he obtained access in June 1850, offered some escape from the miseries of politics and everyday troubles. His political hopes, both general and personal, collapsed. For a few months he kept up hopes of a revolutionary revival as he published six issues of a short-lived 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung: Politisch-Okonomische Revue' (including his analysis of the French revolution later republished as 'Die Klassenkampfe in Frankreich, 1848 bis 1850' and in English as 'The Class Struggles in France, 1848-50'), while sketching a prospect of the possible passage from democratic to proletarian revolution ('permanent revolution') for the benefit of the Communist League. Yet, unlike many other of the refugees crowding into London, he soon accepted that the revolutionary era was at an end. In the overheated atmosphere of inquest, rivalry, recrimination, and mutual accusation that tends to follow lost revolutions, the German Workers' League in London broke away from Marx and Engels -- never the best of committee men -- as did most of the London communists, leaving them politically quite isolated, while in 1851 the police succeeded in virtually destroying the Communist League in Germany. It was formally dissolved by Marx in November 1852. Politically he was at zero point. Intellectually few could even read him, for attempts to publish his writings in 1851 came to little, as did his hopes, excessively optimistic as usual, to complete his economic work. Ferdinand Lassalle, shortly to be founder of the first mass workers' party in Germany and an admirer of Marx (who did not return the admiration), arranged for the publication of a first instalment, 'Zur Kritik der politischen Okonomie' (Berlin, 1859), which Marx failed to follow up. The enormous preparatory manuscripts of 1857-8 became influential after their publication under the title 'Grundrisse' in 1939-41. The contrast between his talent, promise, and achievement and his political isolation visibly embittered Marx, and made him even more intolerant, both in public and in private. 
At the same time Marx's material situation was catastrophic. With no gift for domestic financial management and living the hand-to-mouth life of the political refugee, without a predictable source of income since 1844, he had been harried by money troubles since the mid-1840s, but with the end of the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung' these became constant and acute. The squalor in which the Marxes -- six persons -- lived in their two furnished rooms in Soho was vividly described by visiting Prussian police spies, and the daily Dickensian struggle with butchers, bakers, landlords, and pawnbrokers emerges in Marx's correspondence with the ever loyal Engels, on whose financial aid he now relied permanently. Three of the Marx children died during these terrible years and were buried in the churchyard of Whitefield's Tabernacle in Tottenham Court Road, Mrs Marx having to beg $2 from a neighbouring French political refugee to pay for the coffin of one of them. Not surprisingly Jenny Marx's nerves often gave way, as did Karl's hardly equable temper. 'At home a constant state of siege' he reported to Engels in 1851; 'Am annoyed and enraged by streams of tears all night long... I'm sorry for my wife. She bears the brunt of the pressure, and 'au fond' she is right. In spite of this... from time to time I lose my temper' (Marx to Engels, 31 July 1851, 'Collected Works', 38.398). It should be remembered that Mrs Marx was not only in charge of the household but also acted as her husband's secretary. It may be that those times of what must have been intolerable pressure led to the birth of Helene Demuth's son, Henry Frederick, who (according to one interpretation) was Marx's child, on 28 June 1851. Jenny Marx seems to have been kept in ignorance, thanks to the faithful and notoriously unbourgeois Engels, who tacitly allowed paternity to be attributed to himself until shortly before he died. We may assume that Marx was not in a position to take responsibility for an illegitimate son. Still, the episode leaves a bad taste in the mouths of Marx's biographers. Befriended later by Marx's daughters, Frederick Demuth, the only member of the Marx family actually to be a class-conscious proletarian (a toolmaker and member of the Amalgamated Engineering Union), died in 1929. It has been suggested that the authorities of the young USSR, anxious to avoid potentially embarrassing claims from illegitimate descendants of Marx, paid him a substantial sum, probably in the mid-1920s, presumably in return for silence about his paternity. The documentation about Demuth was sufficiently important to be submitted to Stalin himself in 1934, who decided that 'the material should stay buried in the archive' (Kapp, 'Frederick Demuth', 18-19, 26-7). 
Ironically, the main victim of those years was not Helene Demuth, who continued as the loved and respected friend, member, and housekeeper of the Marx family until her employer's death and is buried in the family grave, but Jenny Marx. 'In all these struggles [she was to write some twenty years later] we women have the harder part to bear, because it is the pettier one. A man draws strength from his battles with the world outside, invigorated by the very confrontation with the enemy, be their number legion. We sit at home and darn stockings. That doesn't save us from worry, and the little everyday miseries slowly but surely grind down the will to live. (J. Marx to W. Liebknecht, 26 May 1872, 'Collected Works', 44.580; slightly modified translation)' In the last decade of her life, when Marx's work made less demand on her time, Jenny's life -- passionate but not entirely conventional by the standards of Haverstock Hill -- turned increasingly round the domestic problems of children and grandchildren. Her daughters, from whom surprisingly few letters to her appear to have survived, talked of her with a sort of amused condescension and made fun of her conscientious reading of 'Das Kapital'. Not so Karl Marx, who thought the most important thing about what he regarded as the first English publication that did his ideas justice was that he received it in time 'so that my dear wife had the last days of her life still cheered up. You know the passionate interest she took in all such affairs' (ibid., Marx to F. A. Sorge, 15 Dec 1881, 46.163). 
If anything Marx's financial problems became worse in the course of the 1850s, although journalism, mainly for the 'New York Daily Tribune', whose editor, Charles Dana, he had got to know in 1848 and for which he acted as London correspondent, provided some fairly regular income. Some of these articles were written for Marx by Engels, notably those later published as 'Revolution and Counter-Revolution, or, Germany in 1848', edited by Eleanor Marx Aveling (1896). In 1862, when the American Civil War had lost Marx this source of income, he reached the nadir of his financial fortunes. His wife attempted to sell his books and (with recommendations from a Philips cousin) Marx actually felt obliged to seek employment as a clerk for the Great Western Railway. He was turned down because of his sensationally illegible handwriting, which has also been the bane of Marxian scholars. In spite of constant, desperate, and always successful appeals for money to Engels, some legacies, and various complex (and sometimes shaky) speculations and credit transactions, the Marx finances were not stabilized until 1869 when Engels, about to retire from the Manchester cotton business, offered to pay all his debts and to provide an annuity of $350, which Marx agreed he could live on -- illness and other unforeseen contingencies apart -- though he also admitted that he had exceeded this sum in the past. In fact the Marxes continued to rely on Engels's extraordinary generosity, as the need arose. 
The problem of the Marxian finances had been particularly intractable for two reasons: the Marxes felt it essential to maintain the public expenditure of a successful professional household, especially after their move into a middle-class district, and they were spectacularly bad at budgeting. Hence the surprising combination of what was then a substantial annual expenditure with almost constant and desperate financial embarrassment. Moreover, matters were made even more difficult by the ill health which increasingly racked Marx's powerful body from 1849. He suffered annual and increasingly severe liver and gall-bladder attacks. From the early 1860s he developed disabling and Job like boils and abscesses -- the famous carbuncles, for which he hoped the bourgeoisie would one day pay. He also suffered from rheumatic pains and occasional paralysis, and, fairly persistently, from headaches, inflammation of the eyes, neuralgia, and chronic insomnia, not to mention from bronchial and lung problems, which were to be the official cause of his death ('cachexy as a result of consumption'). In his last thirty years he was, for practical purposes, under constant medical attention. It is possible that some of his medical problems were psychosomatic ('of a nervous nature'), as his doctor suggested on at least one occasion. They were almost certainly aggravated by his diet, smoking, and drinking habits, and quite certainly by the enormous workload he imposed on himself by day and night. 
These were the conditions under which Marx entered the second, and very much more rewarding, decade of his British exile, when he became a well-known figure in British politics and an influential one in international labour politics, and also produced the only volume of 'Das Kapital' published in his lifetime as well as virtually all of the manuscript of what was to be published posthumously as volumes 2 and 3 of that work and the 'Theorien uber den Mehrwert' ('Theories of surplus value'). 
Since 1846 Marx had established relations with the British Chartists -- notably G. J. Harney, who appears to have been the main British contact for the Communist League, and later Ernest Jones. However, his contacts with the main body of the post-Chartist labour movement, the trade unions, were probably mediated through old Communist Leaguers among German workers in Britain, who retained their admiration for him, such as the tailor G. Eccarius, who in 1863 arranged his participation in a trade union meeting in favour of the north in the American Civil War, presided over by John Bright. This initiated his relations with leading figures of the British trade union and labour movement such as Robert Applegarth, W. R. Cremer, and George Odger. The British unions were to provide the crucial organizational backing for the new International Working Men's Association, to the inaugural meeting of which, on 28 September 1864, Marx was invited as a representative of the German workers, and to whose provisional committee he was elected. 
Although Marx at this time had few supporters anywhere, sheer intellectual superiority immediately made him the leading figure in this organization. Since, unlike in the Communist League, he was in no position to exercise authority directly, he now also demonstrated a political tact not evident in his earlier career. Composed of representatives of virtually all tendencies on the European left, ranging from moderate trade unionists to anarchist insurrectionaries, the 'International' was to acquire considerable public prominence, coinciding as it did with a marked growth in labour activity and organization in Europe, which it attempted to inspire and co-ordinate. While uninterested in revolutionary projects the British unions, engaged in the struggle for electoral reform and union rights, found Marx's insistence on class-based political action congenial and welcomed the International's efforts to prevent the import of strike-breakers from abroad. Marx became the chief draftsman of its documents, beginning with its rules and inaugural address (1864), and indeed was chiefly instrumental in holding its disparate elements together until they broke apart under the strain of the battle between Marx, the champion of state power and politics, and Bakunin, the anti-political anarchist, and in the aftermath of the Paris commune of 1871. Most of the British trade unionists abandoned the International after its, or rather Marx's, 'Address on the commune', better known as 'The Civil War in France' (1871) -- the third of his remarkable pamphlets on the contemporary history of France. This document, which profoundly influenced subsequent revolutionaries from Lenin to Mao, abandoned the deliberate moderation of the earlier statements of the International to return to 'the old boldness of speech' (Marx to Engels, 4 Dec 1864, 'Collected Works', 42.18), thus reinforcing the impression that the International, identified with Marx, was the heart of international revolution, which had been gaining ground for some time. Although the British government did not take these attacks seriously, Marx himself was not displeased that 'I have the honour to be AT THIS MOMENT THE BEST CALUMNIATED AND MOST MENACED MAN OF LONDON. That really does one good after a tedious twenty years' idyll in the swamp' (ibid., Marx to Kugelmann, 18 June 1871, 44.158). His prominence in the International also attracted attention to his writings. Volume 1 of 'Das Kapital' was published in 1867, its preface dated from London on 25 July 1867, the only one of Marx's major works which was published in his lifetime (its first English translation, edited by Engels and translated by S. Moore and Eleanor Marx Aveling, was published by Swan Sonnenschein in 1887). Between 1869 and 1872, for the only time in his lifetime, new editions of his earlier writings were published: 'The Eighteenth Brumaire' (1869), the 'Communist Manifesto' (1872), and the second and much rewritten edition of 'Das Kapital' (1872). On the other hand the breakup of the International in 1872 -- its relics were dispatched to New York -- virtually ended his life as a practising politician. 
Although the 1870s left Marx with far more time and without serious financial worries, they also virtually brought to an end his theoretical work. While he continued to read endlessly in a variety of languages -- he now learned Russian -- after 1872 he wrote little, published less, and added hardly anything to the vast but unco-ordinated mass of manuscript written in the 1860s, although he made an attempt to return to the second volume of 'Das Kapital' in 1877-8, which he said he hoped to complete within a year. Engels's shock at the fragmentary state of the material after his friend's death is comprehensible: he had been given the impression that it was close to completion. Why Marx never concluded his 'magnum opus' has been endlessly discussed since his death, but there is no doubt that with the end of the International something went out of his life. 
However, he was by this time a personage of some note, or notoriety, in various countries. Indeed, his (unsuccessful) application for naturalization in 1874 was intended to safeguard himself against action by the authorities in newly united Germany and the Austrian authorities at Karlsbad where, under the watchful eye of the local 'Bezirkshauptmann', he took the cure with his daughter Eleanor, until a nervous Habsburg government intimated its intention to expel this 'outstanding leader of the democratic-social party' (Kisch, 31, 73) if he were to return. He began to attract interviewers. More to the point, in Germany the two labour and socialist parties, both founded by his disciples, merged in 1875 (on terms which he bitterly denounced in the so-called 'Critique of the Gotha programme' of that year, posthumously published by Engels in 'Die Neue Zeit', 1891) to form what was to become the largest of pre-1914 Marxist parties. More surprisingly, the translation of 'Das Kapital' into Russian (1872) gained him immediate and profound influence among Russian intellectuals. The censors of St Petersburg had authorized its publication on the grounds that 'it is possible to state with certainty that very few people in Russia will read it and even fewer will understand it' (Figes, 139). While he had been in touch with Russian exiles since the 1840s, his links with Russian intellectuals, in whose country -- to cite a British report of 1879 -- he expected 'a great and not distant crash' ('Collected Works', 24.581), now became extremely close. His relations also remained close with France, the only other country in which a translation of 'Das Kapital' appeared in Marx's lifetime (1872-5); two of his daughters, Jenny and Laura, married Frenchmen -- respectively Charles Longuet (1833-1903) and Paul Lafargue (1842-1911) -- while a third, Eleanor, was for some years engaged to another, the communard and historian of the Paris commune Hippolyte Prosper Olivier Lissagaray (1838-1901), and would almost certainly have married him but for a paternal veto. 
In Britain, where 'The Times' and some other newspapers were to receive the news of his death from the Paris papers, Marx remained little known and intellectually isolated. Not surprisingly he resented the fact that even his earliest British disciple, founder of the Democratic (from 1884 Social Democratic) Federation, H. M. Hyndman, initially thought it advisable not to mention his name, on the grounds that the English did not like the word socialism and 'have a dread of being taught by a foreigner' (Marx to Hyndman, 2 July 1881, 'Collected Works', 46.102). Such contacts as he had earlier, mainly with the radicals of the 'Fortnightly Review', appear to have been mediated by the small band of positivists (E. S. Beesly, Frederic Harrison), themselves supporters of the International and among the rare British sympathizers with the Paris commune. Characteristically, Sir Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff's letter of 1 February 1879 to the Empress Friedrich (ibid., 24.580-82) passes naturally from a lengthy account of a meeting with Marx to some gossip about the English positivists. 
A number of writers have left very similar impressions of Marx in his last decade: a 'firm neck' (Kisch, 70) on still massive shoulders supported 'the head of a man of intellect and the features of a cultivated Jew' ('Collected Works', 24.568) framed by long grey hair and beard, 'which contrast strangely with a still dark moustache' (ibid., 24.580) and dark bushy eyebrows (Kisch, 70). Few failed to remark on the sharp, sparkling eyes. He looked old, almost certainly older than his years -- the 'Chicago Tribune's' reporter thought 'he must be over 70 years of age' in December 1878 ('Collected Works', 24.568). He seemed to enjoy life. He was cultured, witty, a gifted raconteur: 'varied by many quaint turns and little bits of dry humour... it was all very 'positif', slightly cynical, interesting' (ibid., 24.580). He impressed by the sheer range of his knowledge -- 'a most impressively cultivated anglo-german 'gentleman'' (Maxim Kovalevsky, quoted in Blumenberg, 151); 'his talk was that of a well-informed, nay, learned man' ('Collected Works', 24.580). All were struck by the contrast between his incendiary reputation and continued belief in revolution on one hand and the dispassionate tone of the elderly scholar-observer on the other. 'It will not be he who whether he wishes it or not will turn the world upside down' observed Sir Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff as he reported to the future Empress Friedrich of Germany that his impression of Marx 'was not at all unfavourable and I would gladly meet him again' (ibid., 24.582). 
With Engels's move to London in 1870 -- he lived a short walking distance away and saw Marx daily -- and with the French sons-in-law as communard refugees in London, Marx now lived close to family and friends. From 1876 he acquired Longuet grandchildren, to whom he became very attached. But for his health, the natural exuberance and 'joie de vivre' on which visitors to the family parties remarked would have been even more evident. However, his health continued to deteriorate, and from 1873 his doctors insisted on annual cures at a spa -- Harrogate, Karlsbad, in the Black Forest, Malvern -- as well as seaside rest in Jersey, Ramsgate, and finally, in 1882, in Algiers and on the Isle of Wight. So, and somewhat more rapidly, did the health of Jenny Marx deteriorate; she died, beloved, emaciated, and stoical, of liver cancer on 1 December 1881, leaving her husband bereft. On the day she died, thought Engels, the Moor also died (Mehring, 528). He outlived her for little more than a year. He suffered his last blow with the death of Jenny, his favourite daughter, on 11 January 1883, aged thirty-seven, probably of cancer of the bladder. On the afternoon of 14 March 1883, sitting in his easy chair in his house at 41 Maitland Park Road, London, he died. He was buried in Highgate cemetery on 17 March, in his wife's grave, in the presence of his daughter Eleanor, her partner Ernest Aveling, Ernest Radford (a friend of Engels), some old comrades from the Communist League, his two French sons-in-law, Wilhelm Liebknecht who spoke for the German Social Democratic Party, and two fellows of the Royal Society -- the communist chemist Karl Schorlemmer from Manchester and the biologist Ray Lankester, a friend of Marx's last years. Engels's lapidary words at the graveside, quoted in every life of Marx since, remained unpublished at the time, except in the Zurich journal of German social democracy, then illegal under Bismarck's anti-socialist law. Engels said: 'As Darwin discovered the law of evolution in organic nature, so Marx discovered the law of evolution in human history... that human beings must first of all eat, drink, shelter and clothe themselves before they can turn their attention to politics, science, art and religion. (Mehring, 531)' Marx died intestate. His youngest daughter, Eleanor, being the only relative resident in Britain, was granted letters of administration for his estate, valued at $250 (Kapp, 'Eleanor Marx', 1.282). The complex fortunes of the voluminous papers of Marx and Engels after their deaths form part of the troubled history of the twentieth century. 'What works?' Marx is reported as having said, bitterly, when asked about them. At his death there seemed little to show for a lifetime of sacrifice in the cause of changing the world. And yet scarcely any nineteenth-century figure has left a larger mark on history either as a thinker or as the inspirer of political action. As a thinker he was destined to make a greater impact -- though in a very different manner -- than any of his other contemporaries except Darwin. His intellectual gifts and achievement -- 'not only originality but also scientific ability of the highest order' (Schumpeter) -- could not but impress even his critics. A century after the publication of 'Das Kapital' he appeared more frequently than anyone else in the index of the 'International Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences', with references to every single one of its sixteen volumes. As for his practical impact, within little more than fifty years of his death regimes officially devoted to Marxism ruled a third of the human race, without counting the many millions who lived under the governments of social democratic parties, many of which also claimed direct descent from him. 
How far was this due to Marx, how far to the parties and movements claiming him as their inspiration? His personal contribution is not to be underestimated. 'The philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways: the point is to change it' Marx had noted down in 1845 ('Collected Works', 5.5). To the object of changing the world he devoted his life. Even sceptical critics noted 'the enormous vigour with which he created an arsenal of ideas for a political party and a host of slogans which could be used immediately and which were of magnificent effectiveness... the glowing passion which fascinated members of his party and his opponents and... the tone of the prophet which made his work unique' (Schumpeter, 119). He died no doubt hopeful, but also frustrated and disappointed. And yet few unarmed prophets were destined to a century of such posthumous success. 
Marx's intellectual influence has been so wide-ranging that a brief summary of his thought is unusually difficult. Since his death, no field of thinking about man and nature has, at one time or another, lacked serious debates about the relevance of his ideas to it. He himself is a major figure in the history of philosophy, economics, sociology, and historiography, though he cannot be adequately contained under any of these headings. The absence of any systematic and comprehensive account of his thought by Marx himself adds to the difficulty. The various posthumous systematizations or 'Marxisms' do not necessarily represent his own views, although the version devised between 1883 and 1895, mainly by Frederick Engels, could clearly claim to be based on a lifetime's partnership with him. 
Marx's starting point was a reflection on human nature. Like other humanist philosophers he assumed that it had a permanent essence, but he historicized this by defining what human beings 'really' are -- not as a collection of permanent and unchanging qualities embodying some arbitrary ideal, but as a process of development inherent in their social existence. Humans produced both themselves and their world, and they did so through 'labour', the interaction of man and the non-human environment, by which they both transformed external nature and modified their own. Yet historically the inability of humans to recognize themselves in the man-made universe which surrounded them ('alienation') made impossible the realization of their full human potential -- until the conditions for ending alienation came into existence in Marx's own times. 
There were thus two strands in Marx's thinking -- utopian or teleological, and historical or evolutionary -- both relying on a coherent but non-linear ('dialectical') analysis and linked by the concept of social practice: only through praxis could man both change himself and the world and arrive at an understanding of what he was doing. In its Hegelian origins it was utopian, or rather eschatological: history was an objective process moving towards a final end -- in Marx's case communism, the situation in which humanity would be able to determine its own development in freedom, no longer enslaved and blinded by the material forces it had created. Yet if this objective was achievable, it was not because it was desirable, but because it was historically inevitable. Moreover, Marx claimed to show why only the modern 'bourgeois' society could create the conditions for, and indeed the mechanism of, its realization, both by its capacity to revolutionize human society worldwide and by generating its own 'grave-digger'. 
This required an understanding of how societies in general developed and changed, and, specifically, of the nature and dynamics of the new capitalist society, which was creating the conditions for human life to move into the realm of freedom. The 'materialist conception of history', elaborated between 1843 and 1846, provided the first; Marx's political economy, which developed the classical lines of thought from Quesnay and Adam Smith to Ricardo, set out to provide the second. Meanwhile recent French historical experience provided both a model of revolution and political action and the concept of history as a struggle between 'classes', one of which acted as the predestined and necessary agent of social transformation. In capitalist society this was to be the function of the propertyless and wage-dependent proletariat, created by the system, whose auto-emancipation would 'constitute... a transition to the 'abolition of all classes' and to a 'classless society'' ('Collected Works', 39.62), and therefore to the end of human alienation. 
In its most general form the materialist conception of history could be stated concisely and (except in one respect) remained substantially unchanged: 'It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but their social existence that determines their consciousness' ('Collected Works', 29.263-4). The motor of historical change was the secular tendency of man's 'material productive forces' to grow and to come into conflict with the rigidities of the ensemble of 'social relations of production', which humans necessarily had to establish to ensure 'the social production of their means of existence'. More precisely, the conflict was with the 'juridical and political superstructure' of the prevailing mode of production, which had become a fetter on its further development. Periodic 'epoch[s] of social revolution' would ensue until the revolutionary era (which Marx believed to be imminent) would -- and here analysis gave way to millennial hope -- eliminate capitalism, 'the last antagonistic form of the social process of production' and thus end 'the prehistory of human society'. 
However, under the impact of Darwin the 'materialist conception' was broadened out into the concept of human historical evolution as an aspect of general (natural) evolution and essentially subject to the same 'scientific laws'. This was later to become the compendium 'dialectical and historical materialism', so influential in the Soviet period. While Engels developed this line of thought from the 1870s rather than Marx, who wrote little on these as on other matters in his last decade, Marx clearly showed a growing interest in the natural sciences at this time. 
Unlike the materialist conception of history, the 'anatomy of civil society', Marx's political economy, which he began to study seriously in 1843, was constantly elaborated and never adequately presented and synthesized. 'Das Kapital' attempted to combine three strands of thought: (1) an analysis of commodity production, comprising an exposition of 'alienation' in its specifically capitalist form -- for example, the so-called 'fetishism of commodities', in which what are essentially social relations between humans 'masquerade as things or relations between things' (Kolakowski, 1.276); (2) a theory of class exploitation (through the appropriation by an employing class of the 'surplus value' created by those whose labour power is hired for wages); and (3) a model of the contradictory 'modus operandi' of a capitalist economy, which eventually creates the conditions for its supersession. The accumulation of profit-seeking capital, which constitutes the engine of capitalist growth, depends on the surplus value extracted from labour ('variable capital'), the ratio of which to 'constant capital' must decline with technological progress, thus leading to a tendency for the average rate of profit to decline. This leads both to increased exploitation of labour, made easier by the 'reserve army' of the unemployed, continuously reinforced by labour-saving technical progress, and to economic concentration. Thus capitalism moves through periodic crises, and a secular tendency towards economic concentration and social polarization, to the moment when, in the course of capitalist development, 'centralisation of the means of production and socialisation of labour at last reach a point where they are incompatible with their capitalist integument' ('Collected Works', 35.750). Marx's writings contain virtually nothing about the post-capitalist economy. 
How far Marx believed these tendencies of capitalism had developed in his lifetime is unclear. How they intersected with the history of men and movements, about which he was far from determinist, could not be predicted a priori. It is safe to say that at the time of his death he did not believe the end of capitalism was immediately to hand. Almost certainly he believed that it would be ended, when the time was ripe, by the socially explosive forces in the mature industrialized societies, although a revolution in the periphery of world capitalism -- he confidently expected one in Russia -- might act as the detonator for their explosion. However, in democratic countries he did not exclude the possibility of a non-violent transition. 


@@@@@


doc= 39022


Engels, Friedrich (1820-1895), businessman and revolutionary leader, was born on 28 November 1820 in Barmen, Westphalia, the son of Friedrich Engels (1796-1860), a textile manufacturer, and Elizabeth, 'nee' van Haar (1797-1873), the daughter of a schoolmaster of Dutch origin. Frederick (as he came to be known in England later in life) was the eldest of three brothers and four sisters. Brought up in a strongly Calvinist protestant household, Engels attended the Elberfeld Gymnasium, before being sent to Bremen to be trained in the merchant's profession. From school onwards, however, Engels developed radical literary ambitions which first drew him towards the literary movement Young Germany and then in 1841 brought him into contact with the Young Hegelian circle in Berlin, where he served one year's military service. During these years in Bremen and Berlin Engels abandoned his family faith and developed a double life, which he was to maintain through most of his life. While preparing himself for work in the family business he wrote prolifically for the liberal and radical press under the pen-name Friedrich Oswald. 
In November 1842 Engels left for England to work in his father's Manchester textile firm, Ermen and Engels. Already a revolutionary republican and an admirer of Jacobinism from his days in the Young Hegelian circle in Berlin, Engels was converted on his way to England by Moses Hess to a belief in 'communism'. Convinced also by Hess's book of 1841, 'Die europaische Triarchie', of the imminence of social revolution in England, Engels used his two-year stay to study the conditions which would bring it about. From this visit came two pieces of writing which were to establish his lasting importance. The first, an essay entitled 'Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie' ('Outlines of a critique of national economy') published in the 'Deutsche-Franzosische Jahrbucher' in 1844, was the earliest Young Hegelian attempt at economic criticism and exerted a decisive influence upon Marx's identification of socialism with the critique of political economy. The second, 'Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England nach eigner Anschauung und authentischen Quellen', was published in Leipzig in 1845 (English trans. as 'The Condition of the Working Class in England', New York, 1887). It established his fame in Germany and has remained famous as a classic account of urban conditions during the period of the industrial revolution. Together these works attest to the importance of what Engels accomplished before his collaboration with Karl Marx and indicate that Marxist socialism was as much the creation of Engels as of Marx. 
Returning home through Paris in the summer of 1844, Engels had his first serious meeting with Marx. Their lifelong collaboration dated from this point with an agreement to produce a joint work, 'Die heilige Familie, oder, Kritik der kritischen Kritik' (1845; Eng. trans. as 'The Holy Family', 1956), setting out their disagreements with other tendencies within Young Hegelianism. This was followed by a second and unfinished joint enterprise, 'Die deutsche Ideologie' ('German Ideology') written in 1845-6, in which their 'materialist conception of history' was expounded systematically for the first time. In both these works, however, Engels's contribution was marginal. 
After residing with his family in Barmen, while writing 'The Condition of the Working Class in England', Engels left for Brussels in April 1845. Ostensibly travelling for purposes of research and continuing to rely upon an uncertain allowance from his father, he spent the years between 1845 and 1848 engaged in political activity among German artisan and communist groupings in Paris and Brussels. The political strategy of the Communist Correspondence Committee, of which he was part, was to encourage international discussion of 'scientific questions' among communists and socialists and to win supporters in German workers' educational societies for open democratic and communist agitation. It was for one of these groups, The League of the Just (subsequently the Communist League), that Engels wrote the first draft of the 'Communist Manifesto' in 1847. 
During the 1848 revolution, Engels joined Marx in Cologne to work as a collaborator on the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung'. Until the spring of 1849 the strategy of the paper was to act as the democratic wing of a middle-class liberal movement against absolutism. Only after the bourgeoisie had failed to play its allotted role in the revolution did the paper openly espouse independent social revolutionary action on the part of workers and peasants. Engels wrote on international and central European affairs until September 1848, but after a warrant was issued for his arrest he fled to Belgium and then France. During the rest of the autumn of 1848 he followed the wine harvest and its pleasures through the Loire and Burgundy to Switzerland, where he remained until he judged it safe to return to Cologne in January 1849. He continued to work on the paper until May 1849, when Elberfeld and other towns rose in revolt against the rejection by the German princes of the Frankfurt liberal constitution. Engels participated in the defence of Elberfeld until expelled as a communist. He then travelled to Baden and the Palatinate, where in June and July he took part in the last phase of armed resistance to the counter-revolution. He then crossed over into Switzerland, made his way to Genoa, and from there travelled by sea to England, where he arrived in November 1849. 
During the following year Engels and Marx attempted to resume their previous political and journalistic activity in London. They re-established the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung' as a bi-monthly review aimed at the democratic and communist diaspora. It was for this journal that Engels composed his long essay 'The peasant war in Germany', aimed at strengthening awareness of German traditions of revolutionary resistance. Engels also wrote extensively on developments in France and Germany for Harney's Chartist monthly, the 'Democratic Review'. When the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung' folded Engels decided in November 1850 to return to work for the family firm in Manchester. But he continued journalistic activity over the next few years, both as a way of remaining prepared for the next revolutionary upheaval and as a means of supporting Marx in London while he elaborated the critique of political economy upon which he had been engaged since the mid-1840s. Thus, it was initially to combat the firebrand insurrectionism of remnants of the Communist League that Engels developed a journalistic expertise in military affairs and it was to assist Marx that he wrote a series of articles under Marx's name, later published as 'Revolution and Counter-Revolution, or, Germany in 1848' (an account of the revolutions of 1848) reprinted from the 'New York Daily Tribune' and edited by Eleanor Marx Aveling (1896). 
From November 1850 to July 1869 Engels worked -- first as an employee and then (from 1861) as a partner -- in the firm of Ermen and Engels, manufacturers of cotton twist in Manchester. His income rose from around $100 per annum in the early 1850s to around $3000 in 1869. Throughout this period Engels led an elaborate double life. As English representative of the family firm he maintained lodgings in the centre of Manchester and participated in the lifestyle of the city's business elite. He was a member of the Albert Club and the Manchester Athenaeum, rode in the Cheshire hunt, and patronized the Schiller Institute. His personal and political life, on the other hand, was lived in a separate household in suburban Ardwick, where he maintained a relationship with Mary Burns ('c'.1823-1863) and subsequently with her sister, Lizzie 
(Lydia Burns; 1827-1878)
. 
Engels apparently first met Mary, an Irish-born worker employed in the Ermen and Engels Victoria Mills, while collecting material for his book during his stay in England between 1842 and 1844, and she accompanied him to Brussels in 1845. But there is no indication of her being with him in Paris or Cologne, and some evidence of his involvement with other women during these years. In the 1850s Engels and Mary were registered in Ardwick as Mr and Mrs Boardman, with Lizzie keeping house. In 1863, after Mary's death of heart disease, Engels transferred his affections to Lizzie. After his move to London in 1870 he lived with her openly, and he married her on her deathbed on 12 September 1878. The status of these relationships has been the object of controversy. In Brussels in 1847, for example, one eyewitness noted that Mary was not acknowledged by Mrs Marx; similarly in 1851, in his correspondence with Marx, Engels was still referring to himself as a bachelor. Nor is there any indication that either of the Burns sisters was ever introduced to the Engels family. On the other hand, Engels was deeply hurt when Marx expressed only cursory regret about Mary's death in a letter begging funds for his family. Thereafter relations appear to have become more relaxed; Marx's daughter, Eleanor, paid visits to the Engels household, and Lizzie appears to have enjoyed friendly relations with Mrs Marx once the couple moved to Regent's Park Road, around the corner from the Marx family. Nevertheless, in the whole of his correspondence there is little detail about his relationship with Lizzie and virtually nothing beyond his reproachful letter to Marx about his feelings for Mary. Despite his theoretical commitment to female emancipation as part of the transcendence of class society (stated in 'Der Ursprung der Familie, des Privateigentums und des Staates', 'The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State', 1884), it seems clear that in his personal life Engels's views on a woman's role were quite conventional and that he avoided relationships with women who might challenge him as equals. 
The ambiguity surrounding Engels's personal relationships formed part of a larger tension between his life as businessman and his commitment to revolutionary politics. Although Engels openly espoused the communist cause even in his native Barmen from 1844 onwards, he never broke with his family. During the 1850s, before the time when he became comparatively wealthy, it is estimated that he sometimes diverted as much as half his annual income to the Marx family. Yet Engels appears also to have remained a diligent member of the family firm and a dutiful son, escorting his parents on a tour of Scotland in 1859, regularly meeting up with his mother during summer holidays at Ostend or Ramsgate into the 1870s, and keeping up with his brothers and sisters until his death. It is clear also that his tastes remained unapologetically bourgeois. He once confessed that his idea of paradise was a bottle of Chateau Margaux 1848. 
During the 1850s and 1860s Engels wrote little of substance. But among his numerous journalistic contributions were a series of attempts to publicize Marx's 'Zur Kritik der politischen Okonomie' in 1859 and volume 1 of 'Das Kapital' in 1867. These contributions are perhaps most noteworthy in highlighting the extent to which Engels's outlook and his interpretation of Marx's work still derived from his Young Hegelian formation. 'Marx was, and is', he wrote in 1859, 'the only one who could undertake the work of extracting from Hegelian Logic the kernel which comprised Hegel's real discoveries... and to construct the dialectical method divested of its idealistic trappings' ('Selected Works', 1.513). They also indicate Engels's growing interest in the philosophy of science and the philosophy of nature, and his ambition to situate what he called Marx's 'materialist conception of history' within an overall schema which would also reconcile his revised version of Hegelian dialectics with evolutionary biology, embryology, and other sciences of nature. Engels's interest in the development of science was already apparent in his 'Umrisse' of 1844, in which he supported his argument by reference to the work of Davy and Liebig. The idea of supporting Marx's discoveries with a general cosmology buttressed by reference to the latest scientific findings may also have originated in his first stay in Manchester. It was an approach employed by the Owenites and, in particular, by his friend the Owenite lecturer John Watts (1818-1887), who in his 1843 lectures 'The philosophy of socialism' at the Manchester Hall of Science used the chemical discoveries of Davy and Liebig to discredit the Malthusian notion of static agricultural productivity. Engels's writings on dialectics and the development of the natural sciences were published posthumously as 'Dialektik der Natur' in 1925. But contemporaries were given some indications of his position in 'Anti-Duhring' (1877) and 'Ludwig Feuerbach und der Ausgang der klassischen deutschen Philosophie' (1886). 
In 1869 Engels retired from the firm with a settlement of $12,500 and resumed his political life. As Marx's health declined in the 1870s Engels took over his work during the last years of the International Working Men's Association (1864-72) and shouldered increasing responsibility for corresponding with infant socialist parties, most notably the newly founded German Social Democratic Party. Engels's most important work during this period was his polemic against the German positivist socialist Eugen Duhring. 'Anti-Duhring' was the first comprehensive exposition of Marxian socialism in the realms of philosophy, history, and political economy. The success of this work, and in particular extracts from it such as 'Socialisme utopique et socialisme scientifique' (1879), published in English as 'Socialism, Utopian and Scientific' in 1892, represented the decisive turning point in the international diffusion of Marxism and shaped its understanding as a theory in the period before 1914. 
After Marx's death in 1883, when he delivered a lapidary funeral oration, Engels devoted most of his own last years to the editing and publishing of the remaining volumes of 'Das Kapital' from Marx's manuscripts. Volume 2 appeared in 1885 and volume 3 in 1894. He also hoped to prepare a related volume dealing with the history of political economy, but failing eyesight and the formidable difficulties of editing the preceding volumes forced him to hand over this task to Karl Kautsky, who subsequently published the work under the title 'Theories of Surplus Value'. 
When Engels retired in 1869 he settled an annual allowance upon the Marx family, and in 1870 he and Lizzie, together with her niece, Mary Ellen (known as Pumps), and a maid moved to London. After Lizzie's death in 1878 Pumps briefly took over as housekeeper, followed in 1883 after Marx's death by the Marx family servant, Helene (Lenchen) Demuth. After her death in 1890 the house was managed by Louise, 'nee' Strasser (1860-1950), the recently divorced wife of Karl Kautsky, and, from 1893, Mrs Louise Freyberger. Engels died of cancer of the throat at his house, 41 Regent's Park Road, London, on 5 August 1895. He was cremated at Woking, Surrey, on 10 August 1895, and his ashes were scattered off Beachy Head in accordance with his wishes. 
In 1962 a document surfaced, purportedly a letter from Louise Freyberger to August Bebel, dated 2-4 September 1898. It claimed that on his deathbed Engels, writing on a slate, had revealed that the father of Lenchen Demuth's illegitimate son, Henry Frederick (born on 23 June 1851), had been Marx himself, and that he was making this known lest it be thought that he was the father and had acted shabbily towards the child. This letter was apparently corroborated by the correspondence between the Marx daughters in which allusions were made to feelings of guilt towards Frederick and to Engels's irritation. But there are a number of unlikely elements in the story, most obviously the absence of any evidence of strain in the relations between Lenchen and Mrs Marx. The guilt towards Frederick may simply have been the result of his being sent out to care. The circumstances in which this letter became public are slightly suspicious, and there is no other evidence either direct or circumstantial linking Frederick Demuth with either Marx or Engels. Most probably the letter was a forgery. 
Three aspects of Engels's life and work deserve particular attention in a British context. The first concerns his 'Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie', written for the 'Deutsche-Franzosische Jahrbucher' in Paris in 1844. As noted above, this essay has generally been regarded as important because of its impact upon Marx, who acknowledged it in his own 'Zur Kritik der politischen Okonomie' of 1859 as a 'brilliant sketch'. The core of Engels's case was that all the categories of political economy presupposed competition, which in turn presupposed private property. For Marx, the Engels critique suggested an alternative to Proudhon's approach ('Qu'est-ce que la propriete?', 1840), which led to a notion of equal wages and of society conceived as 'abstract capital'. If Engels's essay did mark the beginning of Marx's ambition to reach a 'scientific' notion of socialism through the critique of political economy, it suggests a far higher degree of continuity between Marxian and British Owenite socialism than has generally been assumed. For Engels was probably stimulated to write his 'Umrisse' by the appearance in 1842 of 'Facts and Fictions of Political Economists' by his friend John Watts. Watts, drawing upon the work of previous radical and socialist critics, Thomas Hodgskin, William Thompson, and John Bray, condemned the split between moral and political economy, condemning the latter for its exclusive focus upon wealth and its acceptance of the 'competitive system' as a starting point. Although restating the argument in historical and Young Hegelian terms, Engels relied heavily upon Watts both for the basis of his argument and for many of its points of detail. 
Secondly, and most obviously, Engels's British reputation rests on his account 'The Condition of the Working Class in England'. Engels's book is important in several respects. Not only was it written from an unusual perspective -- that of a German philosophical communist dedicated to the cause of the working classes -- and not only was it based on extensive reading of government inquiries and press reports, it was also the product of Engels's extensive contacts with local labour activists. In particular, Engels relied upon information supplied by the Chartist leader and factory campaigner James Leach ('c'.1806-1869), whose 'Stubborn Facts from the Factories by a Manchester Operative' appeared in 1844. Engels's acquaintance with local leaders makes his account of Chartism of particular interest. 
In addition, in his eyewitness description of the vivid contrast between suburban and proletarian Manchester, Engels produced what many have regarded as a classic account of the nineteenth-century industrial town, fit to stand comparison with Dickens's 'Hard Times' or Disraeli's 'Sybil'. In particular his description of the spatial configuration of Manchester, constructed in such a way that its affluent burghers need never confront the squalor and misery upon which their wealth was based, has been seen as a decisive symbol for the invisibility of the conditions in which wealth under capitalism was produced. 
It is important, however, to realize that Engels's description was not simply the product of raw and unprecedented experience. It was not his first visit to Britain (he had been in Manchester in 1838) and he had arrived in 1842 fully convinced by Hess's 'Die europaische Triarchie' that England was heading for social revolution. In other respects, too, he came to his material with formed views: acquaintance with Hegel's work predisposed him towards contrasts of 'appearance' and 'essence'; agreement with the views of Feuerbach and Marx on the alienation of labour predisposed him to associate the condition of the proletariat with degradation; and a reversion to animality and an admiration for Thomas Carlyle reinforced his conviction of the inhumanity of the 'cash nexus'. Nevertheless, the result was a particularly powerful and memorable portrait of urban and industrial England, and a classic account of the industrial revolution and the development of the working class. This was to form the basis of Marx's account of industrial capitalism. Engels, following Hess, believed himself only to be tracing the destiny of England. Marx, however, in the 'Communist Manifesto' turned Engels's account into a universal picture of modern industry and proletarian revolt. 
The third point concerns Engels's political and intellectual legacy. Engels's political conception of British society was ultimately quite uncomplicated and remained remarkably constant: communism (or socialism) was the modern form of democracy. Modern capitalism had brought to power a new bourgeois class who controlled the state and exploited the proletariat -- the great majority of the people. The aim, therefore, was to establish rule by a party representing the proletarian majority and to abolish private ownership of the means of production, the main cause of the poverty of the people. This democratic-communist transformation was to be accomplished, if necessary, by force. In the first half of his life the legacy of the French Revolution, an upbringing under Prussian absolutism, and his experiences of 1848 all led him to associate this change with violent revolution. But in his later years, as the condition of British workers improved and their political rights increased, as a result, Engels thought, of Britain's supremacy in the world market, Engels turned increasingly away from the romantic insurrectionism of his youth. Unlike Marx he was happy to acknowledge the improvements which had occurred since his book of 1845 and to adjust his theory to the changing political situation. He believed that British workers would again turn to socialism once economic supremacy was lost, and thought this to be happening the 1880s. In consequence he was generally opposed to revolutionary or 'Marxist' sects and favoured mass constitutional working-class parties. Towards the end of his life he warmly welcomed the new unskilled trade unionism of 1889 and the formation of the Independent Labour Party in 1892. Engels's pragmatism, his ecumenical stance towards parties of labour, and his economistic approach to political change left a lasting impact upon British radicals, socialists, and communists, and his picture of the development of the nineteenth-century British labour movement has remained and will continue to be an important influence upon the work of social and labour historians. 


@@@@@


doc= 39023


Letts, John (bap. 1772, d. 1851), stationer and diary publisher, was baptized on 21 June 1772 at St Peter's Church, Cornhill, London, the third of the three children of John Letts and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Beaman, who were both also baptized and married in the parish. 
After serving an apprenticeship as a bookbinder, Letts set up business as a stationer in the City of London in 1796. His premises were in the Royal Exchange, and his clientele included merchants and traders in the City. One of the chief requirements of the latter, apart from the regular recording of financial transactions, was a need to know about the movements of ships to and from the Port of London. This they obtained from a diary in which prominence was given to the working week, with a cash ruling through the diary section and tide tables in the opening pages. 
Letts sensed that there could be a market for more general diaries of this type, but ones that were future-dated, so that the diary owner could plan ahead and not simply record the events of the day. His first such diary was issued in 1812 as a deliberately commercial product. Unlike existing diaries, it simply printed the dates of a six-day working week, Monday to Saturday, with no information other than the public holidays as they fell. The publication was branded by a printed label on the front cover 'Diary. 1812. Sold by John Letts Stationer. Royal Exchange'. There was soon a public demand for more informative contents, and by the early 1820s Letts was publishing a range of diaries in different sizes and formats, incorporating in their pages governmental, legal, commercial, and astronomical information, as what was essentially a combination of a detailed almanac and a day-to-day dated notebook. 
On 4 February 1800 Letts married Mary Spicer, in Saffron Walden, Essex. They had two sons, John and Thomas Letts, who were also baptized at St Peter's, Cornhill. Mary died on 6 October 1815, aged forty-two, and was buried at St Stephen's, Coleman Street. On 16 November 1816, at St Michael's, Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire, Letts married his second wife, Frances Debenham (1788-1848), then aged twenty-eight. John and Frances had twin sons and two daughters. 
The commercial publication of Letts's diary proved to be a success, and the booklet was well received by the merchants and shipping personnel whose patronage Letts sought. However, although Letts realized that a more general publication might well appeal to a wider market, his initial commercial activity was modest, and two factors rather militated against any immediate expansion. The first was that his output was restricted to local consumers in particular lines of business. The second was that he was not a natural businessman, and pursued his chosen trade more with a sense of stolid optimism than with a genuine entrepreneurial flair. The diaries were in a sense simply an extension of his basic skills as a bookbinder. It might also be added that the 1830s were not overall a favourable time for commercial development. It was thus left to his son, Thomas, who took over the firm in the 1830s, to move the business significantly forward, and to diversify it into maps and stationery products and to find an overseas response to these, especially in the English-speaking world of the burgeoning British empire. 
By the time Thomas took over, Honest Jack Letts, as he had come to be known, was living in retirement with his wife at Broxbourne, Hertfordshire. It was there that Frances predeceased him, dying of dysentery on 30 April 1848, aged fifty-nine. John survived her for less than three years, dying of dropsy on 25 March 1851. Although both wife and husband ended their days in Broxbourne, they were each buried at St Olave's, Hart Street, London, where John's eldest son was rector. The Revd John Letts officiated at his mother's funeral, but not his father's. 
The family firm later came to bear the name not of its founder, John Letts, but of Charles Letts, Thomas's son, who broke with the company in 1881 to set up independently. John Letts's own firm went into liquidation in 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 39024


Lucas, Joseph (1834-1902), lamp manufacturer, was born on 12 April 1834 at Carver Street, Birmingham, the eldest son of Benjamin Lucas, a plater, and his wife, Catharine, 'nee' Ball. He received his basic education, probably only on Sundays, at a school attached to the church of the Saviour in Edward Street, Birmingham, run by the non-denominational Unitarian minister George Dawson, who was the first to articulate the notion of civic enterprise and to find in Joseph Chamberlain its greatest disciple. At the age of about thirteen, Joseph Lucas followed his father and was apprenticed to H. and G. R. Elkington, a firm of Birmingham silversmiths; he served seven years before qualifying as an electro-plater journeyman by the time of his first marriage, to Emily Stevens (died 1885), on 20 July 1854. Over the next eleven years they had six children, his eldest son, Harry, becoming his lifelong business partner. 
In 1860 Lucas began in business, selling buckets, shovels, and other items of hollow ware door-to-door, which led in 1869 to his first entry in White's 'Birmingham Directory' as a dealer in lamps and oils. As business prospered, Lucas took on a small three-storey terraced house, 209 Great King Street, and in 1872 seventeen-year-old Harry Lucas joined his father. Within three years they had set up the Tom Bowling lamp works in Little King Street, Birmingham, producing a lamp of the same name for the fishing industry. Both were agreed on the need to find a more profitable adjunct to lamp oil, which had been selling well after fish oil had been replaced by paraffin and petroleum in the late 1850s. Their decision to concentrate on lamps which would burn the new fuel turned out to be an astute move. The growing popularity of the bicycle created an unprecedented demand for lamps, and Lucas was quick to realize that if he was to make any impression on this new market he would have to make the move from trader to manufacturer. In 1878, when laws were being passed requiring bicycles to carry lamps after dusk, Lucas decided on his first cycle lamp, the 'King of the Road'. It was certainly a gamble, since the bicycle was still expensive, difficult to handle, and many years from becoming universally popular. Even though Lucas was running his business very much on a hand-to-mouth basis, he had enough confidence to take advantage of the growing number of cycling clubs springing up all over the country. In 1880 he was granted a patent for his new lamp, nicknamed 'His Majesty', and in the same year the first signs of interest were shown from across the Atlantic. In the spring of 1881, the first consignment of King of the Road lamps was shipped to the States. 
In 1882, after ten years in the business, Harry was brought into formal partnership, creating the firm of Joseph Lucas & Son. It was a difficult period for both men. Joseph's wife died, aged fifty-two, in February 1885, and he married, with some haste, his 51-year-old widowed cousin, Maria Tyzack, 'nee' Lucas (died 1900), in November of the same year. The new business partnership also had to deal with stresses relating to cash flow and the potentially more serious threat from infringement of patent rights. Joseph Lucas was never slow to invoke the law if his designs were being pirated, but being litigious only served to detract from harnessing trade in a still fickle market. With this in mind, Lucas typically ensured that his lamp designs kept in fine tune with bicycling trends. 
The development of the first pneumatic tyre for bicycles, patented in 1888 by a Belfast veterinary surgeon, John Boyd Dunlop, put paid to the 'boneshaker', and transformed the bicycle industry. Cycling now became a popular pastime for countless people and, in 1891, Lucas launched the Tom Bowling Lamp Works Cycling Club for the benefit of staff members. However, it was becoming increasingly obvious that if he was to take full advantage of the expanding business, Lucas would need to build new premises. Funds being in as short supply as floor space, Lucas decided to form a public limited company to raise the necessary capital to finance the building of a five-storey factory close to the original site in Little King Street. In 1892 the firm of Joseph Lucas & Son Ltd was incorporated, with Joseph as chairman, and himself and his son Harry as joint managing directors. The new company, with 700 personnel on the payroll, appointed Walter Chamberlain, youngest son of Joseph Chamberlain, to the board. Walter, who was then working for Nettlefolds, was to be part of the team that ran the company throughout the Edwardian years and into the age of the motor car. In 1895, Lucas patented perhaps his most profitable accessory, the legendary Silver King of the Road, which remained the company's best-selling line over the next decades. After 1898, the influence of the company having spread beyond the midlands, he opened an office in Holborn, London. 
Lucas showed a great deal of kindness towards members of staff, and certain people who had displayed great loyalty over the years were remembered in his will. He was a great exponent of the views of George Dawson, who held that public service was a religious duty. But, as a devout teetotaller, abstinence was the order of the day. Lucas would have no truck with an inebriated worker and had no compunction in dismissing without notice anyone found smelling of alcohol. He had been a member of the Birmingham Temperance Society since 1877, and in 1888 was elected to the board of directors of the Temperance Hall Company. Through his munificence the hall was rebuilt and in October 1901 Joseph Chamberlain, the secretary of state for the colonies, performed the opening ceremony. Ironically, Lucas died of typhoid fever at the Hotel Bristol, Naples, on 27 December 1902, after the ship he was sailing in called at the port. Had he drunk the wine and kept off the local water he might not have fallen ill. 
Lucas was survived by his third wife, Mary Anne ('b'. 1850/51), daughter of Samuel Owen, whom he had married on 30 July 1901, just one year after the death of his second wife. He left the bulk of his estate to his wife, children, and grandchildren, but he set aside $4000 to enable a special trust to be set up for 'the diffusion and promotion of the principles and practice of total abstinence from alcoholic liquors among the inhabitants of the city of Birmingham and its neighbourhood'. Lucas was buried at Moseley parish church, Worcestershire, on 14 January 1903. 


@@@@@


doc= 39025


McVitie, Robert (1809-1883), baker and confectioner, was born at Nunholm, Dumfries, the son of William McVitie, farmer, and his wife, Jean Green. His father was a failed poet and a friend of Sir Walter Scott, who used his name in 'Rob Roy'. After an apprenticeship to a Dumfries baker, Robert McVitie joined his father in Edinburgh, where he helped to run a provision shop in a tenement house in Rose Street that had been inherited from an uncle. When his father returned to Dumfries, McVitie continued to keep the shop. He moved to Charlotte Place and on 30 January 1844 married Catherine, daughter of William Gairns. They had two sons and two daughters. 
By 1856 McVitie was advertising himself as a baker and confectioner, the baking being carried out in the shop basement. His two sons were apprenticed as bakers in the firm, and as the business grew McVitie was able to open other retail outlets and to send his sons to the continent, to learn French and German and to study European baking methods. On their return, the firm introduced Vienna bread to Edinburgh and described itself as 'Boulangerie Francaise et Viennoise'. McVitie retired in 1880, and died from cancer on 21 November 1883 at 6 Mansfield Place, Edinburgh. His wife had predeceased him. 
The business was continued by their younger son 
Leaving the production side to his manager, Alexander Ross, McVitie opened up distribution centres in England. In 1887 he engaged Alexander Grant, who was soon made foreman. That year he visited plants in the United States to learn about the latest biscuit-making technology, and he made a further visit twelve years later. Then in 1888 Charles Edward Price (died 1934), a former traveller for Cadburys, became a partner of what was renamed McVitie and Price; he concentrated on the marketing side, but retired in 1901 and served as Liberal MP for Central Edinburgh from 1906 to 1918. 
The bread and catering activities were now carried out by a separate firm, which in 1898 was named McVitties Guest & Co., the other partner being Edward Graham Guest, McVitie's brother-in-law. In 1902 they opened a modern, air-conditioned building in Princes Street. 
When Price left the biscuit firm Grant was appointed general manager, and he and McVitie worked hard for much of the decade on starting up a branch factory in London. With the dependable Grant in charge of the Edinburgh activities, McVitie came to spend most of his time in London, and he also built a residence at Northchurch, near Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, where he lived with his wife, Louisa Elizabeth, daughter of William Thompson; they had no children. For a time he represented the chamber of commerce on the board of management of the Royal Infirmary in Edinburgh, and he was a member of the Merchant Company there. 
McVitie had unsuccessfully contested an Edinburgh ward for the town council as a Unionist, and in London he maintained his political links by becoming president of the Harlesden Conservative Association. He was also patron of several charitable institutions. His outside directorships included that of the Employers' Mutual Insurance Association of Scotland Ltd. A quiet, industrious, and conscientious man, he chose able managers to assist him in making the firm one of the leading biscuit manufacturers in Britain. However, his exertions clearly shortened his life; he died, aged only fifty-six, on 15 July 1910, at his home, Woodcock Hill, Northchurch, near Berkhamsted, and was buried on 19 July at Dean cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 39027


Marks, Michael (1859-1907), retailer and chain store founder, was born in Slonim, Russia, in June 1859, the youngest child of Mordecai Marks, a tailor, and his wife, Rebecca. His mother died in childbirth and he was raised by his elder sister. The family lived in considerable poverty and social oppression, typical of so many Jewish communities in nineteenth-century Russia. In his early twenties Marks fled a rising tide of antisemitism and arrived penniless in the north of England. He made his way to Leeds hoping to find employment with John Barran, a manufacturer of clothing who favoured East European refugees. By chance he came across Isaac Dewhirst, a wholesaler, who offered him help and loaned Marks $5 to buy goods from his warehouse. Marks intended to make a living as an itinerant peddler, but he was physically frail and unsuited to such work. As an alternative he took a stall at Kirkgate open market in Leeds, which operated on Tuesdays and Saturdays, and at Castleford and Wakefield, which had different market days. In a short time he expanded his turnover in Leeds by working a stall in the covered market, which was open all week. All his goods were clearly priced and available for customer inspection, and his practice of offering a wide range of products for 1died, under the slogan 'Don't ask the price, it's a penny', was especially popular. From a business point of view it made for simple accounting, as Marks kept no written records in his early years, though he was obliged to rely on a large turnover to compensate for his small margins. His search for products that could sell for 1died led him to stock an increasing variety of wares, from all types of household goods to toys, haberdashery, and stationery. In 1886 he married Hannah (Fanny), daughter of Moses Cohen, a tailor. They had four daughters, including the feminist Rebecca Dora Sieff, and a son, Simon Marks (1888-1964), who followed his father in business. 
As the business expanded in Leeds, Marks was forced to recruit assistants who could run the stalls while he concentrated more on buying and distribution. He then expanded his business into the markets of the fast growing cotton towns, opening 'penny bazaars' in Warrington in 1887, Birkenhead in 1890, and most importantly in Wigan market-hall in 1891. Wigan was better placed as a distribution centre and he opened a warehouse there and set up home with his family, in order better to supervise his growing retail empire. In 1892 he established another outlet in Bolton and in 1894 a shop in Manchester. Such expansion was proving too difficult for Marks to manage alone and he began to search for a partner; he first approached Dewhirst, but when he declined, Marks formed a partnership with Thomas Spencer, Dewhirst's cashier. Spencer brought with him much needed organizational skills together with some useful business contacts. The firm of Marks and Spencer was established in 1894 with each partner making share contributions of $300. Marks remained in charge of all the buying operations and the retail side while Spencer focused on the wholesale side and the distribution of goods from the warehouse. It was at this time that Marks moved to Manchester, living above the shop and also leasing a warehouse in the city which was to become the new focus of operations. 
Shortly after the firm became a limited company in 1903, Spencer retired and Marks was faced with an increased burden of work. He was now the director of a fairly large organization that had over sixty retail outlets in 1907, all based on the popular principles of open displays and fixed prices. Marks lacked any formal education and was certainly unaware of any of the theories of retailing, but he did have a unique understanding of the market and what customers wanted. He set out to offer consumers value for their money. This was a reflection of his humanitarian outlook, best seen in his treatment of employees. This benevolent attitude was also strongly apparent outside business: he regularly gave money to charities, including the working men's club in Manchester. He also avoided confrontation, inspiring confidence and affection from employees as well as his many friends. He died on 31 December 1907 at Knoll House, 396 Bury New Road, Higher Broughton, Salford; he was survived by his wife. He left a thriving retail business in the hands of managers until his son was old enough to take responsibility for it. 


@@@@@


doc= 39029


Joseph, Michael (1897-1958), publisher, was born on 26 September 1897 at 123 Osbaldeston Road, Upper Clapton, Hackney, London, the elder of two sons of Moss Joseph, a diamond merchant, and Rebecca Davis. At eleven Joseph won a London county council scholarship to the City of London School, where he excelled in classics. He left in 1914 and had intended to go on to the University of London but the outbreak of the First World War disrupted this plan. Instead, he joined the University of London Officers' Training Corps and from there volunteered for service in the army. In 1915 he was gazetted to the Wiltshire regiment, and from 1916 to 1919 served as a lieutenant and a captain in the machine-gun corps. He then returned to the University of London to take a part-time course at University College for a diploma in journalism. He did not take the examination, however, as he found the course 'sadly academic and hopelessly unpractical' (M. Joseph, 'Journalism for Profit', 1924). By now Joseph had already started writing, and his first book, 'Short Story Writing for Profit', to which Stacy Aumonier contributed a foreword, was published in 1923. The directness of the title reflected the book's purposeful nature. 
In 1918 Joseph married the actress Hermione Ferdinanda Gingold (1897-1987); they had two sons: Leslie, born in 1919, and Stephen Joseph, founder of the Stephen Joseph Theatre in the Round in Scarborough. Michael Joseph started working for the literary agents Curtis Brown in 1924 and became a director in 1926. In the same year his first marriage was dissolved and on 11 March he married Edna Victoria Nellie Frost (1899/1900-1949), daughter of Thomas Richard Frost, solicitor. They had a daughter, Shirley, born in 1927, and another son, Richard, born in 1940. Meanwhile, further books followed, among them 'The Commercial Side of Literature' (1925) and 'The Magazine Story' (1928). Joseph's lasting love of cats resulted in a quite different work, 'Cat's Company' (1930). 
On 5 September 1935 Joseph founded his own publishing house, Michael Joseph Ltd, as a subsidiary of Victor Gollancz, with Gollancz himself and Norman Collins as directors and Joseph as managing director. The enterprise was highly risky, as it fell in a difficult decade when many established publishers were closing or experiencing financial restraints. In his semi-autobiographical work 'The Adventure of Publishing' (1949), Joseph recorded that he was one of the few young publishers who held on 'by the skin of their teeth'. His firm not only survived but prospered, bringing out books by H. E. Bates and by a number of other well-known authors, among them C. S. Forester's 'The General' (1936), Monica Dickens's 'One Pair of Hands' (1939), and Richard Llewellyn's 'How Green was my Valley' (1939). (Joseph persuaded Llewellyn to change his proposed title, 'The land of my fathers', to something more biblical and nostalgic.) Other authors 'discovered' by Joseph include Paul Gallico, Richard Gordon, Vicki Baum, Joyce Cary, and Vita Sackville-West. Relations between Joseph and Gollancz were not always smooth, and the two were quite different in character. Gollancz was 'fiery... arrogant and excitable', while Joseph was 'cool, persuasive, charming and rather cautious' (Dudley Edwards, 197). Joseph was constrained by Gollancz's economic objectives, and the pair did not agree on many aspects of publishing. Joseph offended Gollancz by accepting 'lowbrow' manuscripts such as 'Pink and Blue: an Anthology of Babyhood' (ibid.) while he resented Gollancz's interference and criticism. In 1938 Joseph bought Gollancz out when he attempted to censor Sir Philip Gibbs's 'Across the Frontiers' on political grounds. 
Although now a full-time publisher, Joseph continued as a writer. 'This Writing Business' had already appeared in 1931, while cats resurfaced in two collaborations -- 'Puss in Books' (1932), written with Elizabeth Drew, and 'Heads or Tails' (1933), with Selwyn Jepson -- and in one of his most personal accounts, 'Charles: the Story of a Friendship' (1943), about his beloved Burmese cat. A play, 'Discovery', followed in 1934, the plot centring on a woman who is capable of dreaming the future. In the Second World War, Joseph served as a lieutenant and captain in the Queen's Own Royal Kent regiment from 1940 to 1941. A further book, 'The Sword in the Scabbard', came out in 1942, based on Joseph's army experiences in both world wars. 
On 15 November 1950, a year after Edna's death, Joseph married Anthea Esther Hodson (1924-1981), his secretary and later a publisher, the daughter of Lord Justice Hodson, a High Court judge ['see 'Joseph, Anthea Esther]. They had two children, Charlotte in 1952 and Hugh in 1954, and settled at Brown's Farm, Old Basing, Hampshire. 
Joseph was a member of the Savage Club and president of the Siamese Cat Society of the British Empire. He gave his recreation in 'Who's Who' as cats, but they were really much more than that. A heavy smoker from boyhood, Michael Joseph died of heart failure and a perforated duodenal ulcer on 15 March 1958 at 20 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, London. His business was plunged into a crisis that culminated in the resignation of most of the board. Only Anthea Joseph remained, together with one other director, and it was largely thanks to her determination that its reputation was restored. 


@@@@@


doc= 39030


Mowbray, Alfred Richard (1824-1875), church publisher and printer, was born on 28 November 1824 at Leicester, the elder son of William Mowbray ('b'. 1798), lace manufacturer, and his wife, Ann. In early life Mowbray was attracted to the teachings of the Oxford Movement with its object of bringing about a catholic revival in the Church of England. He subsequently trained as a teacher at St Mark's Teacher Training College in Chelsea, where he was noted as a high-churchman. At the age of twenty-one he was appointed headmaster of the church school in Bingham, Nottinghamshire, and in 1848 he married one of the teachers on his staff. This was Susan [
A stained-glass window in Bingham church, designed by Mowbray and still visible in the late twentieth century, is indicative of his continuing enthusiasm for things ecclesiastical. This moved him, after various other teaching posts, to accept a call to go out to New Zealand to further the work of Bishop Selwyn in creating the new cathedral in Wellington. At this time, however, a visit to Oxford led Mowbray to an encounter with the Revd Thomas Chamberlain, vicar of St Thomas's and an ardent follower of the Oxford Movement in its later ritualist phase. Chamberlain's resolve was to do for the slum poor of his parish what Pusey and Keble had been doing for the intellectual classes, and to teach the truth, as the Oxford Movement saw it, of the Christian faith in simple pictorial but effective ways. He persuaded Mowbray to stay in Oxford and help him in this work. 
Mowbray's first involvement was in the social work of the parish, in which he was immensely active. He also formed the Oxford Churchman's Union among undergraduates of the university. But he soon came to see that, if the teaching of the catholic movement were to be more widely spread, there was need for a bookshop to sell tracts and other publications, together with other aids to devotion. For this purpose he opened the first Mowbray bookshop at 2 Cornmarket, Oxford. This prospered so much that he extended his work to church printing and publishing in larger premises at 116 St Aldate Street. Leaflets, tracts, books, and ecclesiastical 'objets d'art' of all kinds now poured from this establishment. In his novel 'Jude the Obscure' (1895) Thomas Hardy gives a description of what can safely be taken to be Mowbray's shop, since it was unique in Oxford at the time. Jude enters the place and sees that 'it contained Anglican books, stationery, texts and fancy goods; little plaster angels on brackets, gothic framed pictures of saints, ebony crosses which were almost crucifixes, prayer books that were almost missals' (Hardy, pt 2, chap. 2). 
A shop was opened in London at 20 Warwick Lane, close to St Paul's Cathedral, and Mowbray's son (Samuel) Edwin was put in charge of it. Some of the firm's publications had immense sales, such as Mowbray's 'Plain Tracts', which ran to over two hundred titles. It also published magazines such as the first 'Communicants' Manual', 'The Bread of Life', and 'The Gospeller' (a monthly parish newspaper later succeeded by 'The Sign'), which came to have a national distribution. 
Mowbray died of heart failure on 17 December 1875 at his home, 116 St Aldate Street, Oxford, aged only fifty-one, and was buried in Holywell cemetery later that month. Edwin Mowbray returned to Oxford after his father's death to run the business as general manager, but was found dead in his bath in October 1897, overcome by escaping gas fumes. Alfred Mowbray's widow, Susan, then took over the business and supervised its transformation into a limited company in May 1903. She died on 25 May 1911 at 26 Winchester Road, Oxford, and was buried in Holywell cemetery beside her husband. Her daughters Marion and Agnes also served as directors, and the latter set up a trust to distribute the income from her shareholding in the firm among surviving family members. This was only terminated in 1988 when the company was taken over by another large bookselling firm. 
The bookshop and publishing business founded by A. R. Mowbray was popularly known as Mowbrays. Over many years, and sustained by Susan Mowbray and later generations of the family, through its sale of books, prayer books, church furnishings, and vestments, it made a recognizable mark upon Anglican life, both in Britain and overseas. 


@@@@@


doc= 39031


Murphy, Frank (1889-1955), radio manufacturer, was born on 16 June 1889 at Penwith Villa, 25 Wrottesley Road, West Plumstead, Woolwich, London, the youngest son of the seven surviving children of John James Murphy (1853-1917), schoolmaster, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Leggo (1855-1924). Following John Murphy's appointment as headmaster of Holmes Road School, Kentish Town, in north London, the family moved to Upper Holloway in 1890, but returned to Plumstead shortly afterwards, where Frank and his younger sister Ethel were enrolled in the local board school. 
From an early age, Frank Murphy displayed a precocious talent for mathematics. He won a scholarship to the East London Technical College, graduating in 1908 with honours in electrical engineering, but lack of funds prevented him from taking up the offer of a mathematics exhibition at St John's College, Oxford. Although not apparent at the time, the frustration and resentment at this checked potential was to mark much of his private life and business career. Murphy was an essentially serious young man, regularly attending the Highgate Road Baptist Chapel where he met, then married on 22 June 1912, his first wife, Hilda Constance (1889-1980), the only child of Charles and Edith Howe of Tufnell Park. The following year the first of three children was born. At the time, Murphy was working as a Post Office engineer, a step up from his first job on the assembly line at the Western Electric Company at Woolwich, where the tedium was relieved by postgraduate evening classes on the development of the cathode ray tube. 
In 1916, when the Post Office released him for military service, Murphy was sent to France as a squadron wireless operator, to be recalled just eight months later to set up an officers' wireless training school at Farnborough, returning to France some weeks later to take charge of the ground-to-air communications operating between Folkestone and Cologne. By the time of his demobilization in 1919, Murphy's future career was still an issue, but after a chance meeting with (Charles) Rupert Casson, a budding copywriter, the two men formed the Engineering Publicity Service (EPS), an advertising company with clients in the engineering field. By 1924 EPS had changed its name to Murphy Casson Ltd, and over the next four years rising profits provided the Murphy family with a comfortable standard of living. Yet material security offered scant compensation for unexplored talents and in 1928 Murphy announced his intended withdrawal from the partnership in order to start his own radio manufacturing company. 
Murphy Radio Ltd, located in the new Welwyn Garden City, was registered on 9 September 1929 with a nominal capital of $6000 and a staff of seven. By 1936 the company was acknowledged as one of the leaders in the field, with 600 staff at Welwyn and sales at an all-time high. With the help of his erstwhile business partner, Murphy set about establishing two fundamental principles -- reliability and value for money. Full-page advertisements ran in the 'Radio Times' featuring Murphy himself, promoting the notion of 'a square deal' rather than the technical wizardry favoured by his competitors. The image of the homely and dependable managing director, 'the man with the pipe', had particular resonance during the uncertainty of the depression. With only approved Murphy dealers supplying and servicing his sets, costs could be pared to the bone and the risks of buying through 'contacts in the trade' were eliminated. 'Murphy News', the in-house magazine begun in 1933, encouraged all employees to share the same level of business integrity vaunted by Murphy. 
In January 1937 Murphy chose to announce his resignation from the board to start a new venture producing and selling good-quality furniture for the mass market. For many years his personal philosophy, that of applied knowledge, had been in conflict with the need to generate profits for shareholders. Murphy fervently believed that industry should be governed by a constitution enshrining workers' rights and obligations. The time between his resignation and the registration of Frank Murphy Ltd in 1938 was taken up with the preparation of a prospectus entitled 'A New Conception for Business'. Murphy set out six basic principles based on the acceptance of applying knowledge with integrity in the service of society. Not surprisingly, these rather esoteric views found few takers and within two years the liabilities of the company were too great for it to continue in business. The long process of winding up was begun and Murphy again found himself subject to the same pattern of high promise and dashed hopes. 
The pressure on his marriage from failed business ventures, combined with the unexpected death of his elder son in 1942, led Murphy to spend increasing time with his widowed daughter-in-law, Audrey, 'nee' Phillips ('b'. 1912), and her two children. The endless gossip generated by this liaison finally broke his marriage and in 1947 he emigrated to Canada with Audrey in a last effort to get his ideas accepted. Their short-lived marriage (annulled in 1949) underscored the forlorn task Murphy had set himself. The one time 'face of radio', a man of unquestionable intellectual capacity, found no ready market in Canada and instead was reduced to taking on odd jobs and driving taxis. Shortly before his death in Toronto on 26 January 1955, Murphy secured the post of mathematics teacher at a Toronto high school, completing a life of elusive promise. 


@@@@@


doc= 39032


Thomas Nelson (1780-1861) was born Thomas Neilson in the village of Throsk near Stirling in Scotland, the son of William Neilson, a farmer, and his wife, Lilias Gibson. He was baptized on 1 October 1780 at St Ninian's, Stirling, and was brought up with the strict religious outlook of the Reformed Presbyterian church (covenanters). He became briefly a teacher at sixteen, and also worked in a local distillery, but eventually left the family farm for London to undertake an apprenticeship with a bookseller at 35 Paternoster Row, abandoning an opportunity to go to the West Indies. After two years in London he returned to Edinburgh in 1798, to set up a business as a secondhand bookseller trading from a small half-timbered shop with its booth opening onto the street at the head of the West Bow, near St Giles's Cathedral. 
At some point Nelson realized the existence of a market for cheap editions of standard, non-copyright works which he initially attempted to satisfy by publishing in monthly parts well-known religious texts such as 'Pilgrim's Progress' and 'Scots Worthies', then by issuing what became the Nelson hallmark, reprints of classics such as 'Robinson Crusoe', 'The Vicar of Wakefield', and Goldsmith's 'Essays'. From these beginnings the emphasis was on price -- he produced inexpensive books accessible to a new reading public of the skilled working classes. Nelson employed the still uncommon process of stereotyping to reduce production costs over a large print run. To circumvent hostility towards reduced profit margins from the book trade, he found alternative outlets, such as direct sales at fairs and markets, and vacant shops rented temporarily in the smaller towns and burghs of Scotland. Thus Nelson established the publishing 'holy trinity' of wide distribution, mass production, and low costs. The first authenticated year of Nelson's operation as a publisher was 1818 when, after restricted growth due to lack of capital, the firm opened a bank account and the company name, with that of its founder, changed from Neilson to Nelson, to accommodate frequent misspelling. Thomas made a joke of it: 'Like the naval hero of the same name, I have had to sacrifice an 'i' in a good cause' (Ramsay, 4). 
On 15 March 1814 Thomas Nelson married Margaret Sibbald Black of Kinghorn, Fife. They had a large family. Three of the five sons later entered the business: William (1816-1887) ['see below'], Thomas (1822-1892) ['see below'], and Peter (died 1871). Their eldest daughter, Anne, married George Brown (1818-1880), who was the leader of the Liberal Party in Upper Canada until killed by an assassin. A son of this couple later joined the family firm. 
The business continued to expand until in 1829 Nelson took the unprecedented step of employing a 'bagman', James Macdonald, the first publisher's representative, to hawk the firm's wares around Scotland and the north of England. It was not initially a successful experiment, orders coming from only one Aberdeen bookseller. The religious nature of many of Nelson's early publications reflected the strict religious outlook of his family. John A. H. Dempster suggests that the early history of Thomas Nelson & Sons conforms to a common early nineteenth-century model. The founder of the publishing house, actuated by zeal to spread the word of God, commences general, secular publishing as an adjunct to this. Succeeding generations inherit the prosperous business but none, or only a diluted form, of the religious motivation. The religious output decreases in proportion to the whole but often remains a steady income generator on the back list. This categorization perhaps ignores the evangelism of the educator: the urge to spread knowledge through good, cheap books across a wide section of the population, a mission which lay, however implicitly, behind the story of Thomas Nelson & Sons until its last years. 



