@@@@@


doc= 39033


Owen, Owen (1847-1910), department store owner, was born on 13 October 1847 at Cwmrhaeadr, near Machynlleth, Montgomeryshire, Wales, the oldest child in the family of three sons and three daughters of Owen Owen (1818-1872), tenant farmer, of Cwmrhaeadr, and his second wife, Esther Elizabeth (1814-1855), daughter of William Evans, a Wesleyan Methodist minister. His father's first wife died in 1843, leaving two sons, one of whom, Thomas, was MP for Launceston from 1892 to 1898. His father married for a third time in 1857. Owen was educated at the Wesleyan college (later Queen's College), Taunton, and in 1860 went to Bath as an apprentice to his uncle, Samuel Evans, who had built up a large linen drapery business. His half-brother, Thomas, had been working there since 1853, and became his uncle's partner in 1863. 
In 1868 Owen moved to Liverpool to set up his own drapery business, hoping to attract the large Welsh population in Liverpool, and leased premises in London Road. He concentrated on rapid turnover and low profit margins, and expansion was so rapid that by 1873 he had over 120 employees and a quarter of an acre of floor space. He insisted on a high standard of service, and in the early days he himself greeted the customers as they entered the store. In 1881 his youngest brother Jabez entered into a partnership with him, which lasted until the former's fatal illness in 1885. Owen soon began to acquire neighbouring properties, and in the 1880s knocked many of them down in order to build hostels for his staff, who were mostly from Wales. He saw his staff as an extended family, and later, when he bought an estate in Wales, he invited many of them there for weekends, and even paid for some of them to go abroad for the sake of their health. Owen was one of the first big shopkeepers to introduce a weekly half-holiday for his employees, and he also set up the Owen Owen Trust in 1900 to help retired members of staff. 
Unlike most other early department store owners, such as David Lewis, also in Liverpool, Owen Owen was not interested in extending the range of goods sold, and although the store had many departments, it remained a drapery business, with dress and curtain materials at the centre of the business. His clientele now came from as far away as north Wales, with people prepared to travel long distances for the good quality merchandise at low prices. Owen was similarly not interested in opening new stores in other cities, and in the 1880s he began instead to invest his profits in other enterprises, notably in North American railways. He helped other members of his family to establish their own businesses, including the drapery businesses started by his brother William in the 1870s, and his brother-in-law R. O. Davies in the 1880s, in Bayswater, London, and in 1889 he became a director of Evans and Owen Ltd in Bath. 
On 19 December 1891 Owen married a shop assistant at Gorringe's store in London, Ellen Maria ('b'. 1858/9), daughter of George Richards, an innkeeper, of Southsea, Hampshire. They had two sons and two daughters. Owen moved to London, but continued to supervise the Liverpool store, which had become a limited company in 1899. It continued to grow, and by 1906 shares in Owen Owen were paying a 16 per cent dividend. The store was now one of the largest in the north. In 1906 Owen went on a fact-finding visit to the United States to investigate American department stores, and he was particularly impressed by the bargain basements and by the advertising: 'Americans don't have sales, they have advertising campaigns' ('Draper's Record', 21 June 1906), he reported. 
From the 1890s onwards, however, Owen became involved mainly in property transactions in London. In 1892 he bought a building in Kensington High Street, which he developed, and sold to Derry and Tom's in 1896 at a profit of $9000. Other developments included Gwydir Chambers in High Holborn (1900-03), and the Dollis Hill housing estate in north-west London, built on 22 acres of open land which he bought in 1903. In 1909 he formed his own property company, Owen Owen estates. Owen also continued to invest in other drapery businesses and department stores. In 1892 he made a substantial investment in the Bon Marche store in Brixton, which was in financial difficulties, and in 1897 he began to buy shares in John Barnes & Co. in the Finchley Road. He became a director of both of these. 
Brought up in a Wesleyan Methodist family, Owen became a Unitarian in the 1880s. He was a Liberal, a supporter of W. E. Gladstone and home rule, and a friend of D. Lloyd George, whom he first met at Grasgarth, in Acton, the home of his brother-in-law R. O. Davies. Throughout his life he supported Welsh causes, particularly education and the arts. He was an influential member of the Welsh National Society of Liverpool, and was later at the centre of London Welsh society. He made generous donations to the national eisteddfod of Wales (which was held in Liverpool in 1884), and the North Wales College, and became a governor of the University College of North Wales at Bangor. He was a member of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion from 1886. He also made donations to the Liverpool University fund from 1902, and took a great interest in the Warehousemen, Clerks, and Drapers' schools at Purley, Surrey. He was involved in setting up the Linen and Woollen Drapers' cottage homes at Mill Hill for retired retail trade workers in 1897. An enthusiastic cyclist, who moved from the tricycle to the bicycle after a course of lessons in 1897, and a tennis player, Owen bought his first motor car in 1907, and travelled in it to and from the estate at Tan-y-Foel, Penmaen-mawr, in Caernarvonshire, which he had bought in 1902. He also bought the Garthgwynion estate, near Machynlleth, in 1906; this included Bwlch, his ancestral home, which his father had had to sell in 1841. He was a JP for Caernarvonshire. 
Owen Owen died of cancer, after an operation, on 27 March 1910, at his London home, the Manor House, 37 Fitzjohn's Avenue, Hampstead. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 30 March 1910, and his ashes were scattered on the family grave in the Machynlleth nonconformist cemetery. His wife survived him. In the years following his death the Owen Owen store in Liverpool ran into difficulties, but in 1925 his son-in-law, Duncan Norman, took it over, built a new store, and revived its fortunes by appealing to a more fashionable market. 


@@@@@


doc= 39034


Pain, James Charles (bap. 1836, d. 1923), fireworks manufacturer, was baptized on 20 November 1836 at St Mary's parish church, Lambeth, the son of William Pain, pyrotechnist, and his wife Eliza, who were then living at Walnut Tree Walk, Lambeth. Although James Pain was the founder of the business named after him, he was seventh in descent from a Pain mentioned in the 'London Gazette' in 1670 as a gunpowder seller. 
Pain was probably apprenticed to his father, who would have trained him in the increasingly sophisticated science of pyrotechnics. Although fireworks themselves are of ancient Chinese origin, and were used in crude form in medieval times in Europe to celebrate military victories, more specialized kinds of fireworks, such as the Catherine wheel, are first recorded only in the eighteenth century, and it was not until the nineteenth century that new ingredients, such as magnesium and aluminium, could be added to the staple gunpowder base to achieve a colourful and brilliant display. 
On 26 November 1855, at the church where he was baptized, Pain married his first wife, Mary Ann Craig, a musician's daughter, also of Lambeth. They had six sons and three daughters. 
About 1860 Pain set up his own fireworks business at 20 Albion Place (later Heygate Street), off Walworth Road, south-east London. Following a fire at the premises in 1864, however, he moved to no. 10 in the same street, and later to no. 15. On 29 September 1873 Pain took a lease on 121 Walworth Road, and at about the same time opened a factory at Brixton, subsequently transferring the works to a new factory in Mitcham about 1878. It was at this stage that he added the manufacture of marine distress flares to the production of conventional fireworks. 
Pain made many visits abroad in the course of his business, travelling to New York, Australia, and Portugal, among other places. In Portugal he was awarded the order of knight of the order of Christ for services to the Portuguese royal family. While on his travels he married his second wife, Elizabeth Ramsay, 'nee' May, a Scot, his first wife having died on 12 September 1884. Pain subsequently moved to Argyll Lodge, Atkins Road, Balham, and Elizabeth Pain died there in 1902, leaving her estate to her daughter from her first marriage. 
By the early 1920s Pain had seen his firm grow into manufacturers of, and contractors for, illuminations and decorations at several towns and sites, while the chief company works at Mitcham covered over 200 acres, with branches at Manchester, Liverpool, and Gravesend. He died of cystitis and acute orchitis on 12 October 1923 at his home, 56 Moyser Road, Streatham, leaving the business in the hands of his sons Philip, in England, and Henry, in the United States. He was buried at Mitcham parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 39035


Player, John (1839-1884), tobacco manufacturer, was born at Saffron Walden, Essex, on 11 July 1839, the son of John Dane Player (1800-1850), and his wife, Sophia, 'nee' Clare. His father, who died young, was a solicitor, and his mother was a schoolmistress. John left home about 1859 for Nottingham, apparently because of a connection with the solicitor Joseph Bright, who was to become an important figure in the town's business and civic life. Player was first employed as a general draper's clerk, but by 1862 he had a shop on Beastmarket Hill, overlooking the large market place, where he started as an agent for lace thread and for Prentice's artificial manures. His next-door neighbour was Ann Whiteley, 'nee' Goodacre, a milliner and lace dealer and a widow ten years his senior, whom he married on 16 August 1862. The couple had two sons. 
Player soon added tobacco to his other lines, though the exact date is not on record. At that time tobacco was sold loose from jars, and weighed and handed over in small screws of plain paper, but Player quickly realized that customer loyalty to a particular type of tobacco was strong and he began to pre-pack his blends. Before very long tobacco took over as the main business of the shop. In 1877 it was so prosperous that Player purchased as a going concern the tobacco manufactory of William Wright, which had been established in Broad Marsh, Nottingham, in 1823, and already employed 150 workers. At this point Nottingham had nineteen firms engaged in the processing of tobacco, though there was no bonded warehouse for any kind of goods in the town. 
The Player genius for advertising and marketing first appeared after the purchase of the Broad Marsh factory and was supported by a rapidly growing experience of the trade. A plain packet of tobacco containing a particular blend was obviously a ripe vehicle for a brand name to be printed on the packet. The first name to be registered was Gold Leaf; in 1877, when he first began manufacture under his own name, John Player also registered his first actual trademark, the familiar drawing of Nottingham Castle. Gold Leaf was evidently an immediate success for a Player price-list of 1881 shows a dozen other varieties of branded packet tobaccos. The Gold Leaf packet of 1885 was a work of art, printed in nine colours and gold; the gold design on the reverse was not unlike the later Picasso dove. All cigarette packets were originally soft and this led to the insertion of a small piece of plain card as a stiffener. Then more colour was introduced and the cigarette card soon became an art form in its own right. The manufacturer quickly recognized them as a major incentive to brand loyalty. 
The most famous of all the Player trade marks was the sailor's head. In 1883 John Player was attracted to a painting of a bearded sailor produced by an artist called Wright of Clapham about thirty years earlier, when uniform had just been adopted by the Royal Navy. The portrait was being used by a small tobacco company, Parkins of Chester, to advertise their 'Jack's Glory' brand. John Player immediately bought and registered the painting as a trademark. Over the years many variations of the background and frame appeared, including the lifebelt with two warships in the background. From the acquisition of the Wright business in 1877, Player's marketing and advertising methods were so successful that he was able to purchase some 30 acres of land in the then undeveloped suburb of Radford. On this site he built three factory blocks; production was transferred to the new site in 1884 but the whole factory was not occupied by Players until towards the end of the century. 
John Player died of liver cancer on 9 December 1884 at 4 Branksome Terrace, Commercial Road, Bournemouth, at the early age of forty-five. For the next nine years the business was continued by family friends and senior employees, and during this interregnum the heirs were groomed to carry on the business. The eldest son, 
John Dane and William Player both married in the final decade of the nineteenth century. The eldest son married Margaret Page, and they lived at Fernleigh, in Alexandra Park, Nottingham. In 1894 his brother William married Mabel Askley, and they had four sons, two of whom entered the firm, and also four daughters. William bought Lenton Hurst, in Nottingham, a house which subsequently became part of Nottingham University. He later acquired Whatton Manor, Whatton, 10 miles east of Nottingham, and made that his home. 
Befitting their pre-eminence as Nottingham businessmen and philanthropists, the two brothers were made honorary freemen of the city of Nottingham in 1934. In that year John Dane Player was also made a deputy lieutenant for Nottinghamshire, having served as a JP since 1905. Having no children of his own, he was a benefactor of the Nottingham children's hospital, to which he gave $50,000 for its rebuilding programme. 
Father and sons had the reputation of enlightened employers. The popular practice of paying every employee an annual bonus on earnings was started in 1910, and holidays with pay were started in 1922. Sports clubs associated with the firm started in the early 1900s and led to a comprehensive welfare and sports organization with well-equipped grounds. The firm became noted for its high wages and excellent working conditions. John Player & Sons, as it became known, continued to grow with the increasing demand for cigarettes. Under the leadership of the two brothers the workforce grew to a thousand by 1898, to 2500 by 1914, and to 5000 by 1928. 
J. D. Player died at his home, Fernleigh, Alexandra Park, Nottingham, on 6 April 1950. His brother, William, died at Whatton Manor on 27 June 1959. Both were extremely wealthy at the time of their deaths: the elder son's estate exceeded $2.5 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 39036


Pye, William George (1869-1949), scientific instrument and radio manufacturer, was born at Battersea, London, on 27 October 1869, the eldest son and the third of the eight children of William Thomas Pye and his wife, Elizabeth. Trained as a scientific instrument maker by his father, who was associated with the Cambridge Scientific Instrument Company, he joined the staff of the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge University at the age of twenty-three. In the same year, 1892, he married Annie Eliza, the daughter of John Atkins, a joiner. They had four children: William John (who died in infancy), Donald Walter, Marjorie Irene, and Harold John ['see below'], who later assisted in his father's business. 
Pye started his own company in 1896. He worked at first on a part-time basis assisted by his wife, his father, and his brothers Henry and Frederick. In 1899 he left the Cavendish Laboratory to devote himself full-time to the business, by then known as W. G. Pye & Co. The company prospered, moving into larger premises in 1899 and again in 1913. 
The outbreak of war in 1914 brought a sudden large demand for optical and electrical instruments for the armed services. In addition to its normal ranges of equipment, the company produced such specialized items as precision gunsights and the first Aldis signalling lamps. Pye's staff more than doubled to meet these orders during the war years. 
After the war the market contracted almost as quickly as it had grown. In 1922 the company sought new business, and produced panels which could be connected together to make various items of radio apparatus. Intended as teaching aids for schools and colleges, they were soon popular with radio hobbyists as well. After the formation of the BBC at the end of the year, the company decided to produce complete radio receivers. However, its sets of the '500' series, though well made, were less sensitive than those of its competitors, and consequently unpopular. 
William's son, 
Apparently disturbed by the dominance of what he had intended to be no more than a subsidiary, William Pye sold the radio business to Charles Orr Stanley in 1929. It continued to trade under the name of Pye Radio Ltd at first, then in 1937 changed to Pye Ltd. The original company, W. G. Pye & Co., continued under William's leadership, successfully surviving the depression of the 1930s. 
William Pye retired and sold his interest in the business to Harold in 1936. He moved to Bexhill, Sussex, where he was able to indulge his interest in sailing. He died at his home, Stepaside, 5 Beaulieu Road, on 13 October 1949. 
Harold Pye ran the company from 1936 to 1947, concentrating again on the design and manufacture of military equipment during the Second World War. He then agreed to sell the company to Pye Ltd. The radio and instrumentation businesses were reunited but no longer controlled by the Pye family. Having ensured that his employees' careers were adequately protected, Pye retired at the early age of forty-six. 
Pye had married Jennie, the daughter of Clowes Garner Milson, on 1 March 1927. They had no children. After Jennie's death in 1948 he moved to Burnham-on-Crouch in Essex and started a second career as a farmer. He remarried on 20 December 1955; his second wife was Edith Pinney, 'nee' Flight, a widow, who brought him two stepchildren, Janet and John. Edith died in 1969; Harold then sold his farm and, like his father, devoted his time to sailing. He died at 40 Westerfield Road, Ipswich, Suffolk, on 20 January 1986. 


@@@@@


doc= 39037


Bowden, Sir Frank, first baronet (1848-1921), cycle manufacturer, was born on 30 January 1848 in Bristol, the son of William Bowden (died 1866), a Bristol manufacturer, and his wife, Louise (died 1879), daughter of Henry White of Bath. Bowden's grandfather had also been engaged in manufacturing in the Bristol area. The death of Bowden's father cut short his education and he took up an apprenticeship in a solicitor's office in London. Four years later he secured a post in the office of the principal law officer, Hong Kong, where he rose to a senior position and amassed a personal fortune dealing throughout the Far East in real estate, stocks, and shares. 
By 1878 Bowden's health began to break down and he decided to satisfy his interest in travel. He moved to San Francisco and in 1879 met and married Amelia Frances (died 1937), daughter of Colonel Alexander Houston, one of the pioneers of California State. In 1885 he visited Harrogate in England and sought medical advice regarding his ill health. He was advised to take up the pastime of cycling and purchased a second-hand tricycle, on which he rode in the winter and early spring of 1886-7. Impressed by the benefits to his health, and recognizing the potential that cycling had to offer, Bowden visited the makers of his tricycle, Angois, Woodhead, and Ellis of Nottingham, and persuaded the company to accept him as its financial backer. 
In January 1889 the Raleigh Cycle Company was incorporated and in 1891, after a disappointing public flotation, Bowden acquired a controlling interest. The 1890s witnessed considerable growth in the cycle industry and the Raleigh Cycle Company Ltd grew significantly through its advertising campaigns, its racing successes, and by building a thriving export business. By 1896 the company had been floated with a capital of $200,000, although Bowden retained a substantial share of this. When the cycle industry witnessed a slump in 1898 Bowden was in a position personally to manage the financial crisis while the firm underwent restructuring. In 1908 another financial crisis arose after substantial debts were incurred by the company, and Bowden was prepared to secure the debts on his personal fortune only if he had complete ownership. Raleigh was to remain a private company until a $2 million public flotation in 1934. 
Bowden made a substantial contribution to Raleigh's success. Although seen as an autocrat by some, he was prepared to entrust aspects of the management to those with talents he recognized. He could be single-minded at times, particularly in his severance with Woodhead and Angois who ceased to serve on the board after 1894. There were failed ventures, such as Bowden's promotion of wooden rims for cycles, which demonstrate that he was not infallible, but Bowden did recognize the significance of American manufacturing methods and marketing and his company was among the UK pioneers of sheet steel pressings and liquid brazing in connection with cycle manufacture. Being an active cyclist Bowden was one of the first English manufacturers to recognize the potential benefits which pneumatic tyres and variable gears had to offer. In January 1903 he founded the Three-Speed Gear Syndicate Ltd, which became the Sturmey Archer Gear Company in June 1908. 
Bowden became a public figure; at local level he was a JP for Nottingham and at national level he wrote widely on his travels, being elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society about 1906. His main publication on cycling was 'Cycling for Health and Points for Cyclists' (1913). In 1915 he received a baronetcy for turning the Raleigh works to munitions manufacture. He died of heart failure at his home, Bestwood Lodge, Bestwood Park, Arnold, Nottinghamshire, on 25 April 1921. His only son, Harold, succeeded to the baronetcy and assumed control of the company. 


Harold, too, chose to delegate to others, as his father had done. While not a major innovator he did recognize the potential of American methods of scientific management and his visit to Henry Ford's works in America in 1921 clearly had an influence on his policy while managing director. His concern was to retain the reputation for the quality of the product while reducing costs of production. While this led to occasional disputes with the shop-floor workers, he sought harmonious industrial relations and introduced profit-sharing schemes and invested in workers' welfare. In 1938 he retired as managing director of the Raleigh Cycle Company: he retained his chairmanship of the Raleigh Cycle Holdings Company Ltd (which had been founded in 1934), and later served as a director of Lloyds Bank. Among his honours was the appointment as GBE in 1929, and the award of the grand cross of the order of the Phoenix (Greece) awarded in 1932. In 1948 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts. 
Harold Bowden married four times. His first marriage, to Vera, daughter of Joseph Whitaker JP, on 7 July 1908, was dissolved in 1919. He married Muriel Smythe, divorcee and daughter of William Ker-Douglas, on 18 January 1920. After her death in 1952 he married on 4 November 1952 June Schenker, divorcee and daughter of Christopher T. H. Mackay, who died in the following year. On 11 February 1957 he married Valerie Came-Porter, widow of Albert Renfrew Porter and daughter of Richard Raymont-Came. He had one son, Frank, and one daughter, Ruth, from his first marriage. His home for many years was the Old Farm House, Marsh Court, Stockbridge; he died in the Royal Hampshire County Hospital, Winchester, on 24 August 1960. 


@@@@@


doc= 39038


Rank, Joseph (1854-1943), flour miller and philanthropist, was born at Holderness Road in Hull on 28 March 1854, the second of four sons (the eldest died in infancy) of James Rank (1829-1874), miller, and his first wife, Mary Ann (died 1858), daughter of Joseph Parrott, a Hull shipowner. He showed little promise at the Revd Haynes's school at Swinefleet near Goole. When at fourteen he joined the family mill, his father rated him good for nothing, and on James Rank's death in 1874, the executors handed him $500 and told him to look elsewhere. Rank set up his own mill, and on 15 June 1880 married Emily (died 1916), daughter of Robert Voase, farmer, of Ellerby, near Hull. Gentle and industrious, she was the ideal helpmate for a man resolved to make good by living on a shoestring. She brought up their three sons (there were also three daughters) to become achievers despite their father's domineering behaviour towards them, the result of his own unhappy childhood. 
While his subsequent pre-eminence as a flour miller undoubtedly owed a lot to good fortune, Rank had a shrewd understanding of his industry. Quick to exploit new technology, he was a first-rate dealer in commodities, being able to make a profit even in conditions of overcapacity and depressed trading. In 1885 he built the Alexandra mill at Hull, incorporating the latest technology of roller-milling, and six years later the Clarence mills, among the most modern in Britain. He increased his profits by importing wheat direct rather than through dealers. He subsequently erected other mills close to English and Welsh ports which had deep water access and could receive shipments of foreign grain. In 1899 the company became Joseph Rank Ltd, with a capital of $700,000. Five years later Rank moved the head office to London. 
During the early 1880s Rank underwent a religious conversion to strict Methodism. Almost his whole life thereafter was devoted to living his simple and childlike faith: he once told his employees that he did not put down all his success to himself, much being due to God and much to themselves. He made his family attend services three times on Sundays, and forbade liquor and tobacco, theatregoing, and dancing in public. Energetic dances at home, however, were permitted, as were visits to the circus. 
A lifelong cricketing addict, Rank took the family to Scarborough annually for the cricket festival. In later years, he often slipped away to Lord's on summer afternoons, with a packet of sandwiches and some ginger pop. Parsimonious to a fault, he avoided eating out, and walked rather than using transport. He did exercises every morning, had an excellent digestion, slept soundly, and to the end remained lithe and energetic. He was a Victorian at heart, paternalistic and mildly eccentric. As an ardent phrenologist, he kept a plaster head in his office, and selected employees by their cranial characteristics. 
Having resisted the temptation in the 1890s to sell his firm and become an evangelist, Rank did the next best thing and gave away most of his wealth. He supported Hull Royal Infirmary and in 1934 endowed the Joseph Rank Benevolent Fund with $300,000 to relieve poverty in the city. Between 1920 and his death he gave over $3.5 million to Methodist causes. His wife died in 1916, and on 3 October 1918 he married her widowed sister, Annie Maria Witty (died 1940). 
In the First World War, Rank served on the Wheat Control Board. After 1918 his sons James Voase Rank and Joseph Arthur Rank were in day-to-day charge. Ranks, the largest milling combine in Britain and one of the largest in the world, continued to expand. The Second World War brought Rank both personal sorrow, with the death of his second wife in 1940, and commercial setbacks when eight mills were wrecked by bombing. Rank himself died at his Surrey home, Colley Corner, Reigate Heath, on 13 November 1943. 
His eldest son, 
As his father's right-hand man, and later as managing director, James Voase Rank steadily increased the number of the company's mills, and became a national figure in the milling business. In 1928-9, as president of its national association, he devised a scheme for rationalizing the industry, which involved quotas and buying in redundant capacity. 
From 1938 onwards the government employed Rank's skills, first to build up a strategic reserve of wheat, and later as director of the Ministry of Food's imported cereals division, a post he continued to hold until his death. In a typically unbureaucratic manner, he oversaw the purchase, importation, and distribution of all cereals and cereal products in Britain, and subsequently for India, other British colonies, and various allied countries. As he was simultaneously president of the millers' national association, he came under criticism for the conflicts of interest the holding of these two posts entailed. 
With an enjoyment of life and abundant energy, in sharp contrast to his father, James Voase Rank was a twentieth-century man through and through. Although still a Methodist, in 1926 he divorced his wife and on 10 May the following year married a divorcee, Mrs Patricia Edytha Morgan (died 1954). There were no children of the marriage. A director of the International Horse Show and a member of the Kennel Club committee, in Surrey he bred horses and dogs. He won awards for his shorthorn cattle. He became a racehorse owner and -- to his father's consternation -- bought a stud near Salisbury in 1934, winning the St Leger four years later. His philanthropy, mainly to hospitals and charitable institutions, was unostentatiously exercised. He died in the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, London, on 3 January 1952. 


@@@@@


doc= 39039


Tuck, Raphael (1821-1900), art publisher, was born into a Jewish family in Germany. He came to England as a young man at a time when both Jews and gentiles from Germany were settling abroad, bringing with him his German wife, Ernestine, three years his junior, and his children, including four sons, Hermann, Adolph, Gustave, and Hugo, and three daughters, Julia, Rose, and Minnie. 
The family settled in London, and there in 1866 Tuck established himself in a new building in Union Street, Spitalfields, his business being the production of chromos, oleographs, and black and white lithographs. His speciality from the start was the printing of coloured reproductions. In 1871 Tuck turned his attention to the printing of Christmas cards, entrusting the venture to his son Adolph, who had joined the business the previous year at the young age of sixteen. His brothers Hermann and Gustave subsequently joined him. Four years later, on 30 January 1875, Raphael Tuck was naturalized as a British citizen. 
The large editions produced by Tuck's firm every season enabled them to provide cards of quality even in the cheapest ranges. Special attention was paid to design and finish. A close watch was also kept on changing tastes over the years, and Tuck aimed to meet the popular demand, however ephemeral, for a particular theme or design. In 1880 the firm held its first Christmas cards competition and exhibition, with prizes of 500 guineas awarded for the best designs submitted. Moreover, as well as offering prize money of this kind, the firm bought designs to the value of over $2500 from competitors. The exhibition itself was held in the Dudley Galleries in London, and together with the competition gave considerable impetus to the Christmas card trade. 
Tuck was equally ambitious in his commissions. Such well-known painters as Sir Edward Poynter, Marcus Stone, William Dobson, John Horsely, George Storey, and James Sant were engaged to paint a series of appropriate designs. Nor was the literary merit of the cards overlooked, and Tuck offered 1000 guineas to Tennyson to compose verses of eight lines each for cards of different types. It is doubtful whether the poet laureate ever had a more generous offer for such a small commission. The firm also organized a competition for amateur artists, again with handsome prizes for work accepted. The submissions were judged by a panel of eminent academicians, including Millais, Marcus Stone, G. H. Boughton, and Solomon J. Solomon. Tuck is cited by Boase (711) as being for many years 'publisher to the Queen and Prince of Wales'. 
Tuck remained in active touch with all operations of the thriving business until his retirement at the age of sixty in 1881, when the increasingly cramped quarters of the Union Street premises necessitated a move to Coleman Street, in the City. Further branches of the business opened in separate buildings elsewhere, specializing in the publication of cards, calendars, and educational books, until it was realized that new, unified premises were needed. A search was made for a suitable site, and one was found in Moorfields. Construction of the new Raphael House, as it was to be called, began in September 1897, by which time publication of the familiar pictorial postcards had begun. On 5 April 1898 Tuck laid the foundation stone of the new premises, and in July the following year personally opened the building. He died of influenza at his family home, 19 Balfour Road, Highbury, London, on 16 March 1900. 


@@@@@


doc= 39043


John James Sainsbury (1844-1928), born on 12 June 1844 at 5 Oakley Street, Lambeth, the only son and youngest child of John Sainsbury ('bap'. 1809, died 1863), ornament and picture frame maker, and his wife, Elizabeth Sarah, 'nee' Coombes (1817-1902). He was probably educated locally and is believed to have started work as a shop assistant to a grocer in the New Cut, Lambeth. Later he was working in Strutton Ground, Victoria, where he met his future wife, Mary Ann Staples. 



@@@@@


doc= 39044


Satchwell, Leonard (1888-1963), electrical engineer, was born on 30 August 1888 in the village of Attleborough, just outside Nuneaton, Warwickshire, the third and youngest child of Walter Satchwell, a Baptist minister, and his wife, Rachel Hore, previously Herbert, 'nee' Baker, of Dover, Kent. Information is scant on his education and apprenticeship, but it seems that he gained much of his engineering experience in Scotland, and it was apparently there that he met and married his first wife, Christian (died 1940). 
In 1921 Satchwell, in partnership with a Mr Johns, founded the Rheostatic Company in Slough, which, with its staff of six, operated from a cowshed on the Slough trading estate. The company's function was to manufacture unbreakable power resistors, used for varying the speed of trams and trolleybuses. In 1927 the company introduced the world's first commercially available thermostat, the 'C' type, for the control of electric heaters, and soon after the more modern 'Q' type room thermostat, which became one of the best-known thermostats of its kind in public and private premises over the next twenty years. At the end of the 1920s, when the company was steadily expanding, a move was made to larger premises on the Farnham Road, Slough. 
Satchwell became chairman and managing director of the Rheostatic Company, posts which he held until 1947. The company continued to expand, so that from 1938 to 1939 he was also a director of the Harland Engineering Company and from 1939 to 1947 of a French subsidiary, La Thermostatique. In 1938 he was a director of the British Electric Plant Company. From 1946 to 1949 Satchwell was a director of Janitor Boilers, and from 1947 chairman. That same year he was also chairman of Weatherfoil Heating Systems. 
The Rheostatic Company was introduced as a public company on the London stock exchange in 1937. The premises were destroyed by fire under somewhat suspicious circumstances on 2 February 1939, but were completely rebuilt in six weeks. As a result of the need for fuel economy in the Second World War a compensator was developed that enabled heating systems in public buildings to be controlled automatically, depending on the temperature of the weather. The firm's resistors were also in demand for use by the Royal Navy and the Royal Air Force, especially to shield shipboard equipment from the harmful influence of nearby magnetized instruments. 
Following the death of Christian in London in early 1940, Satchwell married Winifred Ada Doris ('b'. 1902/3), the daughter of Edwin Henry Stevens, a retired oil company salesman, and fourteen years his junior, whom he had known for some years through business contacts when the directors went to South Africa to form a subsidiary company, Contractors in Paarl, Cape Province. The marriage took place in Westminster, London, on 3 June 1940. The new Mrs Satchwell was a director of Rheostatic from 1945 to 1947. A divorce then took place, however, and Mrs Satchwell married M. J. Gartside, who took over as chairman of Rheostatic in 1948 following Leonard Satchwell's retirement. Satchwell's long-standing association with Winifred had been the cause of considerable bitterness in the Gartside family. 
In 1953 the company sold its resistor business and concentrated on temperature control systems. In 1967 it was acquired by Elliott Automation, which was itself absorbed by the English Electric Company and so became part of the General Electric Company (GEC), the largest electrical manufacturer in Britain. 
Meanwhile, in the mid-1950s, and probably in Guernsey, where he had made his home following his retirement, Satchwell had married Marion, his third wife. There were no children of any of the three marriages. 
Satchwell died of heart failure at the Princess Elizabeth Hospital, St Martin's, Guernsey, on 9 June 1963, and that same year the Rheostatic Company was renamed Satchwell Controls (Satchwell Control Systems from 1964) in commemoration of its founder. Satchwell's widow survived him into the 1990s, when the company was still based in Slough. 


@@@@@


doc= 39048


Slazenger, Ralph (1845-1910), manufacturer of sporting goods, was born Ralph Slazenger Moss at Lymm, Cheshire, the oldest of the twelve children of Joseph Slazenger Moss (1810-1872), a tailor with shops in Warrington and Lancashire, and his wife, Eliza Lazarus. Both were prominent members of the Jewish community in the Manchester area. 
Moss was educated at Manchester grammar school until 1859, when he entered his father's business as an apprentice. By the time of his father's death in 1872 the business had expanded considerably, with four shops of general outfitters. Together with his brothers Isaac (1857-1940) and Albert ('b'. 1856), he fostered further expansion, importing goods from abroad and establishing factories in both Manchester and Paris. During this period he claimed to have spent thirty years as a volunteer in the Lancashire light horse, as a keen proponent of national defence. 
With an eye on wider markets, Moss left the northern business in the hands of his brothers and moved to London in 1885, starting a new business at 56 Cannon Street, manufacturing indiarubber goods for the growing enthusiasm for middle-class sports. This was more than just a commercial move to exploit new markets; it represented a significant break with his regional and religious roots as he renounced Judaism and shortened his surname officially to Slazenger. One great boost to his personal life, and his business, came with his marriage in 1890 to a wealthy widow, Jane Stokes (died 1912?), of Hawkes Bay, New Zealand. There were no children but the marriage had other fruits. 
Slazenger's business grew rapidly from this time onwards, not least because he became a leading manufacturer of balls and other equipment for the booming late-Victorian middle-class games of golf and lawn tennis. The latter was the focus of a sharp commercial struggle for the publicity which came from providing balls for the All England Lawn Tennis Club's annual Wimbledon tournaments and its ancillary events, such as the tournament at Eastbourne. Slazenger's involvement in this was in large part due to the acumen and rather sharp practices of his manager, Archdale Palmer, who dragged the firm into a scandal amid allegations of attempted bribery at Wimbledon in 1905. This did not, however, harm the firm's reputation or growth and Palmer continued to work for Slazengers. Having moved largely from manual to machine production, Slazenger floated his business on the stock exchange in 1910, increasing profits by fifty per cent, to almost $50,000 per annum, by 1913. Other brothers became involved in the firm, Horatio (1859-1946) as a director and Frank ('b'. 1860) as the manager of their New York agency. 
As his prosperity grew Ralph Slazenger became heavily involved in the corporate life of the City of London, becoming a member of the Spectacle-makers', Shipwrights', Gardeners', Fruiterers', Loriners', and Makers of Playing Cards' livery companies, as well as master of the Needlemakers'. This brought social recognition, the freedom of the City of London, and election to the common council of the City for Dowgate ward in May 1903. In 1909 he was appointed sheriff of London but he was defeated in an election for alderman. Because of his public role in entertaining foreign dignitaries he was honoured by the king of Portugal and by the king of the Belgians, who made him an officer of the order of the Crown in August 1910. His public life extended to visible philanthropy, as a governor of Christ's Hospital and of the Royal School for Deaf Children at Margate; he was also a keen supporter of the Royal Orthopaedic Hospital, where he endowed a children's bed in his own name, a common seeking after immortality for people of similar status. Like many of the affluent middle classes whose leisure he serviced, he was an avid sportsman, a cricketer, golfer, and shot; he also became a member of the Royal Automobile Club. 
Slazenger died at his Kensington home, 9 Kensington Court, on 24 October 1910 from bronchitis and influenza; his wish for a non-religious cremation was ignored by his wife who arranged an Anglican service. He was cremated at Putney Vale crematorium on 27 October. At the time of his death the firm that he had founded was one of the most significant sporting goods businesses in Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 39049


Smith, Thomas James (1827-1896), manufacturing chemist, was born in June 1827 in the small village of Whitfield, near Haydon Bridge, Northumberland, and baptized there on 17 June 1827, the eldest of four children of Horatio Nelson Smith and his wife, Jane. T. J., as Smith became known, was apprenticed to a dispensing chemist in Grantham, Lincolnshire, at a time when pharmacy had only just emerged as a distinctive practice from the three separate professions of physician, surgeon, and apothecary. He supplemented his skills by attending University College, London, from 1854 to 1855, passing the minor examination of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society (RPS) in June 1855. In August he passed the major examination, which enabled him to become a member of the RPS. He was formally elected on 6 February 1856 and six months later moved to Hull, Yorkshire, where he bought as a going concern the chemist's shop at 61 Whitefriargate. 
At first a general retail pharmacist, Smith developed an interest in the properties of cod-liver oil. This was already in use in British hospitals for combating two of the scourges of the day, rickets and consumption. It normally had a deep brown colour and a strong and unpleasant fishy flavour. Smith aimed to find a method of making the product -- for which there was a keen demand -- purer and more palatable. His experiments, supported by correspondence with medical specialists, enabled him to market his own oil. He refined his product by blending different oils, then putting the 11/2 gallon bottles on a flat roof to be bleached by the sun, a process that also improved the taste. 
The various sorts of cod-liver oil were imported to Hull from Norway, where specialists had evolved a process to remove the stearin (fat in its solid form). In 1860 Smith went to Norway to investigate this source of supply in person, being the first Englishman to do so. On this pioneering visit he bought 750 gallons of the best oil at a price 1's'. 3died cheaper per gallon than in London, at the same time making contracts for further visits. 
Back in Hull, Smith decided that the Whitefriargate shop was too small for the wholesale business to which he had now progressed, and he bought 10 and 11 North Church Street, converting them to a warehouse in 1860. In 1861 he rented premises -- a house, shop, and outbuildings -- at 10 North Churchside. He was by this time selling a superior product at a lower price than his competitors. In 1880 a London specialist wrote to Smith suggesting that he bottle the oil and sell it under a brand name. Smith's Paragon cod-liver oil thus came into being and the business continued to flourish. Also in 1880 Smith bought the freehold of the North Churchside premises with a $500 loan from his father. 
Meanwhile Smith had become an active member of Hull's civic community. He was a town councillor from 1875 to 1882 and again from 1885 to 1892. While on the council he founded the Hull branch of the Charity Organization Society, and served the Hull chamber of commerce for many years as honorary secretary and treasurer, two of them as president (1879-80). He was also a member of the East Yorkshire Conservative Association. A natural development from his interest in medicine was his membership of the sanitary committee, which addressed the problem of pre-empting the epidemics to which Hull, as a growing immigration port and commercial centre, was vulnerable. 
By his late sixties, Smith was suffering increasing ill health. He had never married, and lived at Hornsea, on the Yorkshire coast, with his spinster sister, Amelia Ann Smith (1839-1905). In 1896 Amelia invited Smith's nephew, Horatio Nelson Smith (1874-1960), who had lived with them as a boy and was then working with a firm of London drapers and woollen manufacturers, to join his uncle in the cod-liver oil business. H. N., as he was known, accepted the offer and arrived in Hull in January 1896 for a trial period. Six months later, on 1 July, he became a partner in T. J. Smith & Nephew. 
Smith was now a complete invalid, and on 3 October 1896 he died at his Hornsea home, 7 Wilton Terrace; he was buried at St Nicholas's Church, Hornsea. Amelia inherited her brother's half-share of the business, but decided to pass it to H. N. At the time of Smith's death, the firm had a staff of three and a turnover of $3000, of which about $2500 was from cod-liver oil. H. N. Smith was its chief, and it was he who developed the surgical dressings side of the business. Thomas Smith's enterprise was thus relatively modest, and his contribution to society was as much through charity and political administration as the wholesaling of cod-liver oil. It was left to H. N. Smith to have the greater vision that made Smith & Nephew into one of Britain's most successful manufacturing companies in the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 39050


Spiller, Joel (1804-1853), corn factor and miller, was born in Bridgwater, Somerset, the son of an ironmonger there. The family was, allegedly, of Flemish origin. In April 1829 Spiller married Sarah Taylor Durston, and in the same year he set up in business as a corn factor and dealer from a shop in St Mary Street, Bridgwater. 
Spiller was a free-trade activist in Bridgwater, supporting the Liberal cause as did his friend, the shipowner James Sully, whose main business was transporting bricks to south Wales and returning with coal. The potential for carrying corn and flour to the expanding coal and iron communities of south Wales was obvious and was exploited by Joel Spiller during the 1830s; his mercantile business prospered and in 1840 he went into partnership with Samuel Woolcott Browne, son of Captain Charles Browne RN, a Bridgwater banker. A substantial four-storey warehouse was built on West Quay and the office was in Castle Street. The opening of a new dock in Bridgwater in 1841 enabled vessels of 500 tons to reach the town, but the town bridge and the vagaries of the tides were to be a limiting factor to the local ambitions of Spiller and Browne and to the industrial development of the city. 
In the early 1840s Spiller and Browne diversified into milling, building a steam mill in Chilton Street. On the repeal of the corn laws in 1846 they expanded the business, renting three local water mills. However, as Britain increased her imports of North American wheat, ports on the west coast and in south Wales became prime locations for steam-driven flour mills. Cardiff was clearly a more promising location for business expansion and in 1852 Spiller and Browne leased a site on which to build a 1200-sack steam mill, at the head of the new west dock, from the marquess of Bute. 
Joel Spiller died, aged forty-nine, during the construction of the Cardiff mill. On one of his visits to the site, in June 1853, he grazed his shin. The injury did not seem to demand attention but within a day or so the wound had turned septic. Spiller returned home to Bridgwater where he died on 7 June leaving a widow and three children. Highly esteemed locally, he was widely acknowledged to have been the architect of his own fortune. He was buried in Wembdon Road cemetery, Bridgwater. 
After Spiller's death, Browne took two of their brothers-in-law into partnership: Charles Thompson, husband of Browne's sister Marian, and William Allen, who had married Spiller's sister. Both men were to make important contributions to the management of the concern, which became a limited liability company in 1887 with a paid-up capital of $440,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 39051


Teacher, William (1810/11-1876), wine and spirit merchant, was probably born in Paisley, the son of a sailor called Teacher and his wife, Margaret Frame. William's father was lost at sea before his first birthday, and his mother worked in a cotton mill at Bridge of Weir, near Paisley. After a cursory education of probably no more than six months in the parish school, Teacher started work in the mill at the age of seven as a 'piecer'. At eleven, he was apprenticed to a tailor, Robert Barr, who inculcated a spirit of self-improvement in his pupil. After his apprenticeship he returned to mill work but got into trouble because of involvement with the radical reform movement, and he subsequently went to work for a Mrs MacDonald, who ran a grocer's shop in Anderston, a fast developing industrial district of Glasgow. Teacher suggested Mrs MacDonald take out a licence for the sale of spirits. The reform of the Scottish excise in 1823 had reduced spirit duty and this, together with the growing industrial population, offered a buoyant market for whisky retailers. Teacher's former trade was renowned for its 'drinking usages' and heavy whisky consumption; this may also have influenced his choice of business. 
Teacher married his employer's daughter, Agnes MacDonald, on 2 June 1834 and ultimately took over the running of the business. In 1836 he opened a second 'dram' shop at 50 Cheapside, Glasgow, and over the next twenty-five years increased his licensed premises to eighteen. Multiple retailing was a new development in the whisky trade and at the time of his death Teacher was probably its largest multiple retailer. Nicknamed 'Old Thorough', he managed the shops in a unique style: excessive drinking was discouraged, 'treating' (the purchase of drinks for friends) was prohibited, and smoking was banned (a ban not lifted by his descendants until 1926). This style has been attributed to his strict Victorian principles but it may also have been a reaction to the temperance movement and to the fact that the town council acquired, and utilized, local police powers to curb an excess of licensed premises well before other Scottish cities. Keeping respectable premises reduced the likelihood of losing one's licence. 
The shops, which were 'the apple of his eye' (Bergius, 14), required a varied stock and this prompted Teacher's move into wholesaling in 1851 at 347 Argyle Street, Glasgow. Expansion required new headquarters in 1864 and the firm moved to 17 St Enoch Square where it remained until 1873 when the site was taken over for the building of St Enoch Station. A new building covering 14, 16, and 18 St Enoch Square was commissioned at a cost of $8000 and remained the headquarters until 1991. 
Teacher and his wife had eleven children. The eldest, a son, died of scarlet fever at seventeen. Two other sons died in infancy. This left William junior (1836-1880) and Adam (1839-1898) as the first and second in seniority. They developed the business on the foundations laid by the 'dram' shops, opening branches in Manchester (1866) and London (1876), registering the blend Highland Cream (1884), and building a malt distillery, Ardmore (1898). 
Teacher was a member and treasurer of the Unitarian church, a minority religion in presbyterian Scotland. Members tended to be freethinkers who stood out against the mainstream. He supported Chartism and later movements for toleration and freedom. He entertained people of note in the world of letters, including Harriet Martineau, Henry and Millicent Fawcett, and Ralph Waldo Emerson. Teacher was a director of the Glasgow Trade Society and a commissioner for income tax. He died from haematemesis on 27 December 1876 at the family home, Rowmore, Row, Gareloch, Dunbartonshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 39052


Terry, Joseph (1793-1850), confectioner, was born on 11 November 1793 at Pocklington, Yorkshire, the son of Thomas Terry, a farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth Dales. After serving an apprenticeship, he opened an apothecary's shop in Walmgate, York. In 1823 he married Harriet, the daughter of William Atkinson, of Leppington Grange, near York; they had five sons and three daughters. Harriet was the sister-in-law of Robert Berry, of the confectioners Bayldon and Berry, in St Helen's Square, York, since 1767. After Berry's death, Joseph joined his son in the euphonious partnership of Terry and Berry. By 1830 he was in sole charge of the business, making cakes and sugar confectionery, marmalade, mushroom ketchup, and medicated lozenges. 
During the 1830s Terry established retail agencies in no fewer than seventy-five towns, mostly in northern England and the midlands, but also in London and Luton. In 1836 he helped to form an association in London to protect the consumer against the adulteration of the products of confectioners and lozenge makers. A roly-poly of a man, bald on top, but with plentiful side hair and mutton-chop whiskers, he died at West Huntington, York, on 8 June 1850, survived by his wife. 
Joseph Terry's second son, 
Always the dominant partner, Joseph Terry put his abundant energies into expanding the firm. In 1864 he transferred manufacturing to a new site in York, where he erected a steam-powered factory. Two years later there were 400 different items in the price list. In 1871 he married Margaret, the daughter of William Thorpe of Aldborough House, Malton, Yorkshire, with whom he had a son and three daughters. 
Their eldest son, Thomas, a partner after 1880, built up exports to Australia and New Zealand. During that decade the firm received a number of exhibition awards for its confectionery. Since at least the 1860s it had been making chocolate products, but its reputation in these lines grew only after Joseph Terry built a separate chocolate factory in 1886. It was incorporated as Joseph Terry & Sons Ltd in 1895, when it had 300 employees. 
On York city council from 1860, Terry served as sheriff of York in 1870, and was later lord mayor four times; he was knighted in 1887. He assisted all the main societies and associations in York, from the school of art to the city's cricket club and the asylum. His craggy and bearded face hid a genial and benevolent disposition. He was a freemason, a member of the York Sunday school committee, and president of the York Conservative Association. However, he overexerted himself in a by-election in the city, and died of heart failure at the Royal Station Hotel on 12 January 1898. He was buried at York cemetery on 15 January 1898. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 39053


Thorn, Sir Jules (1899-1980), businessman, was born in Vienna, Austria, on 6 February 1899 to Jewish parents: his father was Leon Thorn, an insurance company director, and he was the youngest of three brothers, one of whom moved to Britain, the other to the USA. On leaving school he was conscripted into the Austrian army to fight in the First World War; he saw action on the Russian front, where he was taken prisoner. After the war he studied business and management at the Handelshochschule -- the commerce school in Vienna. On graduation he obtained a position as representative of an Austrian electric lamp manufacturer, and first arrived in Britain in that capacity. When that company went bankrupt in 1926 Thorn found himself responsible for a number of its debts, but, such was his business reputation already, he was able to raise sufficient capital to pay them off and start up in business for himself, as an importer of Hungarian lamps, selling them through his own Electric Lamp Service Company Ltd, which he incorporated in March 1928. In 1928, however, following government restrictions on lamp importations, imposed under pressure from a cartel of the British lamp manufacturers (which he was later to break), Thorn went into manufacturing under the Atlas brand. In the same year he married Dorothy Olive Tanner; they had two children, Cedric and Ann. In 1936, having diversified into the manufacturing and selling of radio equipment, his company, named Thorn Electrical Industries, went public, its shares being oversubscribed by a factor of 35. It was at this time that Thorn was joined by radio engineer and fellow Austrian, Alfred (Freddy) Deutsch, in a partnership that lasted forty years. 
Thorn's aggressive move into the new area of manufacturing in the face of opposition from established firms was typical of him. He possessed an entrepreneurial attitude then unusual in the British industrial establishment, and was motivated by the challenge of success itself rather than personal gain. Time and again he committed his own and his family fortune to high-risk ventures, entering new markets, buying companies, or investing in new ideas. Concomitant with this calculated high risk-taking, Thorn concentrated control of the company entirely in his own hands. Short in stature and unflinchingly courteous, he was nevertheless ruthless and renowned for his tireless energy and ebullient flair. Throughout a period of increased corporate bureaucratization, Thorn retained a high degree of independence and maintained his self-made image as a rebel. 
Thorn was interested in psychology and used it in his sales and management method, instilling in all his staff a belief in Thorn Electrical Industries, urging them to identify as much as possible with the company's interests. Equally, he strove to convince retailers how Thorn products could improve their businesses. In the 1930s he knew the majority of his staff by name, and tried to help them both personally and professionally. By 1976, 15,000 staff (of a total workforce of 75,000) had more than ten years service, and 30,000 had more than five years. 
In 1946 Thorn secured a crucial coup, signing an agreement with an American company, Sylvania Electric Products, for co-operation in the development and manufacture of fluorescent tubes. With this deal he established the basis for the company's post-war success in lighting equipment. In the same year Thorn Electrical Industries produced their first television receiver, under the Ferguson brand, continuing their trademark expansion and diversification, which by 1950 had encompassed Ekco-Ensign Electric. In the immediate post-war years Thorn acquired more British lamp factories, and plants in Australia and South Africa. With the acquisition of Tricity Cookers in 1951 he moved into a new and booming field in domestic electrical appliances. In the same decade he took over the manufacture of the HMV and Marconiphone range of consumer products from Electric and Musical Industries Ltd and purchased Ultra Radio and Television -- moves that consolidated his position as a leading manufacturer of consumer appliances. 
In 1961 Thorn entered the retail market, merging his manufacturing interests with Radio Rentals, then the country's leading domestic appliance rental organization. Further expansion in this side of the business occurred in 1975 when he purchased J. and F. Stores. In 1968 he bought Kenwood, manufacturers of food mixers, and the Parkinson Cowan range of gas cookers and meters. To ensure supplies of sheet metal, essential to the production of cookers, he purchased Metal Industries, and as a result diversified into engineering; Clarkson International Tools was bought in 1974 and Cleveland Twist Drill in 1976. Thorn also invested $1,250,000 in lighting laboratories at Enfield. 
The extent of Thorn's control over the company was demonstrated by his unwillingness to retire and to relinquish control to a successor, and in the last years of his career there were open quibbles over his leadership. However, in 1976, the year he retired as chairman, the company showed pre-tax profits of $74.4 million on a turnover of $956 million. 
A naturalized British citizen, Thorn was knighted in 1964. Of his private life, little is known. His family were sent to America on the outbreak of the Second World War. His marriage never recovered from this separation and the couple parted in 1950. In 1971 his first marriage was dissolved, and on 23 June 1971 he married a divorcee, Jane Norfolk, the daughter of Arthur Mayle, a farmer. Late in life he became a successful racehorse owner and bought an important collection of Impressionist paintings. Thorn gave generously to charity, particularly to Jewish charities, and specifically to the Haifa Technion, which married his Jewish sentiment to an abiding interest in scientific development. Throughout his career he combined great accuracy of judgement over business and take-over issues with determined ruthlessness and an institutional drive, which motivated both him and his employees and made him and the company important factors in the post-war British economy. He died at his home, 21 York Terrace East, Westminster, London, on 12 December 1980, survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 39055


Sangster, Vernon Edmund (1899-1986), football pools promoter, was born at 69 Orient Street, Cheetham, Manchester, on 25 June 1899, the son of Alfred Edmund Sangster and his wife, Robina Kate, 'nee' Burgess. His father was a wholesale draper operating from a number of warehouses in Manchester. Sangster manifested little interest in pursuing the family business. Following the First World War, during which Sangster spent a brief period of service as a teenage soldier of the Manchester regiment in the 55th West Lancashire division, he and his father noticed the growing interest in football betting in the north-west of England. They drew up a plan based on the principle that large prizes for a little outlay would appeal to the gambling instinct, and that enough stakes pooled could generate large prizes. They launched their scheme, based on coupons, in 1923 in Manchester. 
The scheme was successful, and in 1925 the Sangsters moved their operation to Liverpool, where Littlewoods and other pools companies were based, giving as their reason the spur of competition. The business prospered during the 1920s, and boomed during the 1930s, causing Vernons, as the company was known, to invest in new plants throughout the Liverpool area. A wealthy man, Vernon Sangster purchased West Lodge on Meols Drive, Hoylake, in the Wirral. Within commuting distance of his various workplaces in the north-west, it was to be his lifelong home, shared with his wife, Margaret Martha (Peggy), with whom he had one son, Robert Edmund Sangster, born in May 1936. The house was also conveniently next door to a golf course: golf was Sangster's favourite hobby. 
Sangster was a paternalistic employer, pioneering a house magazine from 1935, with a variety of features and a regular contribution from himself. He was known as the 'Guv'nor' to his 6000 employees. The works-based singing group, the Vernons Girls, sang their way to national fame during the war. Sangster thus developed both formal and informal techniques of securing good working relations in his pools-checking plants, as well as publicity for his company. Most of his workforce were women, largely employed on a part-time and seasonal basis. 
During the 1930s Sangster engaged in public philanthropy, donating large sums to local charities at a time when there was considerable national concern over the health and morale of the unemployed in poorly-off areas. In particular, he donated thousands of pounds to Liverpool city council to found the Vernon Sangster Sports Centre at Stanley Park. Set alongside his paternalism and philanthropy, however, was his oft-repeated maxim to his son that there was no room for sentiment in business. 
Vernons, in common with other pools companies, faced difficulties despite its prosperity. During the 1930s a strong anti-gambling lobby wanted to stamp out pools betting. The Irish Hospitals' Sweepstake raised the spectre of a national lottery. A few tricksters attempted fiddles by infiltrating coupons into the system after the football results were published. As a consequence, Sangster was a leading founding member of the Pools Promoters' Association (PPA), formed in 1934 to articulate and lobby for the interests of his company. Through the PPA, Sangster also opposed the imposition of a pool betting duty by the Labour government in the later 1940s. 
Sangster ran the business until his retirement in the early 1970s. By then, Vernons's market share had decreased in competition with Littlewoods. Sangster appears to have been upset about, and to have resisted, the attempts by his son, Robert, to sell the company. In retirement Sangster lived with his wife and a number of house servants. He died at his home on 17 December 1986 from cardiac failure and arteriosclerosis. His funeral took place at St Hildeburgh's Church, Hoylake. Survived by his wife, he left an estate worth almost $3 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 39056


Walker, (Richard) Sebastian Maynard (1942-1991), publisher, was born on 11 December 1942 at the Imperial Nursing Home, Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, the only son and elder child of Richard Fife Walker, mechanical engineer, and his first wife, Christine Mary Wilkes (died 1968). The family owned Walker Crosweller, makers of thermostats and shower valves. Sebastian attended the junior school of Cheltenham College and boarded at Rugby School (1956-61) before going to New College, Oxford, where he took a second in French in 1965 and developed his passions for gourmet cuisine and social climbing. 
Abandoning a doctoral thesis on French historian Jules Michelet, Walker spent a couple of years (1968-70) in management training at two light engineering firms in greater London, B. Elliott of Acton and Max Fordham of Camden Town. His mother, who suffered from mental illness, committed suicide in December 1968. Walker had intended to enter the family business, but he suddenly decided otherwise in October 1970 and went into publishing. Engaged by the Chatto and Windus/Bodley Head/Jonathan Cape consortium as a sales representative, he soon became its European sales manager, travelling in France, West Germany, and Italy. In 1973 he set up home in Alwyne Place, Canonbury, London, with his homosexual lover, Donald Richards (1950/51-1990), an Australian student, later a writer and stockbroker. They underwent a form of wedding ceremony. The part-work publishers Marshall Cavendish employed Walker from 1975 to 1977. Though still primarily a salesman, he also started their children's imprint. Chatto and Windus then called him back as director of children's books (1977-9). 
Perceiving a gap in the market, Walker borrowed $20,000 in 1978 and formed Sebastian Walker Associates, an independent publishing house, operating from his spare bedroom. Picture books for infants were his speciality. Other publishers devoted relatively little attention to them, but they possessed two commercial advantages: a long shelf-life and international appeal. With editor Wendy Boase and designer Amelia Edwards, Walker brought to these publications the production values normally associated with books for adults. Rechristened Walker Books, his company issued its first seventeen titles in 1980. The following year it went into profit with a popular series of board books for babies by Helen Oxenbury. 
Walker declared that he would stop at nothing to get the best children's authors and illustrators. Walker Books offered top-quality paper and colour printing and paid appreciably larger advances than competitors, who, after bitter complaints about 'poaching', had to follow suit. Aggressive marketing culminated in an unprecedented deal with Sainsbury's in 1985, whereby cut-price titles went on sale alongside groceries in supermarkets. Traditional booksellers were outraged; Walker Books boomed, moving via Tottenham Court Road to spacious offices in Vauxhall Walk. Its list included works by Hugh Scott, Quentin Blake, Nicola Bayley, and Jill Murphy. Critics grumbled about the low ratio of words to pictures, but Walker maintained that his products coaxed infants over the threshold of literacy. 
Sebby Walker, a trim figure usually in an open-necked shirt, appeared to take children's books very seriously and himself not at all. Effervescent, boastful, gossipy, and apt to fantasize, he made a habit of archness, and his curly dark hair, bright eyes, and toothy grin combined with his favourite exclamations -- 'Crumbs!' 'Golly!' 'Horrid!' -- to create a boyish air that neither large rimless spectacles nor latterly a beard much diminished. Money matters were 'a bore' but being 'mega-rich' was rather fun. He had separated from Richards (who was having an affair with Bruce Chatwin) and moved in 1982 to a fashionably minimalist studio apartment in Holland Park Road, dominated by his collection of modern British art and a concert grand piano on which he earnestly practised every day. He was a sponsor of Glyndebourne Opera and a director of the Rambert Dance Company. Best of all he liked to give parties, especially for musicians, artists, and aristocrats. While his charm and intelligence won him scores of carefully tended friendships, he still seemed an essentially solitary man without much instinctive understanding of people's feelings. He suffered a nervous breakdown in 1986. 
Employees found Walker inspirational and autocratic. There were fresh flowers on every desk and free hot lunches, but he wanted total loyalty. His obsessive perfectionism sometimes spilt over into petulance, so departures from Walker Books frequently grew acrimonious. By 1990 it was producing 300 titles per year and had an annual turnover of $18 million. When he gave 51 per cent of the company to a discretionary trust for the benefit of staff, authors, and illustrators in May 1990, business rivals were puzzled, unaware that he had been diagnosed as HIV positive in autumn 1989. Sebastian Walker died at his home in Holland Park Road, London, on 16 June 1991 of an AIDS-related brain disease. He was credited with the revitalization of publishing for the very young. 


@@@@@


doc= 39057


Whitbread, Samuel (1720-1796), brewer and landowner, was born on 30 August 1720 at Cardington, near Bedford, the seventh of eight children and the youngest of five sons of Henry Whitbread (died 1727) and his second wife, Elizabeth Read. The Whitbread family were of prosperous nonconformist yeoman stock, farming their own land and closely associated with leading Bedfordshire puritans. Whitbread's father was receiver of the land tax for Bedfordshire, and his first wife was the daughter of John Ive, a London merchant. This gave Whitbread the advantage, through a half-brother, of a connection in the City when his widowed mother apprenticed him at the age of sixteen to John Wightman of Gilport Street, a leading London brewer, for the large fee of $300. He set up in business himself in December 1742 with two partners, Godfrey and Thomas Shewell, buying a small brewery at the junction of Old Street and Upper Whitecross Street and another brewhouse for pale and amber beers in Brick Lane, Spitalfields. Whitbread brought an inheritance of $2000 to the firm, plus the proceeds of a small family holding in Gloucestershire, and loans from friends and kinsmen in Bedfordshire. He became free of the Brewers' Company on 8 July 1743. The partnership was valued at $14,016, owning the leases of 14 public houses, with further loans to publicans, and deployed 18 horses and almost 18,000 casks. However, this was the prelude to a dramatic new venture. 
Godfrey Shewell withdrew from the partnership as Thomas Shewell and Samuel Whitbread borrowed more to buy the large site of the derelict King's Head brewery in Chiswell Street in 1750. The new brewery was specifically for the single product porter, the basis for the vast brewing enterprises then being developed in London by Henry Thrale and Sir Benjamin Truman. It was named the Hind's Head brewery after the Whitbread family coat of arms. From the outset Whitbread was the leading partner financially, solely responsible for management, and Shewell withdrew completely in 1761, Whitbread buying out his share for $30,000. Great expansion ensued, with such notable innovations as vast underground cisterns containing 12,000 barrels of porter, designed by John Smeaton, and benefiting from installation of only the second Boulton and Watt steam engine in London (Henry Goodwyn, also a brewer, had beaten him by a matter of months). Public renown came on 27 May 1787 with a royal visit to Chiswell Street -- by the king and queen, three princesses, and an assembly of aristocrats in train -- with James Watt on hand to explain the mysteries of his engine. In the year of Whitbread's death, 1796, the brewery produced an unprecedented total of 202,000 barrels (that is, almost 30 million quart pots of porter). 
Great investment in the brewery did not preclude Whitbread's amassing a personal fortune and large estates. On his marriage in July 1757 to Harriet, daughter of William Hayton of Ivinghoe, Buckinghamshire, a leading London attorney, Whitbread began buying land in Cardington, the locality of his birth. His wife died in 1764, leaving him with an only son, Samuel Whitbread (the couple also had two daughters). Whitbread went on to buy the Bedwell Park estate in Hertfordshire in 1765, and he also owned London houses, first at St Alban's Street, Westminster, and then at Portman Square (from 1778), together with a large house in Chiswell Street by the brewery. In 1795 shortly before his death he bought Lord Torrington's Southill Park estate in Bedfordshire and immediately engaged the architect Henry Holland to rebuild the existing house. Whitbread had by this time accumulated a landed estate worth some $400,000. 
Affluence brought higher social status and also Whitbread's second marriage on 18 August 1769 to Lady Mary Cornwallis, younger daughter of Earl Cornwallis; but she died in 1770, giving birth to a daughter, Mary Grey (1770-1858). Whitbread became MP for Bedford in 1768, mainly, but certainly not always, supporting the tory interest until his son took over the seat in 1790. He was regarded as completely independent of the administration and spoke mainly on matters pertaining to the brewing industry, save that he was a firm advocate of the abolition of the slave trade. 
Whitbread died on 11 June 1796 at Bedwell Park. He appointed his three senior clerks as his executors because his son was 'a perfect stranger to the whole' (Mathias, 309). Whitbread not only had his own portrait painted by Sir Joshua Reynolds, but he also commissioned Thomas Gainsborough, Gainsborough Dupont, and George Romney to paint portraits to hang in the library at Southill of all nine of his senior clerks and brewers, in recognition of their importance in managing the business. Unfortunately, in their very rich gilt frames the pictures had to observe the dissipation of the great fortune by the younger Samuel Whitbread as he pursued a costly social and parliamentary career, neglecting the brewery which had been the source of the family's wealth and prestige. 


@@@@@


doc= 39061


Worthington, William (1723-1800), brewer, was born at Orton on the Hill, Leicestershire, the fourth child of William Worthington (1687-1742), yeoman farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth. In 1744, on reaching his majority, Worthington moved to Burton upon Trent to work as a cooper in Joseph Smith's small brewery situated on the west side of the High Street. Burton was already famous as a brewing centre, noted for the exceptional qualities of its water which produced a fine-quality, strong ale able to withstand long and arduous journeys. By the 1750s, a modest but growing export trade with the Baltic States, via the Trent Navigation and Hull, was well established. 
It was this lucrative, but risky export trade which attracted Worthington to brewing, and in 1760, having raised a mortgage of $320, he purchased the brewery from Smith's successor, Richard Commings. The following year he extended the property, adding a tunhouse and second brewhouse. In 1760 he also married a widow, Ann Tarratt; they had two sons. Worthington's wife is thought to have provided the finance for his first export of ale to the Baltic and, eighteen months later, when nothing further had been heard of the shipment, to buy out his partner's share in the venture. Her confidence was rewarded: the proceeds were to exceed all expectations and establish the brewery, later to become one of the best-known of all British breweries, on a sound footing. 
The few surviving letter-books reveal the difficult and speculative nature of the export trade. Yet Worthington's business flourished; it is difficult to trace its growth with accuracy, but by the 1780s the brewery probably had an annual output approaching 1500 barrels, much on a par with that of Worthington's two great rivals, Benjamin Wilson and Michael Bass (Owen, 'Industry in Burton', 56). Like them, William was as much merchant as brewer. While brewing formed the heart of his enterprise, consignments of ale, sent mainly to Danzig and St Petersburg, were frequently bartered for iron bars, staves, and wood. Indeed, by the 1780s, Worthington with his younger son, Thomas, was listed among Burton's leading timber merchants. 
Worthington's two sons, William (1764-1825) and Thomas (1766-1805), followed him into the business, their marriage in 1791 to the two daughters of Henry Evans, a wealthy Burton brewer, greatly enhancing the prospects of the brewery. The previous year Evans had purchased on behalf of his daughters the brewery built and worked by John Walker Wilson, situated opposite Worthington's business. On their marriage, the brewery passed into Worthington hands. By the time of Worthington's death in 1800, Worthington & Co. ranked among the biggest provincial breweries; eighty years later, Alfred Barnard noted that it was the 'largest pale ale brewery in the hands of a single family' (Barnard, 1.411). Besides the brewery, Worthington left his sons and widow substantial property in Burton, farms at Hartshorne and Gresley, and a considerable fortune. 


@@@@@


doc= 39062


Wright, William Valentine (bap. 1826, d. 1877), soap manufacturer and wholesale druggist, was baptized on 26 February 1826 at St Peter and St Paul's parish church, Aldeburgh, Suffolk, the son of William Wright, builder and carpenter, and his wife, Susannah. His middle name suggests that he was born on 14 February. 
Following apprenticeship to the drug trade with Messrs Grimwade, Ridley & Co. of Ipswich, he went to London and was an assistant at the pharmacy of John Bell & Co. in Oxford Street. He remained there until 1848, when he obtained a partnership with an elderly druggist, James Curtis, in the latter's premises at 11 Old Fish Street Hill. On 6 March 1849, at Wivenhoe parish church, Essex, Wright married Elizabeth Mustard, a young woman of his own age born in nearby Great Bentley. The couple had nine children, five daughters and four sons, and by 1871 the family was living at Alde House, Thornton Road, Clapham, together with a niece, a cook, and a maid. James Curtis retired soon after Wright's marriage, and Wright continued alone until 1860, when he was joined by G. B. Francis, a former assistant with him at Bells. 
Wright lived at just the right time to take advantage of the burgeoning soap industry of the nineteenth century, which had grown in response to the demands of an expanding population. The smoke and grime of industrial towns made soap for their inhabitants a necessity, instead of a luxury, as it had earlier been. And as the standard of living of city dwellers rose from 1860, a huge potential market for soap was created, first among the middle classes, then among the industrial workers. 
Wright did more than simply make soap. By this time he was making and selling a liquid coal-tar solution, calling it Wright's Liquor Carbonis Detergens. He marketed a product that not only cleaned, as all soaps did, but also cleansed: this soap could be used not simply for washing but also for treating the skin. Doctors noted its antiseptic properties, especially in treating skin diseases, and it quickly became a standard remedy. Wright sought to bring it to a wider public, and eventually succeeded in incorporating it in a soap base. Thus, about 1866, Wright's Coal Tar Soap was born. Meanwhile in 1863 the City of London corporation had purchased Wright's premises for road improvements. Using the compensation money for disturbance, Wright moved the business in 1867 to new premises in Southwark. 
Wright met an untimely death when travelling with his son Charles in Dundee. Inflammation in the face developed into erysipelas, and on 17 September 1877 he died at the Royal Hotel, Nethergate, Dundee, aged fifty-two. He was survived by his wife who retained her interest in the business until she sold it in 1892. Although Wright pioneered the manufacture of coal-tar soap, it was left to his son, William Valentine jun., to take over the business after his death and actively promote the new product. It did not really become popular outside medical circles until 1892, however, when the firm made radical changes in the methods of manufacturing soap and adopted a milling process in place of the former melting method. 


@@@@@


doc= 39063


Ridley, John (d. 1782), bookseller and publisher, about whose background little is known, may have been related to booksellers of the same name recorded at Woodbridge in Suffolk from the 1750s. The earliest record of John Ridley as a London bookseller is in the imprint of a book published in 1763, where he is described as 'successor to the late Mr. Jackson' (Greene). Entries for Ridley can also be found in London trade directories from 1765, although his forename is occasionally given as 'James'. His premises were in St James's Street. In the 'Eighteenth Century Short Title Catalogue' there are at least 180 imprints in which Ridley is mentioned, dated between 1763 and 1782. He appears to have been particularly closely associated with Sir John Hill, some thirty of whose works published between 1765 and 1775 bear Ridley's name in the imprint. During the 1770s, he also issued a number of pamphlets on American affairs. 
Ridley's career as a bookseller is particularly well documented. He became the principal London bookseller to the university library at Gottingen in 1768 and continued to enjoy this position until his death. In contrast to the period after 1770 when only occasional letters are preserved, the first few years of Ridley's association with Gottingen are especially well documented, as his invoices and accompanying letters, all very neat and legible, were considered worthy of preservation with the original lists of orders in the library's archives. These provide a rare insight into the way a high-class London bookseller in the middle of the eighteenth century acted on behalf of a foreign institutional client. 
Ridley's letters show that he acted not merely as a supplier of books to Gottingen but advised the library extensively on the contemporary London book trade. In selecting a bookseller to replace Thomas Osborne as Gottingen's principal supplier, Wilhelm Best, the Hanoverian diplomat charged with supervising Gottingen's dealings with London booksellers, may well have taken the convenient location of Ridley's shop into account: Ridley enjoyed the advantage of having premises a short distance from Best's own residence in St James's Place. 
Ridley also brought to his work a knowledge of the current as opposed to the antiquarian trade. His emergence as Gottingen's principal supplier took place at a time when the library was gradually moving away from the selection of antiquarian books from catalogues to the acquisition of the most significant new publications. These were mostly ordered from Gottingen simply on the basis of brief book-trade announcements of forthcoming publications, and Ridley's advice on the status of such announcements proved invaluable. None of the 312 books that are known with certainty to have been supplied to Gottingen by Ridley was printed before 1701. 
The earliest Ridley bill received by Best is apparently that of 21 November 1767. The bill dated 14 February 1768 might be considered typical of those that survive. It contains thirty-six items ranging in price from 1's'. (for copies of John Windus's 'Journey to Mequinez', London, 1725; and 'The Examination of Doctor Franklin', London, 1767), to $3 3's'. 0died (for the tenth and eleventh volumes of Sir John Hill's 'Vegetable System' in folio, published by Ridley himself). The total bill was for $27 10's'. 6died, plus 15's'. 6died for packing. Gottingen normally placed four such orders each year. (Gottingen University Library, Bibl. Arch. 9a, fols. 42-3). 
In the letter accompanying his bill of February 1768, Ridley points out 'some few mistakes', in the Gottingen order list 'with respect to prices' and describes in detail his reasons for not being able to supply certain titles (Gottingen University Library, Bibl. Arch. 9a, fol. 45). In October 1768 he refers to a thirteenth volume of the 'Vegetable System' which he has ready for publication. He has 'therefore taken the first opportunity to send it, and it will probably be received before it is advertised in London' (ibid., fol. 59). Further evidence of the range of Ridley's contacts within the trade and beyond is found in other letters. Although these contacts do not appear to have extended to Scotland or Ireland, he was at least prepared to enter into correspondence on Gottingen's behalf with booksellers in Dublin, for example, or with authors about forthcoming publications. The standard of service and knowledge of the current trade shown in the correspondence contrast strongly with other London booksellers' communications in the library's archive, and show Ridley to have been the ideal bookseller for the university when there was a requirement for the rapid and efficient acquisition of new publications. 
Ridley died on 22 February 1782 at his home, 77 St James's Street, London. In the same year Wilhelm Best retired to Hanover. Ridley's business was taken on by George Harlow, who appears to have continued to receive most of Gottingen's orders. Ridley's own family relationships are unknown, although diocesan records mention the death of his wife on 31 December 1774. It is possible that the Joseph Ridley who exhibited a printing press at the Royal Society of Arts in 1795 was also a relative. 


@@@@@


doc= 39065


Best, Wilhelm Philipp (1712-1785), diplomatist, was born in Hanover, but he spent most of his working life in London. After completing his studies at the University of Helmstedt, he entered the service of George II's electoral government as 'Geheimer Kanzleisekretar extraordinarius' ('privy chancellery secretary') in 1737. In 1746 he was posted to the Hanoverian legation in London, where he remained until about 1782, serving under five successive heads of legation. From 1770 he was styled 'Hofrat' or 'counsellor'. From the 1750s to the 1770s he lived at 6 St James's Place. 
Probably Best's most significant contribution to Anglo-Hanoverian relations during his long residence in London was as the 'de facto' intermediary or representative of the University of Gottingen, the Hanoverian 'national' university, founded by the electorate's leading minister, Gerlach Adolph, Freiherr von Munchhausen (1688-1770), in 1737. It was probably in December 1752 that Munchhausen charged Best with overseeing the London side of the acquisition of books for the university's rapidly growing library. Best's surviving correspondence is one of the most important sources for the history of the library in this important early phase. By 1800 it was to become almost certainly the largest single assembly of books in the western world and an unparalleled resource for study and research. Books acquired through the London book trade formed a significant proportion of the estimated 133,200 held by the library by this date. Their presence in Gottingen contributed in no small measure to the increasing awareness of English-language authors in central and eastern Europe. 
Best was responsible for ensuring the smooth dispatch of Gottingen's quarterly deliveries of books from London. They were normally sent by diplomatic courier via Harwich and Hamburg or Bremen, typically reaching Gottingen about two months after the orders had originally been dispatched. He was able to build a firm and lasting relationship with such members of the book trade as Thomas Osborne, Davis and Reymer, or John Ridley and his successors. His close working relationship with Osborne enabled the library to build its collection retrospectively through antiquarian purchases. In a later phase, when the emphasis had shifted to current publications, Ridley proved a remarkably well-informed and reliable supplier. Best's correspondence provides important evidence for the working methods of these booksellers and for the practical arrangements for the international book trade. It also shows the energy and enthusiasm with which he carried out his tasks. 
Apart from book orders, Best advised and assisted the University of Gottingen and members of its faculty in a wide range of matters relating to British affairs. For example, he negotiated with the typefounder William Caslon (1692-1766) over the purchase of Arabic types for the university printer and pressed the case of the astronomer Tobias Mayer (1723-1762), and later his widow, in the Admiralty's competition for a practical method of determining longitude. His correspondence also supplies interesting information about his dealings with British officials and tradesmen. 
From about 1782, when Best appears to have retired to Hanover, where he died in 1785, his role at the legation was gradually taken over by his son Georg August Best (1755-1823), who had studied law at Gottingen and returned to London as 'Kammersekretar' in September 1778. Like his father, Georg Best also appears to have become quite well known in London society. In 1780 he was elected a member of the Royal Society. He remained in London during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars, and the occupation of the electorate, being raised to a Hanoverian peerage in 1815. A notice of his death appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of April 1823: 'In Sloane-street, aged 67, Baron Best, one of his Majesty's Privy Councillors, K. C. H. and F. R. S. &c.'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39066


Montgomery, James (1794-1880), cotton manufacturer and author, was born on 2 December 1794 at the cotton mill village of Blantyre on the Clyde in Lanarkshire, son of William Montgomery, employed in Taylor's cotton mill, and his wife, Helen, 'nee' Reid. Little is known of Montgomery's early life. Raised in the first generation of Scottish children to be inducted into the machine-dominated discipline of the cotton factory, he not only learned to read and write, but also acquired a thorough knowledge of cotton spinning, weaving, and finishing. By the mid-1830s he was working as a cotton mill manager for MacLeroy, Hamilton & Co. of Calton, Glasgow, where the Scottish cotton industry flourished before fading in the railway age. 
Montgomery came to public notice in 1832 with the publication of his 'The Carding and Spinning Master's Assistant, or, The Theory and Practice of Cotton Spinning'. This was an invaluable practical handbook -- the first of its kind. Compiled from notes made for Montgomery's own use as a mill manager, it presented rules, illustrated with worked examples, for calculating speeds, drafts, and settings for cylinders, rollers, and spindles, and ways of adjusting them to suit various cotton qualities, or to produce yarns differing in fineness, a knowledge jealously guarded by the first generation of mill overseers and managers. A second edition appeared in 1833 and a third in 1836, which was enlarged and retitled 'The Theory and Practice of Cotton Spinning, or, The Carding and Spinning Master's Assistant', all from the same publisher, John Nixon of Glasgow. In addition Montgomery prepared a small pocket manual of rules, calculations, and worked examples for use by mill overseers. Entitled 'The Cotton Spinner's Manual, or, A Compendium of the Principles of Cotton Spinning' and issued by his publisher in 1835, and again in 1850, it was similar to George Galbraith's 'The Cotton Spinner's Companion', published in Glasgow in 1834. 
Through his publications, Montgomery's reputation spread abroad. When, in 1835, Daniel Treadwell, inventor, entrepreneur, and Rumford Professor at Harvard University, visited Britain, he was commissioned 'inter alia' to secure economic and technical information. Finding Glasgow manufacturers far more open than those in Manchester, Treadwell gleaned what he could from Montgomery and relayed his information to one of his sponsors, Samuel Batchelder (1784-1879), a prominent New England cotton manufacturer. This led Batchelder to invite Montgomery to become superintendent of the York Manufacturing Company at Saco in Maine, USA. In 1836, or soon after, Montgomery emigrated with his family, which, by the time of the US census of 1840, comprised two males beside himself and six females. 
Whereas in Glasgow Montgomery had managed a factory with 11,000 spindles and 200 power-looms, all steam-driven, in Maine he had charge of three (later four) factories of 3000-6000 spindles each, and a total of several hundred water-powered looms. While at Saco, Montgomery wrote his most important book, 'A Practical Detail of the Cotton Manufacture of the United States of America, and the State of the Cotton Manufacture of that Country Contrasted and Compared with that of Great Britain', which was published in Glasgow in 1840. It responded to British worries about American competition in overseas textile markets, and the debate over relative cotton manufacturing costs in Britain and the USA. The volume gave precise estimates, unmatched elsewhere and derived from first-hand experience in both countries. Montgomery concluded that overall American running costs were 3 per cent less than British ones. When he came to revise the volume he brought the differential of American advantage down to 1 per cent. Both figures were much lower than British commentators had earlier alleged. One unexpected result of the publication of his 'Practical Detail' was a vigorous, and at times slanderous, debate in the Boston newspapers about the relative costs of steam power and water power in manufacturing cotton. Montgomery was accused of underestimating the cost of water power as compared with steam power. His opponent Justitia, who gave his pseudonym to the debate, has been identified as Charles Tillinghast James (1805-1862), a mill engineer from Rhode Island. 
Montgomery left Maine in 1843, and worked in New York state until 1850. He then joined the sporadic migration of workers from New England to the south and became superintendent and treasurer of the Graniteville Manufacturing Company's factory in South Carolina. Sponsored by William Gregg (1800-1867), the well-known promoter of southern manufacturing, the mill started in 1849, when it ran 10,000 spindles and 300 power-looms, driven by water turbines. Montgomery stayed there until 1863. In 1867 he was superintendent of the Batesville Manufacturing Company in the South Carolina piedmont. Montgomery retained strong Presbyterian convictions, but was recalled as tolerant of others. His wife, whose identity is unknown, died in 1876. Montgomery died at Pliny, Greenville county, South Carolina, on 27 December 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 39069


Marshall, Peter (1902-1949), minister of the Presbyterian Church of the United States, was born on 27 May 1902 at 70 Henderson Street, in industrial Coatbridge, the son of Peter Marshall, insurance agent, and his wife, Janet Muir. He was four years old when his father died. Domestic discord followed his mother's remarriage, and Marshall sought enlistment in the Royal Navy, but at fourteen was rejected as under age. He found employment with an engineering firm and studied at evening classes. During his next nine years in the iron and steel industry he became active in churches and was drawn to the Christian ministry, thanks to the influence of missionaries such as Eric Liddell, the Scottish Olympic champion. Hopes of being sent to China by the London Missionary Society failed to materialize as he lacked academic qualifications. 
A visiting cousin drew his interest to America, and in 1927 Marshall became an immigrant, arriving alone in New York with no prospects. He dug ditches across New Jersey and took other jobs until a former classmate invited him to Alabama, where he was promised work on a Birmingham newspaper. Marshall travelled south, worked as a galley proof-reader and became active at the city's First Presbyterian church. The pastor, Dr Trevor Mordecai, befriended the young Scot, and he soon became a scoutmaster, ministerial candidate, and teacher of the men's 'Bible' class. He was accepted at Columbia Theological Seminary, Decatur, Georgia, where his schooling in Scotland was accepted as equivalent to the American degree of bachelor of arts. For two years his seminary expenses were paid by the Birmingham 'Bible' class. Graduating 'magna cum laude' in 1931, he spent two years as pastor of the Covington Presbyterian Church, Georgia, before accepting a call to the Westminster Presbyterian Church, Atlanta. 
Marshall's renown as a dynamic preacher and orator of irreproachable character began spreading through the south. One popular sermon he titled 'Azaleas and agnostics'. On 4 November 1936 he married a member of his church, Catherine Wood, a 22-year-old student at Agnes Scott College. Negotiations had already begun by New York Avenue Presbyterian Church, Washington, DC, enquiring whether the tall, impressive Marshall would consider becoming senior pastor of 'the church of Abraham Lincoln'. In 1937 he accepted and began a magnificent ministry of faith and prayer in the nation's capital, attracting large weekly crowds. A year later he became a naturalized US citizen, and received an honorary doctor of divinity degree from the Presbyterian college, Clinton, South Carolina. 
In March 1946, while delivering a sermon, Marshall suffered a heart attack. Upon recovering, he resumed the strenuous pace of his ministry, and in January 1947 was elected by the United States senate to be its chaplain. He quickly established a reputation in the senate chambers for the sharp and pungent quality of his prayers. During a debate on foreign aid in 1947, he opened one session with 'O God our Father, give us the determination to make the right things happen, and the courage to stand for something, lest we fall for anything. Amen' (Marshall, 'Prayers'). Senators of both parties began arriving early to hear the prayers offered by their chaplain. Despite the dangerous condition of his heart Marshall continued to accelerate the pace of his ministry, as outside invitations to preach increased. On 25 January 1949 he awoke very early with pains in his chest and arms. He was taken to the George Washington Hospital, Washington, DC, but he died from a severe heart attack. On Thursday 27 January 1949 Dr Clarence W. Cranford, Baptist minister, offered before the senate the last prayer prepared by Peter Marshall: 'Deliver us, our Father, from futile hopes and from clinging to lost causes... We know that we cannot do everything, but help us to do something. For Jesus' sake, Amen' (ibid.). His wife, Catherine, wrote a best-selling biography of him, entitled 'A Man called Peter' (1951); and she also edited a volume of his sermons and prayers, 'Mr Jones, Meet the Master' (1951). His life story became the subject of an acclaimed film. 


@@@@@


doc= 39070


Martin, Paul Augustus (1864-1944), photographer, was born on 16 April 1864 in Herbeuville, France, to a local farming family, his father, Jean Baptiste Martin, being a mill and vineyard owner. When his childhood home was destroyed in 1869 by the hostilities of the Franco-Prussian War, his family was forced to relocate in Paris, but in turn they were trapped there during the siege and the brutal commune of 1871. Having barely survived, the family fled to London in 1872, where they settled in without further difficulty. After attending St Mark's College in Chelsea, Martin studied at the Ecole Gosserez at Chalons-sur-Marne, France, from 1878. In 1880 he was apprenticed to the London wood-engraver M. Douet and did so well that he stayed with him for six years. In 1886 he moved to the Fleet Street firm of R. and E. Taylor. The public had a voracious appetite for the woodcuts filling the popular press and for some years Martin was a skilled practitioner in this active industry. 
When he was ten years old Martin had purchased a packet of materials to 'make your own photographs', and he produced simple cyanotypes of leaves and other objects by contact. By 1884 he was able to afford a camera and began practising as one of the new wave of amateur photographers. In the first decades of photography most of the sensitive materials had to be made by the photographer himself, often immediately before use. An already costly hobby was made prohibitively expensive to most working people simply because they did not have sufficient leisure time to practise it. With the widespread introduction of packaged factory-made plates and paper in the 1880s, it became possible to take photographs in odd moments and on the occasional bank holiday. Martin's early work was generally a record of outings he had taken with friends, and he became active in the camera clubs and in amateur exhibitions. 
In 1892 Martin acquired one of the new breed of so-called 'detective' cameras. Most of these were novelties, inspired by literature and disguised in various ways. His bulky Facile plate camera was wrapped in paper to look like a parcel of books. Held under an arm, it permitted the taking of candid 'snap-shots' (a term applied by Sir John Herschel) with relatively short exposures. Martin's world was that of the working person and it was to this world that he turned for subjects. He was never a voyeur, but by not calling particular attention to the act of photographing he was able to inject real life into his images. Many of his pictures were taken while running errands in the Fleet Street area. Others were taken on bank holidays, in the public parks, and on excursions. 
Martin's mechanical ingenuity greatly improved his simple camera and allowed him to photograph under conditions previously thought impossible. In 1896 he was awarded the royal medal by the Royal Photographic Society for his series of 'London by Gaslight' photographs (now in the collection of the Royal Photographic Society at the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, Bradford). Taken at dusk with a mixture of twilight and the novel new gas-lighting, the series presented an image of urban life previously unrecorded by photography. A measure of its impact at the time is the fact that his night views beat out another new type of imaging introduced in 1896 -- the Rontgen rays. He was invited to show his work at the exhibitions of the pioneering art-photography group the Linked Ring Brotherhood (though he was never a member), and he supplied images to the Eastman Kodak Company to use in their advertising. He was in constant demand as a speaker and a judge to camera clubs and exhibited widely. 
Even as Martin's reputation in the world of amateur photography was growing ever greater, his hobby was beginning to undermine his livelihood. The demand for woodcuts began to shrink near the end of the century as photomechanical processes became more common. He declined George Davison's offer in 1899 to join the Kodak firm as he had heard that their prospects were 'none too rosy', a decision he was later to regret bitterly. He had already completed arrangements to enter into partnership with H. G. Dorrett, a fellow amateur, and left wood-engraving to set up as a photographer to supply the press. In this highly competitive and rapidly evolving area he was never successful, and the firm eventually did most of its trade in making lowly photographic buttons. 
Martin married Clara Emily Ackary ('b'. 1867/8) on 20 October 1900; they had two sons. He continued to photograph for exhibition, often during family holiday trips, but more and more came to recognize just how special his 1890s work with the Facile camera had been. In retirement he once again became an active lecturer: with his enormous moustache and ample supply of lantern-slides depicting the end of the century, he was widely known. Although he had never been successful as a press photographer, he now found he had a steady demand from publishers wanting accurate and lively views of days gone by. In 1937 Beaumont Newhall included his work in his pioneering photohistorical exhibition 'Photography, 1839-1937'. In 1939 his work was featured in the 'Centenary of photography' exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. That same year he published his autobiography, 'Victorian Snapshots'. 
With the advent of the Second World War Martin lost his opportunity to appear before camera clubs. His death at 55 Hosack Road, Balham, London, on 7 July 1944 went unnoticed in the press; he was buried in Morden cemetery, London, on 12 July. The turmoil of the blitz very nearly destroyed his photographic legacy; however, nearly a thousand of his lantern-slides and press-prints were rescued from commercial files by Helmut and Alison Gernsheim and are now at the University of Texas at Austin. The photographic historian Brian Coe discovered the remains of Martin's work for Kodak sitting in a barrel ready for silver recycling: these now form part of the Kodak Collection in the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television at Bradford. Meticulously kept personal albums, mostly of platinum prints, were preserved by his family and are now in the Victoria and Albert Museum. Quite by chance the contents of an auctioned tea trolley yielded many of his exhibition negatives and prints and they are now preserved in the archives of the Royal Photographic Society, held at the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television. Although he was not a social documentarian by intent, Martin's photographs are among the finest records of late nineteenth-century society, and particularly urban working-class life. He had lived and worked in England most of his life but never obtained citizenship. 


@@@@@


doc= 39071


Abbas Hilmi II (1874-1944), last khedive of Egypt, was born on 14 July 1874 in Alexandria, Egypt, the son of Muhammad Tawfiq (1852-1892), sixth ruler of Egypt under the dynasty founded in 1811 by his great-great-grandfather Mehmet Ali, and Princess Emine Hanem (1858-1931), daughter of Ibrahim Ilhami Pasha and the granddaughter of Abbas I. He had a younger brother and three sisters. Egypt was officially part of the Ottoman empire, but was occupied and administered by Britain from 1882. 
Brought up in the harem until he was eight, Abbas was subsequently educated at a specially built school next to the Abdin Palace in Cairo until 1883 and then in Switzerland before entering the Theresianum Academy, Vienna, in 1887. He gained a speaking knowledge of Arabic, English, French, and German alongside his Turkish mother tongue. His studies ended abruptly when his father died from pneumonia on 7 January 1892. A day later the Ottoman government recognized him, by virtue of primogeniture, as the new khedive (viceroy) of Egypt. Because he was not eighteen until July, there was uncertainty about whether he could immediately assume the throne. However, Britain wanted to avoid an interregnum and so his age was calculated by the Muslim calendar with its 354 days, making an immediate accession possible. The handsome young sovereign sported a pointed upturned moustache; official portraits depicted him in fez and uniform of the Ottoman ruling family. 
As with his father, however, Abbas was allowed only to reign: Lord Cromer (Evelyn Baring), the British agent and consul-general, was the effective ruler of Egypt. But whereas Tawfiq had been grateful to Britain for saving his throne during the Urabi uprising of 1882, Abbas resented the foreign domination. His energetic pursuit of power brought him into conflict with the British residency, the equivalent of government house in a crown colony. In January 1893 he sacked a pro-British prime minister and installed one of his own choosing after Alfred Milner, a senior official in the residency, had advocated maintaining a 'veiled protectorate' in his book 'England in Egypt', published a month earlier. The ministerial crisis ended in a humiliating climb-down by Abbas but it nevertheless presented him as a potential ally for Egypt's nascent nationalist movement. His next showdown with the British occurred in January 1894 after he made disparaging remarks about the Egyptian army to its commander-in-chief Horatio Kitchener. With Kitchener threatening to resign, Britain issued a demarche to Abbas requiring him to retract the comments. The threat of deposition hung over all subsequent acts of misbehaviour. Kitchener never forgave Abbas and a lasting antipathy ensued. In public Cromer put the khedive's behaviour down to youthful exuberance; his private view was that the dynasty had long been degenerate. 
Swayed by a corrupt and sycophantic court, Abbas developed a self-indulgent personality that made it difficult for him to sustain political alliances. He gave financial backing to nationalists but the ensuing relationships foundered because of disagreements over future constitutional arrangements. The khedive wanted a strong monarchy, not European-style democracy. The British exploited these differences to divide their enemies. As the defender of Islam in Egypt, Abbas cultivated contacts with religious leaders and one of his most stable friendships was with Sheikh Ali Yusef, who was known for his moderate views. 
Abbas married Ikbal Hanim (1876-1941), a former member of his mother's household, on 19 February 1895; they had four daughters prior to the birth of a son and heir, Muhammad Abdel Moneim (died 1979), on 20 February 1899; a second son was born three years later. In 1900 Abbas began an affair with Marianne Torok de Szendro (1874-1944), an American-born Hungarian countess whom he first met while studying in Vienna. Because of Tawfiq's stipulation that monogamous marriage was a requisite for Egypt's rulers in the modern age, a divorce from his wife was deemed necessary before a second marriage could take place. Chafing against this constraint, Abbas secretly married his lover (the date is unknown), witnessed only by two sheikhs. An official wedding took place on 28 February 1910, officiated by the grand mufti of Egypt. Because of its polygamous and morganatic nature, the event was again kept secret, aside from an entry for Torok in 'Genealogisches Handbuch des Adels' (1911). This listed her as Princess Djavidan Hanem, wife of the khedive of Egypt. The marriage was dissolved in 1913. 
Abbas's international policies involved a vain attempt to play off France and Turkey against Britain. In 1895-8 he reluctantly agreed to the reconquest of the Sudan and he bitterly resented the ensuing Anglo-Egyptian condominium agreements of 1899. It was not that he sympathized with the Sudanese; rather, he believed that the Egyptians alone should control the Nile. (Towards the end of his life he formed the ridiculous view that Britain had gained control of Egypt and the Sudan by deliberately fomenting two supposedly anti-British uprisings, Urabi's in 1882 and the Mahdi's in 1885.) The Anglo-French entente of 1904 -- by which France recognized Britain's position in Egypt -- prevented him from manipulating imperial rivalries. Abbas responded by helping establish a pressure group in London called the English Committee for Egypt, headed by J. M. Robertson MP. At the same time, however, he attempted to put his relations with Britain on a more cordial footing and accepted a British officer as an aide-de-camp. 
Without French opinion to restrain him, Cromer became even more autocratic. The nationalist credentials of Abbas suffered as a consequence, especially after the Dinshwai incident in June 1906 when the British treated an affray with brutal severity. Cromer retired soon after; his replacement, Eldon Gorst, was on good terms with Abbas, having previously served in Egypt. It helped that both shared an interest in horse breeding. (A century later the khedive's name still figured prominently in Arabian breed history.) Gorst's remit was to increase the influence of the khedive in the context of greater authority for Egypt's political institutions, but the liberal approach unleashed nationalist pressures and Abbas's newly cosy relationship with the British residency made him unpopular. His most trusted political friend, Boutros Ghali, was assassinated in 1910 after he and Abbas supported Britain's plan to extend the Suez Canal Company's ninety-nine-year lease by another forty years. For a while it looked as though the edifice built by Cromer would collapse. The death of Gorst in July 1911 was a massive blow to Abbas. Not only did he lose one of his best friends (he had rushed to a deathbed meeting and later attended the funeral) but Gorst's replacement, Lord Kitchener, was his nemesis. 
Kitchener's return to Egypt as consul-general in September marked a resumption of autocratic methods of imperial rule, aptly signalled by his arrival in a warship rather than the customary steamship. A policy of humiliating Abbas was systematically pursued: Kitchener, for instance, wore his field marshal's uniform for meetings rather than that of a minister-plenipotentiary. Matters became so fraught that Abbas insisted that every conversation be put into writing. In the summer of 1914 Abbas planned to visit London but Kitchener ensured that an audience with the king would not be forthcoming. To avoid this snub, Abbas went instead to his estates in Turkey. During a visit to Constantinople he was shot by a pro-Turkish Egyptian student; a facial wound was sustained making speech painful for several months. 
Abbas was recuperating in Turkey when the First World War broke out. His attempts to return to Egypt were blocked by Kitchener on the ground that he was pro-Ottoman, although it was not until 5 November that Britain declared war on the Ottoman empire. On 19 December, the day after Egypt became a British protectorate, Abbas was deposed in favour of his father's brother, Hussein Kamal. The title sultan replaced khedive in order to indicate the break with the Ottoman sultanate. Abbas never forgave his uncle for usurping him, and the family grievance was extended to Kamal's successor, Fuad. Cromer defended the deposition in his biography of Abbas (1915); a contrary perspective is given in A. H. Beaman's 'The Dethronement of the Khedive' (1929). For the rest of the war Abbas sided with the central powers in the hope of reinstatement. He lived for a while in Vienna, where he was involved in efforts to maintain Italy's neutrality, and thereafter lived in Switzerland. 
After the war Abbas unsuccessfully sought compensation from the British government for properties it had sequestrated. Further misfortune beset him in the early 1920s when his Turkish estates were confiscated. He continued to follow the political situation in Egypt and wrote a critical piece on the British relationship in 1930 entitled 'A Few Words on the Anglo-Egyptian Settlement'. Lingering hopes of regaining the throne were only extinguished in 1931 when he renounced his claim in return for a pension from the Egyptian government worth $E30,000 per annum. Fuad was anxious to ensure that his son Farouk succeeded him. In the late 1930s Abbas worked on his memoirs (which were published posthumously). He remained in Switzerland during the Second World War and died aged seventy on 21 December 1944 in Geneva. 


@@@@@


doc= 39072


Abdul Rahman, Tunku (1902-1990), prime minister of Malaysia, was born in Alor Setar, Kedah (a Malay state then under British 'protection'), on 8 February 1902, the seventh son of Abdul Hamid Halim Shah, sultan of Kedah ('fl'. 1882-1943), and his Thai wife, Makche Menjelara. Abdul Rahman, known as the Tunku (prince), was educated in Alor Setar, in Bangkok, at the Penang Free School, and at St Catharine's College, Cambridge (1922-5), where he acquired the reputation of a playboy and failed to take a degree. In 1931 he entered the Kedah government service. In 1938 he started legal training at the Inner Temple but returned to Malaya on the outbreak of war. When the Japanese invaded in December 1941, he prevented the retreating British from taking his father with them, on the ground that the ruler should remain with his people. During the occupation Japan restored Kedah to Siam, and the Tunku continued in state administration. 
The aftermath of war was a turbulent period for Malaya. The upheaval of the Japanese occupation was exacerbated by rice shortages, racial conflict, and a crisis in Anglo-Malay relations over the Malayan Union constitution, whose provisions to reduce the sultan's authority and to offer citizenship to non-Malays provoked unprecedented opposition from Malays, who feared being overwhelmed by the Chinese. Led by Dato Onn bin Jaafar, they formed the United Malays National Organization (UMNO) and forced the British to replace the union with a federation (February 1948), which safeguarded the Malays' political position. Although Abdul Rahman participated in the struggle against the Malayan Union, he resumed legal studies at the Inner Temple in 1947. Having been called to the bar, in 1949 he joined the Kedah legal department, later transferring to the federal legal department as a deputy public prosecutor. 
Shortly after the resolution of the crisis in Anglo-Malay relations the Chinese-dominated Malayan Communist Party launched an armed struggle. The consequent emergency (1948-60) aggravated the polarization of Malays and the Chinese, and when Dato Onn proposed to bring them together by opening UMNO to non-Malays he was forced out of the party. Somewhat surprisingly, the Tunku emerged as his successor and resigned his government appointment. A Malay prince, the Tunku could be relied upon to preserve the communal identity of UMNO; English-educated and experienced in government, he was equipped to champion Malay interests in negotiations with the British. Like Dato Onn, however, the Tunku recognized the need to reach an accommodation with non-Malays. His approach was far less precipitate than Onn's: he worked for the formation of what became known as the Alliance, a coalition between UMNO and the non-communist Malayan Chinese Association and Malayan Indian Congress. 
The British at first dismissed the Tunku as lightweight, and were concerned that his Alliance would institutionalize rather than bridge communal divisions. The first federal elections of July 1955, when the Alliance won fifty-one of the fifty-two elected seats, established the Tunku's nationalist credentials. He was appointed chief minister, and, after he had refused to compromise with the Communist leader Chin Peng during the Baling talks (December 1955), the British accepted the Alliance demand for independence by 31 August 1957 at the London conference in January-February 1956. The elaborate independence constitution, drafted by a commission of Commonwealth jurists chaired by Lord Reid, attempted to strike a balance between the rights of all Malayan citizens on the one hand and the special privileges of the Malays on the other. In effect it confirmed Malay control of government and Chinese economic dominance. As prime minister of independent Malaya, Abdul Rahman retained close links with Britain through the sterling area, the Commonwealth, and the Anglo-Malayan defence arrangement. In 1963 Malaya merged with the former British colonies of Singapore, Sarawak, and North Borneo (renamed Sabah) to form Malaysia, with the Tunku as head of government. 
Tunku Abdul Rahman was robustly anti-communist, genuinely committed to non-communalism, and unashamedly reliant on his loyal deputy, Tun Abdul Razak. Although he presented himself as the happy prince presiding over a multiracial society, the security of the country, race relations, and eventually his own political position were subjected to immense strain. In 1963 Indonesia launched a three-year but unsuccessful armed 'confrontation' against Malaysia. Then Lee Kuan Yew's political ambitions and vigorous campaign for a 'Malaysian Malaysia' proved too much for Alliance leaders, who forced the secession of Singapore in August 1965. Third, radical Malays criticized the Tunku's compromises with the Chinese, who for their part complained that they were relegated to the status of second-class citizens. Following general elections in May 1969, communal tensions erupted in violence, which effectively ended the Tunku's political career. In September 1970 he was succeeded as prime minister and party leader by Tun Abdul Razak. From 1970 to 1973 the Tunku served as secretary-general of the Islamic Secretariat in Jiddah. Having retired to Penang, he took up journalism with the 'Star', and, although he had not been noticeably squeamish about detaining opponents when prime minister, in old age he was an outspoken but inviolable critic of the authoritarianism of Dr Mahathir (prime minister from 1981). He died in Kuala Lumpur on 6 December 1990. Abdul Rahman was thrice married and his children included four whom he adopted. His third wife, whom he married in 1939, was Sharifah Rodziah binti Saiyid Alwi Barakbah (died 2000). Among his many honours and titles were the awards of Companion of Honour (1961) and an honorary doctorate of law from Cambridge (1960). 
The relatively smooth transfer of colonial power to the Alliance convinced some that Abdul Rahman was a British stooge. This taunt misses the mark, for, although he did not acquire the accolade of a 'prison graduate' or bear the scars of a freedom fighter, and while he lacked the charisma of Sukarno and the drive and administrative capacity of Lee Kuan Yew, the Tunku pursued his own political goals, which were shaped by a shrewd assessment of the needs of Malaysia's multiracial society. Indeed, Tunku Abdul Rahman flourished as a consensus politician whose relaxed style and genuine humanity -- which more than compensated for an exasperating disinclination to master a brief -- helped him steer his country into the post-colonial world. 


@@@@@


doc= 39074


Greig, Teresa Mary Billington- (1876-1964), suffragette and political theorist, was born at 197 Friargate, Preston, Lancashire, on 15 October 1876, the second daughter of William Billington, variously described as an engineer, shopkeeper, and shipping clerk, and his wife, Helen (or Ellen) Wilson. She was educated until the age of thirteen at the Convent of Notre Dame, Blackburn. At seventeen she ran away from home, escaping the burdens of domestic and waged labour. Her uncle took her in at Manchester, where she trained as a pupil teacher at St Edmund's and studied, organized, and debated at the Ancoats University settlement. In 1903 she became a teacher in a Manchester elementary school. She rejected Roman Catholicism in favour of militant socialist agnosticism and was transferred to a Jewish school, with the help of Emmeline Pankhurst, to prevent her being sacked for refusing to give prescribed religious teaching. 
In April 1904 Billington helped to organize the Manchester teachers' equal pay league, having joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) as a major speaker shortly before. She had started a career in political activism very young because she had exceptional oratorical and administrative skills, reinforced by self-confidence. In 1905 she became a paid organizer for the Independent Labour Party. Sylvia Pankhurst described her as 'a large, powerfully built woman, with a round pleasant face', who 'sought to be considered unconventional'. Others more charitable noted her green eyes and inspiring vigour (Pankhurst, 187). In May 1906 she helped to organize a major suffrage deputation from the East End of London to parliament, and participated in the militant campaign of disrupting cabinet members' public appearances. She horsewhipped the stewards who ejected her from Asquith's meeting in Northampton. She spent some periods in Holloway prison, always protesting against the illegitimacy of a man-made legal system. She has been described as the non-violent militant but she was fined in July 1906 for dealing a return blow with her fist to a policeman in Cavendish Square, crying 'You shall not strike our women!' (ibid., 210, 212-13). She was among those arrested and imprisoned after creating a disturbance at the opening of parliament in October 1906 in protest against the government's refusal to include women's suffrage in its legislative programme. A character sketch of her by Frederick Pethick-Lawrence singled out her moral courage, and J. J. Mallon suggested that she had intransigence and passion too: 'There will be quick loves but equally quick repulsions' ('Non-Violent Militant', 7). 
In autumn 1906 Billington went to Scotland to organize WSPU branches. She took part in the by-election campaign at Aberdeen South in February 1907, when the WSPU pursued its line of opposing all Liberal candidates, regardless of their views on women's suffrage. During this hectic period she married in Glasgow, on 8 February 1907, a socialist businessman, Frederick Lewis Greig (1875/6-1961), who worked as a manager for a billiard table manufacturer. He was the son of Frederick Murray Greig, a saddler. Their two names were united in a nuptial agreement which ensured equal rights in marriage. 
Billington-Greig's theory was refined during 1906-7 in a series of articles, pamphlets, and speeches for which her notes survive. She developed a distinctive demand for full sexual equality, rejecting bad tactics even for good ends and attacking misogyny in social relations. She rejected the psychological disability which society created in women as well, seeking 'emancipation from all shackles of law and custom, from all chains of sentiment and superstition, from all outer imposed disabilities and cherished inner bondages which unite to shut off liberty from the human soul borne in her body' ('Non-Violent Militant', 137). In December 1907 she debated with Margaret Bondfield (a leading Labour Party activist and trade unionist) about whether women formed a sex class: 'The quicker you give women the power to care for women's interests, the quicker all women will have redress' ('Sex Equality versus Adult Suffrage', Manchester Women's Freedom League, 1908; Holton, 58). 
Throughout her life Billington-Greig found it difficult to work collaboratively, and she fell out with the Pankhurst leaders of the WSPU in 1907. With Edith How-Martyn and Charlotte Despard she formed the Women's Freedom League, which continued to protest against the 'man-made laws' that oppressed women. A particularly imaginative strategy was the refusal to participate in the census of 1911, and generally their tactics stressed non-co-operation rather than aggressive demonstration or courting arrest. In her 'The militant suffrage movement' (first published in 'The New Age') she rejected the emphasis on the vote, in 'Feminism and politics' in favour of a feminism which would 'remake society, would set up new standards, would destroy old customs, would establish a new morality' ('Non-Violent Militant', 227). 
In December 1910 Billington-Greig left the Women's Freedom League and retired from direct action, becoming a critic and historian of the suffrage agitation. She retained a belief in the efficacy of passive resistance, as a superior tactic which could include women of all classes, over demonstration, hunger striking, and arson. She spent the next three years as a freelance journalist and speaker. In 1913 she wrote against the 1912 'White Slave Act' and feminist emphases on social purity for women; in 1914 she demonstrated yet further estrangement from the mainstream of suffragism by writing in favour of birth control. After a brief marital separation in winter 1913-14 she returned to Glasgow and gave birth to her daughter Fiona in December 1915. During the war and again in 1923 she spent some time substituting for her husband at the billiard works, an interest which was later to lead her to create the Women's Billiards Association and the sports fellowship which would enable poor girls to take part in athletics. Feminism remained important to her, and she managed to earn money briefly as paid organizer for the Business and Professional Women's Club in 1936. 
In 1937 Billington-Greig re-entered the Women's Freedom League and turned it into Women for Westminster in 1945; she carried out a merger with the National Women Citizens' Association in 1948, representing women's organizations on various official bodies. She clearly now believed that political participation could bring about the systematic cultural change for which she yearned. She believed herself a failure when in later life she could not find a publisher for a life of Charlotte Despard, leader of the Women's Freedom League, and had little writing published after 1911. Her draft autobiography was never completed. Her husband died in 1961, and she died of cancer at the South London Hospital for Women on 21 October 1964. She had retained her feminist principles throughout. While believing that the unity of all women through their womanly activities, above all as consumers, was the way forward, she never ceased to believe in the power of women through independent organization to make cultural change. Her collected writings might have been better described as the title of her last major publication, in 1912, 'The Consumer in Revolt', and she herself as in her own critique of direct action, 'a feminist, a suffragist, and a rebel'. Despite her own sense of frustration and failure, she has inspired substantial critical commentary. 


@@@@@


doc= 39075


Brooks, (Beatrice) Romaine Mary (1874-1970), painter and lesbian icon, was born in a hotel in Rome on 1 May 1874, the third of three children of Major Harry Goddard, army officer, and his wife, Ella Waterman (died 1902), who were both American citizens. Her father was reputed to be an alcoholic, and her parents divorced not long after her birth. Her mother was very rich, having a number of residences in various European countries. Despite this she seems to have spent little time or money on her two daughters, reserving most of her affection for her sickly and unstable son, St Mar; according to Romaine's later account, her mother was extremely cruel both mentally and physically (see Secrest, 15-23). Her education seems to have been haphazard, including a girls' school in New Jersey, a convent in Italy, and a finishing school in Geneva. By 1893 she was asserting her independence, first studying singing in Paris, where one of her fellow students was the noted contralto Clara Butt. She also met Alexander Hamilton Phillips, St Mar's doctor, with whom she may have had an affair, and possibly even gave birth to a daughter, but this is extremely uncertain. By 1895 she had extracted a small financial settlement from her mother, and in 1896 went to Rome to study art at the Circolo Artistico and the Scuola Nazionale, where she was the only woman student. She had been drawing and painting since childhood, and from this time she was able to devote most of her time to painting. 
In Italy, Romaine Goddard made the acquaintance of a number of expatriates, most of them British. Capri in particular at this time was a haven for wealthy British homosexual men, particularly artists and writers, who were avoiding Britain in the wake of Oscar Wilde's trial, and here from 1899 onward she met such writers as Somerset Maugham and E. F. Benson, as well as John Ellingham Brooks (died 1929), with whom she struck up a friendship. In 1901 her brother died and her mother summoned her to Nice. There Mrs Goddard died of diabetes in 1902, leaving a considerable fortune to Romaine. This marked a major change in her life; for example it is at about this time that she began wearing masculine clothing. She married Brooks on Capri on 13 June 1903, thereby incidentally acquiring British citizenship; the marriage seems to have lasted effectively only about a year before Romaine broke off relations with her husband. In September 1904 she went to London, buying a studio in Tite Street, and shortly thereafter took a small studio at St Ives. There she worked on developing what would henceforth be her characteristic austere style, especially her range of greys, blacks, and whites, without apparently any contact with other artists in the town. About this time she also became friendly with Lord Alfred Douglas. In 1905 she moved to Paris, where she soon became involved with the circle around her fellow American the princesse de Polignac, 'nee' Winnaretta Singer. However, it was not until 1910 that she mounted her first major exhibition at the Galeries Durand-Ruel in Paris, which immediately established her reputation. Gabriele D'Annunzio (with whom she may have had an affair) described her as 'the most profound and wise orchestrator of greys in modern painting' (Secrest, 419), and the critic Robert de Montesquiou called her 'cambrioleur d'ames' (thief of souls), referring to the perceptiveness of her portraits (Chadwick, 86). In fact, she did not restrict herself to portraits, also painting a number of female nudes of a stylized androgynous type. A favourite model was Ida Rubinstein, sketches for whose portrait she used as the basis of her picture 'La France croisee' (1914; Smithsonian Institution, Washington). For this and for the service her art had rendered to France, she was awarded the medal of the Legion d'honneur in 1920. 
In 1915 Brooks met another American, the writer and salon hostess Natalie Clifford Barney (1877-1972), who became her partner until 1968. They spent much of the First World War in Paris, although in 1916 Romaine Brooks returned to Italy. She was back in France by the end of the war. About 1921 they made the acquaintance of Radclyffe Hall and Una Troubridge, and Romaine Brooks appeared thinly disguised as Venetia Ford in Hall's novel 'The Forge'. Despite her displeasure at this, in 1924 Romaine Brooks painted a portrait of Una Troubridge (Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC), taking a studio in London for the purpose. The finished portrait was regarded as something of a caricature, and did nothing to improve relationships between the two lesbian couples. 
Brooks and Barney collaborated on a novel, 'The One who is Legion, or, A. D.'s After-Life', which was privately printed in London in 1930 with illustrations by Brooks. In 1927 they took two villas in Beauvallon in the south of France which they linked together with a shared dining-room; the resultant house they named Villa Trait d'Union (Hyphen Villa). J. E. Brooks had died in May 1929, and in the mid-1930s Romaine Brooks set about re-establishing her American citizenship. In 1935 she returned to the United States, but was back in Europe by 1939, spending most of the war in or near Florence. After 1945 she rented an apartment in Nice and divided her time between it and the Villa Gaia (Gay Villa) at Fiesole, near Florence. Her relationship with Natalie Barney grew increasingly fraught over the years, and in 1968 she finally broke off relations on the grounds of her infidelity. Romaine Brooks died at her home, 11 rue des Ponchettes, Nice, on 7 December 1970. 
Romaine Brooks' reputation as a painter suffered a sharp decline in the years after the Second World War, but it recovered after her death, especially because of her rediscovery by the lesbian movement in the 1970s. Her reputation as an artist is complemented by the non-heterosexual appeal of her female nudes, by her inclination for a masculine style of dress apparent in her self-portrait (1923; Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC), and by her position within the well-to-do homosexual circles of France and Britain in the early twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 39076


Browne, (Frances Worsley) Stella (1880-1955), feminist and abortion law reformer, was born at Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, on 9 May 1880, elder daughter of Daniel Marshall Browne RN (1843-1883) and his second wife, Anna Dulcibella Mary Dodwell (1848-1919). Her father drowned on duty with the Canadian marine when she was three. 
Related, through her mother's sister's marriage to Sir Alexander Siemens, to the Anglo-German engineering dynasty, Stella Browne was educated partly in Germany, and at St Felix School, Southwold. She attended Somerville College, Oxford, from 1899 to 1902, achieving second-class honours in modern history. A teaching career ended when her health broke down from strain and privation. From 1907 to 1912 she was librarian at Morley College in south London. From 1912 she seems to have supported herself (rather precariously) by reviewing, journalism, translating, and lecturing, eked out by occasional clerical jobs. 
Stella Browne participated in the famous 'Freewoman' debate of 1912 on chastity and sexual desire in women, and corresponded with Havelock Ellis from 1914 until his death in 1938 ['see 'Freewoman circle]. She was active in the British Society for the Study of Sex Psychology. The papers she gave to the society, entitled 'The sexual variety and variability among women and their bearing upon social reconstruction' (1915; published, 1917) and 'Studies in female inversion' (1918; published, 1923), emphasized the need for women to speak about their own experiences. In both principle and practice Stella was a convinced believer in free love, known to have had various lovers, certainly some male, and possibly some female, though these cannot be reliably identified. She translated and annotated significant works of continental sexology including Van de Velde's 'Ideal Marriage' (1928) and 'Fertility and Sterility in Marriage' (1931), F. Muller-Lyer's 'Marriage' (1931), and Max Hodann's 'History of Modern Morals' (1937). She also translated German poetry, including that of Otto Braun (published in an English translation of Braun's 'Autobiography', 1924). 
Stella Browne's vigorous support for birth control (well predating the First World War) and abortion (her earliest published statement dates from 1915), largely conducted through the auspices of the Malthusian League, was part of a wide-ranging agenda of feminist and socialist reform. She desired to place in women's own hands the means to control their fertility, while also working to relieve the stigma on illegitimacy. In evidence to the interdepartmental (Birkett) committee on abortion in 1937, she courageously revealed that if abortion 'was necessarily fatal or injurious, I should not be here before you' (B. Brookes, 'Abortion in England, 1900-1967', 1988, 122). 
Stella Browne was also involved with other organizations, including the Women's Social and Political Union, the Divorce Law Reform Union, the No-Conscription Fellowship, the Humanitarian League, and the Federation of Progressive Societies and Individuals. She was an early member of the British Communist Party and was also active in the Chelsea branch of the Labour Party and the Fabian Society. Though often alleged to have been a eugenicist she repeatedly criticized the criteria of 'fitness' propounded by the Eugenics Society. However, she did join the society for a short period (1938-42), probably to represent the interests of the Abortion Law Reform Association of which she was a founder (1936). 
In her later years, with sight deteriorating and other health problems, Stella Browne lived with her younger sister (Alice) Sylvia Lemira Browne in Liverpool, far from comrades in the struggle. Stella none the less remained actively in touch and constantly wrote to the press to keep alive the issue of legalizing abortion. Her associates regularly described her as 'indomitable'. 
Stella Browne died from heart disease during the night of 8 May 1955 at her home, 39 Hawarden Avenue, Sefton Park, Liverpool. She was cremated and her ashes scattered on 11 May at Landican cemetery, Birkenhead, where a memorial plaque to her was later erected. The campaigns she fought for seemed at the time to be in eclipse; twelve years later, however, the Abortion Law Reform Association was instrumental in aiding the passage of David Steel's act of 1967, which did not, however, go as far as Stella Browne would have wished in leaving the decision entirely to the woman concerned. Her writings remain of considerable pertinence to feminist debates. 


@@@@@


doc= 39077


Chesterton, Ada Elizabeth (1869-1962), journalist and philanthropist, was born at Oxford House, Thurlow Park Road, Dulwich, London, on 30 June 1869 (her name was registered as Ada Eliza), the daughter of Frederick John Jones, a manufacturer of braces, and his wife, Ada Charlotte, formerly McDonald 'nee' Sheridan. Born into a family for whom journalism was a way of life (her father and brother wrote for the press), Ada began life as a Fleet Street reporter when she was sixteen years old. Much of the material that she published was not signed with her birth name. Instead she preferred to use a range of pseudonyms, including Sheridan Jones, John Keith Prothero, and Margaret Hamilton, or, after her marriage, to refer to herself as Mrs Cecil Chesterton. 
By 1900, when Ada Jones met the brothers Gilbert Keith Chesterton and Cecil Edward Chesterton (1879-1918), she was an established freelance journalist. Gilbert Chesterton described her as 'perhaps the most brilliant' of the independent journalists who worked in Fleet Street during the early twentieth century (G. K. Chesterton, 188). Her journalistic career included a stint as assistant editor for 'New Witness' (formerly known as 'Eye-Witness'), edited by Cecil Chesterton, and a period as the London representative for 'Everyman'. 
At the centre of Ada's relationship to the Chestertons was a long courtship with Cecil. After rejecting his marriage proposals for many years she eventually agreed to marry him when he was enlisted as a private during the First World War. They married on 9 June 1917 at two ceremonies, the first at a register office in London and the second at Corpus Christi Church in Maiden Lane, London. Cecil Chesterton survived the war only to be taken seriously ill with nephritis shortly after the armistice. Upon hearing the news of his illness Ada, with the help of Maurice Baring, managed to arrange transport to the military hospital in France where he was being treated. She arrived just before he died, in December 1918, and was the only member of his family present when he was buried. 
Ada Chesterton decided that the best way to deal with her grief was to leave her familiar surroundings and go abroad. She persuaded the 'Daily Express' to commission her to write a series of articles about Poland, to where she sailed on the American warship 'Westward Ho!', the first ship to cross the North Sea -- still unswept of mines -- after the war. When she returned to London she used her contacts to establish the Eastern European News Service. Her interest in reporting from overseas continued in the years that followed and resulted in 'My Russian Venture' (1931), 'Young China and New Japan' (1933), and 'Salute the Soviet' (1942). 
The investigative journalism that Ada Chesterton undertook at home was equally dynamic. Following a conversation about the plight of homeless women in London, she voluntarily took to the streets for two weeks in 1925. The editor of the 'Sunday Express', who agreed to publish her experiences, bet that she would not last more than a couple of nights. It was a bet that he lost as she sold matches, begged in the street, and slept in a variety of shelters. Her account was subsequently published as 'In Darkest London' (1926), in which she tried to convey the insight that she had gained: 'I had experienced actual physical privations which women of the middle class may weep over, but cannot comprehend' (p. 255). The book, which caused a sensation, called for social and political change, and was followed by further works highlighting the plight of the poor, such as 'Women of the Underworld' (1928) and 'I Lived in a Slum' (1936). 
The impact of 'In Darkest London' led to Ada Chesterton's involvement in raising money for houses to provide a refuge for homeless women. The first house opened in 1927 and the shelters became known as Cecil Houses. The council of reference for Cecil Houses included Gilbert Chesterton, Vincent McNabb, and H. G. Wells. Throughout her life Ada continued to pursue this philanthropic work. At the end of the Second World War she opened the Cecil Residential Club for Working Girls on Small Wages, and in 1953 she opened the Cecil Residential Club in Kensington for female pensioners. 
Ada Chesterton's work with Cecil Houses is often seen as her greatest legacy but it is important to recognize her other contributions to the public sphere. While some of her 'preposterous' serial novels ('The Chestertons', 258) were written largely to fund other activities (such as 'New Witness') her commitment to the arts was strong. She was the drama critic for 'G. K.'s Weekly' and wrote two plays with Ralph Neale (one of which was a stage adaptation of 'The Man who was Thursday'). Her many biographies included 'The Chestertons' (1941). She always thought of herself as a journalist and enjoyed the respect of colleagues in that essentially male environment, as an intelligent, determined, and prolific writer. 
Ada Chesterton was made an OBE in 1938. Formerly an agnostic, she was received into the Roman Catholic church in 1942. She died, of cerebral thrombosis and cerebral arteriosclerosis, in a nursing home at 4 Birdhurst Road, Croydon, on 20 January 1962. 


@@@@@


doc= 39078


Cooper, Selina Jane (1864-1946), suffragist and socialist, was born on 4 December 1864 in Callington, Cornwall, the sixth of seven surviving children of Charles Coombe, railway labourer and later railway subcontractor, and his wife, Jane Uren, dressmaker. In 1876, after her father's sudden death from typhoid fever, eleven-year-old Selina, her widowed mother, and youngest brother moved up to Barnoldswick in north-east Lancashire where cotton mills offered jobs to impoverished families like the Coombes. 
Selina Coombe became a half-timer: she combined part-time school with working as a creeler in the cardroom, supplying bobbins onto which fleecy strands of cotton were wound prior to spinning. On her thirteenth birthday even her half-time schooling ended forever, and the 1881 census records sixteen-year-old Selina as 'Cotton Operative'. Shortly afterwards she left the cardroom to care for her mother, now bedridden; and in 1883 they moved to nearby Brierfield, squashed between Burnley and Nelson, both fast expanding weaving towns. Here Selina worked as part-time nurse, part-time washerwoman until her mother's death in 1889. Returning to the mill, she entered Tunstills' winding rooms and joined a trade union -- the large Burnley Weavers' Association. Other aspects of Selina Coombe's life, however, like those of so many other working-class women of her generation, remain shadowy. 
Nelson and Burnley became early centres of socialism, and Selina Coombe was among the many millworkers drawn into the heady movement. On 24 October 1896 the Revd Leonard of nearby Colne Independent Chapel, a socialist, conducted the marriage of Selina Coombe and Robert Cooper (1869-1934), cotton weaver and founder member of the Nelson Social Democratic Federation (SDF). Their son John Ruskin was born on 21 May 1897 but died of acute bronchitic convulsions on 24 September 1897: this private sorrow haunted Selina long afterwards. However in 1899 Leonard offered the Coopers escape into the countryside, managing a new Co-operative Holiday Association centre at Keld in Swaledale. On their return, their daughter Mary was born on 8 March 1900; and about new year 1901 the Coopers moved to nearby 59 St Mary's Street, Nelson -- where all three lived for the rest of their lives. 
In 1898 Selina Cooper was elected president of the new Brierfield branch of the Women's Co-operative Guild, so gaining invaluable experience as a public speaker and finding a springboard for the suffrage campaigning which now swept her up. About 1900 she began collecting signatures locally among women cotton factory workers for a petition protesting that their denial of the franchise was 'unjust and inexpedient' (Liddington, 102). On 18 March 1901 she accompanied the 29,359-signature petition down to Westminster, informing the Lancashire MPs meeting the deputation that women have 'to educate their children, but if they are not interested in national life, how could they impart to their children a knowledge of true citizenship?' (ibid., 105). At this gathering Selina Cooper, fast emerging as a talented speaker, met influential members of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS) including the society's president, Millicent Fawcett, and the Leeds socialist Isabella Ford. 
The Coopers' home became a focus for local campaigns. In February 1901 Selina Cooper was elected a poor-law guardian, her candidature supported by both the SDF and the Independent Labour Party (ILP). In 1903 she helped launch the Lancashire Women Textile Workers' Representation Committee, and in 1906 organized the Nelson Suffrage Society which met in the Coopers' small front room. 
Selina Cooper's belief in both socialism and women's suffrage was tested in 1905 and again in 1907 at Labour Party conferences when, as an ILP delegate, she seconded a women's suffrage resolution -- only to be defeated by an adult suffrage amendment. Disenchanted, suffragists like Selina Cooper distanced themselves from the Labour Party -- and from the increasingly militant Women's Social and Political Union. Instead, from 1906-7 she worked as a NUWSS organizer, deploying her considerable speaking skills nationally -- including supporting the young Bertrand Russell, suffrage candidate at the 1907 Wimbledon by-election. 
However in 1912 a new Labour-suffrage alliance was forged, triggered by the obduracy of Herbert Asquith's Liberal government and helped by ILP lobbying of the Labour Party. Along with other radical suffragists -- Ada Nield Chew, Annot Robinson, Ellen Wilkinson -- Selina Cooper now became in tremendous demand as a speaker; helped by the NUWSS's new election fighting fund, she stumped the country, supporting Labour by-election candidates and lobbying the giant Miners' Federation to put its might behind women's suffrage. 
On the outbreak of war suffrage campaigning was suspended. Selina and Robert Cooper, like other ILP members, opposed the war and supported local conscientious objectors; in 1917 Selina bravely led a Women's Peace Crusade procession through Nelson, despite scuffling and jeering. But unlike other internationalist suffragists, Selina Cooper did not resign from Mrs Fawcett's NUWSS; and once women over thirty were enfranchised in 1918 the NUWSS encouraged her (rather unrealistically, given her feminism and her anti-war stance) to stand for parliamentary selection in a Lancashire constituency. 
In 1923 and again in 1924 Selina Cooper did stand for election -- as Labour candidate for Nelson town council; an outspoken socialist and known supporter of birth control, she was not elected. However, nominated by the Nelson Weavers, she was appointed a magistrate in 1924; and in 1930 she was co-opted onto the Burnley guardians (a district within Lancashire's new public assistance committee). As unemployment rose in 1931, Selina Cooper JP found herself outnumbered on a magistrates' bench 'swarming with manufacturers' (Liddington, 369) after a Nelson Weavers' demonstration against strike-breakers led to a mounted police charge and an arrest. Later that year, amid economic and political crisis, grassroots socialists like Selina Cooper found their convictions shaken to the core by Labour leadership betrayal. 'Philip Snowden and MacDonald took place of a God in those days. And when they tumbled, my mother', Mary Cooper recalled '... got very sad' (ibid., 377). 
In 1933 Selina Cooper spoke in London's Central Hall on married women's right to work -- 'the married women of the north beg their sisters in the south to help them face the 'new menace' which is threatening our position as women workers' (Liddington, 402) -- sitting down to thunderous applause. Recently widowed, she was invited in 1934 by a new pro-communist Women's World Committee Against War and Fascism to join a small delegation to Nazi Germany to visit four women prisoners; on her return she told about the grim realities of Nazism. A supporter of the Popular Front in the late 1930s, in 1940 Selina Cooper joined the more marginal People's Convention initiated by the Communist Party; she was soon expelled from the Labour Party, so finding herself for the first time in half a century cast outside mainstream labour politics. It was a bitter blow. 
Selina Cooper died at home on 11 November 1946 shortly before her eighty-second birthday, and was cremated three days later. The memorial meeting was attended not only by Coombe and Cooper relatives, but also by Nelson's mayor and councillors, fellow magistrates, and members of the public assistance committee, Nelson Labour Party, women's co-operative guilds -- and even one or two from the far-off Edwardian days of the Nelson Women's Suffrage Society. 
Memories of the campaigns of Selina Cooper and her associates faded rapidly after the First World War, overlain by the more dramatic suffragette narratives of the Pankhursts. However, her papers were preserved by her daughter, and rediscovered in 1976; and in 1996, to mark the fiftieth anniversary of her death, a memorial exhibition and lecture about Selina Jane Cooper were organized in Nelson. 


@@@@@


doc= 39079


Collet, Clara Elizabeth (1860-1948), civil servant and promoter of women's education and employment, was born at Sunny Bank, Hornsey Lane, Islington, London, on 10 September 1860, the second daughter and fourth child of Collet Dobson Collet (1812-1898), a prominent champion of press freedom and editor of 'The Free Press' (later the 'Diplomatic Review'), and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Sloan, who ran a laundry in north London. The surname Collet was one which Clara's father and her aunt, Sophia Dobson Collet, an authority on Brahmo Samaj, had added to their given surname Dobson, as an inheritance from their grandmothers. The family tradition was unitarian and radical, and Clara's father was closely associated with Karl Marx; in childhood Clara was very friendly with the Marx family (especially Eleanor Marx), though in adult life she was unimpressed by Marx's philosophy. 
Clara Collet was educated at the North London Collegiate School for Girls from 1873 to 1878, when she was persuaded by the headmistress, Frances Buss, to take up a teaching post at Wyggeston Girls' School, Leicester, where she worked from 1878 to 1885. While there she read for her first degree, and followed this by enrolling at University College, London, where she took an MA in mental and moral science (possibly the first woman to do so); she won the Joseph Hume scholarship in political economy in 1886, and completed her course in 1888. Her tutor was the economist H. S. Foxwell, whose friend and partisan she quickly became. She also acquired a deserved reputation as a statistician and an economist. 
In 1891 Collet began a long and distinguished career in government service, with her appointment as assistant commissioner to the royal commission on labour. From 1888 to 1892 she also collaborated with Charles Booth on his classic sociological study, 'The Life and Labour of the People of London'. This fitted in well with her statistical and sociological background and inclinations. Her published contributions to the text were her essays on women's work in the East End of London, and on secondary education for girls, reflecting her lifelong concerns with women's education and employment. In 1893 she was appointed labour correspondent to the Board of Trade. She made reports to the royal commission on secondary education in 1894, and to parliament on the wages of domestic servants in 1899. In 1903 she became senior investigator (for women's industries) at the Board of Trade, and from 1909 she attended meetings chaired by the president of the Board of Trade (then Winston Churchill). Her initial enthusiasm for working in close contact with leading politicians rapidly led to frustration, to the extent that she threatened resignation in 1910 over the treatment of women in labour exchanges. Despite this she remained at the Board of Trade and in 1920 was appointed a member of the trade boards, a position which she held until 1932. 
In addition to her government employments, Collet held various posts concerned with women's education, most notably as president of the Association of Assistant Mistresses in Secondary Schools, in 1891, and as a governor of Bedford College, London, from 1902 until her death in 1948. She was also a member of the council of the Royal Statistical Society from 1919 to 1935, and a member of the council of the Royal Economic Society from 1920 to 1941, as well as being an active member of the Fabian Society, and of the Charity Organization Society. 
Collet published a number of articles on the situation of working women, some of which she collected and published together in three highly influential books: 'The Economic Position of Educated Working Women' (1890), 'Educated Working Women' (1902), and 'Women in Industry' (1911). In addition she provided statistics for the inquiries of the British Association for the Advancement of Science into women's employment in 1900. She was probably the first British promoter of women's employment to base her arguments on a foundation of statistical evidence and systematic interviewing. In this she found herself able to challenge the pronouncements of such established economists as Alfred Marshall, and, ironically, she appears to have influenced his wife, the equally eminent economist Mary Paley Marshall. 
In 1893 Collet became a friend of the novelist George Gissing, on whose works she had already lectured publicly. A long and vigorous correspondence with him rapidly developed into a close friendship, in which she acted as his confidante as well as helping him financially when she was able. After his death in 1903, as a trustee of his estate she continued to take an active interest in his sons and remained a friend of Gabrielle Fleury, his common-law wife at the time of his death. 
Collet had a considerable interest in her family history, and in her later years she devoted considerable time to this, lecturing in India on Joseph Collet, a former governor of the Madras presidency, whose notebooks she finally prevailed upon Longmans to publish (with her annotations), in 1933. 
Collet was short and dark-haired. Although not from a poor background, she had to work to support herself, and her earnings and consequent savings were her only guarantee of financial security and independence. Her manner appears to have been decisive and authoritative; and her nephew Robert Collet recalled that she always had to be right about everything, and she usually was (Tindall, 171). She appears to have dominated her family in her latter years, and after a mastectomy in 1936 she moved them all from Hampstead in London to Sidmouth, Devon. Clara Collet died at her home, Clifton, Cliff Road, Salcombe Regis, Sidmouth, Devon, on 3 August 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 39080


Chew, Ada Nield (1870-1945), labour organizer and suffragist, was born at Hollins, Butt Lane, Audley, Staffordshire, on 28 January 1870, the second child in a family of thirteen of William Nield, brick maker, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Hammond. Ada was taken from school at the age of eleven to help look after the family, especially her younger sister May, who was an epileptic and in 1920 was committed to the Cheshire County Asylum, where she died in the 1920s. 
In 1881 the Nield family moved briefly to Malvern, Worcestershire, where Ada's father farmed, with little success, until 1887. They then moved to Crewe, and Ada worked at a shop in Nantwich. By 1894 she was working at Compton Bros. clothing factory, where she made her first public contribution by writing a number of letters to the 'Crewe Chronicle' signed A Crewe Factory Girl. These letters were circumstantially critical of the pay and conditions of factory women, especially compared to those of their male colleagues doing the same work. This resulted in Ada losing her position, and thereupon she became an active member of the Independent Labour Party (ILP), being elected in December 1894 to the Nantwich board of poor law guardians. She also contributed to 'The Clarion' and the 'Labour Leader', and travelled round Britain speaking for the ILP, particularly in the 'Clarion' van; through this activity she met George Chew (1872-1940), another ILP activist, whom she married in 1897. In June 1898 their only child, Doris, was born, and this restricted Ada's activities considerably for the next two years. They settled in Rochdale, where they kept a 'fent' shop (a Lancashire dialect word for remnants of cloth). In 1900 she resumed her career as speaker, and became an organizer for the Women's Trade Union League, in which capacity she travelled widely throughout Britain. She also became involved in the league's Potteries Fund Committee, helping to find and aid victims of lead poisoning in the Potteries, a cause to which she devoted considerable energy well into the 1920s. 
In 1903 George Chew gave up the fent shop for a retail business in drapery and footwear which he and Ada continued for the rest of his life, and which gave Ada the security to continue her work for the labour and women's movements. According to Ada's daughter, at this time the family enjoyed a range of intellectual interests, including visits to the Rochdale Theatre Royal whenever possible, and reading such authors as Wells and Bennett, and the American feminist Charlotte Perkins Gilman. Ada was also at least on speaking terms with such contemporary socialist luminaries as the MacDonalds, the Bruce Glasiers, J. R. Clynes, Enid Stacy, Julia Dawson of 'The Clarion', and Mary Macarthur of the National Federation of Women Workers. 
It was about this time that Ada began to develop a serious interest in women's suffrage. At first, in 1904, this demonstrated itself in opposition to Christabel Pankhurst's (and the ILP's) support for the 1904 'Women's Suffrage Bill' on the grounds that it favoured well-to-do women at the expense of the working classes -- an 'adult suffragist' viewpoint which she consistently maintained -- and later, as a principled opponent of physical force, she rejected the militant tactics of the Pankhursts' Women's Social and Political Union. However, by 1911 the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS) was not only strongly opposed to militancy, but becoming closely involved with the labour movement, and it was at this time that Ada became a frequent contributor to the NUWSS organ, the 'Common Cause'. She also became a paid organizer of the NUWSS in 1912. On the outbreak of war in 1914, as a convinced pacifist, she aligned herself with those members of the NUWSS (such as Catherine Marshall, Helena Swanwick, Maude Royden, and Selina Cooper) who refused on principle to undertake war work. 
The war marked an end of Ada's major political activity, although she did continue to work in connection with lead poisoning, was an active member of the Manchester branch of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, and made occasional contributions in the 1920s to the 'Woman's Leader', registering her opposition to Eleanor Rathbone's campaign for family allowances. However, she now concentrated on the family business, starting an independent mail-order wholesale drapery line which met with such success that by 1922 she had to rent a small warehouse. She retired from the mail-order business in 1930. Although a seasoned traveller to all parts of Britain, she had never been abroad until 1927, when she and her daughter holidayed in the south of France. This she followed with a visit to her brother in South Africa in 1932, a round-the-world tour in 1935, and motoring holidays in France and Switzerland. Her foreign travels were ended by the outbreak of the Second World War. Her husband died in 1940, and Ada herself died on 27 December 1945 at 55 Ormerod Road, Burnley, Lancashire. Her burial took place at Rochdale on 31 December. She was survived by her daughter, Doris, who later edited a selection of her writings together with a brief biography. 
Ada Nield Chew was very diffident about her personal appearance, but contemporaries record that she was very good-looking, with striking red hair. Throughout her life she consistently and actively supported the causes of working women and of peace. 


@@@@@


doc= 39082


Adamson, Joy (1910-1980), conservationist and artist, was born on 20 January 1910 in Troppau, Silesia, the second of the three children of Viktor Gessner (died 1933/4), civil servant, and his wife, Traute Greipel (1888?-1973). Her mother's family was well off, owning lands and paper factories. After her parents were divorced in 1922 she was brought up by her maternal grandmother in Vienna. She attended a boarding-school for four years and then took a variety of courses, mainly in art and music. At twenty, volatile and troubled, she eloped with the son of a wealthy banker; the affair ended in 1932 leaving her with serious psychological damage, which was not alleviated by periods of psychoanalysis. On 17 January 1944, after two short-lived marriages, between which she emigrated to Kenya, she took as her third husband George Adamson (1906-1989), assistant warden with the Kenya game department. 
Joy Adamson's first major undertaking, begun about 1937, was a pioneering project painting east African plants. After initial instruction from her second husband, Peter Bally ('b'. 1895), a botanist at the Coryndon Museum, Nairobi, she completed a classic series of about 500 scientifically accurate colour paintings, many exceptional for their freshness and vigour. The Royal Horticultural Society in London recognized the outstanding quality of the work, awarding her their Grenfell gold medal in 1947. While accompanying George Adamson on his safaris she became impressed with the urgency of recording the rapidly vanishing rituals and regalia of the peoples of Kenya. Starting in 1948, and always under-funded, although supported for a time by a government commission, she painted about 580 watercolour portraits. Authentic and admirably representative of Kenya's native peoples, these constitute a veritable 'Bayeux tapestry', capturing the 'arresting and lasting images' of ways of life now gone (House, 182). Many are housed in the National Museums of Kenya, Nairobi; some are reproduced in her book 'The Peoples of Kenya' (1967). 
Joy Adamson became famous, however, as the author of the best-selling trilogy 'Born Free', 'Living Free', and 'Forever Free' (1960-62), the wonderful story of Elsa the lioness, further popularized in Columbia Film Studio's box-office success, 'Born Free' (1966). Beginning in 1956 George and Joy Adamson reared the cub Elsa until she reached maturity, successfully released her to the wild, and retained her affection and trust even after she had mated and borne cubs -- a unique achievement for the time. Although not scientific in the formal sense, the Adamsons' work was a significant contribution to animal psychology, demonstrating that lions are capable of a far wider range of behaviour than previously assumed. From the broader perspective, 'Born Free' (books and film) brought a new public awareness of African wildlife and was one of the factors in the rise of the conservation movement. Royalties ($250,000 by the mid-1960s) and funds raised by Joy Adamson's worldwide promotional tours were largely funnelled into the Elsa Conservation Trust, which concentrates especially on conservation in Kenya. In 1977 Joy Adamson was awarded the Austrian cross of honour for science and the arts. She undertook two additional animal studies, successfully rearing and re-establishing in the wild first a cheetah and then a leopard (described in books published in 1969, 1972, and 1980). 
Temperamental, restless, autocratic, and so difficult to work with that sooner or later she broke with almost all her close associates, Joy Adamson was nevertheless a vibrant, magnetic personality, handsome in her youth with blond hair and striking blue eyes. She brought energy, tenacity, courage, and vision to her many undertakings. She died at Isiolo, Kenya, on 3 January 1980, of stab wounds inflicted during an altercation with a disgruntled former employee. Her body was cremated at Nairobi crematorium and her ashes were placed on the graves of Elsa the lioness and Pippa the cheetah in Meru National Park, Kenya. 


@@@@@


doc= 39083


Craig, Edith Ailsa Geraldine (1869-1947), theatre director and costumier, was born on 9 December 1869 at Gustard Wood Common, Hertfordshire, the first of two children of the actress Dame Ellen Alice Terry (1847-1928) and Edward William Godwin (1833-1886), architect, with whom Terry had eloped in 1868. The family lived in Fallows Green, Harpenden, Hertfordshire, designed by Godwin, until 1874. After her separation from Godwin in 1875, Terry was primary carer (helped by housekeeper Mrs 'Boo' Rumball) for Edith Craig and her brother (Edward Henry) Gordon Craig (1872-1966). Terry's second husband, Charles Wardell (whom she married in 1877), provided a parental figure for the children such that Edith took the name Wardell. However, Terry's third husband, James Carew (whom she married in 1907), met with Edith Craig's disapproval. Craig was educated at Mrs Cole's school, a co-educational institution in Foxton Road, Earls Court, London; the Royal Academy of Music; by Alexis Hollander in Berlin, Germany from 1887 to 1890; and intermittently by Elizabeth Malleson of Dixton Manor Hall, Winchcombe, Gloucestershire. 
Craig worked for the Lyceum Theatre company, designing costumes and acting under the stage name of Ailsa Craig, touring America in 1895 and 1907. Craig appeared with Henry Irving in a number of plays, such as 'The Bells' (1895) by Leopold Lewis. In 1895 her performances in Sir Arthur Wing Pinero's 'Bygones' and Charles Reade's 'The Lyons Mail' respectively were praised by George Bernard Shaw and Eleanora Duse. Craig acted in plays by G. B. Shaw and H. Ibsen, toured with Mrs Brown Potter and the Independent Theatre, and was stage director for her mother on tour after she left the Lyceum Theatre. 
With financial backing from her mother Craig started a business, Edith Craig & Co., producing costumes for several London theatre productions. During Terry's lease of the Imperial Theatre, Edith Craig collaborated with her mother and brother on various productions. In 1902-3 she collaborated with the artist Pamela Colman Smith on the design of scenes for W. B. Yeats's 'Where there is Nothing' and J. M. Synge's 'The Well of the Saints'. Craig was an active member of several significant theatre societies which produced experimental drama in London; some of them directly challenged the lord chamberlain's regulation of the stage: the Independent Theatre; the Stage Society; the Masquers; the Pioneer Players; the Phoenix Society; and the Renaissance Theatre Society. 
Craig was active in the women's suffrage movement, selling newspapers in the street and working at branch level for the Women's Freedom League after getting into conversation with a woman selling its paper in the street. A member of many suffrage organizations, she worked in a professional capacity for the Actresses' Franchise League and independently on numerous successful suffrage productions. Craig notably directed 'A Pageant of Great Women', a play she devised with the writer and actor Cicely Hamilton. This was performed nationwide with audiences in some cases of 2000. 
Craig consolidated her work as a director with the Pioneer Players (1911-25), the London-based theatre society which she founded. Under Craig's leadership this society became internationally known for promoting women's work in the theatre. It performed significant plays by women such as Susan Glaspell ('Trifles', 1919, and 'The Verge', 1925), 'Hrotsvit' ('Paphnutius', 1914), and Christopher St John ('The First Actress', 1911, and 'Macrena', 1912). It also became renowned for its support of progressive political campaigns and its production of a number of significant translated plays by dramatists such as Paul Claudel, Anton Chekhov, Nikolay Eveinov, and Saint-Georges de Bouhelier. 
After the Pioneer Players was effectively wound up in 1920, Craig worked on several productions in London and the provinces. Notable productions included nativity plays in London and York; John Fletcher's 'The Faithful Shepherdesse' (1923), formerly directed by Craig's father, Godwin; Hugo von Hofmannstahl's 'The Great World Theatre' (1924); the first modern production of John Webster's 'The White Devil' (1925); and George Bernard Shaw's 'Back to Methuselah' (1930). In the 1920s work took Craig to Hampstead, where she directed plays for the Everyman Theatre, and to Yorkshire as art director for Leeds Art Theatre. Craig valued the traditions of stagecraft but she also welcomed innovations in the theatre and film. Her expertise in the latter medium was demonstrated by her performance in 'Fires of Fate' (1923), a film adaptation of a story by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. 
After her mother died in 1928, Craig began her campaign for a fitting memorial. In 1929 the barn in the grounds of Ellen Terry's house in Smallhythe Place, Tenterden, Kent, was converted into a theatre where Craig directed performances on the anniversary of Ellen Terry's death. The Priest's House, next door to Ellen Terry's house, Craig's home, became a dynamic cultural centre, attracting Radclyffe Hall and her partner Una Troubridge, together with Vita Sackville West and Virginia Woolf. 
Active in teaching and adjudicating amateur theatricals for the British Drama League, the Women's Institute, and the British Empire Shakespeare Society, Craig gave one of the prestigious Shute lectures at the University of Liverpool in 1935. She developed a national reputation for her pageant productions at Mount Grace Priory, Northallerton, Yorkshire (1927) and the Tenterden jubilee pageant (1935). The Chilham pageant (1946) was Craig's last work. 
Craig lived with the writer Christabel Marshall (known as Christopher Marie St John) from 1899, when the two women shared a flat at 7 Smith Square, London. They lived in a flat in Adelphi Terrace House from 1907 to 1909 before moving to 31 Bedford Street, Covent Garden, where they were joined in 1916 by Clare Atwood (known as Tony) (1866-1962), the artist, forming a permanent 'menage a trois' about which George Bernard Shaw urged St John to write. Although Craig rarely wrote, she was involved in some publications relating to her mother and to Bernard Shaw which provoked a rift in the relationship with her brother. Edward Gordon Craig's 'Ellen Terry and her Secret Self' (1931) explicitly objected to 'Ellen Terry and Bernard Shaw: a Correspondence' (1931) edited by St John. In 1932 Craig co-edited with St John 'Ellen Terry's Memoirs', responding to her brother's representation of their mother. Craig had taken on other family responsibilities that year, having adopted Ruby Chelta Craig, daughter of Edward Gordon Craig's son. Craig was reconciled with her brother some time before her death. 
Opinions differed about Craig's personality. Some found her domineering and difficult to work with, while others enthused about her professionalism and inspirational effect on newcomers to the profession. May Whitty remembered her as a 'magician'. Craig's friends claimed that she was denied opportunities to establish herself in a permanent theatre; Lilian Baylis is said to have excluded her from a post at the Old Vic. However, Craig worked successfully on several collaborations and was credited with numerous directorial achievements -- so much so, that George Bernard Shaw claimed that 'Gordon Craig has made himself the most famous producer in Europe by dint of never producing anything, while Edith Craig remains the most obscure by dint of producing everything' (Holledge, 162). Craig's work in the theatre received national press coverage yet she has rarely featured in theatre histories or biographies or autobiographies of her contemporaries. Overshadowed by her mother and brother, Craig has received recent critical re-evaluation by feminist critics, particularly in the ground-breaking work on Edwardian actresses by Julie Holledge (1981) and Katharine Cockin (1998). Literary portraits of Edith Craig have been claimed for Virginia Woolf's pageant organizer, Miss La Trobe, in 'Between the Acts' (1941) and for Clemence Dane's possessive daughter, Blanche Carroll, in 'Eighty in the Shade' (1958). 
Rheumatism prevented Craig from pursuing a musical career as a pianist. Later in life she had restricted mobility although she was reluctant to allow this to affect her work. Craig died of coronary thrombosis and chronic myocarditis on 27 March 1947 at Priest's House, Smallhythe Place, Tenterden, Kent, and her body was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 39084


Ford, Isabella Ormston (1855-1924), socialist propagandist and suffragist, was born on 23 May 1855 at St John's Hill, Clarendon Road, Headingley, Leeds, the eighth and youngest child of Robert Lawson Ford (1809-1878), solicitor and landowner, and his wife, Hannah (1814-1886), the daughter of Thomas Benson Pease of Darlington and Martha Whitelock. When Isabella was ten the family moved to Adel Grange, a large property on the outskirts of Leeds, which was to be home for her and two of her sisters, Elizabeth Helen 
(Bessie; 1848-1919)
and Emily Susan (1850-1930), until shortly before Isabella's death. 
The Ford children were brought up in a Quaker household immersed in radical Liberal politics, women's rights campaigns, and humanitarian causes. The girls were educated at home by governesses and were taught a wide range of subjects. Isabella's mother encouraged her to take an interest in the employment conditions and education of working women and at sixteen she was expected to teach in a night school for mill girls set up by her parents and a local shoemaker. A family friend, Emma Paterson, president of the Women's Protective and Provident League, suggested that she should become involved in trade union organization and during the mid-1880s Isabella Ford helped to establish two short-lived societies for women workers in Leeds. It was the labour unrest of 1888-90, however, which brought her to prominence as a trade union organizer. She assisted in disputes among female textile workers and took a leading role in the lengthy Leeds tailoresses' strike of 1889. She also took part in the Manningham mills dispute in Bradford in 1890/91 and became a lifelong friend of Ben Turner, leader of the Textile Workers' Union. 
The labour unrest also marked the beginning of Isabella Ford's commitment to socialist politics and she was a founder member of the Leeds Independent Labour Party (ILP). From then on she argued that trade union organization, the vote, and socialism were all necessary for women's emancipation, although her priorities shifted over time. During the 1890s, as president of the Leeds Tailoresses' Union, she was most active in day-to-day organizing work among clothing workers and in speaking for the Textile Workers' Union in its drive to recruit more female members in the West Riding. She was a member of the executive committee of the Women's Trade Union League and after 1895 attended international textile workers' congresses where she translated from French and German for the English delegates. Isabella Ford tried to draw the attention of middle-class women to the work conditions of female workers by speaking at meetings of women's organizations, such as the Women's Liberal Federation, and by writing numerous pamphlets on the subject. 
Isabella Ford also carried out propaganda work for the Leeds ILP, speaking at meetings all over the West Riding and writing a column in the 'Leeds Forward'. She was one of the 'new life' socialists who gathered around the Yorkshire writer Edward Carpenter (1844-1929). She was attracted by his vision of a socialism which would transform all areas of life, including the relationship between the sexes, and which would bring love, truth, and beauty into people's lives. Adel Grange became a centre for anyone interested in socialism and women's rights and attracted visitors from all social classes. Isabella Ford had a wide range of interests. She wrote three novels, 'Miss Blake of Monkshalton' (1890), 'On the Threshold' (1895), and 'Mr Elliott' (1901), and was a member of the Leeds arts club, the Humanitarian League, and the Leeds Women's Suffrage Society. In 1895 she was elected to the parish council of Adel cum Eccup. 
After 1900, despairing of her lack of success in organizing women workers, Isabella Ford concentrated on propaganda work for socialist and feminist politics at a national level. Between 1903 and 1907 she was elected to the national administrative council of the ILP and embarked on a punishing schedule of meetings which took her all over the country. She was excited by the revival of the women's suffrage movement and was one of a small number of socialist women, neglected in both suffrage and labour histories, who tried to link feminism and socialism, never putting one before the other. She took every opportunity to persuade the labour movement to support a limited franchise and spoke on this subject at the annual conferences of the Labour Representation Committee in 1903 and 1904, which she attended as a delegate of the ILP. In 1904 she took part in a debate with the adult suffragist Margaret Bondfield and was described by Sylvia Pankhurst as 'a plain, middle-aged woman, with red face and turban hat crushed down upon her straight hair, whose nature yet seemed to me... kindlier and more profound than that of her younger antagonist' (Pankhurst, 178). Isabella Ford also reminded the Hungarian suffragist Rosika Schwimmer of 'a caricature of an English spinster', and yet when she began to speak her wit and depth of knowledge about her subject soon captured an audience's attention (R. S., 'Women's age of innocence'). 
Isabella Ford's writing style was also full of wit and humour and her output reached a peak between 1903 and 1906 both in quantity and quality. Articles and letters appeared regularly in the ILP journal, 'Labour Leader', varying from commentaries on recent political events to more discursive pieces which analysed women's social position. Her ideas were explored more fully in an important pamphlet, 'Women and Socialism', published by the ILP in 1904, in which she attempted to develop a theory which would link the labour movement and the women's movement together. As the demand for the suffrage grew more urgent after 1907, and a rift developed between the Labour Party and the militant suffragettes, Isabella Ford decided to join with other committed suffragists in giving priority to the vote. Between 1907 and 1915 she served on the executive committee of the constitutionalist National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS), led by her close friend Millicent Fawcett. She used her speaking talents to good effect at meetings all over the country and was described as the 'raciest' speaker in the NUWSS: 'she speaks with equal success to an audience of 5,000 working men or 25 clergymen -- they laugh and weep as she chooses, and they all love her' ('Common Cause', 3 Oct 1913). Her speeches referred constantly to the problems faced by working women. She made a special effort to gain the support of labour groups and played a role in bringing about the alliance for electoral purposes in 1912 between the Labour Party and the NUWSS. 
In this, as in most of her activities, Isabella Ford acted as a conciliator. She was described by one contemporary as: 'broad and well balanced, and even for Suffrage... refuses to be a fanatic... she swims in the mainstream, she belongs to the centre... Sweet humour puts a twinkle in her eye and on her lips a laugh, at herself maybe, with no bitterness. (Mallon)' On the other hand she was not afraid to express intense indignation against injustice, in particular on behalf of the weak.During the First World War Isabella Ford was a pacifist and resigned with other friends in 1915 from the executive of the NUWSS in order to work for peace, as usual speaking at meetings all over the country. She served on the executive of the British section of the Women's International League. She was also a member of the Union for Democratic Control and the 1917 Club and established a Leeds branch of the Women's Peace Crusade. 
In the post-war period, age and ill health curtailed her public activities, but Isabella Ford continued to work wherever she could for women's rights, international peace, and socialism. In 1919, for example, she attended an international congress of women in Zurich and in 1922 she was a delegate to the international peace conference at The Hague. She was asked on a number of occasions to stand for parliament as a Labour Party candidate, but declined because of her health. None the less she continued to work for the Labour Party and campaigned for her old friend Philip Snowden at the 1923 election which saw the return of a Labour government. 
Isabella Ford never fully recovered from the death in 1919 of her sister Bessie, who had always provided emotional support, and wrote to Edward Carpenter that 'a piece of myself is gone' (I. Ford to E. Carpenter, 2 Aug 1919). In 1922 she moved with Emily to Adel Willows, a small property near the Grange, and it was here that she died in her sleep on 14 July 1924 after several months of ill health caused by a weak heart. Her funeral took place at the Quaker burial-ground, Adel, and a memorial gathering organized by the Women's International League and the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship was held at the Guildhouse, London, on 28 July. She left an estate valued at $24,540, which, apart from a legacy to her parlourmaid, was shared among her relatives. 


@@@@@


doc= 39085


Bonny, Anne (1698-1782), pirate, was born near Cork in Ireland. Evidence from her descendants suggests that she was the illegitimate daughter of William Cormac, lawyer, and his maidservant. Cormac, who raised his daughter as a boy, found his legal practice so affected by his affair that he decided to go abroad. Taking Anne and the maid with him, he sailed to South Carolina, where he became a successful merchant and purchased a plantation. 
Anne grew up to be a fierce-tempered and headstrong young woman. In 1718 she married a penniless sailor called James Bonny; this so upset her father that he turned her out of his house. Bonny and Anne made their way to the island of New Providence in the Bahamas, where they hoped to find employment. There Anne was courted by the pirate John Rackam (d. 1720), a bold and reckless character whose colourful clothes had earned him the nickname Calico Jack. Rackam had arrived in the Bahamas in 1719 in order to take advantage of the royal pardon which had been extended to pirates. He persuaded Anne to leave her sailor husband and go to sea with him. When she became pregnant he took her to Cuba, where she gave birth to their child. Soon afterwards he sent for her and she rejoined his crew, dressed as usual in men's clothing. Rackam had resumed his life as a pirate and Anne took part in a series of attacks on shipping in the Caribbean. 
Around this time another female sailor, Mary Read (c.1695-1721), joined Rackam's crew. She too had been brought up as a boy, had spent some years as a soldier in Flanders, and after her husband's death had joined a merchant ship bound for the West Indies. Bonny and Read became close friends and, according to witnesses at their subsequent trial, were the fiercest members of the crew: 'they were both very profligate, cursing and swearing much and ready and willing to do any thing on board' (TNA: PRO, CO 137/14). On 5 September 1720 Captain Woodes Rogers, the governor of the Bahamas, issued a proclamation, printed in the 'Boston Gazette', which announced that Rackam and twelve others, 'including two women, by name Anne Fulford alias Bonny, & Mary Read', had stolen the 'William', a 12-ton sloop armed with six guns, from Providence roads and had committed several acts of robbery and piracy. Within a few weeks Rackam's ship was intercepted and captured off Negril Point, Jamaica, by a heavily armed privateer commanded by Captain Jonathan Barnet. The pirates were taken ashore and confined in the gaol at Spanish Town. 
On 16 November 1720, at an Admiralty court presided over by Sir Nicholas Lawes, governor of Jamaica, Rackam and the ten men in his crew were found guilty of piracy. They were hanged a few days later. Bonny and Read were tried by the same court on 28 November and were also found guilty and condemned to death. However, they revealed that they were both pregnant and were reprieved. Mary Read died in gaol and was buried on 28 April 1721. Evidence provided by the descendants of Anne Bonny suggests that her father managed to secure her release from gaol and bring her back to Charles Town, South Carolina, where she gave birth to Rackam's second child. On 21 December 1721 she married a local man, Joseph Burleigh, and they had eight children. She died in South Carolina, a respectable woman, at the age of eighty-four and was buried on 25 April 1782. 


@@@@@


doc= 39086


McFall, Frances Elizabeth Bellenden (1854-1943), novelist and women's rights campaigner, was born on 10 June 1854 in Donaghadee, co. Down, Ireland, the fourth of the five children of Edward John Bellenden Clarke (1813-1861), a lieutenant in the Royal Navy and coastguard, and his wife, Margaret Bell Sherwood (1813-1874). Both parents were English, and after the death of her father in 1861, Clarke and her family moved to near Scarborough, Yorkshire, to be near her mother's relatives. Educated at home until the age of fourteen, she had two years of formal schooling, first at the Royal Naval School at Twickenham, Middlesex, and then at a finishing school in Holland Road, Kensington, London. Viewing marriage as her only opportunity to continue her education, on 23 August 1870 she married David Chambers McFall (1834/5-1898), an army surgeon attached to the Indian border regiment. He was about twenty years her senior, a widower with two sons, Haldane (who was only six years younger than Clarke) and Albert. Frances McFall's only child, David Archibald Edward (Archie) McFall, who became an actor, was born on 7 October 1871. From 1873 to 1878 she travelled with her husband and son to Singapore, Ceylon, China, Japan, and the Straits Settlements. In 1879 they moved to Norwich, where David McFall was stationed, and then in 1881 moved to Warrington, Lancashire, where he retired as honorary brigade surgeon. Their marriage was not a happy one, and in 1890 she left her husband and son and moved to London to pursue her writing career. 
McFall's first book, 'Two Dear Little Feet', a cautionary tale about the dangers of fashionably tight boots, was published in 1873, but after that she had little success in getting her early fiction published. In 1888 she published her first novel, 'Ideala: a Study from Life', anonymously and at her own expense. The success of 'Ideala' (which was republished by Bentley in 1889) gave her the courage and the resources to live on her own. From the beginning her desire to write was inseparable from her desire to instruct and reform. Profoundly influenced by Josephine Butler's campaign against the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', she was intent upon educating her readers about any and all issues she felt pertinent to the well-being and advancement of women. In her novel 'The Heavenly Twins', published under the pseudonym Sarah Grand, she condemned the sexual double standard, argued for more opportunities and independence for women, and criticized gender-role socialization. But her central subject was the spread of syphilis from men to their wives and children; the disease's destructive effects are represented with clinical detail, presumably gleaned from her husband's medical textbooks. Not surprisingly the novel was rejected by numerous publishers, but when Heinemann published it in 1893 it became a sensational best-seller. It was reprinted six times in its first year and sold over 20,000 copies by its second year in print. It was condemned on moral grounds and criticized for its confusing narrative structure, but it was praised by Mark Twain and George Bernard Shaw and thrilled a reading public eager for fiction that dealt in a frank manner with sexuality and the issues of the day. It was the first of what came to be called 'new woman' novels (McFall claimed to have coined the term 'new woman') which depicted women's growing dissatisfaction with the restrictions of Victorian society. 

'The Heavenly Twins' changed McFall's life. With it was born the persona of Sarah Grand, often called 'Madame' Grand, a self-styled 'woman of genius', who was impeccably dressed, had a charming manner, and wore distinctively large hats, and who lectured and wrote on women's issues for the next two decades. McFall's philosophy was moderate in nature: she advocated marriage and contested the sexual double standard by demanding sexual purity for men as well as women. She believed that this very moderation, combined with her witty and calculatedly feminine style, would do more for women than the militant agenda and tactics of the suffragettes. In 1901 she went on a four-month lecture tour of the United States, and from 1903 to 1912 she lectured throughout England and published numerous articles promoting women's suffrage as well as rational dress and the benefits of bicycling for women. She was a member of the Women Writers' Suffrage League and the Women Citizens' Association, and vice-president of the Women's Suffrage Society. After moving to Tunbridge Wells in 1898, she became president of the local branches of the National Council of Women and the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. 
Although McFall continued to write fiction, none of her other novels matched the success or generated the controversy of 'The Heavenly Twins'. Her autobiographical novel, 'The Beth Book' (1897), contains some of her best writing in its first half, which vividly depicts the deprivations of the heroine's childhood and boldly describes the awakening of her sexuality. But like 'The Heavenly Twins' it is overly long and tackles too many topics, including vivisection, lock hospitals, and the abuse of caffeine. She turned her attention to land reform and sweatshops in her last two novels, 'Adnam's Orchard' (1912) and 'The Winged Victory' (1916). 
After women got the vote in 1918, McFall's celebrity quickly faded. By 1922 most of her books were out of print. She often responded to formal criticism of her writing by saying that matter meant more to her than manner, but by being tied so closely to the issues and controversies of her age, the matter of her novels eventually lost its relevance. In the 1970s interest in McFall's work was revived by feminist literary criticism, but her passionate and well-intentioned novels -- unwieldy, proselytizing, often tiresome in their detail and length -- remain of interest primarily as historical documents. 
After living in Tunbridge Wells with her stepson, the artist and writer Haldane McFall, for twenty years, Frances McFall moved to Bath in 1920. There she turned her considerable energies towards civic duties, taking on the largely ceremonial post of the city's lady mayoress from 1922 to 1929 (excluding the years 1923 and 1924), serving with Mayor Cedric Chivers, a widower and businessman. When Bath was bombed in 1942, relatives persuaded her, with difficulty, to leave her damaged home and move to Calne, Wiltshire. McFall died there at her home, The Grange, on 12 May 1943 and was buried on 15 May in Lansdown cemetery, Bath. 


@@@@@


doc= 39087


Jesse, Wynifried Margaret (1888-1958), writer and criminologist, was born Wynifried Margaret Jesse on 1 March 1888 at Holly Bowers, Chislehurst, Kent, second of three daughters of the Revd Eustace Tennyson d'Eyncourt Jesse (1853-1927), a high Anglican clergyman, and his wife, Edith Louisa James (1866-1941), second child of a self-made Cornishman. Jesse's paternal grandmother, a sister of Alfred Tennyson, had been engaged to A. H. Hallam (the subject of Tennyson's 'In Memoriam') at the time of his tragic death. With no settled career, her father often went abroad, sometimes taking the family, and she early imbibed the love of travel. Her mother seemed to cherish ill health and became increasingly erratic and bad-tempered. Jesse recalled an 'infinite succession' of lodgings as a dreary feature of her childhood. Her formal education was mostly at various day schools, but from an early age she showed both an aptitude for art and the gift of independent thought. In her nineteenth year she went to study art under Stanhope and Elizabeth Forbes at the Newlyn School in Cornwall, where she acquired the name Fryniwyd, edited the colony's short-lived magazine, and exhibited a few pictures. 
Realizing that her metier lay more in writing than in art, Jesse descended on London in 1911 and was soon contributing to leading dailies under her gender-neutral 'nom de plume' F. Tennyson Jesse. In 1912 her short story 'The Mask' was published to acclaim in the influential 'English Review'. It attracted the attention of the successful playwright Harold Marsh (Tottie) Harwood (1874-1959), who wanted to dramatize it (and who on 9 September 1918 married her), and of William Heinemann, who offered to publish her first novel. She later described 'The Milky Way' (1913) as a light-hearted affair and a 'very bad book', but in a contemporary review in the 'Daily News and Leader' Rebecca West said the author had shown herself 'a master of descriptive prose'. 
Jesse had been launched on a literary career that would span nearly forty-five years. Her 'oeuvre', of an uncommon range, was to include nine novels, three books of short stories, two of poems, and four volumes of 'belles-lettres', three plays (and another six -- including 'Billeted', 1917 -- with Harwood), a history of Burma, and eight books on criminology. 
Long wanting to fly, Jesse went up in a pusher-type aircraft over Lake Windermere. Unaware of any danger, she waved to people below and put her right hand into the invisibly spinning propeller just behind her. Seven unsuccessful operations to save her fingers followed, and to enable her to bear the pain she was prescribed morphia, to which she became addicted. She was fitted with a mechanical device, which she called her 'pandy', and courageously resumed her travels. In 1914 she persuaded the 'Daily Mail' to send her to the Belgian front as a war correspondent, one of the few women then to achieve that status. Visits to France followed and the Ministry of Information asked her to write about the women's army; 'The Sword of Deborah' (1919) was the vividly written result. 
The twenties and thirties were decades of wide travel and of intense literary activity, with diversity the keynote. A success in one genre was followed by a move into another. 'That is why I have never been a best seller,' Jesse once explained (J. Colenbrander, 'Introduction' to F. T. Jesse, 'The Lacquer Lady', 1984 reprint). In the highly respected 'Murder and its Motives' (1924, rev. edn 1952), in which she illustrated the six motives with celebrated cases, she coined the word 'murderee' to describe those who laid themselves out to be murdered. Francis Camps, an expert in forensic medicine, described her as one of England's greatest criminologists. Harry Hodge, publisher of the renowned 'Notable British Trials', recruited her as his first woman editor, and she produced six in the series, starting with Madeleine Smith in 1927 and including Rattenbury and Stoner (1935) and finally Evans and Christie in 1957. She attended trials and went to crime venues to soak up atmosphere. 
A chance meeting in Burma, which led to Jesse hearing at first hand the story behind the British annexation of Upper Burma in 1885, gave rise to her most critically acclaimed novel. 'The Lacquer Lady' (1929) is a remarkable vision of life at the royal palace with its splendours and its horrors seen through the eyes of a young woman who becomes the favourite of the Burmese queen. It was the Book Society's choice for January 1930 and the book Jesse felt she should live by. 
Jesse's other well-known novel, 'A Pin to See the Peepshow' (1934), was based on the Thompson-Bywaters case. The hanging of Edith Jessie Thompson outraged her, as did injustice wherever it was found. She assiduously espoused the cause of women, firmly believing that women should hold any post of which they were capable. However, as early as 1919 she asserted: 'I am not, and never have been a feminist... never having been able to divide humanity into two different classes labelled 'men' and 'women'' (F. T. Jesse, 'Sword of Deborah', 1919, 7). In 1948 she and Harwood wrote a dramatized version of her novel, which led to a row with the lord chamberlain. 
In 1939 Jesse and Harwood began a correspondence with friends in America in which they reported on the political events and their personal experiences during the first two years of the Second World War. The letters were published as 'London Front' (1940) and 'While London Burns' (1942). Another war book was 'The Saga of the 'San Demetrio'' (1942), a classic and moving account of a tanker set ablaze by a German raider and then reboarded and salvaged by some of her crew. It was later filmed. 
There is compassion in Jesse's writing, even though she made so many of her fictional characters die. Her prose style is direct and engaging and her descriptive passages reveal a painter's eye. Her imagination was that of a poet, but always under control. She was very much a down-to-earth romantic. 
Jesse was delicately built with golden hair when young, had large grey-green eyes, and was renowned for an aura which captivated men and women alike. She personally deprecated her looks -- 'It was the beauty of youth and it did not last long' (Colenbrander, 65) -- but Rebecca West said she had never seen a lovelier girl and claimed her to be one of the three great beauties of the time, the only flaw her voice -- West called it hideous, others stentorian, though it improved as Jesse grew older (ibid., 78). She loved good conversation and regarded letter writing as a natural function, and her sense of humour illuminated both. She was generous with her time for her friends, but periodically crippling depression brought despair, distrust, the inability to work, and uncharacteristic unkindness, and even attempts at suicide. Three miscarriages and the strain of keeping her marriage a secret for several years -- her husband feared that he would lose access to his son should his married mistress hear of it -- also cast shadows over a relationship which nevertheless endured until Jesse's death. Jesse died of a heart attack on 6 August 1958 at her home, Pear Tree Cottage, 11 Melina Place, St John's Wood, London, and was cremated at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 39088


Hall, Augusta, Lady Llanover (1802-1896), promoter of the Welsh national revival, was born on 21 March 1802 at Ty Uchaf, Llanofer, Monmouthshire, the youngest daughter of Benjamin Waddington (1749-1828), landowner, and of Georgina Mary Ann (1771-1850), daughter of John Port of Ilam, co. Durham, and a great-niece of Mary Granville 
(Mrs Delany; 1700-1788)
. Of her five sisters, three died in infancy and another, Emilia, died in 1819 at the age of twenty-five. Her surviving sister, Frances Bunsen (1791-1876) ['see under 'Bunsen, Christian Karl Josias von] married Christian Karl Josias von Bunsen, Baron von Bunsen, Celtic scholar and later Prussian ambassador to Britain. Augusta and her sisters received a wide-ranging education at home under the direction of their accomplished mother. On 4 December 1823 she married Benjamin Hall (1802-1867) of Aber-carn and Hensol, industrialist and politician, son of Benjamin Hall (1778-1817), the industrialist. She became Lady Hall in 1838, when her husband was created a baronet; in 1859 he became Baron Llanover of Llanover and Abercarn. Both their sons died young, and their only surviving child, Augusta Charlotte Elizabeth, married John Arthur Edward Jones (Herbert) of Llan-arth Fawr in 1846. 
Although Lady Llanover was a talented editor and illustrator, and a well-connected and accomplished hostess within the London parliamentary circle, she is mainly remembered for her contribution as patron of the language, literature, and national institutions of Wales. Her interest in all things Welsh was fostered both by contact with the Welsh-speaking tenants of her father's estate, and through the influence of Lady Coffin Greenly of Titley Court, Herefordshire, a patron of the emerging national literary revival of the time. 
It was through Lady Greenly that Augusta Hall met the leading figures of this movement, and became an enthusiastic supporter. A vivacious and resolute personality, her reputation in Wales was established in 1834, when she won first prize for an essay at the Cardiff eisteddfod on the preservation of the language, literature, and traditional dress of Wales, and received the honour of ovate of the national Gorsedd of Bards. She subsequently adopted the pseudonym Gwenynen Gwent ('the bee of Gwent'). In the previous year, the Abergavenny Cymreigyddion Society, a Welsh literary society that was to play a major role in the revival of interest in Welsh and Celtic scholarship, had been established. Augusta Hall and her husband soon became its chief patrons. She also played an active role as patron of the Welsh Manuscript Society, formed under the auspices of the Cymreigyddion. She built up an extensive library at Llanofer and, in 1853, secured the manuscripts of Edward Williams (Iolo Morganwg), which were transferred to the National Library of Wales in 1916. She assisted and patronized Maria Jane Williams of Aberpergwm in preparing for publication a collection of Welsh airs, and supported Lady Charlotte Guest in her translation of the 'Mabinogion' legends. She was a patron of the Welsh Collegiate Institution at Llandovery, established in 1848, and subscribed to and supported the publication of many Welsh books, including the financing of the first periodical for women in Wales, 'Y Gymraes', in 1850. 
Llanover House, completed in 1837, became the centre of a wide cultural circle that encompassed many leading scholars of Wales and Europe. Poets and authors, antiquarians, musicians, prominent clergymen, politicians, diplomats, and members of the royal houses of Europe all spent time at Llanofer. The household was staffed by Welsh-speaking personnel, and the traditional Welsh seasonal celebrations held there became renowned. Llanofer estate was populated almost entirely by Welsh speakers, ensuring the survival of the language in this Anglicized area for another half-century or more. At Aber-carn, the school that Lady Llanover directly supervised taught through the medium of Welsh, and it was there also that she and her husband endowed an Anglican church, which was transferred to the Welsh Calvinistic Methodists in 1862 following the refusal of the vicar to conduct the services in the vernacular. At that time she personally supervised the preparation of a revised version of the 'Book of Common Prayer' for use at the new church. A fervent protestant, she later endowed other Welsh dissenting chapels at Llanofer and Aber-carn. Her interest in the continuation of Welsh traditions led her to employ a resident harpist and to establish a harp manufactory at Llanofer. She was also an ardent supporter of the Welsh woollen industry, which is reflected in her design for a Welsh national costume, the creation of which she is credited with. Her other interest was temperance, and it was owing to her influence that several public houses on the Aber-carn and Llanofer estates were converted into temperance inns. 
During the 1860s Lady Llanover published a major work, 'The Autobiography and Correspondence of Mrs Delany' (1861-2), and a housekeeping manual, 'Good Cookery... and Recipes Communicated by the Hermit of the Cell of St Govan' (1867), which contained her well-known illustrations of Welsh peasant dress. She also illustrated a children's book, 'The Paper People', by Mrs Shaw Lefevre, and, with others, illustrated 'The Literary Remains of the Reverend Thomas Price (Carnhuanwc)' (1854-5), edited by her friend Jane Williams (Ysgafell) of Talgarth. 
Lady Llanover survived her husband by over twenty-eight years. During her widowhood she spent some time in London and Bath, but lived mainly at Llanofer, where she continued to support Welsh literature and other Welsh causes. In her latter years and afterwards, some commentators ridiculed her rather eccentric zeal for Wales and the Welsh, yet at her death tributes were paid to her long-standing and active role as a leading patron of the Welsh literary and national movement. She died at Llanover House on 17 January 1896 and was buried there six days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 39089


Lowndes, Marie Adelaide Elizabeth Renee Julia Belloc (1868-1947), author, was born on 5 August 1868 at 11 George Street, Marylebone, London, the first of two children of Louis Marie Belloc (1830-1872), French barrister, and his wife, Elizabeth (Bessie) Rayner Parkes (1829-1925), great-granddaughter of Joseph Priestley, formerly editor of the 'English Woman's Journal' and an active British feminist, who had converted to Catholicism. Marie Belloc and her younger brother, Hilaire Belloc, were brought up as Catholics, spending most of their time at La Celle St Cloud, then a rural suburb of Paris. During the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 and the Paris commune of 1871 the family lived in London at 11 Great College Street, Westminster. Although their house in France had suffered badly from the war, they returned, and continued to spend much of the year there even after the death of Louis Belloc in August 1872. Both Marie and Hilaire considered themselves at least half French, and Marie always seemed to speak English with a slight French accent (although she was known as Mary to her brother and most of her friends). When not in France they lived with Mrs Eliza Parkes, Bessie's mother, at 17 Wimpole Street. However, in 1877 Mrs Parkes died, and shortly afterwards Bessie Belloc lost much of her money through an unfortunate investment, which forced the family to move to a cottage at Slindon in Sussex. 
Marie Belloc's life was thus subject to disruption; her formal education seems to have consisted of two years in a convent at Mayfield in Sussex, and even in old age she regretted her poor spelling of both French and English. Despite this, in her teens she decided to become a writer, and in 1888 Cardinal Manning, a family friend, introduced her to W. T. Stead, who accepted her as a contributor to the 'Pall Mall Gazette' under the tutelage of Edmund Garrett. Her first major assignment was collaborating on a guide to the 1889 Paris Exhibition. From then on she continued to write for the 'Pall Mall Gazette', among other periodicals, mainly on French matters, making numerous trips to France, and meeting many prominent French writers of the day, including Edmond de Goncourt, Paul Verlaine, and Jules Verne. In this way she contributed to the family income, helping among other things to subsidize Hilaire Belloc's education. On 9 January 1896 she married Frederick Sawney Archibald Lowndes (1867-1940), a staff writer on 'The Times'; they had one son and two daughters. 
Although she had a reasonably successful career as a journalist, Marie Belloc Lowndes's main ambition was to write books, especially fiction. Shortly after their marriage Frederick Lowndes was left a legacy of $2000 and suggested that they live on this while Marie tried her hand at writing. Her first two books had little success, but she soon began to make a name for herself. In the course of the next fifty years she published at least seventy books of various kinds, mainly under her own name, but for two works using the pseudonyms Philip Curtin and Elizabeth Rayner. Her books included biographies of royal persons, but more usually they were romances or crime novels. It was the last genre with which she came to be most associated, especially through her novels 'The Chink in the Armour' (1912) and most of all 'The Lodger', published in 1913, a story of a London couple in the 1880s who suspect that their lodger is Jack the Ripper; this has undergone various adaptations, as a stage play, several films (including an early Alfred Hitchcock), and an opera by Phyllis Tate. 'The Lodger' was a best-seller in its day, yet Marie Belloc Lowndes found herself constrained in the summer of 1914 to borrow $350 from her brother, Hilaire Belloc, to pay off an overdraft, a debt which seemed to rankle over the years, although in general brother and sister remained friends. 
In 1909 Marie Belloc Lowndes and her husband had set up house at 9 Barton Street, just round the corner from her childhood home at Great College Street. Even before her marriage she had enjoyed an active social life, among other things attending the Sunday 'at homes' of Constance and Oscar Wilde, and after her marriage her husband's unsocial working hours allowed her to lead, as she put it, 'the life of a happy widow'. During the day she wrote (with a quill pen), but from late afternoon she regularly went visiting or entertained. She made friends with (among many others) Henry James, Rhoda Broughton, and George Meredith, as well as Margot Asquith; during Herbert Asquith's premiership she was a frequent guest at 10 Downing Street. She also helped younger writers, encouraging among others Graham Greene, Hugh Walpole, Margaret Kennedy, E. M. Delafield, and L. P. Hartley. Like her mother, but unlike her brother, she was a strong supporter of women's rights, being president of the Women Writers' Suffrage League in 1913. Also, like many suffragists at this time, she was always a smart dresser, asserting that every woman ought to dress as far as she could afford to do so in the fashion. She was a frequent traveller, especially to the USA, to which she made annual visits in the 1930s, and where she had many admirers -- some unexpected, such as Ernest Hemingway, to whom her books had been recommended by Gertrude Stein. 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 Marie Belloc Lowndes and her husband (now retired) moved to 28 Crooked Billet, near Wimbledon Common, where her husband died in 1940, to her great grief. Henceforward she embarked on autobiography, producing four highly successful volumes: 'I, too, have Lived in Arcadia' (1941), 'Where Love and Friendship Dwelt' (1943), 'The Merry Wives of Westminster' (1946), and 'A Passing World' (1948). In 1942 she had moved back to Barton Street, this time to no. 1, and she spent the rest of her life between there and Parfetts House, Eversley Cross, Hampshire, where her daughter Lady Iddesleigh lived. She died at Parfetts House of stomach cancer on 14 November 1947. 


@@@@@


doc= 39090


Marsden, Dora (1882-1960), suffragette and philosopher, was born on 5 March 1882 at The Hey, Marsden, Yorkshire, the fourth of five children of Fred Marsden (1851-1913), woollen waste manufacturer, and his wife, Hannah (1852-1936), daughter of a millwright, William Henry Gartside, and his wife, Elizabeth. Fred Marsden's business was in decline and he emigrated with his eldest son to Philadelphia, USA, in 1890 leaving Hannah to support her children alone by returning to her maiden trade of seamstress. 
It was an inauspicious beginning for a woman the writer Rebecca West described as 'one of the most marvellous personalities the nation has ever produced' ('Time and Tide', 16 July 1926). Yet it partly explains Marsden's subsequent feminism and lifelong commitment to the ideal of economic independence for women. Marsden's escape from dependence was through education. A pupil teacher at thirteen who qualified fully at eighteen, she won a queen's scholarship to become an undergraduate at Owens College, Manchester, in 1900. 
In Manchester Marsden's political awareness developed as she came into contact with a range of feminists whose activity was beginning to coalesce around the struggle for women's suffrage. Influential in this group were Isabella Ford, Teresa Billington, Eva Gore-Booth, and Christabel Pankhurst, a fellow student at Owens College. Marsden graduated in 1903 with an upper second-class degree and embarked on a successful career in teaching which in 1908 culminated in her appointment as a headteacher of a teacher-training centre in nearby Altrincham. 
In spite of this remarkable professional success Marsden remained active in the Pankhursts' Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) which had been formed in Manchester in 1903. Wishing to devote herself full-time to the suffrage movement she resigned her post in March 1909. She became a paid organizer for the WSPU and quickly established a reputation for ingenuity and bravery -- a reputation enhanced by her own diminutive size and in West's view 'exquisite beauty' ('Time and Tide', 16 July 1926). She was arrested and imprisoned several times in 1909-10 and though there is no firm evidence she was forcibly fed, she suffered physically in this period. Following one particularly daring escapade involving the then home secretary, Winston Churchill, she nearly fell to her death from the top of the Empire Hall in Southport where she had perched overnight to evade the alleged impregnable security. She appeared on the front page of the 'Daily Mirror' (31 March 1909) looking especially waif-like and bedraggled following a long battle with the police. 
Yet in spite of her high profile both nationally and within the WSPU, the 'sweetest, gentlest and bravest of suffragettes' (Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence to Dora Marsden, 6 Oct 1909) became increasingly critical of the union. In common with a growing number of other activists, Marsden was disillusioned with Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst's leadership and resentful of their autocratic style. Dora Marsden also thought their political strategy, largely devoted to ever increasing acts of militancy, was flawed, and restricted feminist debate and analysis to the single pursuit of the vote. Having served the WSPU so well and bravely, she resigned in January 1910. 
Marsden resurfaced in November 1911 to publish and edit 'The Freewoman: a Weekly Feminist Review'. Though described by some as 'a disgusting publication... indecent, immoral and filthy' (Edgar Ansell to Dora Marsden, 14 July 1912), in its forthright discussions of sex, marriage, motherhood, and 'women's sphere', it stands out as the most outstanding feminist journal of the early twentieth century. It attracted articles from writers such as Rebecca West and H. G. Wells, and rates as Marsden's finest achievement ['see 'Freewoman circle]. 
However, Marsden began to retreat from feminism into an individualist philosophy inspired by the German anarchist Max Stirner, and after a short break, the paper became the 'New Freewoman: an Individualist Review' in June 1913, and following Stirner's 'The Ego and his Own', 'The Egoist' in January 1914. 
As Marsden concentrated on her philosophical analysis of egoism, the literary content of the paper grew. Indeed, some commentators claim that in attracting such talents as West, Wells, Ezra Pound, and others to the 'New Freewoman' and 'The Egoist', Marsden became a seminal figure in the development of imagism and early modern British and American literature. Though this is contentious, Marsden was, however, certainly involved in the career of the Irish writer James Joyce. She published in serial form Joyce's 'Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man' in 1914 and was later willing to defend his 'Ulysses'. One instalment of this then highly controversial work appeared in the January-February 1919 issue. 
By 1912 Marsden was living in Southport, eventually setting up a permanent home with her mother, Hannah, and Grace Jardine, an active suffragette and worker on 'The Freewoman'. Marsden never married but enjoyed close friendships with a number of women including Jardine, Rona Robinson, and Mary Gawthorpe. Both Rona Robinson, who taught with Marsden in Altrincham, and Mary Gawthorpe, were active in the WSPU and became fervent supporters of 'The Freewoman'. Marsden was close to her mother throughout her life and she lived with her from this time until her death in 1936. 
From 1913 onwards Marsden did not take part in any formal political activity. During the war she occasionally attacked both jingoism and pacifism from an individualist, Stirnerian viewpoint in 'The Egoist' and could not resist the odd scathing attack on the Pankhursts. In isolation, she concentrated on developing her philosophical work. 'The Egoist' collapsed in December 1919 and Dora Marsden moved to an aptly named cottage, Seldom Seen, in the Lake District the following year. She continued to work on her 'magnum opus' which had become more obscure, including proposed volumes on time, space, and religion. She became increasingly reclusive and delusionary and her mental and physical health began to suffer. However, with the generous help of her long-standing friend and benefactor Harriet Shaw Weaver (who had supported her financially since 1913), two volumes, 'The Definition of the Godhead' (1928) and 'Mysteries of Christianity' (1930), were published. As a result of their poor reception and her isolation Marsden suffered a nervous breakdown in 1934 and she attempted suicide in 1935. Diagnosed as suffering from psychotic depression, she became a patient at Crichton Royal Hospital, Dumfries, where she remained until her death on 13 December 1960. She was buried in Dumfries high cemetery on 16 December. Again with Weaver's help one further slim extract of her previous work, 'The Philosophy of Time', was published in 1955. 
Marsden died a lonely and forgotten figure. It was an ignominious end for a 'brave and beautiful spirit' (Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence to Dora Marsden, 6 Oct 1909) whose prime importance lies in her remarkable contribution to suffragism and early twentieth-century feminism, but whose later life serves as a warning of the perils of political and personal individualism and isolation. 


@@@@@


doc= 39091


Normanton, Helena Florence (1882-1957), barrister and feminist campaigner, was born on 14 December 1882 in London, the eldest of two daughters of William Alexander Normanton (1853-1886), pianoforte manufacturer, and his wife, Jane Amelia (1850-1900), daughter of Thomas Williams Marshall and his wife, Harriet. When Helena was aged four, her father was found dead in mysterious circumstances with a broken neck in a railway tunnel. Her mother sought respectable ways to support her daughters, letting rooms of the family home at 30 Willington Street, Woolwich, to the wives of officers, but soon moved to Brighton where she ran a small general (grocery) store and later turned the family home at 4 Clifton Place into a modest boarding-house. 
Helena Normanton excelled at school and in 1896 won a scholarship to York Place Science School in Brighton, the forerunner of Varndean School for Girls. In July 1900 she left as a pupil teacher, and after her mother's death she helped to run the family's boarding-house before leaving Brighton to accept a place at a teachers' training college at Edge Hill, Liverpool (1903-5). She lectured, predominantly in history, at both Glasgow and London universities, and was for a time tutor to the sons of the baron de Forest, a Liberal MP. 
During the period up to 1918 Helena Normanton appears to have combined a teaching career with a developing interest in the position of women, becoming a prolific writer and public speaker on feminist issues, and furthering her own education, reading for a history degree at London University (passing with first-class honours), and holding a diploma in French language, literature, and history from Dijon University. Described by her niece Elsie Cannon as a 'suffragette -- though not of the ultra-militant kind', she was active in the campaign to extend the franchise to women. Perhaps drawing on her own childhood experiences she recognized that many women and children could not rely, as society then expected, on a morally responsible male capable of providing financial security. On 1914 she published a pamphlet entitled 'Sex Differentiation in Salary' arguing for equal pay for equal work. On the front cover a 'Special War Notice' challenged readers to consider the plight of female headed households: 'During and after a war, many soldiers' wives and widows become the breadwinners for families. Should they be paid according to their sex or their work?' Pamphlets advertising public meetings organized by the Women's Freedom League throughout 1919 list Helena Normanton as a speaker and she was also an ardent and practical supporter of the Indian National Congress and editor of its London-based organ 'India' (1918-20). 
In the preface to her book 'Everyday Law for Women' (1932) Normanton wrote that she conceived the ambition of becoming a barrister at the age of twelve during a visit to a lawyer with her mother. Her first application to be admitted to the Middle Temple, in 1918, was presented immediately after the enfranchisement of women became law but was unanimously refused. Undeterred, and supported by the Women's Freedom League, she lodged a petition against the benchers' decision at the House of Lords. However, before the date fixed for its hearing, the 'Sex Disqualification (Removal) Bill' (1919) was introduced which allowed women entry to the legal profession; the press attributed its enactment in large part to her campaign. On Christmas eve 1919, within forty-eight hours of the passing of the new act, she made a second application to the Middle Temple, and was successful. She became the first woman to be admitted to the Middle Temple as a student to the bar. Unusually, she took the three compulsory parts of the bar examination simultaneously, passing with first-class marks in one part and second-class marks in the other two. She was called to the bar on 17 November 1922, a few months after Ivy Williams had become the first woman to do so. 
On 26 October 1921, while a bar student, Helena Normanton married Gavin Bowman Watson Clark (1873-1948), son of the Scottish politician Gavin Brown Clark, and her application to retain her maiden name after her marriage attracted considerable public interest. Helena deplored the loss of a woman's identity on marriage and its disadvantageous legal results. While she believed in the respectability of retaining the title Mrs she also wished to maintain continuity of identity in her professional career. She was the first married British woman to be issued a passport in her maiden name (1924) and also fought for the right of women who married foreigners to retain their British nationality. Later in life she quipped, 'Anne Boleyn did not change her name even though she married the King. He at least had the decency to leave her with her own name even though he took her head' ('Yorkshire Post', 26 March 1954). The couple had no children. 
Despite the many barriers Helena forged a successful legal career that included some notable 'firsts'. She was the first woman to obtain a divorce for a client and to lead the prosecution in a murder trial (May 1948). She was the first female counsel in cases in the High Court of Justice (1922), the Old Bailey (1924), and the London sessions (1926). In a breach of promise case she obtained for her client the highest damages in such a case obtained by a woman up to that date -- $1250 and costs. In 1925 she became the first woman to conduct a case in the United States, appearing in the test case in which a married woman's right to retain her maiden name was confirmed. In 1949, with Rose Heilbron, she became the first female king's counsel in England and Wales. 
Despite these achievements, Normanton felt betrayed by members of the legal profession who fabricated myths that were damaging to her career. Charges of advertising (forbidden by legal etiquette) were made against her, as the notoriety she had gained from her writing, public speaking, and feminist activities ensured that as one of the first women to be admitted to the bar she was a focus of (unwanted) attention. Believing that these rumours had led to the rejection of her application to practise on the western circuit, in April 1923 she requested the bar council to hold a full inquiry into whether she had ever advertised herself. She called attention to the way in which male barristers used their relatives as vehicles for self-promotion, and supplied documents indicating the great trouble she had taken in trying to minimize public scrutiny. She curtailed her public speaking engagements, forfeited a handsome income writing for the daily press, and resigned from all the organizations and committees of which she was then a member. No notification of the outcome of the inquiry was given to her and she continued to complain of the inequity of treatment of male and female barristers by the bar council. A further incident arose in 1933 when she was referred to in the press as the 'senior practising woman barrister in England'; the general council of the bar urged her to make clear that she was 'in no way responsible for the description'. 
Conscious of the difficulties women faced, Normanton did what she could to support other women pursuing a legal career. Of particular importance was her role as a mentor and sponsor to female students whom she accepted into her chambers. Women still found it difficult to obtain positions in chambers, as male barristers often refused to sponsor them. She protested that this informal segregation of men and women seriously disadvantaged women who were denied the opportunity to develop contacts that would be important for the progression of their career. 
Normanton's relatively low earnings from the law compelled her to supplement her income. She let rooms in her house in Mecklenburgh Square, Bloomsbury, and advised enquirers of her need to charge fees 'on the rare occasions when I in fact accept speaking engagements' (Helena Florence Normanton Archive). Under the pseudonym Cowdray Browne she published 'Oliver Quendon's First Case' in 1927, a romantic detective novel. A contributor to the thirteenth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' she also published two books on famous cases, 'The Trial of Norman Thorne' (1929) and 'The Trial of Alfred Arthur Rouse' (1931). She wrote several titles published under the 'Books of Our Time' series and numerous articles and studies on topics as diverse as Shakespeare, buying a house, and (following Edward VIII's abdication) a study on the succession to the throne. 
Between the wars Helena's experience of the English divorce courts led her to reflect on perceived deficiencies of the current statute. She fought hard to equalize and extend the grounds on which a petition of divorce could be made between husband and wife. However, her desire was not to challenge the sanctity of marriage but rather to standardize what she termed in 1934 'irregular' partnerships ('Huddersfield Daily Examiner', 3 Oct 1934). She argued that the tremendous cost of divorce and limited grounds on which a petition could be filed ensured separated partners could not divorce but remained legally married while they formed separate unions unrecognized by the state and to which illegitimate children were often born. She highlighted how difficult it was to maintain the ideal of a single monogamous marriage for life where couples were separated by drunkenness, imprisonment, or psychiatric confinement. At the annual meeting of the National Council of Women in October 1934, her resolution to reform matrimonial law was strongly opposed by the Mothers' Union, and was passed only with the addition of a clause disallowing divorce during the first five years of marriage. She publicly declared that its inclusion represented a 'cowardly capitulation to reactionary ecclesiastics, who would rather never see young people free to marry' (Helena Normanton Archive). In 1938 she resigned the chairmanship of the Married Persons Income Tax Reform Council, frustrated with those who failed to keep pace with her, and she urged women to 'press forward to open the Church, the Stock Exchange, the House of Lords, the Diplomatic and Consular Services, the Press Gallery in the House of Commons, and the Overseas Civil Services to women'. Her historical reading convinced her that the limitations and restrictions placed on women of her day were a recent phenomenon, and she referred to women's past achievements in her arguments supporting the extension of women's rights. 
Normanton's resignation as president of the Married Women's Association over the submissions which she presented on the association's behalf to the royal commission on marriage and divorce in 1952 highlighted the complexity of feminist responses to these questions. She proposed that husband and wife should have a fairer financial partnership, principally effected by 'paying' a wife an allowance from the family income voluntarily agreed on between the spouses or adjudicated by the courts, and she proposed that wives who were guilty of 'wilfully negligent housekeeping should become amenable to law whether by way of remedial training or penalty' ('Manchester Guardian', 25 Nov 1952). The Married Women's Association complained that the memorandum had been submitted to the royal commission by her 'without previous circulation to executive or members'. The association felt Helena's proposal of a housekeeping allowance for wives equated to 'pocket money given to a child', particularly as the housekeeping money was to remain the absolute property of the husband. It was felt to represent a complete departure from the association's policy of standing for a 'true partnership in marriage based on joint responsibility and mutual aid'. In a scathing attack the association stated 'this is a middle-class Victorian approach to the problem. The underlying attitude in this evidence is that a wife is an employed subordinate, and not a partner' ('Manchester Daily Dispatch', 3 April 1952). Helena, who argued that neither spouse was entitled to the resources of the other, felt the association's proposal to pool the resources of husband and wife was 'nonsensical rubbish', which negated the work of previous feminists in obtaining the 'Married Women's Property Acts' and was thus 'dangerous for a wife... and unfair to the husband' ('Beckenham Advertiser', 26 Nov 1952). She withdrew the report and founded a breakaway organization, the Council of Married Women, with other former senior members of the Married Women's Association. However, the legislation eventually enacted followed from the stance of the association: the principle of marriage as a partnership was maintained and the complementary and equally necessary contributions of both husband and wife were recognized in the legal joint ownership of the matrimonial home and the incomes of both spouses. 
The controversy surrounding this issue highlights how Helena's strong notion of social duty and responsibility and her desire to equalize relationships between the sexes could combine to support a position which some women perceived as anti-feminist. While seeking to ensure wives were protected from husbands whose sense of duty did not extend to providing adequately for partners whose primary occupation was maintaining the family, she also felt wives who misappropriated funds should be admonished or punished. She was concerned that without maintaining the separation of property between husbands and wives, feminist agitation and protest would be lost as women, who were the prime instigators of such action, would find themselves without access to the tremendous amount of money required to finance particular protests ('Beckenham Journal', 28 Nov 1953). 
Among her various interests, Normanton founded the Magna Carta Society and served as its honorary secretary for many years (1921-53). She learned Italian and paid several visits to the country, meeting Mussolini in 1935. After the Second World War she remained active in feminist circles as a member of the Six Point Group and the Council of Professional Women. Her irrepressible activism continued and, maintaining her long standing pacifist beliefs, in 1953, aged seventy, she marched in a women's demonstration against the atom bomb. 
Although she lived in Bloomsbury with her husband, Helena Normanton maintained her links with the Brighton area. She was a passionate supporter of the proposed university for Sussex, making the first donation to the Sussex University appeal in 1956; she followed this gift of $5 with a larger donation of $45 and bequeathed the capital of her trust to the university. She requested that part of the university be named after her 'because I was the first subscriber to the project and because I make this gift in gratitude for all that Brighton did to educate me when I was left an orphan' (last will and testament). 
In her lifetime of activism, Helena Normanton challenged the social norms of her generation while simultaneously being careful to conform to strict etiquette and make the most of feminine wiles. During her tour of America in 1925 a reporter for 'The World' (7 January) commented: 'Mrs. Normanton is tall and stout of build. She is in every respect the typical matron. Distinctly feminine in appearance and manner and also in inclination, as was proved when she left the group of reporters cooling their heels in her hotel while she walked up and down Fifth Avenue 'to look at the shops'.' She was remembered by close relatives as an imposing character who dressed in black from head to toe. Her niece Elsie Cannon wrote of her: 'controversy often surrounded Helena Normanton, sometimes, I fancy, deliberately fostered to attract attention for some cause for which she was fighting, or perhaps to stimulate demand for her articles and talk... life near her could on occasion be like having a volcano as a neighbour, but it's quite true, it wasn't dull!' She was careful to ensure that she was correctly known as the first female barrister 'to practise' in England, and not as the first female barrister. The distinction was important to her, having suffered from the charges of self-promotion made against her throughout her long and successful career. She died in a nursing home at 44 Sydenham Hill, Sydenham, London, on 14 October 1957, and was buried, after cremation, with her husband in Ovingdean churchyard, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 39092


Sieff, Rebecca Dora (1890-1966), feminist and Zionist, was born on 23 February 1890 at 38 Copenhagen Street, Leeds, the eldest daughter of Michael Marks (1859-1907), founder of the Marks and Spencer retailing group, and his wife, Hannah Cohen. At the time of Rebecca's birth her mother, being illiterate, inscribed the birth certificate with a tiny cross. There was one son, Simon, born two years before Rebecca, who was always destined to take over the business, and three younger sisters. In 1894 the family settled in Manchester, where Michael Marks rented his first high-street shop. By this time he had joined forces with Tom Spencer, his cashier, and in 1903 the firm of Marks and Spencer Ltd was registered. 
As the business prospered Rebecca was able to attend Manchester High School for Girls, a non-denominational school of high academic standing which encouraged women's higher education. In 1908 she enrolled to study English literature at Manchester University and on 15 June 1910, aged twenty, married 21-year-old Israel Moses Sieff (1889-1972) -- an economics graduate from Manchester University and also the son of a Lithuanian refugee pedlar -- on the roof of Manchester's Midland Hotel. They had three sons and a daughter. 
Manchester's spectacular growth in the nineteenth century as a centre for business, commerce, and the chemical industry attracted enormous Jewish settlement as the great wave of Russian pogroms broke out. In the years before the First World War key friendships were made between Chaim Weizmann, a brilliant young scientist appointed reader in chemistry at Manchester University, his wife, Vera, and C. P. Scott, editor of the 'Manchester Guardian'. At the same time as Weizmann won the sympathetic ear of politicians such as Winston Churchill, David Lloyd George, and Arthur James Balfour, he was forging close friendships with the Sieff and Marks families, who by this time had sufficient financial resources and business skills to help promote his Zionist ideas. 
Although there were, from at least 1909, various women's groups and individuals working for the welfare of women and girls in Palestine, Rebecca Sieff took the lead in the struggle to weld them into one force which would ultimately be active in the practical work of building the state of Israel. Her approach to the Zionist movement was much influenced by what she witnessed in the suffragette movement, for she campaigned also for votes for women, equal pay and working conditions, equality of opportunity within trades and professions, and for the economic independence of women. Although the relationship with the English Zionist Federation (EZF) was always slightly uneasy as some felt that the splitting away of the female workers could only weaken the whole, Rebecca was adamant that for women to take part on an equal basis they must organize and work as women and not as an adjunct to the men's movement. 
In early 1919 Sieff, together with Vera Weizmann, Olga Alman, and Romana Goodman, finally persuaded the EZF leadership to allow the formation of a separate women's federation. Sieff was elected their first president, and in July 1920, following her first visit to Palestine, the Women's International Zionist Organisation (WIZO) was formed in London 'to promote the welfare of women and children in Palestine and to carry out specific works in the reconstruction of Palestine', according to the words of the official resolution. 
In 1926 Israel and Rebecca Sieff and their four children -- Michael, Marcus, Daniel, and Judith -- moved to London, where Rebecca became well known as an elegant society hostess organizing balls and galas for Jewish and non-Jewish events. In 1933, when Hitler came to power in Germany, she immediately established the women's appeal committee of the central British fund to rescue thousands of women and children from Nazi-dominated Europe. But that year personal tragedy struck too when their son Daniel died. The family founded a scientific research institute in his honour, known today as the Weizmann Institute of Science at Rehovot, Israel. During the 1930s Sieff travelled around the world for Zionist and anti-Nazi causes but she also campaigned vigorously for fuller parliamentary representation of women via the Women for Westminster group, which she founded, as well as demanding equal compensation for civilian women injured in bombing, equal rights in welfare and legal status. 
In June 1946 Sieff headed a march to Downing Street of 200 women protesting against the British government's raid on the Jewish Agency's office in Jerusalem. In September she spent time with holocaust survivors still living in a displaced persons' camp at Bergen-Belsen and two months later, in an impassioned speech to the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine, demanded both the rescue of Jews stranded in displaced persons' camps and the immediate establishment of the Jewish state. 
Following the proclamation of Israeli independence in 1948, Rebecca Sieff made Israel her permanent home. The years after independence demanded great flexibility within WIZO, of which she had been world president since 1920, as waves of immigrants flooded the new country and the organization placed more emphasis on traditionally 'female' issues, especially the care of home and family, while Sieff continued to fight for women's political rights. 
In 1956 a bomb at Sieff's home in Tel Mond killed her gardener, but she was unhurt. In 1960 the British government appointed her an OBE and, three years later, when she resigned her executive position in WIZO, she was appointed honorary life president. She died at the Ichilov Hospital, Tel Aviv, Israel, on 8 January 1966, a few days after her husband, Israel, had been created a life peer. She was buried on 10 January at Tel Mond. 
Sieff's level of commitment and her concentration on the struggle for women's rights in a male-dominated Zionist movement marked her out from the start among Zionist philanthropists. Yet, in common with many nineteenth-century pioneers of women's rights, while she promoted the centrality of the family in women's lives, her many involvements inevitably took her away from her own family for long periods. 


@@@@@


doc= 39093


Barking, Clemence of (fl. 1163-c.1200), Benedictine nun and hagiographer, of Barking Abbey, was responsible for an Anglo-Norman life of St Catherine of Alexandria which is the only life of this saint known to have been written by a woman in medieval Britain. Of Clemence's own life as much or as little is known as of that of her famous contemporary Marie de France ('fl'. 1154-1189): both women name themselves in their texts, and this, together with the texts themselves, is the basis for knowledge of them. The earliest extant manuscript of Clemence's 'La vie de Sainte Catherine' dates from 'c'.1200. A learned woman at Barking Abbey in this period is likely to have been from noble or at least gentry stock, and although unprofessed women sometimes spent time in such convents, Clemence, on her own testimony, was a nun. She chose a virgin martyr and patron saint of female learning as the subject of the life for which she claimed authorship, and the 'Vie de Sainte Catherine' emphasizes the superiority of the saint's life as bride of Christ to that of the married life of the emperor Maxentius's wife (whom Catherine converts). 
Learning among the women of Barking is witnessed in the seventh century and from the tenth century to the dissolution, making the abbey perhaps the longest-lived, albeit not continuously recorded, institutional centre of literary culture for women in British history. Clemence's Latin, like that of some other women at Barking in the twelfth century, seems to have been good: her life of Catherine is a skilful translation from the most ornate and learned of the Latin lives of St Catherine (the longer, so-called 'vulgate' version). The translation was probably made for a double audience: Clemence names herself as the translator and says that her poem was undertaken 'for love of Barking' (Clemence of Barking, verses 2690-2), but within the poem she also addresses the audience as 'segnurs' (ibid., verse 1159). This suggests that in addition to the nuns of Barking and, perhaps, other conventual audiences, Clemence had a court audience in mind. As one of the old Benedictine royal nunneries, Barking was a cultivated and aristocratic milieu which remained closely connected with the Anglo-Norman court. An Anglo-Norman verse life of Edward the Confessor, underlining both his virgin sanctity and the legitimacy of the Anglo-Norman succession, was produced by an anonymous nun of Barking between 1163 and 1189. Clemence has been thought, though not proven, to have been its composer. 

'La vie de Sainte Catherine' is written in accomplished Anglo-Norman octosyllabics, and draws on liturgical, devotional, and romance registers in elaborating its source material. The poem alludes extensively to the Anglo-Norman 'Tristan' as part of its comparison of courtly and marital love with the love experienced by the celibate woman as a bride of Christ. It may also owe something to Anselm's thought on God's nature and power. 
An elegant and powerful hagiography, the poem is of particular value as a twelfth-century woman writer's account of the emotional and intellectual value of a life vowed to virginity. In addition to extended treatment of Catherine's debate with fifty pagan philosophers, the life contains much narratorial commentary and reflection. Like all medieval women and medieval laymen, enclosed nuns were forbidden preaching (and many other forms of public speaking such as university 'disputatio'), but Clemence used the hagiographic legend as a vehicle for addressing the concerns of her own community and of the society in which she lived. 
The manuscript evidence suggests that her voice, in so far as it is represented by her 'Vie de Sainte Catherine', did not go unheard. While some Anglo-Norman hagiography survives only in a single holograph, Clemence's text is extant in three manuscripts (two insular, one continental), and it is also quoted in a large insular preaching compilation of the late thirteenth or fourteenth century. The life also has echoes and analogies in other Anglo-Norman hagiographic works, though the significance of these textual connections is not yet fully established. The possibilities of mutual influence between Clemence and the other named women writers of post-conquest Britain -- Marie de France; Marie, who may have been a nun of Chatteris, author of the Anglo-Norman life of St AEthelthryth; the Marie who wrote the 'Espurgatoire Seint Patrice'; and the writer of the Barking 'Edouard', if this was not Clemence herself -- also have yet to be fully investigated. 


@@@@@


doc= 39096


Wilton, Eve of (c.1058-c.1125), Benedictine nun and anchoress, was the daughter of a Danish father and a Lotharingian mother. They gave her to Wilton Abbey, Wiltshire, when she was a child of about seven, in 1065. She remained there until 'c'.1080, when she left to become a hermit in France. A treatise in the form of a letter, 'Liber confortatorius' ('Book of comfort'), written to her a few years after her departure by Goscelin of St Bertin, a friend and former mentor, provides relatively detailed information both about Eve and about Goscelin's feelings for her. 
It was from Wilton's cloister that Eve was able to witness the end of England as an Anglo-Saxon kingdom. Wilton was a foundation closely associated with the royal house of Wessex, heavily patronized in Eve's time by Queen Edith (died 1075) herself. Just after her reception Eve, together with Goscelin, was present at the dedication of a new church built at the instigation of the queen in honour of the earlier royal -- and sainted -- Edith (died 984x7). The next year brought the Norman conquest. Thereafter Goscelin seems to have visited Wilton less often, but it seems as if he and Eve kept in touch through the occasional meeting and through letter-writing. Then, 'c'.1080, without any warning -- or so Goscelin complained -- Eve left Wilton to become a recluse at St Laurent de Tertre in Angers. 
In Angers, Eve lived in a tiny 8 foot cell. Goscelin's letter is at the same time a lament for the loss he feels he has suffered by her decision to leave England, and an occasion for devising an intensive reading programme for her so that the devil will not get the better of her in her new surroundings. In her cell Eve has only a small window through which to communicate with the outside world; through this are to be passed tomes such as Augustine's 'Confessions' and the 'City of God', Boethius' 'Consolation of Philosophy', the histories of Eusebius and Orosius. The list stands as a corrective to the frequently held assumption that after the golden age of double monasteries in the eighth century educational attainments among female religious became negligible. 
Eve died 'c'.1125. A poem celebrating her life by the poet Hilary relies heavily for its description of Eve's virtues on hagiographical topoi but it also adds a new chapter to her life of which Goscelin, perhaps, never knew. At some point Eve left Angers, and moved to St Eutrope near the priory of Leviere to live with a former monk of Vendome, Hervey. The new monastic movements of the twelfth century did much to encourage such spiritual partnerships, though they still caused the raising of many an eyebrow. However, in Hilary's words, Eve and Hervey were considered to share 'a worthy and pleasing companionship' ('Hilarii versus et ludi', 51). A letter of 1102 from Geoffrey, abbot of Vendome, to Eve and Hervey also gives their relationship his blessing: 'who is perfect in love, let them not fear' ('1 John' 4: 18). 


@@@@@


doc= 39101


Alfonsi, Petrus (fl. 1106-1126), scholar and translator of scientific works, was born in northern Spain, to Jewish parents. He was baptized a Christian on 29 June 1106 in Huesca, Aragon, with the names of the apostle on whose feast day the baptism took place and of his godfather, Alfonso I of Aragon ('r'. 1104-34). To his contemporaries he was sometimes known as Petrus Ebreus, but Petrus Alfonsi and Petrus Alfonsus are the forms of his name commonly found in modern scholarship, though the manuscripts favour Alfunsus, Anfulsus, Anfusus, or Anfus (all with -f- or -ph-) and also Amdefunsus, for the second element. Until his baptism, according to his own testimony and that of another Jewish scholar from Huesca, Abraham bar Hiyya, Alfonsi had been a prominent member of the Jewish community of Huesca, a city which, until its capture in 1096, had been in Islamic territory. His educational and cultural background, therefore, was in secular sciences of ultimately Greek origin, but read in Arabic, and in the Hebrew scriptures. It was this background that put him in a unique position to impart the knowledge of Arabic science to a European audience. Although he addresses 'all the Peripatetics in France' in a letter in which he advertises his teaching skills, the only country in which his presence is attested is England. The belief that he was 'a doctor of king Henry I of England' rests on the evidence of just one fourteenth-century manuscript of his 'Disciplina clericalis' (CUL, MS Ii.6.11). More secure is the evidence of a work on the times when the moon's orbit crosses that of the sun, which is entitled 'The opinion of Peter the Hebrew, surnamed Anphus, concerning the Dragon, which the lord Walcher, prior of the church of Malvern translated into Latin', and which refers in its text to conversations between Alfonsi and Walcher (Bodl. Oxf., MS Auct. F.1.9, fol. 96). 
Prior Walcher died in 1135 and the presence of Alfonsi in the west country in the years before that date might have been a contributing factor to the remarkable efflorescence of Arabic science in that region from the 1120s onwards. One example of this is the knowledge (for the first time in the Latin West) of a complete set of astronomical tables. The mid-ninth-century tables ('Zij') of al-Khwarizmi were translated by Alfonsi and included the starting date (or radix) of 1 October 1116. No integral version of Alfonsi's translation appears to have survived, for at an early date some chapters from a version by Adelard of Bath were added to, or replaced, Alfonsi's canons (rules for using the tables). Adelard's own version of the tables (without Alfonsi's chapters) includes the date 1126, and it is clear that the one version is closely related to the other, though this relationship is obscured by the several variant versions given by the manuscripts. In any case, these versions bear witness to a close association between Alfonsi and Adelard in the west country (where Adelard was writing) and the lively interest in astronomy in that area: probably Alfonsi was one of the 'magistri' in 'Arabum studia' to whom Adelard expresses his debt. It is possible that he subsequently returned to Spain, but so far it has proved impossible to identify Alfonsi with any certainty in Iberian records. 
Petrus Alfonsi wrote two major literary works. The first is the 'Dialogi', a set of twelve conversations between Alfonsi's new Christian self and his old Jewish self, Moses, in which his purpose is to justify his conversion to Christianity. His criticisms of Judaism are backed up by copious references to the 'Talmud' and the work quickly became, and remained, a popular work for Christian apologists and missionaries dealing with Judaism, and, through its description of Jewish mystical ideas, had an influence on Joachism and the Christian cabbala. But the 'Dialogi' also explores what Islam has to offer (here Alfonsi uses the Arabic text of the 'Apologia' of Pseudo-al-Kindi, which was later to be translated by Pedro de Toledo) and digresses quite widely, and explicitly, on medical, astronomical, and cosmological topics. The second work is the 'Disciplina clericalis', an equally popular collection of proverbs, exemplary tales, and animal fables, loosely strung together to provide an education for a 'gentleman' (including table manners), and taken from Arabic and Hebrew sources. This was translated into European vernaculars several times and influenced Boccaccio and Chaucer. 
The digressions in the 'Dialogi' point to Alfonsi's principal interest in medicine and astronomy. No medical work of his survives and it is rather as a teacher of astronomy that he advertises himself in his letter to the peripatetics of France. Here he claims astronomy as the culmination of the seven liberal arts, which he classifies differently from Boethius and the main Latin tradition, throwing out grammar and logic and substituting medicine and necromancy. He gives as an example of his competence in astronomy a portion of his introduction to the astronomical tables of al-Khwarizmi. 
Other works have been attributed to Petrus Alfonsi. One which was probably correctly attributed, but is no longer extant, is 'three books of dialogues of which the first is about the seven arts, the second about religions, [religious] laws and faiths, and the third about man's advantage ['humanum proficuum']', mentioned in the late fourteenth-century 'Catalogus scriptorum ecclesiae' of Henry Kirkestede (R. H. Rouse, ed., 'Catalogus de libris authenticis et apocryphis', PhD diss., Cornell University, 1963, 221). The third book is also cited by Peter of Cornwall in the late twelfth century. But the 'Liber Marii de elementis', whose author refers to a book of his own called 'De proficuo humano', is probably not by Alfonsi, but rather by the Marius Salernitanus who was a teacher of Gottfried of Viterbo (died 1192x1200). Similarly the 'Liber ysagogarum Alchorismi in artem astronomicam', attributed in one manuscript to 'magister A' and featuring the table of eras from Alfonsi's translation of al-Khwarizmi's 'Zij', is probably not by Alfonsi but rather by another Jewish scholar, Avendauth. 
In spite of strenuously denying his Jewishness in the 'Dialogi', Alfonsi had the typical interests of Jewish scholars of his time: in theology on the one hand, and in astronomy, astrology, and other mathematical topics on the other. By being one of the first Jewish scholars to transfer this knowledge into a Christian context, he has an important place in the history of culture. 


@@@@@


doc= 39103


Wulfric of Haselbury (c.1090-1154/5), priest and hermit, spent much of his life enclosed in a cell at Haselbury Plucknett (Somerset), where he lived a life of great austerity and received many visitors, including kings and queens. 
Perhaps 'c'.1090, Wulfric was born to English parents of middling social rank at Compton Martin (Somerset), a village some 9 miles from Bristol, the lord of which was William FitzWalter. Having been ordained priest, Wulfric first ministered at Deverill, near Warminster (Wiltshire), where he led a worldly life and spent much time in hunting and hawking, until a chance encounter with a beggar converted him to a stricter life. William FitzWalter thereafter recalled him to be parish priest at Compton Martin. After a few years there, about 1125 William enabled him to settle as an anchorite at the parish church of Haselbury Plucknett, a village of which he was also lord, some 28 miles to the south. For the rest of his life, Wulfric occupied a cell on the north side of the chancel; he had a servant to attend to his needs. He was not the parish priest, but for the most part he co-operated amicably with the married clerk, Brictric, who had cure of souls. 
Wulfric was not inducted into his cell, as would have been customary, by the bishop of Bath, then Godfrey; but he obeyed the directions of Godfrey's successor, Robert. He maintained close touch with the nearby Cluniac priory at Montacute which daily supplied him with food. Spiritually, he held the Cistercians in high regard and he especially revered the community at Ford in the east of Devon (now in Dorset); but he was not well disposed towards the Augustinian canons. His own way of life was rigorously austere. He wore a hair shirt which he soon covered with a hauberk of chain mail supplied by William FitzWalter. He undertook prolonged vigils and fasts, and he frequently immersed himself in cold water. He engaged in bookbinding and oversaw the making of church vestments. 
Wulfric became famous for his miracles and gift of prophecy. Unlike Brictric, he was almost certainly bilingual in English and French. His most interesting contacts were with Anglo-Norman royalty. A courtier of Henry I, Drogo de Munci, was stricken with fits for suggesting the seizure of money from Wulfric's cell; a visit by Henry and his queen, Adeliza, led to Wulfric's healing of Drogo. Wulfric later prophesied that Henry's crossing of the English Channel in 1133 would be the last that he would make alive; upon learning in 1135 that this had come true, Wulfric declared that Henry would find mercy with the Lord, 'because in his life he had striven for peace and justice, and had built the Lord's house at Reading [Reading Abbey] with regal magnificence' ('Wulfric of Haselbury', ed. M. Bell, 116-17). Before Stephen succeeded, he and his brother Henry, bishop of Winchester, visited Wulfric, who prophetically hailed Stephen as king. Wulfric also foretold the disturbances that would follow a divided succession, including Stephen's captivity at Lincoln in 1141. Later in his reign, Stephen visited Wulfric, who reproved him but promised that he would reign for as long as he lived. He also censured the haughtiness of Stephen's queen, Matilda, who had snubbed at court William FitzWalter's wife. Wulfric charged the future Henry II 12's'. for his followers' depredations at his cell and foretold that Henry would not reign during Stephen's natural life. Another prophecy was of the failure of the second crusade. 
Wulfric died on 20 February, probably in 1154 but possibly in 1155; the monks of Montacute and Ford contended for his body, but Robert, bishop of Bath, insisted upon his wish to be buried in his cell. His body was soon twice translated to places in the chancel of the church. His cult developed somewhat slowly, but throughout the latter middle ages Haselbury became a place of pilgrimage. Henry of Huntingdon was the first chronicler to refer to Wulfric, but practically all that is known about him comes from a life written 'c'.1184 by John, prior and later abbot of Ford. Wulfric's career illustrates how, when Englishmen were largely debarred from normal ecclesiastical promotion, the eremitical life could offer a way to spiritual authority with both the French and the English. 


@@@@@


doc= 39105


Abbo of Fleury (945x50-1004), abbot of St Benoit-sur-Loire, was a French monk influential, by both his presence in England and his writings, in the monastic revival of the late tenth century. He was born in the region of Orleans between 945 and 950. As a child he was put into the monastery of St Benoit-sur-Loire at Fleury, which claimed to possess the bones of St Benedict. Although he became a professed monk, he was educated not only at Fleury but also at the schools in Paris, Rheims (where his teachers included the mathematician Gerbert d'Aurillac, later Pope Sylvester II), and Orleans. After returning to Fleury, Abbo was put in charge of teaching and continued his studies, especially in the field of computistics. Probably his first work was a commentary on the 'Calculus' of Victorius, which is noteworthy because of its attitude to the liberal arts and the light it sheds on the great library at Fleury, as well as for its scientific interest. At the abbey he would have met Englishmen who either visited or spent periods of time there as monks; notable in the latter category are Oswald (in 961 to become bishop of Worcester, and one of the prime movers of the monastic revival) and, somewhat later, Germanus, who after unsatisfactory stays at Oswald's foundations at Westbury, Ramsey, and Winchcombe, was driven into exile at Fleury from 975 to about 978, when he returned to Ramsey in Cambridgeshire. 
These connections help to explain Abbo's sojourn in England from 985 to 987. Possibly to get away after failing to be elected abbot at Fleury, he accepted an invitation from Oswald to head the school at Ramsey. There a prominent pupil was Byrhtferth, a notable figure in the history of science and in particular of computation. Byrhtferth's celebrated 'Manual' (or 'Enchiridion') owes a good deal to Abbo, and the splendid early twelfth-century copy of this (Oxford, St John's College MS 17) includes a computus heavily dependent on Abbo's works and four short treatises attributed to him. 
While in England Abbo also came into contact with Dunstan, whose final three years as archbishop of Canterbury coincided with Abbo's stay at Ramsey. A notable outcome of their friendship was one of the key documents of English medieval hagiography, a 'passio' for St Edmund, king of East Anglia, killed by invading Danes in 869. This was composed by Abbo, at the request of the monks of Ramsey, after he had heard Dunstan tell the story of Edmund's death, ostensibly passed on from the martyr's aged armour-bearer. Although the putative facts are English (and less heavily embroidered than the legend was later to become), the literary echoes are strongly classical, especially Virgilian. A few years later AElfric turned Abbo's 'passio' into English prose, referring to its author as a 'highly learned monk'. Abbo also addressed to Dunstan three poems (including a triple acrostic called by Stubbs 'A curious specimen of misdirected ingenuity' ('Memorials of St Dunstan', 410)) and about the year 1000 was sent, by the abbot of St Augustine's, Canterbury, the first prose life of Dunstan with a request that he versify it; this, however, was never accomplished. 
An indication of the value Abbo placed on his time at Ramsey is the dedication to its monks of his 'Quaestiones grammaticales', the first work he wrote after returning to Fleury and in 988 being elected its abbot. This rather extensive treatise sheds valuable light on questions of tenth-century pronunciation as well as on Latin grammar; to what extent it represents problems posed by the monks of Ramsey is not clear. 
From his lofty position as abbot of Fleury, Abbo took an active role both in efforts to intensify monastic reform along lines generally called Cluniac (Fleury, though not technically subject to the Burgundian monastery of Cluny, had close ties with that great house) and in struggles over the relative power of papal and royal authority, the latter being that of the new Capetian dynasty. He became involved with the bishop of Orleans in a heated battle over monastic exemption from episcopal control, and in the context of justifying his position articulated views which seem to point towards the well-known division of medieval society into those who worked, those who prayed, and those who fought. Attempting to intervene in a squabble between the monks of a small abbey dependent on Fleury (at La Reole in Gascony) and the local townspeople, he was fatally injured -- having thus some grounds to be considered a martyr -- and died there on 13 November 1004. He was buried at Fleury. 
The literary efforts of Abbo's later years reflect largely the preoccupations of his abbatial office. Several letters survive, as do an apology (concerned mainly with his positions on church reform), a collection of canons which was to be influential on the more definitive collections of the next century, and an epitome of lives of the popes (perhaps drawn from the 'Liber pontificalis'). There are also an important early work on logic, now known as 'Syllogismorum categoricorum et hypotheticorum enodatio', and a few further scientific works, mostly brief treatises on computistic and astronomical subjects. Some of these were known in England also, as witness the appearance of three of them in a New Minster, Winchester, manuscript of 'c'.1025, interspersed among works by earlier writers on computistics (Cambridge, Trinity College, MS R.15.32/945). 
One of the most versatile thinkers and writers of his time, Abbo put his mark on several areas of medieval life and thought, but none more so than in transmitting much that was valuable from the tradition of reformed French monasticism to the nascent monastic culture of late tenth-century England. 


@@@@@


doc= 39114


AElfheah (d. 971), magnate, was probably the eldest of Ealhhelm's sons, since he was married by 940 to AElfswith. She was a kinswoman of King Eadwig ('AS chart.', S 662), who made AElfheah his seneschal and in 959 appointed him ealdorman of central Wessex. AElfsige, bishop of Winchester, addressed AElfheah as 'my beloved friend' ('AS chart.', S 1491) and made him guardian of his son Godwine (died 1001); Brihthelm, AElfsige's successor, was also a kinsman of AElfheah ('AS chart.', S 615). AElfheah was connected with AElfthryth, who married Edgar in 964 or 965 and he may have been godfather to one of her sons; in his will ('AS chart.', S 1485) he made bequests to both athelings and to their mother. AElfheah's will, when compared with the royal charters in his favour, allows some estimate to be made of his wealth: about 700 hides of land in seven shires. The will also mentions his brothers, but names only AElfhere; the others were Eadric ('AS chart.', S 1292), who probably predeceased him, and AElfwine, who became a monk of Glastonbury and was living in 975 ('AS chart.', S 802, 1276). AElfheah also made a bequest to his sister's son AElfwine, son of AElfric Cild. He died on 18 April 971 and was buried at Glastonbury Abbey, of which he and his wife were benefactors; he also gave lands to Abingdon, Bath, the Old Minster, Winchester, and Malmesbury. He left two sons, AElfweard and Godric; the latter is perhaps the earldorman of Lindsey killed at the battle of 'Assandun' in 1016. 


@@@@@


doc= 39117


Agilbert (d. 679x90), bishop of the West Saxons, was from a leading Frankish family, certainly connected with the family of St Audoin (St Ouen), who died in 684, and probably with the royal Merovingian family itself. He was the second bishop of the West Saxons and, later, bishop of Paris. According to Bede ('Hist. eccl.', 3.7), some time after Cenwalh had been restored as leader of the West Saxons in 646, Agilbert arrived in his kingdom. He was a 'Gaul' or Frank, who was already a bishop when he arrived, having been ordained in Francia, presumably without a see. Before his arrival in England he had been studying in Ireland. Cenwalh invited Agilbert to stay among the West Saxons as their bishop, in the see established by Birinus at Dorchester-on-Thames. This position Agilbert held 'for some years' until Cenwalh tired of his 'barbarous speech', which presumably means that the bishop never properly mastered the language of his hosts. The West Saxon kingdom was then divided into two sees, one being given to Bishop Wine. Agilbert, it is said, was deeply offended and left the kingdom. He then seems to have headed north to the court of the Northumbrian kings Oswiu and Aldfrith, for the life of St Wilfrid states that Agilbert ordained Wilfrid priest at Ripon at the king's command; this happened in 663 or 664. In 664 Agilbert appeared alongside Wilfrid and with his priest Agatho at the famous Synod of Whitby, where he championed the Romanist cause. It was, however, Wilfrid who spoke 'in his own tongue' for their side in the dispute, which again hints at Agilbert's poor command of English. Shortly after the synod, Agilbert was back in Francia where, along with eleven other bishops, he took part in Wilfrid's consecration as bishop at Compiegne; this also took place in 664. Although Bede refers to Agilbert in this context as bishop of Paris, he cannot have been appointed to that city until 666 or 667, for there is a charter of that date attested by Importunus, his predecessor as bishop there. Agilbert must have become bishop by 668, however, since in that year he entertained Theodore in Paris as the latter made his way from Rome to Canterbury to take up the archbishopric. 
Agilbert's fortunes in England seem to have been governed by the tide of Mercian expansion, rather than to have been the result of his inability to speak English properly. He left southern England around the time the Mercians acquired control of the area to the south of the Thames valley, but at a later point ('c'.670), when Mercian influence in Wessex was on the wane, Cenwalh invited him back to become bishop of Winchester. Now bishop of Paris, Agilbert declined the offer and sent his nephew Leuthere in his place. He died some time between 679 and 690, and he was buried in the crypt which he had built at the double monastery of Jouarre, east of Paris, over which his sister Theodechild had presided as abbess. 
Agilbert's career serves to emphasize the strong links between the Frankish and the English ruling elites in the mid-seventh century. His very name was the Frankish form of AEthelberht, which may suggest that he had some family relationship with the Kentish royal house, and it was at this time, according to Bede ('Hist. eccl.', 3.8), that Earcongota (daughter of Eanbald, king of Kent) and several other Anglo-Saxon princesses joined Frankish monasteries, perhaps through the agency of Agilbert. At the same time that the bishop first appeared in England, the all-powerful mayor of the palace in northern Francia was Erchinoald. The mayor had acquired the Anglo-Saxon Balthild, whom, about 648, he provided as a wife for the Frankish king, Clovis II. On the latter's death in 657, Balthild emerged as a powerful dowager queen. Interestingly, Agilbert's departure from Francia to Ireland was probably at the time that Balthild first became queen, and his return to his homeland coincided with her fall from power in 663 or 664. Once back in Francia, Agilbert was clearly a supporter of Erchinoald's successor as mayor, the notorious Ebroin, whose most influential ally was Audoin, with whom Agilbert was also linked. It was no doubt at Ebroin's behest that Agilbert entertained Theodore in 668, for Bede tells of how the mayor monitored the archbishop's every move through Francia. The last that is heard of Agilbert is on another (and this time plainly disreputable) mission for Ebroin, some time between 676 and 679. It is therefore reasonable to speculate that Agilbert's stay in England was as an exile in retreat from the ruling faction of Erchinoald and, later, of Balthild -- an exile which came to an end when Ebroin and Audoin got the upper hand in Francia. His sojourn in Ireland may likewise have had a dimension in Frankish politics, for it may have been he who prepared the way for the exile of the young king, Dagobert II, who was sent there some time between 651 and 657. Agilbert may also have played a part in Dagobert's return from Ireland in 676, which was arranged through the bishop's old friend, Wilfrid. His career in Ireland, England, and upon the continent invites speculation at every turn, but the overall impression is clear enough: Agilbert was a figure of international importance through whom Frankish influence on the development of the church in southern England was maintained. 


@@@@@


doc= 39121


Alhred (fl. 765-774), claimed descent from another collateral branch of the family of Ida, deriving from the latter's son Eadric. That his family may have been connected with the Tyne area is suggested by the fact that his son Osred II was buried at Tynemouth. Alhred minted coins and, in 768, he married Osgifu, apparently a daughter of the former king Oswulf, perhaps to strengthen his position. He patronized missionary activity on the continent and there has survived a letter from him and Osgifu to the Anglo-Saxon missionary bishop Lul, referring to the exchanging of names for commemoration in the mass between England and the continent, and asking particularly that Lul should 'help and care for our embassies to your lord the most glorious King Charles [Charlemagne], that you may make peace and amity, which are proper to all, to be firmly strengthened between us' (Tangl, no. 121; 'English Historical Documents', 1, no. 187). The letter also alludes, however, to disturbances in the churches and people of Northumbria, which seems consistent with a report in another source of how Liudger, the future bishop of Munster, had to return to Frisia because of civil disturbances at York, where he was studying. Finally, in 774, King Alhred was 'deprived of the society of the royal household and nobles, by the counsel and consent of all his people' (Symeon of Durham, 'Opera', 2.45), and fled first to Bamburgh, and then into exile in the kingdom of the Picts. As with Oswulf, his deposition hints at the power of the Northumbrian council. 


@@@@@


doc= 39123


Anna (d. 654?), king of the East Angles, became king after the Mercian king Penda invaded and killed King Ecgric and the former king, Sigeberht. Anna was the son of Eni, brother of Raedwald, an earlier ruler of the East Angles. His accession must have taken place at some point after Penda gained power in Mercia (probably in 632); later Ely sources indicate that Anna became king in 635 or 636, but this information may not be reliable. Almost nothing is known of his reign, except that for three years he sheltered Cenwalh, the West Saxon ruler driven out of his kingdom by Penda about 642, and that he was a generous patron to the monastery founded in Burgh Castle by the Irishman Fursa. 
Two of Anna's daughters made important marriages, which may reflect political alliances: the better-known, AEthelthryth, married first the ruler of the South Gyrwe (a Middle Anglian people) and later King Ecgfrith of Northumbria, while her sister Seaxburh became the wife of King Eorcenberht of Kent. Both these women were later venerated as saints, after having been successive abbessess of the house at Ely founded by AEthelthryth. A third daughter, AEthelburh, became abbess of the Frankish monastery at Faremoutiers-en-Brie, as did Anna's stepdaughter, Saethryth. Later sources mention a fourth daughter, named Wihtburh, said to have been a nun at Ely; she was originally buried at East Dereham and then translated to Ely where a cult developed. From the reference to a stepchild, the daughter of Anna's wife, it would seem that the king had married a widow; her identity is unknown and the suggestion that she was Hereswith, sister of Hild, abbess of Whitby, is based on a misconception. 
Anna was remembered more for his Christian behaviour and saintly progeny than for his actions as king. Like his predecessors, he was killed during an invasion of East Anglia by Penda of Mercia, probably in 654. Later Ely sources place this event in the nineteenth year of his reign, and state that he was buried at Blythburgh in Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 39127


AEthelstan AEtheling (d. 1014), prince, was the eldest son of AEthelred II (c.966x8-1016), king of England, and of AEthelred's first wife, AElfgifu, daughter of Thored (Thorth), who held office as earl of Northumbria from 'c'.975 to 'c'.992. AEthelstan was born probably in the early or mid-980s, and made his first appearance as a witness in a charter of King AEthelred for Abingdon Abbey issued in 993. Little is known of his childhood and youth, though there is reason to believe that he may have spent some part of it on a royal estate at AEthelingadene (Dean 'of the athelings', identified as Dean in west Sussex), and that his paternal grandmother, AElfthryth, may have played a significant part in his upbringing. AEthelstan continued to attest charters in the later 990s and in the early years of the eleventh century, invariably positioned ahead of his younger brothers; his last appearance is in a charter dated 1013. King AEthelred's marriage to Emma of Normandy, in 1002, does not appear to have affected AEthelstan's position as his father's prospective successor, and it must be assumed that sooner or later AEthelstan became a significant political force in the kingdom. He would have witnessed the increasing influence at court of Ealdorman Eadric Streona, and may well not have approved; he seems also to have formed a friendship with Sigeferth and Morcar, two of the leading thegns of the 'Five Boroughs' in the east midlands. In 1013 King AEthelred was forced into temporary exile in Normandy; and while it is not known for certain what became of AEthelstan and of his surviving younger brothers, Edmund (Ironside) and Eadwig, during the reign of King Swein Forkbeard (1013-14), it seems likely that they remained somewhere in England. 
AEthelred returned from exile in the spring of 1014, whereupon AEthelstan would have resumed his position as his father's prospective successor. It would appear, however, that AEthelstan fell ill during the early summer of that year. He received his father's permission to draw up his will on 25 June 1014, and died later on the same day. It emerges from the will (copies of which were preserved in the archives of Christ Church, Canterbury, and the Old Minster, Winchester) that AEthelstan held land in at least ten counties of south-eastern England, and that he took special interest not only in the religious houses at Winchester and Canterbury, but also in those at Shaftesbury and Ely. His personal possessions included no fewer than eleven swords (one of which had belonged to Offa, king of the Mercians), a coat of mail (which had been lent to Morcar), two shields, a drinking-horn, a silver-coated trumpet, and a string of fine horses. AEthelstan was buried at the Old Minster, Winchester. His untimely death meant that his younger brother, Edmund Ironside, entered the political arena as King AEthelred's prospective successor. Edmund was soon forced, in effect, to take a stand against the regime personified by his ailing father but controlled by Eadric Streona, prompting Eadric to transfer his allegiance to Cnut, and leading ultimately to the defeat of the English at the battle of Ashingdon in 1016. 


@@@@@


doc= 39128


Baithene mac Brenainn (d. 598) was designated as abbot by Columba, that is, by the founder and 'patronus' of the community -- a community known as the 'familia' ('household') of Columba or of Iona. Baithene, originally named Conin, was the subject of a short life of uncertain date, but probably of the eighth century, in which he was remembered as the pre-eminent pupil of Columba, inferior in knowledge of the scriptures only to his teacher. Columba was perceived by Adomnan as Baithene's 'foster-father' as well as his kinsman (Adomnan, 1.2, 3.18). Indeed, the bond between Columba and Baithene was not represented so much as one of physical as of spiritual kinship, expressed in the language of secular fosterage. The nature of the bond is represented by the story Adomnan tells of the designation of Baithene as successor. Columba was copying a psalter and got as far as the verse of 'Psalm 33', where it is written, 'But they that seek the Lord shall not want for anything that is good.' At this point, which was also the end of a page, he laid down his pen and declared, 'Here, at the end of the page, I must stop. Let Baithene write what follows' (Adomnan, 3.23). 


@@@@@


doc= 39129


Bald (fl. c.900), supposed physician and medical writer, was the owner and probable author of a work titled 'Laeceboc' (leechbook), a compilation in Old English of medical recipes and treatments. All that is known of Bald is to be found in the Latin verse colophon to the 'Laeceboc', as found in the British Library manuscript (BL, Royal MS 12 D.xvii) and written about 950, most probably at Winchester. The colophon begins: 'Bald owns this book, which he ordered Cild to write'. It also states that the 'Laeceboc' is the dearest of all Bald's books. Everything else that can be said about Bald is inference from these statements and from the internal evidence of the work itself. 
The manuscript appears to be a copy of an exemplar written some fifty years earlier, hence the suggestion that Bald may have been active about 900, that is, in the very last years of the reign of Alfred the Great. The work is in two books dealing respectively with externally and internally manifested ailments. It draws on the standard works of early medieval Mediterranean medicine as well as on native material and is distinguished by its high level of organization. It is impossible to know whether Bald or Cild selected and arranged the materials, because the word 'componere' (write) could mean either 'write down' or 'compose' in medieval Latin. It may be conjectured that Bald was a physician and a layman able to read English (and probably medical Latin) living in the late ninth century, probably in the vicinity of Winchester, who had available to him several books on medicine in Latin and English, from which he (or Cild) selected, modified, and arranged medical materials into the two parts of the 'Laeceboc'. It is tempting to think that its composition may have owed something to the stimulus of Alfred's revival of learning. At any rate, Bald, whether or not he was author of his 'Laeceboc', has left to posterity an example of vernacular medical material of the greatest value for assessing the medical competence of Anglo-Saxon practitioners. If his book had not survived it would not be known that such practitioners were familiar with the standard works in Latin containing the best of Greek and Roman medicine, and integrated them into an English tradition to produce prescriptions that were 'about as good as anything prescribed before the mid-twentieth century' (Cameron, 117). 


@@@@@


doc= 39134


Blaimac mac Flainn (d. 825) was martyred on Iona by 'the heathens'; his death was commemorated in a poem by Walafrid Strabo, abbot of Reichenau (died 849). 


@@@@@


doc= 39135


Bresal mac Segeni (d. 801), promulgated the law of Columba in 778. The continued spiritual reputation of Iona in his time is attested by the pilgrimage in 783 of Artgal, son of Cathal, king of Connachta, to Iona, where he died in 791. 


@@@@@


doc= 39138


Brude mac Bile (d. 693), king of Picts, was overking of the Picts from 672 until his death. Irish annals call him 'king of Fortriu' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.193) and his mother presumably belonged to the royal matrilineage of that Pictish province (roughly the southern half of modern Perthshire). Ecgfrith (died 685), king of Northumbria, was said to have been his cousin ('fratruelis'), and it seems that Ecgfrith's uncle, King Eanfrith, may have been the maternal grandfather of Brude's mother; not, as is sometimes supposed, her father ['see 'Picts, kings of the]. Brude's father is stated to have been a king of Ail Cluathe ('Rock of Clyde', present-day Dumbarton). There are two kings called Beli in the Strathclyde royal genealogy (Bile seems to have been the Pictish form of the British Beli, adopted into Irish); to identify either Beli as Brude's father is possible, but strains the chronological evidence to its limits. 
Brude succeeded in the Pictish kingship to Drust, Donuel's son, who had been expelled in 672 after an abortive revolt against Ecgfrith (the Picts had been subject to Northumbria since the 650s) ended in the slaughter of the Pictish army. In 682 Brude is said to have 'destroyed' the Orkney Islands and between 680 and 683 the annals record several 'sieges' within what might well have been Brude's sphere of interest, though he is not named in connection with any of them. 
In 685 King Ecgfrith, apparently without provocation, invaded the country of the Picts. A Pictish force, by a series of deceptive withdrawals, led the Northumbrians on beyond the rivers Earn and Tay, and on Saturday 20 May inflicted a heavy defeat upon them in swampy ground at Nechtansmere, or Dunnichen Moss, near Forfar. Ecgfrith himself died. An Irish verse says that Brude was fighting for 'the heritage of his grandfather' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.194). It has been suggested that his maternal grandfather may have been the king of, or a nobleman in, the province of Circhenn (modern Angus and Mearns). A further possibility is that the grandfather was Donuel, the father of Gartnait and Drust, Brude's immediate predecessors. Brude could thus provide an example of a nephew succeeding to his maternal uncle(s) in a matrilineal society; however, other explanations of his ancestry have been put forward. As a result of the Pictish victory (or perhaps, rather, of Ecgfrith's death), the Picts were free thenceforward from Anglian dominion and occupation. 
Brude died in 693 and was believed to have been buried in Iona. He was remembered partly for having freed his kingdom from Northumbria, and partly for having been a friend of Adomnan, the ninth abbot of Iona, who died in 704. A story in an Irish homiletic life of St Adomnan tells of his distress when Brude's body was brought to the island for burial. 


@@@@@


doc= 39139


Brude mac Maelchon (d. c.586), king of Picts, was the earliest of seven 'historical' bearers of the name Brude in the Pictish king-lists ['see 'Picts, kings of the]. That name, not certainly of Celtic origin, was Brude or Bruide in Irish. Its principal Pictish forms, perhaps later than the Irish, were Bridei (known to Bede 'c'.731) and Bredei. Maelchon is sometimes used by modern writers as a nominative, because the true nominative of Brude's father's name is in doubt. Chronologically, he could have been Maelgwyn, king of Gwynedd in north Wales, who died in 547 or 549. 
There is no contemporary record of Brude. He was remembered, it seems, for having checked an eastward expansion of Scots into Pictish territory, about 558 ['see 'Dal Riata, kings of]. The event is noted laconically -- 'Flight before Maelchon's son' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.21) -- in the annals of Ulster, and more explicitly in later versions. 
Adomnan of Iona, writing his life of Columba about 700, believed that Columba had travelled at least once to the country of the Picts, by way of the Great Glen and Loch Ness, to visit their king Brude in a fortified residence near the River Ness (the site of the medieval castle of Inverness has been suggested). These chapters of the life are far more concerned with Broichan, a malign magician and the foster father of Brude, than with the king himself. However, one chapter represents Brude as exercising lordship over a king of Orkney, which surely implies considerable sea power. Adomnan says nothing of Brude's relations with southern Picts; but Bede (about 731), after drawing a distinction between northern and southern Picts, seems to imply that Brude, 'a very powerful king' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 222), had been sovereign over both. 
Brude may have been the first king of a Pictish province to claim sovereignty over all the Picts. Certainly he is the first Pictish king to be mentioned by the annalists, but perhaps only because the monastery of Iona, ultimate source of much annal information, had been founded in his reign. Bede believed that it was 'the Picts' who had granted the island to Columba. Adomnan has nothing to say on that matter. He relates that Brude was initially hostile to the saint, but for the rest of his own life treated him with the greatest honour. He does not suggest that Brude was converted by Columba, or even that he was ever a Christian. 
Brude's death is dated by the annals of Ulster to 583, perhaps intended for 586 or 587. The lists say that he reigned for thirty years. The dating of his death, and those of several of his successors, may have been calculated from a regnal list and, if so, cannot claim to have independent authority. 


@@@@@


doc= 39142


Bugga (fl. late 7th-early 8th cent.), abbess, was the daughter of King Centwine of Wessex ('r'. 676-85). She is known chiefly from a poem written by Aldhelm to celebrate a church she had built dedicated to the Virgin Mary; her nunnery is the earliest recorded in the kingdom of the West Saxons. The poem gives some interesting information on the operation of the mixed community of monks and nuns over which Bugga presided. It reveals, for instance, that the monks and nuns formed separate choirs, that male and female lectors read the lessons, and that the chanting of the psalms was accompanied by a psaltery and a lyre. There are also references to a cross of gold and silver with jewels, a golden chalice with jewels, and gold-embroidered cloths. Unfortunately the location of her foundation is not known. Various attempts have been made to identify Bugga with other religious women known by that name or having names ending in '-burh' or '-burg' from which it is likely to have been derived, but none carry conviction. In particular it should be noted that there are no grounds for equating her either with Boniface's correspondent Bugga (Haeaburh) of Kent or with Abbess Bugga of Withington (Gloucestershire). A Latin verse epitaph survives for her, which reveals that she was abbess for thirty-four years. 


@@@@@


doc= 39145


Ceolwulf II (fl. 874-879), king of the Mercians, succeeded Burgred, who was driven out by the vikings in late 873 or early 874. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' calls Ceolwulf 'a foolish king's thegn' who owed his kingship to the vikings. His only other appearance in English narrative sources is in 877, when the chronicle notes that a viking army retired into Mercia and divided it, sharing out part of it among themselves and leaving the rest for Ceolwulf. A regnal list from Worcester gives Ceolwulf a reign of five years: counting from his accession in 874, this suggests that he ruled the western part of Mercia, including Worcester, for another two years after the viking settlement. He was probably the leader of the 'English' force that killed Rhodri Mawr, king of Gwynedd, in 878, as reported in Welsh and Irish annals. Nothing is known of Ceolwulf after 879: the next Mercian leader on the Worcester regnal list was AEthelred. By 883 AEthelred was ealdorman in charge of Mercia under Alfred, who may by this stage have been recognized as king of the Anglo-Saxons and not just the West Saxons: the independent kingdom of the Mercians was no more. 
Although the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' gibes that Ceolwulf was a foolish thegn and that he acted as steward for the vikings, holding the land 'ready for them on whatever day they wished to have it' ('ASC', s.a. 874), contemporary evidence from charters and coins shows Ceolwulf acting independently as king of the Mercians. Two charters from 875 survive in his name ('AS chart.', S 215 and 216), calling him 'rex Merciorum' ('king of the Mercians') and witnessed by Mercian bishops and nobles. A later charter ('AS chart.', S 361) refers to another grant of Ceolwulf, still called 'rex'. Three types of penny survive in his name. Only a fragment survives of one; the other two, the two emperors and cross-and-lozenge, were also issued by King Alfred. The cross-and-lozenge penny was the product of a reform of the coinage, carried out by Alfred and Ceolwulf together. Alfred may have preferred dealing with his brother-in-law Burgred and later his son-in-law AEthelred, but it is clear that in the 870s both Mercians and West Saxons recognized Ceolwulf as the Mercian king. The fact that after the viking settlement of 877 Ceolwulf still held some part of Mercia may suggest that he was a shrewder negotiator than the composer of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' chose to remember. 


@@@@@


doc= 39147


Cillene Droichtech (d. 752), whose name is literally 'little man of the church [and] bridge builder'. He belonged to the southern Ui Neill, but to a collateral branch identified neither with the rulers of Brega nor with those of Mide. In 727 the relics of Adomnan were taken to Ireland and 'Cain Adomnain' ('the law of Adomnan') was renewed. The 'cain' ('lex' or 'rechtge') of this kind was an edict established by a combination of royal and ecclesiastical authority, usually under the patronage of a saint, whose relics might be brought on circuit. The validity of the 'cain' was normally temporary (perhaps seven years), and it might thus be renewed; while it was in force, it was secured by an elaborate structure of sureties and pledges, designed to ensure that all authority, whether of kindred, lord, king, or church, had both an obligation and an interest in upholding the law. In the eighth and early ninth centuries these 'canai' or 'leges' were to be the most dramatic expression of ecclesiastical influence on Irish society. A subsidiary purpose of Cillene's renewal of the law of Adomnan was, according to a late text, to establish peace between the two great branches of the northern Ui Neill, Cenel Conaill and Cenel nEogain. Even though the information is from a late source, it is plausible: Adomnan's foundation at Raphoe was associated with his law, and it lay in the small kingdom of Cenel nEndai, situated between Cenel Conaill and Cenel nEogain. The peace may indeed have lasted long enough to help Flaithbertach mac Loingsig of Cenel Conaill to defeat and kill Cinaed mac Irgalaig in 728 and to reign for a few years as king of Tara. The relics of Adomnan were, however, brought back from Ireland in 730, and in 732 fighting broke out again between Cenel Conaill and Cenel nEogain, leading in 734 to the abdication of Flaithbertach mac Loingsig and the succession of his enemy Aed Allan mac Fergaile. 


@@@@@


doc= 39154


Lees, Frederic Richard (1815-1897), temperance advocate, was born on 15 March 1815 at Meanwood, near Leeds, the only child of Joseph Lees ('c'.1795-1845), who conducted a school there, and his first wife, Anne (1796-1815), the daughter of Ephraim Sanderson of Aberford, also a schoolmaster. Joseph Lees remarried in 1816 and had nine children with his second wife, Isabella Bickerdyke. Prominent in local radical circles, he served as secretary of the Leeds Political Union in 1832. He sent his eldest son to Mr Compton's school in Bury (1825-8), and then articled him to a solicitor named Wailes in Leeds (1828-36). 
Lees made his living as a temperance writer, editor, and speaker. One of the pioneers of teetotalism in the north of England, he took a pledge against drinking any kind of alcohol in 1835. Two years later he became joint secretary of the British Association for the Promotion of Temperance. From 1840 to 1844 he edited and published the 'British Temperance Advocate and Journal', and from 1844 to 1850 edited the 'Truth Seeker'. In 1854 the new United Kingdom Alliance appointed him as a travelling secretary. Two years later Lees won the prize that the alliance offered for the best statement of the case for prohibition, published as the 'Alliance prize essay, or, An argument, legal and historical, for the legislative prohibition of the liquor traffic'. 
Despite frequent ill health Lees wrote incessantly. His principal books and shorter publications were reprinted as 'The Selected Works' (8 vols., 1884-7) and 'The True Thinker' (6 vols., 1891-7). Lees emphasized secular and scientific arguments against alcoholic drink. To enhance his position as the philosopher of temperance, he styled himself Doctor after 1842, when he received an honorary degree from a minor German university. 
Intense and inflexible, Lees often courted controversy. As a young man he offended the orthodox by challenging the inerrancy of the 'Bible' and in the 1840s flirted with pantheism. Ironically, he died a member of the Church of England. He irritated traditionalists by his demand, as early as the 1840s, that non-intoxicating grape juice be used in the eucharistic sacrament. With Dawson Burns he published 'The Temperance Bible Commentary' (1868) to establish that the 'Bible' never sanctioned fermented wine. Lees was forced to resign his alliance office in 1858 after he had accused the English-born American temperance reformer John Gough of being a secret drinker, and Gough sued him for libel. Radical in his political views, Lees upset many reformers when his independent candidacy at Leeds helped bring about the defeat of the incumbent Liberal MP, Edward Baines, in 1874. Lees headed a minority faction of the Good Templar fraternal temperance organization in the British Isles during a worldwide schism. He had joined the templars in 1869 while on a lecture tour in the United States, a year after Joseph Malins organized the first English lodge. Lees denounced the secession that Malins instigated in 1876. Malins claimed to be fighting for the right of black people in the American south to join the templar society, but Lees, an old abolitionist, regarded the real motive as a grab for power. Lees and Malins became adversaries in an expensive, acrimonious, and protracted law suit. 
Lees enjoyed a happy family life. In 1838 he married Mercy Joanna Jowett (died 1870), the daughter of a Leeds printer; they had two children, Frederic Arnold (1847-1921), a physician, surgeon, and botanist, and Mary Eleanor, who later married Freeman Whatmoor. On 25 September 1878 he married Mrs Sarah Barnesley, 'nee' Brooks, of Manchester, who died in 1889 at the age of fifty-eight. He lived most of his adult life at Meanwood, near Leeds, but he died at 1 Park Road, Halifax, on 29 May 1897. He was buried at Meanwood on 1 June. His son, Frederic Arnold Lees, contributed an introduction to the biography written by (George) Frederic William Lees ('b'. 1872), perhaps his son or a son of one of F. R. Lees's half-brothers. 


@@@@@


doc= 39155


Jones, Leifchild Stratten, Baron Rhayader (1862-1939), temperance advocate and politician, was born at 44 Albert Street, Regent's Park, London, on 16 January 1862. The fourth son of Thomas Jones (known as Jones Treforris) of Morriston, Glamorgan (1819-1882), a Congregational minister who served as president of the Congregational unions in England and Wales and in Australia, and his first wife, Jane, 'nee' Jones (died 1867). Leif Jones had two older brothers who later became prominent: Sir (David) Brynmor Jones (1852-1921), a barrister and Liberal MP, and John Viriamu Jones (1856-1901), a scientist and principal of University College, Cardiff. 
Jones began his secondary schooling at Swansea, probably at the Normal College. While his father preached in Australia during 1877-80 he attended Scotch College, Melbourne, where he graduated in first place in a class of over 500 boys. He won a scholarship at Trinity College, Oxford, where he took first-class honours in mathematics in 1885. He also studied law at the Middle Temple. 
The turning point in Jones's life was his appointment, while still at Oxford, as tutor for the children of the future ninth earl of Carlisle. He became the secretary, disciple, and ally of Rosalind Howard, later countess of Carlisle, an imperious and outspoken prohibitionist. Having taken the teetotal pledge at Naworth Castle, Lady Carlisle's Cumberland seat in 1885, he started his temperance work by speaking at local meetings. In 1894 he said: 'Nothing in life is more precious than the feeling of comradeship, of solidarity, of unity that comes of sharing in the onward march of some great human cause' ('Alliance Year Book', 18). He did not regard sobriety as a panacea for all social problems, but he emphasized the reciprocal connection between drink and poverty. 
Despite his libertarian principles, Jones belonged to the prohibitionist wing of the temperance movement. When he joined the prohibitionist United Kingdom Alliance in 1892, he was immediately appointed a member of its consultative committee. In 1895 he joined its executive committee. He worked closely with Lady Carlisle and the prohibitionists in her family circle -- her son Geoffrey Howard, her daughter Lady Cecilia Roberts, and her son-in-law Charles H. Roberts -- as well as the alliance president Sir Wilfrid Lawson, a north country neighbour, and Good Templars such as Guy Hayler and Joseph Malins. 
At the turn of the twentieth century uncompromising prohibitionists were losing their influence in the temperance movement and with the Liberal Party and, as the alliance's president from 1906 to 1932 Jones presided over its decline. He fought proposals for public management of the retail drink trade, promoted by Joseph Rowntree and Sir Thomas Palmer Whittaker. During the First World War he discouraged David Lloyd George's tentative discussion of state purchase and nationalization of the drink trade. Committed to prohibition by local option, Jones would support other reforms only when they reduced the consumption of alcoholic drink. He testified before the royal commission on licensing (England and Wales) on 9 July 1930. In 1933 he signed the 'agreed' temperance programme, a kind of treaty between prohibitionists and other temperance reformers that outlined points of consensus and smoothed over a row ignited by Henry Carter, a 'moderate' who had served on the royal commission. 
During much of his period of office as president of the United Kingdom Alliance, Jones sat as a Liberal MP, on the radical wing of the party (he was, for example, an early supporter of women's suffrage). Defeated in 1892 at Westminster, where he stood as a radical and Labour candidate on a platform of opposing privilege 'in every shape', he was also unsuccessful at Leeds Central in 1895 and at Manchester South in a by-election in 1900. He eventually entered the House of Commons after winning a by-election for the Appleby division of Westmorland in March 1905, and held the seat by the slender margin of five votes in the Liberal landslide of 1906. He lost it in the first general election of 1910, but in the second general election of that year was returned for Nottinghamshire Rushcliffe. He was sworn of the privy council in 1916. As a supporter of Asquith he lost his Nottinghamshire seat in the 'coupon' election of 1918, and then stood five times for the temperance stronghold of Camborne, Cornwall: unsuccessful in 1922, he won the seat in 1923 but lost it in 1924, regaining it in 1929 and losing again in 1931. He served on the public accounts committee of the House of Commons, but held no ministerial office. 
In January 1932, after losing his Commons seat, Jones was made a peer, on the recommendation of Philip Snowden, and took the title Baron Rhayader. Shortly before that he had adopted by deed poll the surname Leif-Jones. A strong advocate of free trade and peace, he was honorary secretary of the Cobden Club from 1927 to 1932 and its president from 1932 to 1938. He was a member of the League of Nations Union and from 1934 to 1937 he was president of the Liberal Council. 
Athletic in his youth, Jones preferred intellectual pursuits as he aged. Although his 'Times' obituary described him as 'genial' he was slow to make friends. In the House of Commons his friends included Isaac Foot and Sir Donald Maclean. Jones read voraciously and played chess. He dined at the Reform Club with writers such as Arnold Bennett, A. G. Gardiner, and H. G. Wells. Despite being a nonconformist minister's son he seems to have been agnostic in religion. An unemotional orator, he spoke slowly, logically, and with an abundance of factual evidence, but also wittily, in his clear silvery voice. Tall, slim, and refined in appearance, he looked frail in later years. Unmarried and increasingly deaf, he was lonely in his last years. He died at his home, 16 Bryanston Street, Portman Square, London, on 26 September 1939, and was cremated at Golders Green three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 39157


Impey, Catherine (1847-1923), political activist and temperance reformer, was born at Street in Somerset on 13 August 1847. Her parents were Robert Impey (1820-1886), originally a tanner, who grew seeds, became an innovative farmer, and sold agricultural equipment, and his wife, Mary Hannah Clothier (1823-1895), whose father was a tanner. Catherine, their second daughter, attended a school for girls at Weston-super-Mare. The Impey family belonged to the Religious Society of Friends. 
Catherine Impey (known as Katie) was active in the temperance movement with a special commitment to work on behalf of children. She served for over forty years as the treasurer of the village mission and Band of Hope in Street. She was also a vice-president of the Western Temperance League, an office-holder in the Independent Order of Good Templars (a fraternal temperance society), and a member of the Street Teetotal Society, the Somerset Band of Hope Union, and the British Women's Temperance Association. She travelled to North America several times for meetings of the Good Templars and of the Woman's Christian Temperance Union. 
During the Good Templar schism of 1876-87 Impey served as honorary secretary of a British mission committee which attempted to organize black people on a non-racial basis in the former slave states, an enterprise financed almost entirely by Quakers. Initiated by Good Templars in England and Scotland opposed to racism, the schism combined conflicts over human rights and Good Templar constitutional procedures with a struggle for power within the order. During this period many prominent Good Templars visited her home. The celebrated black writer William Wells Brown was her guest at Street, and she stayed at his home while visiting Massachusetts. Impey was outraged when in 1886 Joseph Malins (1844-1926), the head of the Grand Lodge of England, negotiated an end to the schism on a basis of racial segregation, a compromise which she deplored as unchristian and contrary to Good Templar principles of brotherhood and sisterhood. Three years later she withdrew from the Good Templar order. 
Devoting much of the rest of her life to the fight for racial equality, Impey had already started a monthly news-sheet called 'Anti-Caste' in 1888. It campaigned against the racial bigotry suffered by non-white peoples throughout the world, particularly in the British empire and the United States. Impey also belonged to the anti-slavery committee of the mid-Somerset monthly meeting of the Society of Friends and the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society. 
In the early 1890s Impey acquired an ally, Isabelle Fyvie Mayo (1843-1914), a Scottish novelist. The two women invited Impey's friend Ida B. Wells, a former slave, to speak in Britain against the lynching of black Americans accused of such crimes as sexual offences against white women. Impey and Mayo organized the Society for the Recognition of the Universal Brotherhood of Man. Its organ, variously called 'Fraternity' and the 'Bond of Brotherhood', first appeared simultaneously with 'Anti-Caste' and then replaced it. 
Impey fell in love with Mayo's Ceylonese protege, a dentist named George Ferdinands, and in 1893 she wrote to him proposing marriage. She believed that racial difference made him hesitant to declare his own love. Ferdinands, who had no interest in marrying Impey, showed the letter to Mayo. Infuriated at Impey's initiative, Mayo severed her relations with Impey and tried unsuccessfully to make Wells do the same. Mayo wrote to Frederick Douglass and other prominent African-Americans in a vain attempt to turn them against their old friend. The breakup of the alliance between Impey and Mayo explains Impey's brief revival of 'Anti-Caste' in 1894; it ceased publication in 1895. 
In addition to her work for temperance and against racism Catherine Impey was active in local government. Serving on the Street urban district committee, the Wells poor-law board of guardians, and the Long Sutton school committee, she advocated women's suffrage in parliamentary elections. 
Impey's family supported her throughout all her public and private controversies. Although at one time engaged to T. Beavan Clark, whose family operated a shoe factory at Street, Impey never married, and resided all her life at her family home. From 1879 she was a vegetarian; so apparently was the rest of the household, but meat was served to non-vegetarian guests. Long before their father's death in 1886, Impey's elder sister Ellen (or Nellie) took charge of the family seed business despite her poor health. The Impeys also attempted jam making but with little success. 
Impey combined militancy with affability, near austerity with generosity. Outspoken and uncompromising, she had a gift for friendship and served local needs as well as worldwide humanitarian causes. By living simply, she found the income to maintain a furnished house for retired teachers and missionaries on furlough. A devout member of the Society of Friends, she wrote frequently for the monthly magazine of Street's Quaker community. Impey died at her home, 3 Wraxhill Road, Middle Leigh, Street, on 14 December 1923 after a short illness; she was buried in Street on 18 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 39159


Hayler, Guy (1850-1943), temperance advocate, was born, of Huguenot descent, on 5 November 1850 at 3 Market Green, Battle, Sussex, the youngest son of George Hayler, a Chartist tailor of Battle, and his wife, Mary Wood Brignall, eldest daughter of John Brignall of Wittersham, Kent. The family soon moved to nearby Hastings. At six Guy Hayler took the teetotal pledge on a blacksmith's anvil and joined the Band of Hope, a children's temperance organization. In 1864, having been orphaned, he moved to Kent, and a year later he moved to London. 
In London Hayler became a working-class temperance enthusiast and political radical while working in the building and decorating trades. He frequently visited the offices of the United Kingdom Alliance, the prohibitionist organization, and William Tweedie's temperance bookshop. In 1870 he joined a Good Templar lodge that met above Tweedie's shop. The Good Templars, a working-class and lower middle-class fraternal temperance society that originated in the United States, had arrived in England two years earlier, and Hayler met his future wife at a lodge meeting. The young Hayler was a political radical; for instance, in 1870 he helped to organize the International Democratic Association's demonstration at Hyde Park in support of the French commune. 
On 29 July 1874, at St Mark's, Kennington, Hayler married Ann Elizabeth (1848-1941), only daughter of Henry Hartley Harriss of Maidstone; they had four sons and four daughters. In the same year Hayler left London to spend more than three decades as a temperance organizer in northern England. He lived for sixteen years at Hull, as agent and, later, secretary for the local alliance auxiliary, and then for eighteen years at Newcastle upon Tyne, as general secretary of the North of England Temperance League. He held concurrent temperance offices, was active in the co-operative movement and building societies, and edited several newspapers, the most important of which was the league's 'Temperance Witness'; he also founded the National Association of Official Temperance Advocates. While working for the league he became an ally of the aristocratic prohibitionist Rosalind Howard, countess of Carlisle. 
When the crushing defeat of the Liberal Party in the general election of 1895 made many of its supporters doubt whether prohibition by local option was practicable, Hayler responded by organizing a national prohibition convention. Always optimistic and cheerful, he never lost faith in a future in which people would embrace prohibition as the only answer to the drink problem. Following the collapse of his health at the end of 1906 he gave up his work as a regional temperance organizer and, in his late fifties, began a new phase of his life, as a propagandist for worldwide prohibition; as early as 1905 he had held international office with the Good Templars. Having returned to London in 1909, after the recovery of his health, he served as honorary president of a propaganda organization, known first as the International Prohibition Confederation and then as the World Prohibition Federation, from its formation in 1909 to 1939. From 1917 until his death he edited a quarterly that reported news about prohibition: the 'International Record'. In 1919, when the Anti-Saloon League of America, in the triumphant early days of national prohibition, founded the World League against Alcoholism, the World Prohibition Federation lost prestige. 
After his return to London Hayler lived in a villa named Courtfield, at South Norwood Park, that became famous for its temperance library of innumerable books and periodicals, annual reports, pamphlets, and posters. Shortly after his death German bombs demolished the house, but much of the library survived. The University of Wisconsin purchased part of it, and thirty-five volumes of pamphlets at Wisconsin have been preserved on microfilm. In his books and pamphlets Hayler often incorporated excerpts from other temperance and government publications, especially statistics; he was more an editor than an original writer. His best-known publications included 'The Master Method: an Enquiry into the Liquor Problem in America' (1901), 'Famous Fanatics' (1910), 'Prohibition Advance in All Lands: a Study of the World-Wide Character of the Drink Question' (1913), and 'The New Europe and Prohibition: a Post War Survey' (1923). He also published a novel, 'George Proctor, the Teetotaler' (1895). In 1918 he contested eastern Surrey as an independent Liberal but was defeated by the coalition Conservative, Sir S. A. Coats, of the thread manufacturing company. 
All Hayler's children were teetotallers. Mark H. C. Hayler (1887-1986) served as executive secretary of the World Prohibition Federation and after his father's death succeeded him as editor of the 'International Record', which ceased publication in 1968. A member of the United Kingdom Alliance executive council from 1938 to 1984, he is best known as the author of a history of the temperance alliance, 'The Vision of a Century, 1853-1953' (1953). He and his brother Glen were imprisoned as conscientious objectors when they refused non-combatant service during the First World War. The eldest son, (Guy) Wilfrid, emigrated to the United States, where he was a successful architect and urban planner. 
Hayler's wife, Ann, died on 30 May 1941. He himself died at Mayday Hospital, Croydon, on 23 September 1943, and was cremated at Streatham Park, Wandsworth, on 28 September; a Congregational minister officiated at the funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 39161


Whittaker, Thomas (1813-1899), temperance reformer, was born on 22 August 1813 near Grindleton, Yorkshire, one of nine children of a tenant farmer. He spent his early years at Clitheroe, where the hell-fire preaching at the Wesleyan chapel made a vivid impression on his imagination, and at the age of six he was sent to work in a local cotton factory. A few years later the family moved to Blackburn and then to Preston, where Whittaker received a little formal education at a night school run by Joseph Livesey (1794-1884), a founder of the teetotal movement. When he was fourteen a drinking incident spoiled Whittaker's prospects in Preston, precipitating a move to Bolton and then to Glossop. At Glossop, aged nineteen, he married, and soon after established his own home. 
A few years later, in 1835, Whittaker was involved in a drunken brawl, and he returned to Blackburn, unemployed and temporarily unemployable on account of a shoulder injury. The death of his first child at this point triggered an emotional crisis which formed the background to his signing a pledge of total abstinence at a teetotal meeting the same year. He subsequently renewed his religious commitment, undertook a programme of self-education, and became involved with neighbourhood temperance work. He was invited by Livesey to become a full-time temperance missionary, and, during 1835-6, itinerated throughout Lancashire, Westmorland, Cumberland, Northumberland, and Durham as an agent of the British Association for the Promotion of Temperance. At Holme in Cumberland he acquired what was to become his trademark: a rattle which he used to attract attention when making announcements of teetotal meetings. 
In 1837 Whittaker visited London, where, following addresses at Kennington and at Exeter Hall on 20 and 21 May, he was engaged as an agent by the New British and Foreign Society for the Suppression of Intemperance (a London-based national organization which changed its name the following year to the New British and Foreign Temperance Society), a post he held until 1849. During this period he promoted the cause of total abstinence in the capital, the eastern counties, and the west of England. In London Whittaker became a member of the Spitalfields chapel of the Revd Robert Aitkin, the maverick Anglican millenarian preacher who was associated with Methodism in the 1830s. There he met Louisa (1810-1875), the daughter of James Palmer, a coachman, whom he married on 6 August 1838 (his first wife had died in 1837). 
In 1849 Whittaker and his wife moved to Scarborough, where he became involved in local politics and journalism. He was often on the Liberal Party's platform, but he failed to gain election to the town council until 1867. He was defeated in the 1873 election, but at a by-election in 1876 he regained a seat which he held until his retirement in November 1884. He was mayor of Scarborough during 1880-81, and was made a JP while in office. His connection with the press began with the establishment of 'The Express' in 1865, and in 1868 he founded 'The Watchman'. In 1877 he acquired an interest in the 'Scarborough Mercury', to which he contributed comments on local affairs for many years. 
Whittaker remained committed to the cause of temperance. He was present at the inaugural meeting of the prohibitionist United Kingdom Alliance in 1853, and he attended all its annual meetings except in 1875, when he visited the United States. In the 1880s, the age of 'gospel temperance', Whittaker was concerned to refute charges that the pioneers of teetotalism had been irreligious. 
Louisa Whittaker died on 9 January 1875, having borne six children, three of whom died in infancy. Whittaker remarried in 1880; this marriage produced three children. His third wife died in 1898, and Whittaker himself died at his home, at 1 Belgrave Terrace, Scarborough, on 20 November 1899, following a bout of bronchitis. A funeral service held on 23 November at Westborough Wesleyan church was attended by representatives of temperance organizations from all over the country. Whittaker was buried in Scarborough cemetery. 
Whittaker published two autobiographical works, 'Life's Battles in Temperance Armour' (1884) and 'Brighter England and the Way to it' (1891), the title of which was a word play on William Booth's 'In Darkest England' (1890). His life has been characterized by Brian Harrison as epitomizing the temperance movement's 'resolute encouragement of working-class self-respect and self-realization' (Harrison, 27). Whittaker was markedly influenced by Benjamin Franklin's autobiography and George Combe's 'Constitution of Man' (1828). He placed great emphasis on the laws of nature, which he believed governed both the physical and the moral aspects of life. He was a very popular orator, and his broad dialect and successful blend of wit and common sense appealed especially to working-class audiences. 


@@@@@


doc= 39162


Carter, Henry (1874-1951), temperance campaigner and pacifist, was born on 3 November 1874 at 17 Cornwall Street, Plymouth, the son of George Henry Richards Carter, a basket-maker, and his wife, Lavinia Johns Kingdon. His father died when Henry Carter was young, so he was brought up by his mother, a devout Methodist and committed teetotaller. At the age of fourteen Carter left school and moved to Cardiff, where he first was apprenticed in an ironmongers' firm and later worked for various wholesale provision merchants, eventually selling on the road. In 1898-1901 he studied at Handsworth College, Birmingham, a Wesleyan Methodist divinity school, and in 1905 he was ordained as a minister. On 5 August 1905 he married Sarah Elizabeth ('b'. 1869/70), daughter of John Rumbelow a machinist. They had a daughter. 
Carter found his life work in 1911 when he was appointed secretary of the temperance committee of the Wesleyan Methodist church. In 1918 this office was expanded to include social welfare. After the merger of the Methodist churches in Britain in 1932 he continued as secretary of the temperance and social welfare committee for the unified Methodist church until his retirement in 1942. As a temperance reformer his watchwords were 'Elevate! Educate! Legislate!' In 1912 he founded the Wesleyan Methodist League of Abstainers. In 1915 he became honorary secretary of the new Temperance Council of the Christian Churches of England and Wales, and in 1916-21 he served as a member of the central control board (liquor traffic). Carter published a respected history of the board's experiment in state management, 'The Control of the Drink Trade: a Contribution to National Efficiency' (1918; 2nd edn, 1919). His conversion to state purchase of the alcoholic drink trade offended many prohibitionists, however, as did his support for the compromise licensing act of 1921 which sharply reduced the hours of sale from those which had existed before the war. 
In 1919, during a visit to the United States to study national prohibition, Carter became a member of the general council of the new World League against Alcoholism. In 1929-31 he served on the royal commission on liquor licensing laws: he signed the majority report, but with reservations. In its support he published a booklet, 'The Nation Surveys the Drink Problem' (1932) and also signed what was called the nine-point programme, published in the 'Christian World' (11 February 1932). In the same year, frustrated with what he considered the impractical rigidity of the prohibitionist United Kingdom Alliance, he published the first, nineteenth-century volume of 'The English Temperance Movement: a Study in Objectives'. Prohibitionists were furious, and, having made his point in defence of moral suasion, Carter decided that it was unnecessarily provocative to write the second volume, on the twentieth century. In 1933, after the unification of the Wesleyan Methodists with the other Methodist churches, some of them committed to prohibition, Carter signed a conciliatory 'agreed temperance programme', along with representatives of the United Kingdom Alliance. He was opposed to gambling as well as to drinking, and wrote 'Facts about Greyhound Racing' (1928) in support of the National Emergency Committee of Christian Citizens, which advocated a local option for the opening of dog tracks. 
Carter's concern for world peace and justice led him to pacifism and to work on behalf of refugees: he announced his commitment to Christian pacifism in an article in the 'Methodist Recorder' (23 March 1933). Carter later helped found the Methodist Peace Fellowship and chaired the National Peace Council. He also was a vigorous opponent of antisemitism. Shortly after the creation in 1938 of the Christian Council for Refugees he became chairman of the board of management. From 1948 until his death he served as chairman of the council. In 1945 he was chosen as chairman too of the Ecumenical Refugee Commission under the auspices of what became the World Council of Churches. Carter later helped form the European Refugee Commission and the Methodist Refugee Fund. He also chaired the executive of the Council of Christians and Jews. In 1950 he published 'The Refugee Problem in Europe and the Middle East'. 
Carter's humanitarian passions were rooted in his evangelical religiosity. His busy schedule did not intrude upon his 'regular, systematic and intense habit of private devotion' (Urwin, 125). His books on Methodism, beginning with 'The Church and the New Age' (1911) and ending with 'The Methodist Heritage' (1951), extended across virtually his entire life as an ordained minister. 
Much of what is known about Carter the man comes from a memoir published by Evelyn Clifford Urwin in 1955. Urwin had access to Carter's diaries and correspondence, interviewed friends, relatives, and staff members, and himself had worked with Carter from 1933. Urwin admiringly recalled Carter's energy, his organizational ability, his gift for winning the loyalty of his staff, and 'his almost boyish boisterous laugh' (Urwin, 120). Although Carter was a prolific writer, 'writing did not come easily to him' (ibid., 103). He spoke little about himself and kept his family life intensely private. His wife's health was fragile and their daughter predeceased them. He irritated critics with what they derided as 'Henry Carter's stunts' (ibid., 122) and suffered from 'a tiny streak of vanity and pleasure in success and esteem' (ibid., 126). He won the admiration of many people prominent in public life. In recognition of his public services he was made CBE in 1934. Carter died from heart failure on 19 June 1951 at the Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth, Marylebone, London, and was buried in Cardiff. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 39163


Raper, James Hayes (1820-1897), temperance reformer, was born on 6 October 1820 at Carlisle, the last of the twelve children of George Raper (died 1820), a stonemason, and his wife, Jane (1780-1860), the daughter of Edgar Thomas Pattinson. George Raper was killed before James's birth, and the boy was brought up by his mother and maternal grandmother, who were committed Wesleyans. He received some schooling, but the details of it are unknown. 
On leaving school Raper worked for one of his brothers, a builder and sculptor, and then for a short period in a draper's shop, before being apprenticed at the locomotive engine works at New Shildon. In 1836 he attended a temperance meeting addressed by Thomas Whittaker (1813-1899), and the following year he signed a pledge of total abstinence. A Sunday school teacher, he went on to help organize the New Shildon Juvenile Temperance Society. 
Finding engineering uncongenial, Raper decided to become a schoolteacher, and after completing his apprenticeship he moved to London, where he qualified at the Borough Road Training College of the British and Foreign School Society. In 1843 he became headmaster of the Fletcher Street Wesleyan schools, Bolton. On 24 December 1844 he married a colleague, Mrs Hannah Kenny (1809-1867), the daughter of John Hunter of Bacup. Together they helped form a branch of the Peace Society in Bolton. Raper was also active in the Bolton Temperance Society and was involved with the Anti-Corn Law movement. In 1846 he was elected a member of the mechanics' institute committee. He took a leading part in the Wesleyan reform agitation in Bolton in 1848, chairing a meeting to discuss changing the connexion's rules to allow lay representatives to take part in the annual conferences. This led to his expulsion by the quarterly district meeting; he subsequently resigned from the Fletcher Street School and with his wife started a private school at nearby Lark Hill. 
Raper became involved with the prohibitionist United Kingdom Alliance at its foundation in 1853, and in 1860 he was appointed its first full-time parliamentary agent, a Manchester-based position which involved lobbying of MPs and paid a salary of $500 per annum. That year he assisted Wilfrid Lawson, MP for Carlisle, to draft the 'Permissive Bill' (providing for a local veto on licensing drink outlets), which the alliance aimed to have enacted as a first step towards total prohibition. A popular orator, Raper spoke widely on the temperance question and represented the alliance at major conventions. In 1873 he visited Sweden to study the licensing system there, and in 1875 he toured Canada and the United States to investigate the working of prohibition, which he deemed a political success. In 1878 he stood as a Liberal candidate in a parliamentary by-election in Peterborough, but failed to win the seat. In the same year he resigned his position as parliamentary agent and joined the executive of the alliance; he continued lobbying MPs and speaking at temperance meetings. 
Raper's first wife died on 4 March 1867. On 22 November 1879 he married Amelia Eliza Tisdall of Tunbridge Wells, the third daughter of Edmund Tisdall, a dyer, of Kensington. The couple settled permanently in London at 33 Pembroke Square, Kensington, where Raper died from complications of influenza on 19 May 1897. A funeral service was held at Brompton cemetery on 24 May, and various memorial services followed over the next few days. Raper was survived by his wife; he had no children. 
Raper was one of the most popular orators of the temperance movement. He was very knowledgeable on the drink question and a respected and effective lobbyist. In December 1897 a memorial fund was set up to finance an annual lecture on temperance known as the Lees-Raper lectureship. (The temperance reformer F. R. Lees had also died in May of that year.) During his life Raper had also been involved with a range of other social and political reform causes, including anti-slavery, anti-smoking, vegetarianism, peace, free trade, parliamentary reform, purity, and sabbatarianism. 


@@@@@


doc= 39165


Wightman, Julia Bainbrigge (1817-1898), temperance activist and author, was born on 23 January 1817 in the Bengal Residency, Cawnpore, India, third daughter of William James, lieutenant-colonel of the East India Company, of Saltford House, Somerset, and his wife, Mary Marshall, daughter of Lieutenant-General Sir Dyson Marshall. Following her mother's death in India, her father returned to England with his family about 1821 and settled at Saltford House, Saltford, Devon. Julia James met and married, on 1 December 1842 in Saltford church, Charles Edward Leopold Wightman (1816-1896), the son of the Revd John Wightman and his wife, Elizabeth Gagaine. With him she moved to Shrewsbury, where his father had the living of St Alkmund's. Charles Wightman was appointed vicar of St Alkmund's Church and took responsibility for the parish. Julia Wightman devoted herself to parish work, including Sunday school and 'Bible' classes. Her first philanthropic undertaking was the rescue of fallen young women: in 1843 she formed a local fund-raising committee, which initially sent girls to local penitentiaries. However, she disliked the existing penitentiary system, with its compulsory two-year residence and regimes of solitary confinement and haircuts upon admittance; after the Chester diocese declined to participate in a joint home with Shrewsbury, she organized the purchase of a house in Wyle Cop, the Salop Home, and was able to use her influence to discontinue such practices. Six years later the penitentiary moved to larger premises on Dogpole, and was eventually taken over by the St Julien's Home in 1866. 
Julia Wightman is better known, however, for her temperance work and her book 'Haste to the Rescue!', an account of her temperance activities in Shrewsbury in the form of letters written to her sister, originally published in 1859. A temperance advocate from the early days of her marriage, after she found the cook drunk in the kitchen, both she and her husband attempted a teetotal way of life, although doctors continually prescribed alcohol for her delicate health. Julia Wightman's temperance work in the Shrewsbury community was inspired partly by reading Catherine Marsh's 'English Hearts and Minds' (1858), an account of Marsh's work with navvies employed on the construction of the Crystal Palace, and partly by her own experience of the poverty, drunkenness, and associated problems of Butcher's Row, the working-class area of Shrewsbury around St Alkmund's Church. Her own book highlighted the extent of the drink problem and made many aware of the role of total abstinence in alleviating the effects of drink among the working classes. 
Throughout her life Julia Wightman was scrupulous in linking all her work with Church of England doctrine and basing it, as she did all her philanthropic activities, around St Alkmund's Church. Despite this Christian-based approach to temperance she did not receive encouragement or support in the early days from the church, but was advised to discontinue the work. However, she was later credited with being one of the major influences in the establishment of the Church of England Temperance Society, founded after the National Temperance League had circulated all clergymen in the Church of England with a copy of her work. Determined to provide an alternative to the public house, Julia Wightman planned a Working Men's Hall to be a 'public house without the drink', first appealing for funds in June 1861. The site of The Fox inn, Shrewsbury, and its adjacent premises were purchased the following year for $700. Royalties from 'Haste to the Rescue!' contributed $550 to the fund. The hall opened in April 1863 with further rooms planned. The total cost of the hall, including land, conversion, and new buildings, was to total over $5000. Its opening was a cause for celebration in the town and was attended by 1000 people, including the bishop and a number of clergymen, gaining it the approval of the Church of England. All connected with the hall had to be total abstainers: the conveyance for the former Fox Inn and the new buildings contained clauses ensuring that the hall keepers should be total abstainers and specifying that all members of the executive committee should be members of the Church of England. The main buildings still exist. 
The hall became the venue for many of Julia Wightman's Christian and philanthropic activities, including 'Bible' classes for postmen and policemen, mothers' meetings, sewing classes, and temperance meetings; the church ragged school, founded in 1862, was transferred to it, all teachers and superintendents of the school being required to be teetotallers. After investigating the Irwell Dining Hall in Manchester, which provided cheap meals, Mrs Wightman ensured that the hall would provide a similar service for market people, as well as housing a club and coffee house. It became the venue for meetings of other philanthropic organizations, but no meetings could be held on the premises that condemned the Church of England. The last phase to be built included baths let to members of the public. 
Having suffered from delicate health all her life Julia Wightman became unwell for the period 1868 to 1875. Despite her enforced absences from the parish she continued her interest in temperance and other philanthropic activities, writing letters to be read at meetings. After her recovery, in 1882, inspired by a visit from Ellice Hopkins, she founded the Shrewsbury Association for Friendless Girls, making it part of the Lichfield Diocesan Association. She also arranged the purchase of a former eye and ear hospital for conversion into a training school for servants and a free registry for those seeking jobs. Christianity and teetotalism was the bedrock of the training received by the girls. She was instrumental in founding branches of the YMCA and YWCA, despite the fact that she disagreed with the organizations' non-sectarian stance. These, like her other societies, were affiliated to St Alkmund's. In 1882 she began 'Bible' classes for young businesswomen, and continued to be interested in these classes, writing letters to be read at meetings, until shortly before her death. 
Julia Wightman played a significant role in making temperance work an acceptable activity for women. Mrs Sewell and Anna Sewell were inspired by her achievements, and as a result took up aggressive temperance work in Wick. Eleanor Harford Battersby added Christianity to her temperance work after reading 'Haste to the Rescue!' and W. S. Caine (1842-1903), later member of the executive of the United Kingdom Alliance, came to visit her and, despite his initial scepticism over the value of teetotalism, signed the pledge with her in 1858. 
Julia Wightman's influence on the local Church of England community was great. In 1881 she intervened in the school board elections. There were nine seats available with eleven candidates; five churchmen, five nonconformists, and a Roman Catholic priest. A strong wave of anti-churchmen feeling existed; Mrs Wightman spoke on the issue at the Sunday meeting before the election and sent a letter on the subject to the Revd J. M. J. Fletcher, who circulated it as a handbill. She encouraged all to vote for the principle of religious instruction according to the established church, and, in the event, the five churchmen headed the poll. A firm sectarian, she would not tolerate criticism of the Church of England. Within her work there had to be conversion to the Church of England; unsectarian work was 'spiritual lawlessness'. Her beliefs remained essentially conservative to the end: she was a fervent anti-Darwinist, producing a booklet 'Evolution or Special Creation: which?' (n.d.) intended to vindicate the accepted biblical concept of creation. This was inspired by reading sermons advocating Darwinism preached by the bishops of Carlisle, Manchester, and Bedford at the Manchester meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and was published at the time of the Darwin memorial appeal in Shrewsbury. 
Julia Wightman was supported in all her work by her husband, the Revd Prebendary Wightman: he assisted in the foundation of the St Alkmund's schools and did the administrative work in the purchase of the Fox Inn for the Working Men's Temperance Hall. He became a trustee of the hall, and as vicar of St Alkmunds was chairman of the committee for the building of the hall. He remained vicar of St Alkmunds, despite being offered other livings, until two years prior to his death in 1896. After an eleven-day illness Julia Wightman died of cardiac dilation and exhaustion following bronchitis on 14 January 1898 at The Crescent, Shrewsbury. She was buried with her husband in general cemetery, Roman Road, Shrewsbury, on 25 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 39167


Marshall, Mary (1850-1944), economist, was born on 24 October 1850 in the village of Ufford, near Stamford, the second daughter of the Revd Thomas Paley and his wife, Judith Wormald. She was the great-granddaughter of Archdeacon William Paley. Her sister and a younger brother also survived into adulthood. 
Although the subject of a lengthy obituary and autobiographical memoirs published after her death, Mary Paley Marshall remains a shadowy figure, a devoted assistant and appendage to her famous husband, Alfred Marshall (1842-1924). Shortly before his death, she claimed that 'to have helped, however little, in a life such as his is an enviable and delightful lot' (M. P. Marshall to J. M. Keynes, 27 July 1922, King's Cam., Keynes Collection). Yet this picture of her as a typical Victorian wife overlooks her importance as a pioneer woman student and university teacher, her unusual role as a middle-class working woman, her considerable talents as a painter, and, more controversially, the evidence of her rejection of the second-class status that her husband increasingly held to be the place of women in society. 
Educated mainly at home, both by her father and by a German governess, Mary Paley's father encouraged her to enter in 1870 for the Cambridge higher local examinations for women over eighteen. She continued her studies in Cambridge, where she lived with Anne Jemima Clough and was one of the first five students at Newnham Hall (the famous Newnham Five), attending lectures given by progressive Cambridge dons who supported the cause of women's higher education. She passed the moral sciences papers of the higher locals with distinctions in political economy and logic, and Alfred Marshall persuaded her to enter informally for the moral sciences tripos, although women at that time had no right to use Cambridge degree examination papers. In December 1874 she was unofficially classed between a first- and second-class degree. 
From October 1875 until her marriage to Alfred Marshall in August 1877, Mary Paley was resident lecturer in economics at Newnham College. After their marriage, which was childless, the Marshalls settled in Bristol, where Alfred became principal and professor of political economy of the new University College. The couple had already begun co-operation on a short text book of elementary economics, 'The Economics of Industry' (1879). While he stood for the book's analytical content, she ensured its freshness and simplicity of style. The book proved a success, being reprinted nine times. 
Bristol was the first university college to experiment in co-education, and, as 'both Alfred and I were anxious that I should help in the work of the College' (Tullberg, 'Mary Paley Marshall', 157), Mary gave her husband's morning lectures. When he fell ill a year later, she took over more of his work, including advanced classes. Her dedication to students was long remembered and, in 1926, she was awarded the degree of DLitt by Bristol University for her lifelong work as a teacher of economics. After an interlude of four terms in Oxford, 1883-4, during which Mary was a popular lecturer in political economy to women students, the couple returned to Cambridge in 1884 on Alfred's appointment to the Cambridge chair of political economy. 
Alfred Marshall's views on the position of women in society and on their academic potential had meanwhile grown conservative, even reactionary. Mary Marshall returned to Newnham as economics lecturer but maintained a low profile. However, her review of Clara Collet's 'Educated Working Women' reveals her clear understanding of the need for women to gain economic independence through education and not face the 'destructive humiliation' of being obliged to marry for a living ('Economic Journal', 12, 1902, 252-7). She retired from teaching in 1916 and devoted the following eight years to the care of her husband, who was becoming increasingly infirm, physically and mentally. She assisted him closely in the production of 'Industry and Trade' (1919) and especially his final work, 'Money, Credit and Commerce' (1923). After his death in 1924, she became honorary librarian of the Marshall Library, and catalogued the many books donated by her husband. 
Any assessment of Mary Marshall's own work as an economist is difficult because she published so little. As a teacher, it may be said that while in her early years she inspired many other women to enter and succeed in 'men's examinations', she later failed to respond to developments in the educational standards of women students and to attitudes to research in late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Cambridge. In an unpublished obituary Claude Guillebaud summarized his aunt's life in Cambridge from 1884: 'Until [Alfred Marshall's] death... she lived only for him, collaborating with him in his writing and tending him with a self-sacrificing devotion that could hardly be exceeded.' After his death 'her individuality blossomed forth in what became for her a real St. Martin's summer.... Age never warped the kindly, tolerant and humorous attitude towards life which made her such a delightful companion' (Tullberg, 'Mary Paley Marshall', 184). 
Mary Marshall died in Cambridge at her home, Balliol Croft, 6 Madingley Road, Cambridge, on 19 March 1944, and her ashes were scattered in the grounds of Balliol Croft, where she and her husband had lived since their return to Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 39169


Fawcett, Philippa Garrett (1868-1948), mathematician and civil servant, was born in London on 4 April 1868, the only daughter of Henry Fawcett (1833-1884), Liberal politician and professor of political economy at Cambridge, and his wife, Millicent Garrett Fawcett (1847-1929), leader of the women's suffragist movement. Philippa Fawcett's political and intellectual inheritance was formidable. Both her parents were active in the movement for the higher education of women. Not yet two years old, she reportedly toddled among the group of senior academics and their wives meeting in her parents' drawing-room in Cambridge in 1869 to plan the scheme of lectures for women that led, in time, to the foundation of Newnham College. 
As the only child in a busy intellectual and politically active household, Philippa Fawcett was exposed to radical causes and was given more independence than was usual among her contemporaries. She attended Clapham middle school in London and then Clapham high school, one of the new Girls' Public Day School Company's schools where standards were based on those in the best boys' schools. She proved at an early age to excel in mathematics and at fifteen received coaching from George Barnes Atkinson of Trinity Hall, Cambridge. From 1885 to 1887 she attended courses at University College, London, in pure and applied mathematics and mechanics, and she also studied chemistry at Bedford College. On the basis of her excellent results in the higher local examinations, she was awarded a Winkworth scholarship to study mathematics at Newnham College, Cambridge. 
At Newnham, Philippa Fawcett's study habits were regular, rarely exceeding six hours daily. She was an enthusiastic hockey player in the Newnham team, an excellent needlewoman, and took part in the college debating society. As was the custom among students aiming for high honours in the mathematical tripos, she was coached by Ernest William Hobson of Christ's College. Great hopes were placed on her achieving high marks in the competitive mathematical honours degree, the tripos. This was officially open to women from the Cambridge women's colleges, Newnham and Girton, although they could be classed only unofficially and received no degree as recognition of their academic success. When the results of the tripos were announced in the Senate House on 7 June 1890, the names of the successful male candidates were read out, and Geoffrey Thomas Bennett of St John's crowned as senior wrangler, the top male student in the first class. As was the practice, the names of the women candidates were then read, their places in the competitive examination being described as 'equal to' or 'between' those of the men. Philippa Fawcett's place was 'above the senior wrangler'. 
Fawcett's success produced a great deal of excitement among the undergraduates and at Newnham, and was widely reported in the press. While it was still generally held that women were mentally incapable of scaling the heights of mathematics, educationists had concluded in the mid-1860s that the quality of mathematics teaching for girls and women was at fault. Greatly improved teaching meant that mathematics became as popular a subject for women at Cambridge as classics or English. Eight women from Newnham and nine from Girton succeeded in the mathematical tripos in Philippa Fawcett's year; two Girton students were also placed among the wranglers. 
In 1891 Philippa Fawcett sat part two of the tripos, which was considered to demand more originality and ingenuity of candidates. Again she confounded the women's critics by being placed, together with Bennett, the male senior wrangler of her year, alone in the first class. Both were former students of University College, London, which in 1892 appointed them fellows, an honour given to distinguished students, though without pecuniary reward. 
Bennett was made a fellow of St John's College, awarded the university prize for mathematics, and lectured for the university. Fawcett was not eligible for any such lucrative posts or prizes. Newnham gave her the Marion Kennedy scholarship, which permitted a further year of mathematical work, resulting in the publication of a paper in a mathematical journal. In 1892 she was appointed a college lecturer at Newnham (which as yet had no fellows), helping other young women prepare for the mathematical tripos. As a teacher she was remembered for her 'concentration, speed,... infectious delight... and patience' (Newnham College 'Roll Letter', 53). 
From 1899 to 1900 Philippa Fawcett embarked on a world tour with Blanche Athena Clough, who was also on the Newnham staff. In July 1901 she accompanied her mother on a trip to South Africa, where the latter headed a government commission of women inquiring into conditions in British concentration camps. She resigned her Newnham lectureship in 1902, when she was persuaded to return to the Transvaal to help establish the school system there. Among her tasks was to train mathematics teachers in Johannesburg and to develop a system of farm schools which could meet the needs of the widespread Boer farming community. 
In 1905 Fawcett returned to England to take up the post of principal assistant in the executive officer (education) department of the London county council (LCC), where she took charge of higher education. She became responsible for existing secondary schools and developed new ones established under the 1902 'Education Act': twenty-seven such schools were established during her time with the LCC. The council attributed much of their success to her expert and enthusiastic direction of the administrative work involved in their creation and development, including the scheme of county council scholarships that enabled students to progress through the system. She was the first professional woman appointed to the council's permanent staff and, remarkably, she received the same salary as would a man in the post. Equal pay for men and women on the council's senior staff, granted in 1919, was her own contribution to 'the Cause'. 
Fawcett's responsibilities at the LCC also included teacher training. Towards the end of the nineteenth century, local authorities, and in particular the LCC, founded day teacher training colleges. Since most existing colleges were denominational and residential, these day colleges sought to break the hold of religion on teacher training and to provide cheaper facilities for students living locally. When the principal of Avery Hill Training College in Greenwich, founded in 1906, fell ill and resigned in 1907, Fawcett 'abandoned her desk at County Hall to mount a rescue operation' and within six months had put the college's administration on a sound footing: 'When we were a ship without a rudder, she pulled us through' (Shorney, 54-5). She took a particular interest in the London Day Training College, founded in 1902 and transferred under her guidance to the University of London as the Institute of Education in 1932. Clapham Day Training College, originally attached to her old school, was reorganized (and in 1953, after her death, was named after her). In 1920 Fawcett was appointed assistant education officer (higher education). On retiring from her post in 1934, she was thanked in particular for the tact with which she had handled the relationship between the council and the University of London and for 'the very happy relations which exist with the governing bodies of secondary schools throughout London' (LCC minutes). 
Philippa Fawcett is known to have participated in a manifesto organized by the suffragettes in July 1910 (Rubinstein, 181, n.70). Otherwise she strongly supported the suffragist cause led by her mother, who while firmly opposing the violent and disruptive methods of the suffragettes was prepared to join with them when they refrained from militancy. However, as a public servant, Fawcett generally kept a low profile during the suffrage campaign. She was a prominent supporter of the League of Nations Union, helping to develop junior and schools branches, and was particularly active in the 'Peace ballot' of 1934-5. She supported the London and National Society for Women's Service (renamed the Fawcett Society in 1953), serving on the executive committee and later as president. She also donated $6000 shortly after the Second World War to the society's library (later the National Library of Women) at a time of serious financial difficulty, rescuing an outstanding collection of archives and printed material on the changing role of women in society. She has been described as a woman of frugal habits, reticent, and modest to a fault (Newnham College 'Roll Letter', 50; Siklos, 40). She had a great love of literature, travel, walking, and gardening. During the First World War she spent her holidays as a relief postman in Yorkshire, and sewed and knitted comforters for the military during the second. She died in London on 10 June 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 39170


Keynes, (John) Neville (1852-1949), logician, economist, and university administrator, was born on 31 August 1852 at Salisbury, Wiltshire, the only son of John Keynes (1805-1878), floriculturist, and his second wife, Anna Maynard Neville. He was reared in a middle-class, staunchly nonconformist household, which included his half-sister (fourteen years his senior), his paternal grandmother, and his father's unmarried sister. At fifteen Neville went to Amersham Hall, a nonconformist boarding-school, and in 1869 he won a scholarship to University College, London. There he won both the London BA and a Cambridge college scholarship. In October 1872 the bright young nonconformist entered Pembroke, a small, traditionally Anglican college, holding its top entrance scholarship in mathematics and classics. 
Keynes's objective was a fellowship that would enable him to pursue an academic career. He despaired of getting any intellectual stimulus from the hired coaches who crammed undergraduates for the two traditionally prestigious honours courses. However, students reading moral sciences, where classes were small, enjoyed direct personal tuition from such charismatic dons as Henry Sidgwick and Alfred Marshall on philosophy, political economy, and logic. Accordingly, he read mathematics until May, when a college examination gave him his chance to win the scholarship enabling him to read moral sciences for the next two and a half years. He also crammed successfully for both parts of the London BSc. Finally, after passing out senior moralist at the 1875 tripos, and after getting the London MA gold medal in June, he was elected a fellow of Pembroke in August 1876. 
Over the next six years Keynes gave intercollegiate lectures on logic and political economy to honours men and students from the recently founded women's colleges, Girton and Newnham. He held a minor college office (domestic bursar) but socialized mainly with faculty colleagues and the Cambridge Congregationalist community -- among whom he met, and fell in love with, Florence Ada Brown (1861-1958) ['see 'Keynes, Florence Ada], the Newnhamite daughter of John Brown, minister of Bunyan Meeting, Bedford. They married in August 1882, the year when a radical reform of Cambridge college and university statutes abolished life fellowships (unless held with a major college office) and financed a redistribution of income to the university through a progressive levy on colleges. As a modern don, concerned to improve the quality of higher education in Cambridge, Keynes now focused his ambitions on the career opportunities offered by a reconstructed university, and vacated his fellowship in August 1882. He looked forward to living (and entertaining his many friends) in the family home he built for Florence and himself at 6 Harvey Road. Henceforth, he dedicated his academic talents to logic and political economy, and his managerial skills (scarce among academics) to an evolving and increasingly influential central administration. 
Keynes's first administrative appointment was assistant secretary (1881) to the local examinations and lectures syndicate, of which he later became secretary (1892-1910). Elected member of the council of the senate (1893-1925), he served as its secretary (1893-1925), became registrary in 1910, and remained the university's head administrator until his retirement in 1925. He was secretary to the moral sciences board for more years than any of his colleagues and its chairman from 1906 to 1912. He became chairman of the board of economics and politics (1908-20), a member of Newnham College council, and served various other councils and syndicates -- each bringing its own load of subcommittees. In sum, throughout four decades, when the 1882 reforms were gradually transforming a loose federation of privileged clerical communities into an integrated and expanding centre of learning, education, and research, Neville Keynes's clear analytical mind, rare organizational ability, undogmatic approach, unpretentious personality, and absolute moral integrity rendered him indispensable whenever difficult or complex or controversial decisions needed to be taken and implemented at university level. 
As logician and economist, Keynes was most productive from 1884 (when he was one of the first twenty-three lecturers appointed by Cambridge University under the new statutes) until 1911. His first book, 'Studies and Exercises in Formal Logic' (1884), was a textbook on deductive logic which became a classic in its field. Written as a students' manual it was revised and enlarged to become a lecturers' bible; the fourth edition (1906) was reprinted in 1930. His second book, 'The Scope and Method of Political Economy' (1891), systematically analysed the methodological debates dividing economic theorists and undermining the scientific credentials of their discipline. Writing from the perspective of the new Cambridge school of economics (founded by Marshall), Keynes clarified contentious issues and explained the approach adopted by leading contemporary theorists, in Europe and the USA as well as Britain. This carefully researched monograph attracted favourable reviews and created an international reputation for Keynes as an economist. It drew such an authoritative line under the long-running methodological debates that it soon became superfluous, except for students of the history of economic thought. The last of several revisions and reprints appeared in 1930. 
Neville Keynes resided in Cambridge until he died there in the Evelyn Nursing Home on 15 November 1949. He was buried three days later, and a memorial service was held at Pembroke. His happy family life had been marred only by the death in 1946 of his brilliant first-born child, John Maynard Keynes. His beloved Florence died in 1958, leaving their two other distinguished children: Margaret (the wife of Archibald Vivian Hill), and Geoffrey Langdon Keynes. 


@@@@@


doc= 39171


Keynes, Florence Ada (1861-1958), social and political activist, was born on 10 March 1861 at 76 Elizabeth Street, Cheetham, Manchester, the eldest of the three daughters and three sons of Dr John Brown (1830-1922), Congregationalist minister, and his wife, Ada Haydon, 'nee' Ford (1837-1929), schoolteacher. Educated at home, she was offered a scholarship at Newnham Hall, Cambridge, when she was seventeen, on the strength of her results in the Cambridge senior local examinations. She began her studies there in 1878 by following the syllabuses originally designed to test the educational standards of schoolteachers. Through mutual family acquaintances in the Congregationalist church, she met (John) Neville Keynes (1852-1949), logician and economist, and they became engaged in 1880. Having passed several examinations at Newnham, she went home to assist in teaching at her mother's school, but returned to Cambridge on her marriage to Keynes on 15 August 1882. Three children, John Maynard Keynes, economist, Geoffrey Langdon Keynes, surgeon, and Margaret Neville (who married Archibald Vivian Hill), social reformer, were born in quick succession. 
With her own financial position secured, Florence Keynes turned her attention to voluntary work, following the ideals of service encouraged both by her religious affiliation and by Newnham. She worked for a number of projects associated with the health care and education of girls and mothers, and in 1895 became secretary of the Cambridge branch of the Charity Organization Society. Her public career began in 1907 when she was elected a local poor-law guardian; she became chairman of the board in 1922. Her brief election manifesto emphasized the view that those parts of the board's work which dealt with women, children, the aged, and the sick, were especially the province of women guardians. Her experience as a guardian left her dissatisfied with the possibilities for effective action by the boards: she felt that she needed the wider powers of the local government politician, but women married to householders had no local franchise, nor power to sit as councillors. When in 1914 married women became eligible to serve as town and county councillors, Florence Keynes became the first woman councillor in Cambridge. She served on the borough council for many years, as alderman from 1930 and as mayor in 1932. In 1920 she was among the first group of women to be made magistrates. During her years on the council she took a particular interest in issues of public and mental health, manifested in the founding of the Papworth colony for tuberculosis victims, and in her work for Fulbourn Mental Hospital. On the national stage she campaigned for the establishment of juvenile courts and urged women to act as jurors and magistrates. She was instrumental in the introduction of women police in 1931 after a campaign lasting seventeen years: this was a typical example of the way women lobbied patiently for reforms through what she later called 'long periods of working and waiting' ('Cambridge Daily News', 19 Jan 1952). 
Working in a private or public capacity, through voluntary or official bodies, Florence Keynes helped to start the country's first juvenile labour exchanges, an open-air school for sick children, a scheme to provide free spectacles and dental treatment for needy Cambridge schoolchildren, surgical aids for the disabled, and respectable lodgings for single women, as well as founding the local folk museum, and setting in motion the scheme to rebuild Cambridge's Guildhall. Much of her voluntary work was performed together with colleagues in the National Council of Women, of which she became national president in 1930. Besides numerous papers on social issues and women's contribution to public life, she published late in life two books of memoirs, one of Cambridge and the other of her large and close-knit family, to whom she always extended generous hospitality. On her ninetieth birthday she described the strategy that she and her women colleagues had adopted in their pursuit of social change: identifying a need, experimenting voluntarily with solutions at a local level, and if successful, seeking to persuade central or local government to carry on with the scheme on a wider scale. 
Florence Keynes died on 13 February 1958, shortly before her ninety-seventh birthday, at her home in Cambridge, 6 Harvey Road. A memorial service was held for her in King's College chapel on 22 February, attended by representatives of the university, the town, and the many voluntary organizations and projects in which she had been involved. 


@@@@@


doc= 39176


Allen, Mary Sophia (1878-1964), police officer, was born on 12 March 1878 at 2 Marlborough Terrace, Newport Road, Roath, Glamorgan, the daughter of Thomas Isaac Allen, a superintendent of the Great Western Railway, and his wife, Margaret Sophia Carlyle. Her sister, Mrs Hampton, was an early member of the Women Police Volunteers. Mary Allen was educated at home and at Princess Helena College, Ealing. In her memoirs she describes herself as a delicate child who was often ill and was therefore forced to lead a rather cloistered childhood. 
In 1909, inspired by Annie Kenney, Allen left home for London to join the campaign for women's suffrage. She served three prison terms for her suffragette activities, during which she went on hunger strikes and was forcibly fed. She was awarded a hunger strike medal from Mrs Pethick-Lawrence in August 1909. In her book 'Lady in Blue' Mary Allen wrote that while in prison she 'first envisaged the idea of women police, to arrest women offenders, attend them at police stations, and escort them to prison and give them proper care' (Allen, 'Lady', 16). 
Following a period of illness (as a result of being force-fed during her final prison term) Allen was forbidden by Mrs Pankhurst from participating in any further militant activities. Instead she moved to Edinburgh, where she acted as an organizer. Shortly afterwards, just after the outbreak of war, she joined the Women Police Volunteers as a constable. The Women Police Volunteers was an independent organization whose members were trained, uniformed, and prepared to work full time. It was founded by Margaret Damer Dawson, and funded by subscription and private donation. In November 1914 Mary Allen and a colleague began their service in Grantham, Lincolnshire, where the population had almost doubled since military troops had taken up residence. Their zeal in discouraging companionship between local women and soldiers at the Grantham camp, so as to prevent prostitution, led to a split in the Women Police Volunteers and the resignation of Nina Boyle, one of its founders. Allen replaced Boyle as sub-commandant in February 1915. In May 1915 she was transferred to Hull, where she and her colleagues maintained order through several Zeppelin raids. After a period of service in Hull she returned to London to assist in the training of policewomen for munitions factories all over the country. She was appointed OBE in February 1918 for her services during the war. 
When Margaret Damer Dawson died in May 1920 Mary Allen succeeded her as commandant of the Women's Auxiliary Service, as her force was now called. Members of the Women's Auxiliary Service initiated women police forces abroad, notably in Ireland and Cologne, Germany. Her first book, 'The Pioneer Policewoman' (1925), describes her work and adventures during this period. Subsequently Mary Allen travelled extensively on lecture tours and inspected the training methods and administration of women police forces in many countries, including Egypt, Brazil, and Finland. About this time the National Council of Women wrote letters of complaint to the Home Office, stating that Mary Allen was masquerading abroad as an official policewoman, whereas in fact she was a purely independent agent. The fact that she continued to wear her uniform -- riding breeches, skirted coat, overcoat, flat cap, and military boots -- together with her authoritative manner and considerable skill in self-advertisement, undoubtedly contributed to her success in this venture. 
In 1927 she founded and edited the 'Policewoman's Review', which ran until 1937. It was here, in December 1933, that she advertised for recruits to her newly formed women's reserve, the object of which was to train women for service in any national emergency. Members were to be trained in first aid, fire drill, and lorry driving, among other things. The idea of a women's reserve generated a number of protests to the press, as well as complaints to the Home Office, which pointed out that many of the aims of the women's reserve were already covered by existing organizations such as the British Red Cross, the order of St John, and the Voluntary Aid Detachment. 
On her first visit to Berlin, in 1934, Allen met Hitler and Goering. With Goering she discussed whether policewomen should wear uniform and was glad to report that his reply (strongly in the affirmative) exactly summed up her own views on the subject, which she considered to be one of the 'most controversial matters concerning policewomen all over the world' (Allen, 'Lady', 155). In the same year her second book, 'Woman at the Crossroads', was published, followed by 'Lady in Blue' (1936). By the late 1930s her concern with the issues of prostitution, white slave traffic, and the illegal drug trade was well established and in April-May 1940 she contributed a series of articles on vice in 'Action', the organ of the British Union of Fascists (BUF). She had joined the BUF in December 1939. Her membership, as well as her involvement with other prominent members such as Sir Oswald Mosley, resulted in a suspension order under defence regulation 18B on 11 July 1940. This involved restrictions on her movement and communications, but she was not imprisoned. Although she repeatedly asked for the removal of these restrictions, the Home Office saw no grounds for granting her request. 
Little is known of Allen from this time until her death, although it appears that she was received into the Roman Catholic church in 1953. She did not marry and had no children. In 1959 she became a patient at Birdhurst Nursing Home, 4 Birdhurst Road, South Croydon, where she remained until her death there from cerebral thrombosis and cerebral arteriosclerosis on 16 December 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 39177


Drummond, Flora McKinnon (1878-1949), suffragette, was born on 4 August 1878 at 12 Elizabeth Ann Street, Manchester, the daughter of Francis Gibson, a tailor, and his wife, Sarah ('nee' Cook). In her early childhood, Flora's family returned to the Isle of Arran where she attended high school. She left at fourteen and took up a summer post as telegraphist, returning to study at a civil service school in Glasgow in winter. There she qualified as a postmistress, but was unable to follow this career owing to new regulations which raised the height standard to 5 feet 2 inches, an inch above her height. Instead, she took further classes in shorthand and typing, funded by her father's relatives. She achieved a prestigious Society of Arts certificate, but remained bitterly disappointed at the loss of her chosen career and angry at the regulation which she felt discriminated against women because of their lower height average. 
As a young woman, Flora Gibson was a keen athlete and a leader among her peers. On 26 September 1898 she married Joseph Percival Drummond ('b'. 1876/7), a journeyman upholsterer from Manchester who was a local celebrity in her small community following his fall from a steamer during a holiday trip to Arran. The couple settled in Manchester, and became involved with the socialist culture surrounding the Independent Labour Party (ILP), the Fabian Society, and the 'Clarion' newspaper. Flora Drummond took several short-term posts in local factories to share and understand the conditions of local women workers, but stopped when poor trade left Joseph unemployed and herself the main wage earner; she then worked as manager of the Oliver Typewriter Company. 
In October 1905 Manchester socialists organized a series of indignation meetings to protest at the imprisonment of Christabel Pankhurst and Annie Kenney, ILP activists who, as members of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), had been arrested following their interruption of a local Liberal rally. Flora Drummond attended one of these meetings in Stevenson Square, where she joined the WSPU. She quickly became part of its leadership, forming an especially close friendship with Annie, whom she followed to London in 1906. There, Flora Drummond put her secretarial talents at the disposal of the WSPU. From December 1906 the WSPU employed her as a salaried organizer. 
Flora Drummond proved popular and innovative in this role. Her small, rotund figure and her Scottish origins gave her the nicknames Bluebell and the Precocious Piglet, and her consistently cheerful manner won a sympathetic audience as she worked to build the WSPU's London branches. Supporters and opponents consistently praised her witty speeches. Outdoor meetings in working-class districts, to which she was used from her socialist work, were her forte. She initiated a group of suffrage bicycle scouts as a mobile propaganda corps who paraded and delivered leaflets on bicycles, a technique borrowed from the 'Clarion' movement. She also demonstrated a talent for original forms of protest, bursting into 10 Downing Street, finding subterranean entrances to parliament, and dancing a highland fling outside Holloway prison. Once she hired a motor launch and moored on the River Thames opposite the terrace of the House of Commons to harangue members taking afternoon tea. 
In June 1908 Flora Drummond was placed in charge of organizing processions for 'Women's Sunday', the largest franchise demonstration to date. Her flair and enthusiasm earned her the nickname General, which she proudly adopted. From this point, she was rarely given any other name, and completed her military persona by regularly sporting a peaked cap, epaulettes, and a sash embroidered 'general', all in the WSPU colours of purple, white, and green. A skilled horsewoman, she often rode at the head of WSPU processions in her regalia, or reviewed her suffragette 'troops' on horseback. 
Flora Drummond's central role in the WSPU was acknowledged when she was summonsed along with Mrs Pankhurst and Christabel in October 1908 for distributing a leaflet urging the general public to 'help the suffragettes to rush the House of Commons'. She and Mrs Pankhurst received heavy sentences of three months, but Flora was released after nine days when it became apparent to the authorities that she was pregnant, and not in good health. The child was named Keir Hardie Drummond in honour of the Labour leader and of his parents' socialist beliefs. Motherhood did nothing to curb Flora's frantic public schedule, but as militancy became more violent her role was increasingly one of organizer rather than participant. This was not unusual; it was essential to retain a core of experienced workers to direct suffragettes in campaigns which became daily more dangerous. Flora's flair for organizing working women made her more valuable in the field than in prison, and she conducted several national tours to recruit women workers. She remained close to the Pankhursts and was again summonsed on conspiracy charges as one of the WSPU leadership in June 1913. This time ill health and an urgent, unspecified operation saved her from a lengthy prison sentence. She remained willing to face arrest, however, and also undertook a hunger strike in 1914. 
When war broke out in 1914, Flora Drummond's loyalty to Christabel and Emmeline Pankhurst meant that she stopped suffrage work and joined their anti-German crusade. Working women still remained her favourite targets for propaganda. She toured the country reviewing lines of female munitions workers in her 'general's' regalia, often accompanied by former adversaries including Lloyd George, whom she now enthusiastically supported. However, as the WSPU became increasingly anti-Bolshevist, she rejected the last vestiges of her socialist past which she now dismissed as 'sentimental'. When the war ended she was one of the few former suffragettes who attempted to continue the popular, jingoistic campaigning which the WSPU had followed from 1914 to 1918. With Elsie Bowerman, another former suffragette, she founded the Women's Guild of Empire, an organization aimed at furthering a sense of patriotism in working-class women and defeating such socialist manifestations as strikes and lock-outs. The guild, which continued working throughout the Second World War, claimed 40,000 members in more than 30 branches at its peak in 1925. In 1926, in an echo of her WSPU work, Flora led 20,000 of its supporters through the streets of London to a meeting at the Albert Hall against a barrage of jeers from socialist protesters. Yet despite the size of the guild, it was as a suffragette that Flora remained best-known. She presided at the unveiling of Mrs Pankhurst's statue in March 1930 where she proved her famous wit remained intact, informing the prime minister that 'half the women here are gaol birds!' ('The Guardian', 18 Jan 1949). 
Although a very public figure, Flora kept her private life concealed. In 1922 she and Joseph Drummond divorced, and later the same year she married Alan Simpson, a marine engineer, but she retained the name Drummond in public life. Simpson, about whom little is known, was killed by a bomb in 1944. Flora herself died on 17 January 1949 at Carradale, Argyll. She was determined and independent to the last: her death followed a stroke, brought on by the effort of attempting to build herself a new house, single-handed, on the shore at Carradale. 


@@@@@


doc= 39178


Smith, (Margaret) Patricia Hornsby-, Baroness Hornsby-Smith (1914-1985), politician, was born on 17 March 1914 at 315 Upper Richmond Road, East Sheen, near Richmond, Surrey, the only daughter and second child of Frederick Charles Hornsby-Smith (died 1944), saddler and master umbrella maker, and his wife, Ellen Florence, 'nee' Minter. She was educated at Richmond county school; after leaving school Patricia, or Pat (as she was known), embarked upon a secretarial career. 
Hornsby-Smith displayed a precociously active interest in politics. In 1930 at sixteen she joined the Junior Imperial League. In the following year the Conservative Party included her in its team of speakers in the general election campaign. Her youth and gender made her contribution quite unusual: many women helped the party but normally as back-room or front lawn supporters; a girl of only seventeen holding forth on a party platform would have been a remarkable sight. It was not, moreover, a general election in which the Conservatives needed to scrape the barrel for supporters; indeed, although she had joined the party when it was in opposition, it dominated British politics for much of the rest of her life. 
For ten years Hornsby-Smith worked as a private secretary in engineering, electrical, and textile firms; she also worked for an employers' federation. The outbreak of the Second World War drew her, like many other women, into voluntary work. She helped to organize a comforts fund for service personnel and to run a Women's Voluntary Services canteen; she was also joint organizer of the National Savings Campaign, and a member of the Barnes war efforts committee. In 1941 she became principal private secretary to Lord Selborne, minister of economic warfare. Her move to Whitehall was part of the government's drive to bring more women into government for the duration of the war, although there was discontent among professional women who felt that their skills were undervalued and underused. The Ministry of Economic Warfare had overall responsibility for the Special Operations Executive (SOE), where women were deployed at all levels -- from agents in the field to wireless operators, administrators, and, of course, secretaries. After the war she maintained her links with SOE by joining the Special Forces Club. 
Hornsby-Smith was, meanwhile, building up her experience within the Conservative Party. She helped to organize the Surrey Young Conservatives and acted as their chair as well as chair of the Young Conservatives in the south-east area. It was regarded as especially important to attract a new generation into the party. In 1945 she was elected to Barnes borough council, and served as a councillor until 1949, sitting on the predictable committees for a woman such as housing, education, electricity, maternity and child welfare, and nursery, as well as the less predictable ones of finance and general purposes, and library. Between 1947 and 1950 she also sat on the Conservative Party's executive committee. In 1946 she attracted wide attention among Conservatives when she gave a fiery address to the annual conference, where the party was still recovering after the shock (for most people) defeat at the general election the previous year. 
For a woman to gain adoption as a prospective parliamentary candidate was difficult, especially in a constituency where there was a chance of winning. Hornsby-Smith was repeatedly rejected, at least on one occasion explicitly because she was a woman. Not surprisingly she believed that selection committees were the 'most potent citadel of prejudice' in all the parties, and that women had to be better than all the men to be selected. 
Once adopted for Chislehurst in Kent, Hornsby-Smith's drive revitalized the constituency, and in 1950 she successfully contested the seat in the general election. As a constituency MP she was hard-working and effective at dealing with constituents, and she increased her majority at each general election during the 1950s. Although it had not been easy for her to break into national politics the party was quick to make use of a new, young, attractive, redhead woman MP. In 1951 she made the women MPs' BBC party political broadcast to woo women voters in the general election, focusing on the cost of living and housing. Her broadcast was generally thought to have been an improvement on Florence Horsbrugh's performance the previous year. 
Hornsby-Smith was quickly spotted for a government post. In 1951 she was appointed parliamentary secretary at the Ministry of Health where she remained for six years. From 1957 to 1959 she was parliamentary under-secretary at the Home Office, and from 1959 to 1961 joint parliamentary secretary at the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance. In 1959 she became a privy councillor. She was the youngest woman ever appointed to government and to the privy council -- not that the competition for these accolades was very great as there had been so few women ministers -- but despite holding a variety of posts for over a decade she never achieved a cabinet post, and was, therefore, never in a policy making position. She was not highly rated by the civil servants at the Ministry of Health, who thought her appointment was a token gesture to increase the number of women in government to two; she was too nervous and inexperienced, and too much of a party politician; but as women ministers often faced hostility from civil servants it is hard to know whether they were making an objective judgement or articulating their prejudice. Conservative prime ministers thought it desirable to have women ministers but, after Florence Horsbrugh's short and sad spell in Churchill's cabinet, not women in cabinet. Her ministerial career ended in 1961 when she was created a dame of the British empire. Her parliamentary career was also interrupted when, as a result of changes in the composition of her Chislehurst constituency and especially the growth of council estates within its boundaries, she lost the seat to Labour in 1966. 
Writing in 1968 Hornsby-Smith reflected that the lot of a woman MP was not a happy one. She described not only the difficulty of selection but also the awkward lifestyle, parliamentary conditions, the domestic constraints, meagre salary and costs of nursing a constituency, the way in which women MPs were expected to restrict themselves in debate to certain subjects, and the problems inherent in received notions of domesticity. Such comments have frequently been made; what would have been more interesting would have been her views -- as a woman who remained a minister for a decade but never made the leap into cabinet -- on the difficulties for women ministers. Perhaps because she was never promoted to the cabinet she was deeply conscious of the prejudice against women in all the parties. 
Although Hornsby-Smith faced hostility in the Chislehurst constituency she was readopted after an emotional outburst at a party meeting, and in 1970 she regained the seat. In the early 1970s boundary changes meant that the constituency was carved up, and she stepped aside so that Edward Heath could stand in the newly formed Bexley and Sidcup constituency that now incorporated part of Chislehurst. In February 1974 she unsuccessfully contested Aldridge-Brownhills in the midlands. 
This defeat marked the end of Hornsby-Smith's House of Commons career and in May 1974 she was created Baroness Hornsby-Smith. She played an active part in the House of Lords for a number of years, despite ill health. Throughout her political career she maintained her wartime interest in voluntary work. She worked for the Arthritis and Rheumatism Council for Research as chair of the appeals committee from 1966, and from 1974 vice-chair of the council; from 1975 she chaired the Electrical Association of Women, and from 1983 the St Edward's Housing Association. Her appointment to company directorships in the 1960s renewed her earlier interests in industry: as chairman of the Western and General Unit Trust, launched in April 1964 to invest mainly in west of England companies, she became the first woman chairman of a unit trust. She also travelled widely: in 1958 she was a delegate to the United Nations; in 1962 she led a parliamentary delegation to Australasia and another in 1972 to Kenya. 
Although she never reached the cabinet Hornsby-Smith was a relatively well-known politician: as a woman MP, minister, and then member of the House of Lords she inevitably stood out among the men, and she was known to a wider public through contributing to the BBC radio programme 'Any Questions?' From 1971 she was a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts. She belonged to the Constitutional, Special Forces, and Cowdrey clubs. She died, unmarried, on 3 July 1985. A memorial service held on 29 October 1985 at St Margaret's, Westminster, was attended by her brother's family and numerous politicians, including the prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, who read one of the lessons. 


@@@@@


doc= 39181


Lovelock, Irene May (1896-1974), founder of the British Housewives' League, was born on 26 May 1896 at Wood Green, London, the elder daughter of William Northover Smith (1864-1953), ironmonger, and his wife, Florence Minnie Heath (1869-1943). She was educated at schools in Margate and Finchley, and at Birmingham School for Young Ladies. She married the Revd John Herbert Lovelock (1903-1986), a Church of England clergyman; they had three children. Irene Lovelock undertook a busy round of parish work in support of her husband. She became involved with the local Mothers' Union and helped with the Sunday school. It was a labour of love. She was a devout believer; her family joked that if St Peter would not let her enter through the gates of heaven she would have said 'Well, really!' 
During the Second World War, Irene Lovelock's husband held the parish at Selhurst, London. In addition to her parish duties, Mrs Lovelock became an air raid warden and a firewatcher; she was subsequently awarded a civil defence medal for this work. During this time, too, both she and her husband's parishioners struggled with the difficulties of housekeeping in an era of rationing and shortages, experiences which undoubtedly provided the backdrop to her decision to establish the British Housewives' League (BHL). 
The BHL was the best-known of a number of predominantly middle-class housewives' organizations which sprang up around Britain at the end of the war. According to an unpublished memoir written by Irene Lovelock later in her life, the idea for the BHL originated with her anger at the sight of women and children queuing for food one cold and rainy morning in June 1945. She called a meeting in her husband's parish hall in protest at the hardships of queuing. The meeting generated great local interest, and the league was officially constituted the following month. A BHL committee was formed, with Mrs Lovelock as chairman. In April 1946 she resigned from that post to become president of the league. 
The league's interests quickly widened to embrace a range of issues affecting housewives and their families. Its main activities centred around the quality, quantity, and cost of food and other household commodities, concerns which, although rooted in an era of rationing and shortages, in many ways foreshadowed those of a later generation of consumer activists. In the immediate post-war period the BHL attracted national attention with a series of high-profile activities. It launched a 'bacon and egg campaign', to demonstrate dissatisfaction with aspects of the government's food policy; a 'vegetable boycott', to highlight what the league considered to be unacceptably high vegetable prices; a 'campaign for cleaner food', which focused on improving hygiene conditions in shops; and a protest against the use of agene in flour for bread. From the early 1950s the league waged a long battle against proposals to fluoridate drinking water. 
The BHL also campaigned against what it termed 'over-control by the state'. Mrs Lovelock warned of the dangers of socialism in language which echoed much contemporary Conservative Party propaganda aimed at women: 'The sturdy independent character of the British Home is being lost in a welter of Control which the State does so badly and which the Mother, given the tools and opportunity, does so well' (British Housewives' League newsletter, July 1946). The league was often accused of being an offshoot of the Conservative Party, a charge it always vigorously rebutted. Like a number of other contemporary women's organizations, the league insisted that it was independent of party political allegiances, regarding this as a source of moral strength. Certainly, it sought initially to maintain a political balance of sorts. Both the Labour MP Edith Summerskill and the former Conservative MP Mavis Tate were involved with the league in its early days (although, significantly, Summerskill's relations with the league rapidly soured). However, the league's criticisms of the Attlee governments became increasingly vehement; in the second half of the 1940s it was supported by a number of prominent Conservatives. For their part, the Conservatives came to regard the BHL as something of a mixed blessing. The party was anxious that the BHL was drawing women away from its own women's organizations. It was also reluctant to be associated with the league's increasingly libertarian stance at a time when it was trying to emphasize its commitment to social reform. 
The BHL did not view itself as a feminist organization. Its members none the less drew inspiration from the suffrage movement, and its methods -- parades, deputations, demonstrations -- recalled suffragette tactics. The league's advocacy of an expanded, public role for the housewife, albeit one grounded in a traditional view of women's domestic role, may also have issued an inadvertent challenge to contemporary conceptions of 'a woman's place'. 
In terms of membership, the league enjoyed its greatest success in the first few years of its existence. In 1948 it claimed to have in excess of 70,000 members, although it would appear that its newsletter, 'Housewives Today', had a circulation of about 3000 at the time. The membership dwindled from the late 1940s, partly as a result of a number of bitter (and public) disagreements among the committee over the finances and direction of the league. 
Irene Lovelock's direct involvement with the league gradually declined, although she remained as president for many years. She maintained that the league's major achievement had been 'to make the nation 'housewife conscious''. Irene Lovelock died at George's Hospital, Tooting, on 9 August 1974. After cremation her ashes were deposited at South London crematorium, Streatham Vale. 


@@@@@


doc= 39182


Maxse, Dame (Sarah Algeria) Marjorie (1891-1975), political organizer, was born on 26 October 1891 at Villa du Palmier, Birmandreis, Algiers, one of the two children, and the only daughter, of Ernest George Berkeley Maxse (1863-1943), British vice-consul at Algiers, and his wife, Sarah Alice, 'nee' Miller (died 1908). Marjorie Maxse was a cousin of Leo Maxse, for many years editor of the 'National Review', and of Sir (Frederick) Ivor Maxse, a distinguished First World War general. Her father's work for the consular service meant that she spent the first twenty-five years of her life abroad, and she acquired an understanding of foreign countries and the aspirations of other peoples that proved of value in later life. During the First World War she served for a time as an auxiliary nurse in a French military hospital. She was appointed MBE in 1918. 
Maxse was a natural leader who combined powers of self-control and reserve with clear vision and a single-minded determination to achieve her goals. Her freedom from personal animus was an especially valuable attribute in the world of politics, where she made her career. In 1921 she was chosen as one of the first women area agents appointed by Conservative central office. The 1918 'Representation of the People Act' meant that urgent attention had to be given to organizing women voters, and the Conservative Party was in many respects in the forefront of this development. In 1923 Maxse was promoted to be the first administrator of the Women's Unionist Organization (WUO) based at the party headquarters in London. The WUO was a highly successful political organization, whose purpose was, she told party agents in 1924, 'to teach women to be voters and Conservative voters, not to create a feminist movement within the Conservative party' (McCrillis, 62). Along with Caroline Bridgeman and Gwendolen Guinness she was one of the WUO's chief promoters. Under John Colin Campbell Davidson, Conservative Party chairman 1926-30, she became in 1928 deputy principal agent of the party. As a member of the governing body of the Junior Imperial League she helped to organize the canvassing of recently enfranchised young women voters, and dismissed the suggestion that the 'flapper vote' had played a part in the Conservatives' defeat at the general election of 1929 (ibid., 190, 216). In 1931 she was appointed chief organization officer, the first woman to occupy such a role in any political party. She held this post until 1939. Maxse was thus one of the 'principal architects' in the development of women's organization in the Conservative Party ('The Times', 6 May 1975). 
Women Conservatives were important for fund-raising and canvassing, and Maxse aimed as far as possible to maximize their influence in the party. She believed that men mostly did not wish to give them organizational responsibility, or indeed any 'legitimate sphere for their aspiration', and so she favoured developing separate women's branches at the constituency level (Maguire, 75). By retaining a separate organization women stood a greater chance to gain recognition of their role, as well as retain a degree of autonomy. She appreciated that this could also lead to their being marginalized, but on balance she felt that the policy brought about real advances. 
Maxse also understood that a united party organization would ultimately develop, and to this end did her best to harmonize relations between the sexes. There were inevitably tensions. When Davidson took office as party chairman he perceived 'a distinct antagonism running right through the organization in the country between the men and the women', which he feared would seriously undermine party unity (Maguire, 79). An obvious area of disagreement lay between party agents and women organizers at the constituency level. The latter, who were paid officials employed by the local associations, convened committee meetings, formed branches, and taught basic political organization to interested women activists. In some places they virtually did the work of party agents, but for less money. The national society of Conservative agents, though, would not countenance admitting them to membership. While advising the women workers not to seek to usurp the position of men, Maxse sought for them greater parity with the party agents. Davidson supported her in mediating the ongoing disputes, and with powerful backing at central office she overcame much of the resentment. Davidson regarded her appointment as deputy principal agent as 'a bold undertaking', but one that he considered to have been vindicated by the growing co-operation between men and women in the party (Rhodes James, 338-9). 
In 1940 Maxse was appointed director of the Children's Overseas Reception Board. In the same year she became, with Lady Iris Capell and Mary Agnes Hamilton, one of the three vice-chairs of the Women's Voluntary Services for Civil Defence (WVS), in succession to Priscilla Norman (Mrs Montagu Norman). In principle a non-political organization, the WVS had a Conservative bias, and both Maxse and her successor, Lady Hillingdon, 'played a major role' in its daily running, in contrast to their Labour colleagues, Mary Agnes Hamilton and Dorothy Archibald (Hinton, 291). 
Maxse relinquished her offices at the Children's Overseas Reception Board and the WVS in 1944, when she accepted an invitation to become vice-chair of the Conservative Party Organization. The general election defeat in 1945 forced the Conservative Party to look hard at its constituency organization, and under Lord Woolton, chairman of central office, the old structure of separate men's and women's branches was abolished. There were still women's sections in the constituencies, co-ordinated by women's advisory committees, whose task it was to advance the interests of women in the party. But Woolton was determined to unify the party structure, and he valued very highly Maxse's experience of the party machine. She served as his adviser on all women's work. 
The decline of Conservative Party organization in the constituencies by 1945 was seen by Maxse as a possible opportunity for the advancement of women, and yet the introduction of joint branches seemed to frustrate this hope. By being grouped with the men, women party workers lost the autonomy they had previously enjoyed without any real compensatory increase in their power or influence. As a party vice-chair Maxse was determined that the joint organization should not become the cause 'of a falling-off on the women's side, for a falling-off had undoubtedly taken place' (Maguire, 141). She feared that the party might lag behind Labour and the Liberals 'in the formulation of policy of special interest to women' (ibid., 154). At the party conference in 1945 a resolution affirming equal opportunities, 'in order to ensure that the best mind or hand shall have the same chance to excel', was rejected (Smith, 74). Conservative women badly needed encouragement, and Maxse supported the formation of a parliamentary subcommittee in November 1946 designed to forge closer links between the parliamentary party and the Conservative women's national advisory council. She would not be deflected from her belief that the best way of advancing the cause of women generally was through Conservative electoral success; thus she adamantly opposed any Conservative involvement in the Housewives' League, which she feared would detract from the party's efforts. Her policy of detachment proved sensible, for the league soon degenerated into reactionary politics before self-destructing. 
In 1948 Maxse was a member of the party committee set up by Rab Butler to frame a 'women's charter': Lady Tweedsmuir and Evelyn Emmet were also members. The committee's brief was to examine all aspects of women in society, and it attacked the discrimination experienced at many levels. It also called for equal pay in at least some sectors of the economy. The committee's endeavours were warmly supported at the annual conference in 1948, though its charter was rejected: delegates preferred that the issues dealt with should be included in statements of general policy, rather than be treated as issues specific to women. But the charter did see light of day as a party document, 'A True Balance', published in March 1949 and enthusiastically endorsed at that year's women's conference. 
In 1952, shortly after her retirement in 1951, Maxse was appointed DBE. She remained active in the work of the United Nations Association and also on behalf of the Anglican church in the diocese of Chichester. She died, unmarried, on 3 May 1975 at St George's Retreat, Ditchling, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 39183


Placzek, Joyce Anstruther (1901-1953), writer, was born on 6 June 1901 at 6 Chester Street, Belgravia, London, the daughter of Henry Torrens Anstruther (1860-1926), a Scottish Liberal MP, and the Hon. Eva Isabella Henrietta Hanbury-Tracy (1869-1935), whose father was Lord Sudeley. Joyce and her elder brother, Douglas (1893-1956), were brought up by their mother after their parents were legally separated, dividing their time between Old Court House, Whitchurch, Buckinghamshire, and in London, 9 Little College Street, Westminster, and later 9 Swan Walk, Chelsea. Joyce's mother wrote articles for magazines (reprinted in 'The Influence of Mars' in 1900); during the First World War she organized camp libraries for the troops and for this was created DBE. Joyce, educated by governesses and, briefly, at both Miss Ironside's and Miss Woolf's (where a fellow pupil was the future Queen Elizabeth, later the queen mother), had a somewhat stormy relationship with her mother. On a long visit to Egypt, where her father was director of the Suez Canal Company, she was able to acquire her excellent French. 
In 1917 as Jan Struther she began to contribute articles and short stories to periodicals such as 'Punch', 'The Spectator', and the 'New Statesman'. She also worked for a time as a secretary at Scotland Yard. 'At an early age she was engaged to a young Grenadier guards officer who killed himself because of gambling debts. This was the first of her many crises which threatened her fragile mental equilibrium' (Dolf Placzek). Jan was slim, tiny (5 feet 1 inch), and very pretty, with dark brown hair, large blue eyes, and a bright, lively manner that was always to make her the object of many men's attentions. On 4 July 1923 at All Hallows Church, London Wall, she married Anthony James Oliphant Maxtone Graham (1900-1971), an old Etonian and Sandhurst-educated insurance broker at Lloyds and heir to an estate in Perthshire 'who had proved a stalwart friend in her first crisis' (ibid.). Three children were born in 1924, 1928, and 1931, and the family, who lived comfortably and could not have managed without Jan's earnings, made their home in Chelsea, at 27 Sydney Street and then at 16 Wellington Square. At weekends they rented the Chief Officer's House, Coastguard Cottages, Camber, near Rye, where Jan, a golf widow, wore a boiler-suit, built her own boat, was a keen botanist, and shied away from hated domesticity. 
Having been asked (even though she was an agnostic) to contribute to an enlarged edition of 'Songs of Praise' (1931), Jan wrote twelve new hymns, including three that were to become extremely well known: 'Daisies are our silver, buttercups our gold', 'When a knight won his spurs, in the stories of old', and 'Lord of all hopefulness, Lord of all joy'. She published her first volume of poetry in 1931, some light-hearted but some, as she said, 'grim and stark and not at all charming' ('New York Herald Tribune'); this was followed by three more small volumes in 1932, 1936, and 1940. 
Meanwhile, Peter Fleming had written to Jan: 'If you ever read the articles on the Court page of 'The Times', you will have noticed that they are mostly about stoats. This seems to me a bad thing, and we should welcome a light and feminine touch occasionally. (Maxtone Graham MSS)' Her brief was to write about 'an ordinary sort of woman, who leads an ordinary sort of life. Rather like yourself' (Struther, 372). On 6 October 1937 the first of thirty-five 1200-word pieces about Mrs Miniver appeared; they were enormously successful, causing much correspondence and the inevitable assumption (denied by Jan) that the Miniver family was based on the Maxtone Grahams. The lightly comic tone was deceptive, for the pieces were beautifully judged, timelessly observant, and full of quiet realism. (The self-mocking yet indomitable voice was one that, in the months leading up to the war, any German reader must have found utterly bewildering.) The articles were published as 'Mrs Miniver' at the end of 1939. The book was successful, but even more so in America where it reached number one in the bestseller list and was a book-of-the-month selection. The book, and later on the 1942 film adaptation (loosely based on the book), was greatly to influence the American people's attitude to a Britain threatened by Nazi invasion. The film was immensely popular, and swept the Academy awards for that year, winning best picture, best script, best director (William Wyler), best actress (Greer Garson), and best supporting actress (Teresa Wright). 'Franklin D. Roosevelt himself is reported to have said to Jan' that 'Mrs Miniver' helped to bring America into the war (private information, Dolf Placzek), and while this may be an exaggeration, its impact on American public opinion was significant. 

'Try Anything Twice', a collection of essays, had appeared in 1938. Jan also wrote many (anonymous) fourth leaders for 'The Times' and was the first woman to be on its editorial board. In June 1940 Jan took the two younger children to New York to stay with her sister-in-law Rachel Townsend at 1 Beekman Place; while they were at boarding-school she lived at 214 Central Park South, writing articles, going to Hollywood while MGM made 'Mrs Miniver', and becoming a well-known broadcaster on the radio programme 'Information Please' (the perfect vehicle for her wit, general knowledge, and enormous vocabulary). She also edited 'Women of Britain -- Letters from England' (1941). Above all, she carried out lengthy lecture tours in aid of the British war relief fund but 'a hundred hotel bedrooms in a hundred cities' (Struther, 21) exhausted her and she had a breakdown, thereafter remaining prone to depression and mental instability. This was despite her newfound happiness with Adolf (Dolf) Placzek ('b'. 1913), a Viennese whom she had first met in England when she worked for refugees. 
Jan and the children sailed from Halifax, Nova Scotia, on VE-day 1945. But in London she and her husband, a prisoner of war from 1942 to 1945, found they had grown too far apart; she went back to New York and, when her first marriage had been dissolved, in 1948 married Placzek, by now a librarian at the Avery Architectural Library at Columbia University and later to be an eminent architectural historian. They lived at 68 West 68th Street but she also maintained a London home at 17 Alexander Place, South Kensington. 'A Pocketful of Pebbles' (1946) reprinted her recent work. 'Her alleged leftist sympathies led to her being spied on during the McCarthy era by which she felt threatened' (private information, Dolf Placzek). She had begun her autobiography when, at first diagnosed as having breast cancer, she died of a brain tumour in New York on 20 July 1953. Her corneas were donated for transplant. Jan Struther's ashes were brought back to her father's grave at Whitchurch. 


@@@@@


doc= 39184


Sutherland, Mary Elizabeth (1895-1972), political organizer, was born on 30 November 1895 at Burnhead, Banchory-Ternan, some miles up the River Dee from Aberdeen. She was the second child and only daughter of Alexander Sutherland and Jessie (died 1911), 'nee' Henderson. She had one younger brother. Her father was a farmworker and later a crofter at Nether Anguston, Peterculter, a few miles from Mary's birthplace. Here she grew up. She attended the local parish school, then won a bursary to the Girls' High School in Aberdeen. During her last years at school her mother was very ill with pulmonary tuberculosis and Mary had to combine schooling with assisting with nursing and housekeeping, travelling to Aberdeen daily. Her mother died in 1911. Her father was a radical, and she later wrote that her parish minister preached socialist sermons and that while still at school she 'found she was a Socialist' ('Clarion', 6 June 1934). 
Sutherland won a bursary to Aberdeen University in 1913. Initially she intended to take only an ordinary degree, but she won another bursary which enabled her to stay for a fourth year to take an honours MA in history. She graduated in 1917 and in the following year qualified as a teacher at Aberdeen Training College, where she helped to organize the trainee teachers who were demanding a minimum salary. She then taught for a year at Aberdeen Girls' High School. 
From 1919 to 1920 Sutherland was assistant secretary to the departmental committee on women in agriculture in Scotland, and from February 1920 to November 1922 organizer for the Scottish Farm Servants' Union, founded in 1913. She travelled widely in Scotland, paying particular attention to the unionizing of women workers in agriculture. In 1922 she was a delegate to the meeting of the International Federation of Landworkers in Vienna. She edited her union's journal, the 'Scottish Farm Servant', and was also vice-chair of the Stirling Trades and Labour Council (1921-2). From January 1923 to January 1924 she was sub-editor on the weekly 'Forward', which gave extended coverage to Scottish Independent Labour Party matters. 
In 1924 Mary Sutherland was appointed Labour Party women's organizer for Scotland, a position she held until 1932; she then became the national Labour Party chief woman officer, following the death of Dr Marion Phillips. This entailed advising and supervising women's sections of local Labour Party branches, arranging the annual women's conference of the Labour Party, and editing the monthly journal 'Labour Woman'. Throughout her career as chief woman officer she was secretary to the standing joint committee of industrial women's organizations (SJC, from 1941 the national joint committee of working women's organizations, NJC), whose members were representatives of the trade unions and the Co-operative Women's Guild as well as of the Labour Party. It campaigned and advised the national executive committee of the Labour Party on matters affecting women. In the 1930s these included factory legislation, family allowances, improved social services, especially for children, and a successful campaign for free school milk and the extension of free school meals. The SJC also supported the Indian nationalist movement and the extension of the franchise to Indian women. From 1934 to 1938, on behalf of the SJC and the International Council of Social Democratic Women, Mary Sutherland campaigned for the release in the USSR of the dissident Russian socialist Eva Broido. The failure of this campaign deepened Sutherland's hostility to communism and all left-wing extremism. From 1932 to 1939 she represented women in the British labour movement on the women's committee of the Labour and Socialist International. 
During the Second World War Sutherland was a member of the Women's Consultative Committee which advised Ernest Bevin, the minister of labour, on matters affecting women workers. She was also a member of a Labour Party anti-German group, which argued that no German, even a Social Democrat, could ever again be entrusted with power. During and after the war she personally assisted refugees of various nationalities. At the end of the war she was active in the Fabian Women's Group while it was preparing its evidence to the royal commission on equal pay (1945-6), which she strongly favoured; the evidence stressed what little progress had been made in the previous thirty years. She was also active in an unsuccessful NJC campaign to stop the closure of wartime nurseries for young children. 
In 1946 the Labour Party established the National Institute of Houseworkers to raise the status of domestic employment by training women who would become domestic workers in institutions such as hospitals and local authority home helps. Mary Sutherland was an active member of its board of directors during 1946-66 and believed strongly in the need to raise the status of domestic work. From 1947 to 1952 she was British representative on the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women. She stressed the importance of this commission to the International Council of Social Democratic Women, of which she was a member from 1955 and chair during 1959-61. She enjoyed travelling abroad and had many friends among women socialists in other countries. She supported British entry to the EEC. She opposed the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, which she regarded as left wing. In 1949 she was appointed CBE. 
Sutherland retired as chief woman officer in December 1960. She received a less than effusive message of thanks at her last party conference in office, in October 1960, moved by Bessie Braddock MP, who pointed out that the tribute was needed because 'our Party would not exist at all if it were not for the valiant band of women supporters of the Party who do the work when everybody else is sometimes doing a lot of talking' ('Labour Party Conference Report', 248). Sutherland had similarly defended the women's sections of the party to the Women's Annual Conference in 1946 against 'a number of quaint notions of critics, who know nothing about their work, the idea for example that a Women's Section was a place where they went to drink tea!' Sutherland continued to be on the Women's Consultative Committee of the Ministry of Labour until 1965. Thereafter she retired from public life. 
Throughout her career Mary Sutherland fought to improve the conditions of women, whether they worked for pay or worked unpaid in the home, and those of children. According to Dame Margaret Cole 'all who worked with her in one capacity or another... retain a clear recollection of a vivid and warm though certainly not an uncritical personality'. She went on to recall the entertainment provided by Mary's stories, told in her native lowland Scots, even when her audiences sometimes failed to catch the full meaning of her broad Doric -- 'for she had a strong sense of humour' ('The Times', 26 Oct 1972). A close Labour Party colleague, however, described her as 'moody to a serious degree', but at other times 'delightful' ('DLB', 248). She was perhaps depressive, at least later in her career, and lonely in the male-dominated Labour Party headquarters. She was an excellent administrator and organizer, and was supportive of, and well regarded by, the women party organizers whom she supervised. 
Sutherland wrote effectively, but in later life her public speaking was marred by a speech impediment which had not been evident when she was younger. She read widely. She did not marry. She lived in a succession of London flats, first in Highgate, then in West Kensington, then in Dolphin Square. The flats were always decorated in dark colours and she habitually dressed in brown. She loved London, but she suffered a stroke, followed by a traffic accident; hence she returned to Scotland to be near relatives. She spent her last years in another flat in the new town of East Kilbride near Glasgow. She died intestate, following a second stroke on 19 October 1972, at Hairmyres Hospital in East Kilbride. Her many books were divided between a local secondary school and Strathclyde University, but her papers were destroyed by her nephew; it is unknown whether this was at her request. 


@@@@@


doc= 39185


Tate, Mavis Constance (1893-1947), politician and feminist, was born Maybird Constance on 17 August 1893, the daughter (there was also a son) of Guy Weir Hogg (1861-1943), sheriff of St Helena and managing director of Solomon, Hogg & Co., and his wife, Constance Piercy Marsden (died 1920). She was educated privately and at St Paul's Girls' School, London. She married, on 9 August 1915, Gerald Ewart Gott (1892/3-1966), a captain in the Bedfordshire regiment, son of George Arthur Gott of Will Hall, Alton, Hampshire. This wartime marriage, of which there were no children, ended in divorce in 1925. That year (22 August 1925) she made a second marriage, to Henry Burton Tate ('b'. 1883/4), also a divorcee, of independent means, the son of Henry Tate, also of independent means. His previous marriage to Ida Guendolen Legge had ended in divorce in 1925. In 1930 she rejected her original first name, Maybird, and adopted Mavis by deed poll. 
Like many women of her class and generation Mavis Tate was not originally a feminist, but during the 1920s she took advantage of the many changes in British society and politics to extend her interests beyond the purely conventional. At this time her recreations included not only gardening and reading but also flying, a subject on which she later became a political authority. She served as a JP for Middlesex. In March 1931 she contested a London county council seat at Islington, and then stood for the West Willesden parliamentary constituency as a National Conservative at the general election in October 1931. Though this was not a Conservative constituency, the landslide victory won by the National Government swept her into parliament. 
As a back-bencher Tate spoke frequently on a wide range of subjects, refusing to be confined to the domestic topics then considered appropriate for female politicians. For example, she took an interest in overseas trade, which led her to criticize the government for failing to gain preference for manufacturers of sugar refining machinery in the Ottawa agreements in 1932. Above all, she made well-informed speeches on civil aviation, and she anticipated the failure of the disarmament convention by urging an acceleration of air force rearmament in 1934. By the mid- and late 1930s she found herself taking an increasingly feminist stance on such issues as maternal mortality rates, birth control clinics, women's nationality, and equal pay. In 1935 she presented a petition designed to allow married women to enjoy independent nationality, just as married men and single women did. In the same year, in a debate on women's pay, she attacked the view that the state had the right to push women into marriage and out of employment. Tate had found her vocation at last, but as her Willesden seat seemed likely to revert to Labour, her career was in jeopardy. Decisive as ever, she switched to a slightly safer constituency at Frome, in Somerset, for the 1935 election; her narrow victory there kept her in parliament until 1945. 
It was the Second World War that brought Tate's career to its peak, though at the price of a breakdown from overwork in 1940. By working closely with the women Labour and Liberal members, she harassed the coalition government for its neglect of women's interests, helping in the process to create what, in effect, was a women's party for the duration of the war. Tate's major achievement was to demand that female civilians be awarded equal compensation with men rather than the two-thirds the authorities considered appropriate. She presented several petitions in support of this claim, and persuaded ninety-five members to vote against the government in a debate in November 1942. As a result the government established a select committee, and in April 1943 accepted its recommendation for equal compensation. From 1943 onwards Tate became a leading figure in the Equal Pay Campaign Committee, whose object was to pressurize the government into conceding equal pay in the civil service and teaching. After a narrow defeat over teachers' pay in 1943 the government resorted to a royal commission as a delaying tactic. 
In spite of her growing political role, however, Tate's life began to deteriorate rapidly by the closing stages of the war. Separated since 1938, she was divorced from Henry Tate in 1944. Her defeat at the general election in 1945 at least left her with more time to campaign for equal pay; but she became angry as the report of the royal commission was delayed until 1946. Meanwhile she maintained pressure on the Labour members, but was frustrated by the new government's insistence that no resources could be found to meet the costs of equal pay for women. After her visit to the German concentration camps with other MPs in 1945 her health deteriorated. She had several operations for gallstones and suffered acute pain for lengthy periods. The culmination came on 5 June 1947 when she was found dead from carbon monoxide poisoning at 6 Bloomfield Terrace, her Westminster home. In a note to her brother, Colonel K. W. Hogg, Tate explained the reasons for her suicide: 'As I have no one dependent on me it seems to me the wiser thing to do to end my life. An invalid is only a national liability today, and I cannot endure the extensive and constant pain in my head and practically no sleep at all week after week. ('The Times', 11 June 1947)' The coroner recorded that she had taken her life while the balance of her mind was disturbed by ill health. Though only fifty-three, she doubtless realized that her chances of returning to parliament were poor, and the prospect of continual physical pain made the situation unendurable. 
Mavis Tate had emerged from a background within the British establishment to make a mark as a radical in public life, and during the 1930s and the Second World War she became a prominent advocate of women's causes. Her vivacious personality, ready wit on the platform, and striking appearance ('The Times', 6 June 1947) gave her an advantage as a public figure. However, her life was punctuated by unhappiness and tragedy, which reflected her decisive temperament and a tendency to overwork. 


@@@@@


doc= 39186


Taylor, Elizabeth (1912-1975), writer, was born on 3 July 1912 at Reading, Berkshire, the daughter of Oliver Coles, an insurance inspector, and his wife, Elsie May Fewtrell. She was educated at the Abbey School in Reading, where Jane Austen -- the writer Elizabeth Taylor most admired, and to whom she was often compared -- was a former pupil. After leaving school Elizabeth worked as a governess, and then in a library. She joined the Communist Party in her early twenties and delivered leaflets from door to door in various London boroughs. She later transferred her allegiance to the Labour Party, which she supported for the rest of her life. In 1936 she married John William Kendall Taylor ('b'. 1908/9), the owner of a confectionery business, and settled with him at Penn in Buckinghamshire. Their children -- a son, Rene, and a daughter, Jo -- were born in the late 1930s. 
Elizabeth Taylor's first novel, 'At Mrs Lippincote's', was published in 1945. It was followed a year later by 'Palladian', which -- more than any other of her works -- displays the influence of Jane Austen. There are several sly references to 'Northanger Abbey' and 'Mansfield Park', and the principal female character is named Cassandra Dashwood. Despite her political sympathies, Taylor gives no indication in this curious novel of an England ravaged by war: the bombed sites, bread queues, and ration books are all notably absent. The man who woos Cassandra is an aesthete called Marion Vanbrugh, who lives in a decaying country house and reads the Greek classics in the original. 'Palladian' is rescued from bookishness, from literary parody, by the vividly drawn people on the periphery of Cassandra's and Marion's courtship -- the vengeful nanny (encountered, perhaps, during Taylor's time as a governess) who 'feigned eccentricity as Hamlet feigned part of his madness', and the alcoholic Tom, who 'could not bear stoicism in those he hurt, could not bear the guilt of forcing them into such courage'. This last observation is typical of the shrewd analyst of the human heart Elizabeth Taylor was to become in the fiction of her maturity. 
The world Elizabeth Taylor describes in her twelve novels and four collections of short stories is confined, in the main, to the English home counties. The majority of her men and women have outwardly comfortable lives. They patronize tearooms and antique shops, attend gymkhanas and church fetes, and seldom discuss the burning issues of the day. Her prose is clear, almost to the point of transparency, and thus an immediate pleasure to read. This clarity of expression is the product of deep and careful consideration, for Taylor believed that the best art always gives the appearance of effortlessness. She is a stylist in the Evelyn Waugh mode, using the right word in the right place to maximum effect. In the late story 'Sisters', from 'The Devastating Boys' (1972), the protagonist, Mrs Mason, is described as 'made for widowhood' and the widow's complacency is conveyed in a few deft phrases: 'Mrs Mason pottered in her garden, played patience in the winter, or read historical romances from the library. 'Something light', she would tell the assistant, as if seeking suggestions from a waiter'. Elizabeth Taylor is one of those writers who concern themselves with seeming domestic trivia, with the unimportant quotidian. When she creates a 'comic turn', usually in the form of a charwoman, she takes discreet pains to show that the performance is a form of self-protection, put on for the employer's amusement. In what is probably her finest novel, 'Mrs Palfrey at the Claremont' (1971), which is set in a genteel Kensington hotel occupied entirely by the elderly, the sadness of Mrs Palfrey's plight is offset with many exquisite humorous touches. The other, more famous Elizabeth Taylor, the film actress, is alluded to when the 'blowsy Mrs Burton' comes to stay, and an unpleasant old bigot, Lady Swayne, prefaces her most repellent pronouncements with 'I'm afraid': 'I'm afraid I'd like to see the Prime Minister hanged, drawn and quartered.' 
Elizabeth Taylor was much admired by Elizabeth Bowen and Angus Wilson, who were also distinguished practitioners of the short story. The short form was her metier, in which -- as Wilson once observed -- her 'warm heart, sharp claws and exceptional powers of formal balance' were joined together in perfect artistic harmony. She is, essentially, a miniaturist, as her stories continue to demonstrate, never more persuasively than in the mordant 'A Dedicated Man' in the collection with that title (1965). This is one of Taylor's masterpieces, and in it two frustrated, fraudulent lives -- lives replete with snobbery and duplicity -- are examined and exposed in satisfying detail. 
Elizabeth Taylor was shy by nature and genuinely modest, given to blushing when praised to her face. She was also, as the poet and critic D. J. Enright noted in an obituary that appeared in 'The Bookseller', extremely pretty. Enright had been her editor at Chatto and Windus, but her work needed very little editing since she was scrupulous in matters of style and punctuation. 
For many years Taylor maintained a correspondence with the novelist, critic, and biographer Robert Liddell. He lived in Greece and Italy and welcomed her news from England. They had one great friend in common, the novelist Ivy Compton-Burnett, and Elizabeth Taylor recounted every visit she made to Ivy's flat in Kensington. Very few of these letters survive, though to judge by the two or three quotations from them in Hilary Spurling's 'Secrets of a Woman's Heart: the Later Life of I. Compton-Burnett, 1920-1969' (1984), they must have been vivid and brilliantly detailed. Taylor describes this friendship by post in the story 'The Letter Writers' (in the collection 'The Blush', published in 1951). She and Liddell made a pact that the letters would be destroyed at their deaths, and alas they kept that pact. 
One of the reasons why Elizabeth Taylor's friendship with Ivy Compton-Burnett lasted so well was that the latter was fond of chocolates. Whenever she went to London, Elizabeth Taylor never forgot to bring a box of the most expensive chocolates from her husband's factory. These were accepted with gratitude, though Compton-Burnett deplored their cost, wondering why Mr Taylor could not manufacture cheaper sweets. 
In 1974 Elizabeth Taylor was diagnosed as having an inoperable cancer. 'Try to keep me alive until I have finished my novel', she urged the doctors who examined her. That novel, 'Blaming', was published posthumously, in 1976. She died at her home, Grove's Barn, Penn, on 19 November 1975. A selection of her best stories, with the apposite title 'Dangerous Calm', appeared in 1995. It confirmed her steadily growing reputation as one of the most assured English short-story writers of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 39187


Brookes, William Penny (1809-1895), surgeon and campaigner for the revival of the Olympic games, was born on 13 August 1809 at 4 Wilmore Street, Much Wenlock, Shropshire, the first of the five children of William Brookes (1776-1830), doctor, and his wife, Mary Doughty (1786-1869). After being apprenticed to a Dr R. Barnett at Stourport in Worcestershire in 1825, Brookes studied at the united hospitals of Guy's and St Thomas's, London, in 1827; it is also known that he went to Padua and to Paris in 1829 to further his studies. Brookes returned to Wenlock in 1831 to take up his father's practice following the latter's death; he was made MRCS in 1831, FRCS in 1870, and LSA in 1831. His practice covered a wide rural area of several communities and it is said that he often rode some 70 miles a day to visit his patients. 
Brookes was a short, stocky man, his passport stating his height to be 5 feet 2 inches. Nevertheless what he lacked in inches his character made up for in organizational ability, perseverance, energy, and vision. A polymath, Brookes was fluent in French, Greek, and Latin, and was a nationally respected botanist. His many and varied interests, in particular the provision of physical education, were all pursued with relentless enthusiasm. On 18 May 1835 he married Jane Clare Talbot (1811-1885) of Fetters Hall, Tettenhall, Staffordshire, daughter of Thomas Faulkner Talbot and his wife, Jane. At Brookes's death, of his two sons and three daughters only Adeline (1839-1925) survived him; a son, William Brookes ('b'. 1845), a brilliant student at Oxford, accidentally drowned there in December 1868. 
Appointed a justice of the peace and, in 1841, commissioner of roads and taxes, Brookes took an active role in civic life. He was responsible for the refurbishment, in 1849, of the council chamber in Wenlock's beautiful sixteenth-century guildhall, he instigated the building of the corn exchange in the town's high street in 1852, and, ever in touch with progress, he was largely instrumental in bringing gas lighting to the town in 1856 and also the railway, which was officially opened in 1862. 
In 1841 Brookes set up the Wenlock Agricultural Reading Society (WARS), an early kind of lending library for working men, which was later accommodated in the reading rooms above the corn exchange. From this society various sections evolved; in particular a class (later called the Olympian Society: WOS) was set up in 1850 to hold annual games 'for literary and fine-art attainments, and for skill and strength in athletic exercise' (W. P. Brookes archives, WOS/1 (1850-76), 135). The games were open to those whom Brookes termed 'every grade of man'. Initially the sports were a mixture of athletic events, old country sports, and a special event to amuse the spectators. On occasion athletes and spectators numbered several thousand, and building on this success Brookes founded the Shropshire Olympian games (1861) and was instrumental in the formation of the National Olympian Association (1865), both of which were hosted by different towns with the host town financing the games. This was a significant new concept; at that time numerous athletic associations were springing up all over the country and the aim of the National Olympian Association was to lay down regulations and to bring some organization to sports associations under one nationally recognized body. Their first games were held at Crystal Palace in 1866 and attracted over 10,000 spectators. The reaction of the 'amateur' sportsmen (principally from the public schools and the universities of Oxford and Cambridge) was swiftly to set up the Amateur Athletic Club (later Association). Anyone could take part in the AAC games but membership of the club was by invitation only. Brookes kept meticulous records relating to the Olympian societies and his other causes, which can now be found in the archives of Wenlock town council. 
Although Brookes had a lifelong admiration for Greece and for the Greek ideal of physical fitness there is no evidence that he ever visited that country. His first known contact with Greece was when he sent a prize of $10 to the Zappas Olympian games in Athens in 1859. From this time he intermittently petitioned the Greek government to re-establish Olympic-styled games. The Greek newspaper 'The Clio' reported, in June 1881, that 'Dr Brookes, this enthusiastic Philhelline is endeavouring to organise an International Olympian Festival, to be held in Athens' (Coubertin collection). Political unrest prevented this; nevertheless Brookes continued a lively correspondence with the Greek charge d'affaires in London, I. Gennadius. 
Brookes's persistent campaign for physical education to be made compulsory in schools brought him into contact with Baron Coubertin, who was researching foreign provision of physical education on behalf of the French government. Following Coubertin's visit to the Wenlock Olympian games in 1890 the two men began a correspondence which lasted until Brookes's death. The young aristocrat referred to the octogenarian Brookes as 'my oldest friend' and, greatly impressed by his lifelong campaign for a revived Olympics with international participation, initially acknowledged Brookes, in the December 1890 edition of 'La Revue Athletique', as the pioneer of modern Olympics: 'If the Olympic Games that Modern Greece has not yet been able to revive still survives today, it is due, not to a Greek, but to Dr W. P. Brookes' (W. P. Brookes archives, WOS/2 (1877-95), 221). The congress of the Sorbonne was instigated by Coubertin, in 1894, to establish an Olympic revival; Brookes, listed as an honorary member, was unable to attend, through ill health, and died on 10 December 1895 at his home, 4 Wilmore Street, Much Wenlock, four months before the realization of his dream, the first modern Olympics held in Athens, in April 1896. He was buried at the parish church of Much Wenlock on 13 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 39188


Allinson, Thomas Richard (1858-1918), dietitian and businessman, was born at 43 Rumford Street, Hulme, Lancashire, on 29 March 1858, the son of Thomas Allinson, a bookkeeper, and his wife, Ellen (formerly Sims). He left school at fifteen and, aiming to be a doctor, he subsidized his studies by becoming a chemist's assistant. In 1879 he graduated LRCP (Edinburgh) and LRCS (Edinburgh). Over the next six years Allinson gained an unusually broad medical experience, in hospitals and country practice, in the poor-law system, in club practice and the police service, and on board ship. In 1885 he set up his own practice in Spanish Place, near Manchester Square in London's West End; the practice was linked with a private hospital that treated patients according to Allinson's ideas. That year he also began writing a column for the 'Weekly Times and Echo'; some of his articles were reprinted in his 'Medical Essays' (2 vols., 1887) and revised in five volumes between 1889 and 1893. 
In 1886 Allinson published 'A System of Hygienic Medicine'. His philosophy sprang from the notion that the body contained a vital force which, if nourished by fresh air, exercise, and appropriate diet, would yield its owner good health. Allinson believed that meat, tea, coffee, tobacco, and alcohol on the other hand weakened the life force. As bread formed an important part of ordinary people's subsistence fare, he insisted that white bread, with its noxious additives, should be avoided, in favour of the wholemeal kind, containing the bran fibre. His 'Advantages of Wholemeal Bread' appeared in 1893. To produce and market wholewheat flour of the desired purity, Allinson established the Natural Food Company, later incorporated under his chairmanship. Allinson bread products continue to be sold today. 
Allinson was a fierce critic of certain current medical practices. In a pamphlet of 1888, 'How to Avoid Vaccination', he condemned this 'nasty rite' (by then compulsory) and explained ways of circumventing the law. The medical authorities in Edinburgh at once compelled him to remove his name from the pamphlet, which none the less continued to circulate anonymously. Allinson also opposed surgical operations, and the wholesale prescribing of drugs, which he considered dealt merely with local areas of illness instead of paying regard to the body's entire system. In thirteen books, in his weekly column, and in more than 1000 pamphlets, as well as in lectures throughout the country, Allinson advocated some sensible ideas about hygiene, but incurred the hostility of the medical establishment. 
After disregarding a caution by the Edinburgh authorities, in 1892 Allinson was charged by the General Medical Council in London with infamous conduct, namely advertising both his services as a doctor and his commercial products. He took his case to the Court of Appeal, but lost. In 1895 he was fined $20 for continuing to style himself LRCP. Five years later he was censured at the inquest on a small child who had died of malnutrition after being fed Dr Allinson's Food for Babies and Invalids, which was shown to consist mainly of pearl barley. In 1910 Allinson was convicted for sending indecent material through the post, though he won the case on appeal. This was probably a birth-control pamphlet, which argued that it was individually and socially wrong for too many children to be born. As early as 1891 he had fallen out over this issue with editors of 'The Vegetarian'. 
During the First World War, Allinson had the satisfaction of seeing the introduction of 'war bread' with a low rate of extraction that benefited health. Despite his love of a good scrap, he presented a sympathetic bedside manner towards the thousands who passed through what he claimed to be the largest medical practice in England. With a lofty brow and twinkly bespectacled eyes above a full beard, he dressed well in black jacket, striped trousers, and fancy waistcoat adorned with a thick, gold fob-chain. His only known pastime was stamp collecting. 
In the final two years of his life Allinson suffered from chronic bronchitis, and he died of tuberculosis at his home at 4 Spanish Place, on 29 November 1918; he was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex, on 2 December. He left a wife, Anna, with whom he had three sons and a daughter, and his estate was valued at $26,048. One son, Dr Bertrand Allinson, a dietetic guru in London, remained in good standing with his medical colleagues; another son, Adrian Paul Allinson (1890-1959), designed posters for the Southern Railway. 


@@@@@


doc= 39190


Ashenden, John (d. in or before 1368?), astrologer, was a Northumbrian who became a fellow of Merton College, Oxford; he spoke of events in Northumberland as 'in partibus meis' (Ashenden, fol. 121'v'). It is likely that he was a native of Ashington, not too far removed from the church appropriated by Merton College at Ponteland. He first appears in an account of disbursements to Merton fellows dated February 1337. He took an active part in college affairs, helping secure Merton's rights to the church at Embleton in 1341 and supervising activities at the college's northern properties in the 1350s. In a college document of 1340 he is styled 'magister'. After his MA Ashenden studied medicine and theology, but is not recorded as having taken an advanced degree. Nevertheless, he belonged to a scholarly circle, based on Merton College, which was devoted to the study of astronomy and astrology. The members of this group included Simon Bredon, Reginald Lambourne, William Merle, William Rede, and Nicholas Sandwich. 
Ashenden specialized in making astrological judgements of eclipses and the conjunctions of planets. The first of his treatises (which are preserved as 'Pronosticationes' in Bodl. Oxf., MS Digby 176) concerned a lunar eclipse and a conjunction of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn which had occurred in March 1345. From these events he divined mayhem, warfare, and 'great mortality'. The battles of Crecy and Nevilles Cross in 1346 and the arrival of the black death in 1348 appeared dramatically to confirm his predictions. Early in 1349 he drafted another treatise in which he argued that 'dry' celestial influences would neutralize the 'cold-wet' nature of the plague. The disease would become less contagious and would finally disappear. Again the course of events seemed to follow his general prognostication. Two later tracts dealt with eclipses and planetary conjunctions occurring in 1357 and 1365 respectively. In keeping with the theory of great conjunctions as enunciated by Abu Ma'shar (Albumasar), Ashenden considered the alignment of Jupiter and Saturn in 1365 to be particularly significant. He believed that the celestial event strongly indicated victory over the French in the Hundred Years' War, the destruction of Islam through a glorious crusade, troubles for the pope, and the emergence of a new religious sect. Although he took account of the possibility of religious turmoil, he was careful to deny that eschatological or millenarian speculation could be validated through astrology. 
In 1346 Ashenden began to compile his most ambitious work, the 'Summa astrologiae judicialis de accidentibus mundi', which he completed in December 1348. His purpose was to elucidate the theories of celestial influence upon large-scale terrestrial events (usually catastrophic in nature -- wars, epidemics, famines, great storms) and the astrological methods of predicting these events. The 'Summa' contains very little material original to Ashenden; it is instead an exhaustive sourcebook of astrological writings of such traditional authorities as Ptolemy, Abu Ma'shar, al-Qabi'si (Alcabitius), and Ali ibn Abi 'l-Rijal (Haly Abenragel). Ashenden also utilized the writings of contemporaries such as Thomas Bradwardine, Simon Bredon, William Merle, and Walter Oddington, and numerous other sources. He copied the original texts so faithfully that the manuscripts he used which are now extant can often be identified. The 'Summa' is a fine example of the plagiaristic 'cut-and-paste' style of academic writing common in the fourteenth century. And for the next two hundred years the 'Summa' was valued as an astrological reference book, gaining wide European distribution in manuscript and in printed form. In the fifteenth century it was rendered into Middle English (Cambridge, Trinity College, MS O.5.26; Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 396) and Middle Dutch (Haarlem, Stadsbibliotheek, MS 187 D 4, dated 1480). Johannes Lucilius Santritter prepared the printed Latin edition of 1489 in Venice. 
Ashenden was a purely academic astrologer. There is no evidence that he sought to exploit his astrological predictions for advancement in ecclesiastical or royal service. In fact, he spent his entire career at Oxford University and was recorded among the fellows of Merton in 1355. Although he may have vacated his fellowship shortly thereafter, he dedicated his 1357 and 1365 treatises to the exercise and recreation of his associates at Merton. He was probably dead by 1368, as he is not mentioned in the will of his friend Simon Bredon, which was drawn up in that year. In addition to the writings noted above, a medical recipe (Parma, Misti MS B 26, fols. 27'v'-29'r') and a tract entitled 'De tribus conjunctionibus' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 393, fols. 79-80) have been dubiously ascribed to Ashenden. 


@@@@@


doc= 39192


Elveden, Walter (d. in or before 1360), ecclesiastic and astrologer, is first recorded as a scholar at Cambridge, probably of Gonville Hall. As a student Elveden had an inclination toward astrology, drafting a table of planetary 'lords of the month' for the period 1332-57. He also compiled an almanac, his 'Kalendarium', for the years 1330-86. Ironically, Elveden's astrological efforts were better received in Oxford than in Cambridge -- William Rede (died 1385) and John Ashenden (died in or before 1368?), both fellows of Merton College, consulted his astrological tables and almanac, and the late fourteenth-century Oxford Carmelite Nicholas Lynn published a famous continuation of the 'Kalendarium'. Elveden had graduated MA by 1348, and, turning to more remunerative legal studies, was made DCL by 1350. His interest in canon law is demonstrated by his having compiled a 'Tabula sexti libri decretalium super diversis signifacionibus verborum', an index to papal decrees. He came to hold a number of benefices in the 1340s and 1350s, mostly in the diocese of Norwich. 
A close associate of William Bateman, bishop of Norwich (died 1355), Elveden doubtless took part in Bateman's litigious assertion of his episcopal prerogatives, notably against the monks of Bury St Edmunds; he also accompanied the bishop on a diplomatic mission to the continent in March 1349. He became Bateman's vicar-general in 1351 and keeper of the spiritualities of Norwich at the bishop's death; but despite his education and experience, Elveden does not seem to have been considered as a candidate to succeed Bateman. At his death, which took place no later than 1360, Elveden left his books, and perhaps an astrolabe, to Gonville Hall; nine of his books, including legal and medical texts as well as a biblical concordance, remain in the Gonville and Caius College Library. One of these (Gonville and Caius, MS 483 fol. 275'r'- 'v') preserves a legal 'quaestio disputata' between Elveden and John Acton (died 1350). 


@@@@@


doc= 39195


Lower, Sir William (c.1570-1615), politician and natural philosopher, was the eldest of the six sons of Thomas Lower and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Reskimer, minor Cornish gentry of St Winnow, near Lostwithiel. His father 'thrust forth his sonnes to be trayned in martiall knowledge and exercise for the publike service of the country' (MacLean, 3.378). In 1586 Lower matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, where he maintained a connection at least until 1593. In 1589 he entered the Middle Temple, where he was penalized on several occasions for riotous behaviour. He became member of parliament in 1601 for Bodmin, and in 1604 was returned -- for seven years -- as member for Lostwithiel. The same year he and his brothers Nicholas and Francis were knighted by James I. Lower married Penelope, the daughter of Sir Thomas Perrott and stepdaughter of Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland, at some unknown date, most likely following his move to London in 1601 since Penelope, apparently, was only twenty-five when Lower died in 1615. His marriage brought him about 3000 acres in Carmarthenshire, with a home farm in Tra'venti, near Laugharne. Percy and Walter Ralegh -- who was a friend of Thomas Perrott's -- were both patrons of the mathematician and natural philosopher Thomas Harriot. It was most likely through these connections that Lower and Harriot became acquainted and that Lower began to study astronomy, mathematics, and alchemy under Harriot's tutelage. 
Nine letters survive from Lower to Harriot, spanning the period 1607-11. They reveal that Lower studied advanced algebra, geometry, and trigonometry, read Kepler in Latin and repeated many of Kepler's calculations, used a telescope in 1610 to observe the heavens, made a celestial sphere from 'the desolution of a hogshead' and discussed these matters with Harriot as well as with other 'Traventane philosophers' ('Miscellaneous Works', 25-6, 28, 42-5). In a letter to Harriot, Lower has left a record of the cross-staff observations which he made of the comet of 1607, later known as Halley's comet. His suggestion in 1610 to Harriot that Kepler's elliptical orbits for the planets might also apply to comets may be the earliest surviving record of what is now the accepted theory of comet orbits. 
Lower's presence with Northumberland at a dinner on 4 November 1605, the eve of the Gunpowder Plot, led to his interrogation concerning the conversation at dinner. His association with the disgraced Ralegh and Percy, and with Harriot, who was under suspicion of atheism, must have made his position difficult. He had other problems: in a letter of 1611 to Harriot, following a discussion of trigonometry and Kepler, Lower concluded, 'I have lost my second boy also, and wel neere eighty catle of the murraine, and they die still; now you know all my discomforts and losses' (Halliwell, 40). He died at Tra'venti on 12 April 1615, on the same day as his mother, Jane, leaving his wife, a daughter, Dorothy, and a posthumous son, Thomas. Although he has no scientific achievement or publication to his credit Lower was a competent astronomer and mathematician and a stimulus to Harriot. His letters capture the excitement generated among natural philosophers by Kepler's discovery of elliptic orbits, the invention of the telescope, Galileo's telescopic discoveries, and the new symbolic algebra. 


@@@@@


doc= 39199


Conamail mac Failbi (d. 710); his 'Roman' counterpart from 707 was 


@@@@@


doc= 39200


Connachtach (d. 802), was abbot for only a year; he died on 10 May 802 and is described in an obit as an excellent scribe, namely, in the terminology of the Irish annals, a scriptural scholar. This suggests that Iona had not abandoned the traditions of scholarship characteristic of the seventh and early eighth centuries. His successor, 


@@@@@


doc= 39202


Cormac ua Liathain (fl. late 6th cent.), whose feast day was 21 June. He belonged to the royal kindred of the kingdom of the Ui Liathain in the east of modern co. Cork (where Castlelyons is Caislean ua Liathain). No life of Cormac survives but he is an important character in Adomnan's life of Columba. He was included together with three other 'holy founders of monasteries', Comgall moccu Araidi of Bangor, Cainnech moccu Dalonn of Aghaboe, and Brendan of Clonfert, who together visited Columba on the island of 'Hinba' ('Life of Columba', 3.17), but his best-remembered role was as a navigator, 'a holy man who sought with great labour not less than three times a desert in the ocean, and yet found none' (ibid., 1.6). By Adomnan's time, it is quite likely that some of the settlements of Irish monks in the Atlantic (Faeroes and Iceland), recorded by the geographer Dicuil in the early ninth century, had already been established. Adomnan, therefore, may have had good reason to believe that none of the land discovered in the Atlantic was inhabited. One detail given by Adomnan, however, raises the question whether Cormac sailed in the same frame of mind. Cormac sailed from Eirros Domno (Erris) beyond the River Moy, namely from the north-western part of Mayo. This included the district in which Patrick lived as a slave, by the 'Silva Vocluti'. Moreover, Patrick is likely to have included that district in those lands beyond which there was only the ocean, the western edge of the inhabited world, to which he was proud to have brought the Christian faith, in fulfilment of an eschatological passage in Paul's epistles implying that once the inhabited world had all been evangelized the last Judgment would come. By Cormac's time it would have been apparent that, though Ireland was on the edge of the world, 'a pimple upon the face of the world', as Cummian (possibly Cummene Fota) was to call it in his letter to Segene, abbot of Iona, and Beccan the anchorite, the last Judgment had not come. Some may well have concluded that there might be inhabited land to the west still unevangelized, land which it was their Christian duty to discover. Cormac, who came from Munster and had no connection with north-western Connacht, may have chosen to sail from Erris, in Mayo, because it was perceived as the western edge of the known world, from which a voyage to discover if there were any more land in the Atlantic might properly begin. 


@@@@@


doc= 39204


Cu Chuimne (d. 747), canonist and hymn writer, is associated with Columba's monastery of Iona in a colophon found in the Paris manuscript Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 12021. His date of birth is unknown but his obit is recorded in 747 in the annals of Ulster, where he is called 'the wise ('sapiens')'. To Cu Chuimne is also attributed a Latin hymn to the Virgin Mary which is considered the best of early Irish Latin hymns, notable for the hymnodist's skill in versification, being marked with alliteration, assonance, and internal rhyme. The hymn, 'Cantemus in omni die', was intended to be sung and testifies to the devotion to the Virgin which was fostered by Adomnan of Iona and developed in the eighth-century Irish church. Two ancient quatrains in Irish are also associated with Cu Chuimne's name. In the annals of Ulster these are attributed to Cu Chuimne's nurse, while in the eleventh-century 'Liber hymnorum' the first quatrain is put in the mouth of Adomnan and the response to the first quatrain, given in the second quatrain, is attributed to Cu Chuimne. The quatrains state that Cu Chuimne squandered his resources on nuns but later repented and devoted himself to learning. These peccadilloes may account for the fact that his name is not mentioned in the later martyrologies. 
The colophon copied into the Paris manuscript Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 12021, states that Cu Chuimne collaborated with Ruben of Dair-Inis (Ruben mac Connad) to compile the 'Collectio canonum Hibernensis'. This collection of canons was drawn up from biblical, patristic, penitential, and conciliar sources, both native and foreign. The wealth of sources shows the number of books available to the compilers, perhaps in the library of the monastery at Iona. The 'Collectio' was a reference book to the enactments of the church, arranged according to subject rather than chronology, and gave instructions on how an eighth-century Christian should live. There are two main recensions of the collection: A, the shorter, in sixty-five books, in which the latest author cited is Theodore of Canterbury (died 690); and B, the longer, in sixty-eight or sixty-nine books, in which the latest author cited is Adomnan of Iona (died 704). The collection contains decrees which had links with native Irish law concerning the family, property, and ecclesiastical organization. There are parallels to the contents in the eighth-century vernacular legal text 'Bretha Nemed' composed in Munster. The 'Collectio' was a juridical source which covered not only spiritual but also ecclesiastical and social activity. Evidence for the actual implementation of the decrees seems slight. The text hardly ever suggests that penalties are to be enforced if the stipulations are not observed. It has been argued that there was originally a florilegium of extracts in Ireland on which the 'Collectio' was based. The compilers often alter their sources and when the authors cited offer conflicting ideas, no attempt is made to reconcile them. Among the sources, two bodies of native synodical decrees are used. Those of the Synodus Hibernensis were propagated by a faction in the Irish church, which followed older ecclesiastical practices, while those of the 'Romani' followed those of Rome. The decrees of the Synodus Hibernensis are believed to show the influence of Cu Chuimne, since he came from Iona, a centre notable for the conservatism of its practices, which was the last to accept the Roman calculation for the date of Easter, in 716. The Synodus Hibernensis passed rulings which were more likely to mention native legal institutions than were those of the 'Romani'. 
All the surviving manuscripts of the 'Collectio' stem from the continent, where it was influential, and much copied, especially in Brittany. No manuscripts of the text survive from Ireland. The text was known to St Boniface, Archbishop Odo of Canterbury, Bishop Arbeo of Freising, Sedulius Scottus, Wulfstan, and, possibly, the Carolingian empress Judith. In the late eighth and ninth centuries the collection was transmitted on the continent particularly in regions with long Celtic traditions or where the 'officially' promulgated Roman texts seem to have been little copied. The Welsh and Anglo-Saxon evidence points to the existence of an insular tradition of the text. The section on marriage influenced later European conciliar collections. It has been proposed that there was a connection between the stipulations of the text on kings, possibly drawn up under the influence of Adomnan of Iona, and a school of thought in the Irish church at that time which was particularly concerned with altering the succession practice, and especially the inauguration ritual, of kingship, and that this influenced the anointing of Pippin III in Francia. 


@@@@@


doc= 39213


Cynehelm (supp. fl. 803x11), martyr, is the subject of an elaborate 'passio' (account of martyrdom) which can be dated on internal evidence to the years 1045-75, although purportedly drawing on English songs and writings. According to this 'passio', he was the son of King Cenwulf of Mercia (d. 821), to whose throne he succeeded as a boy of seven years. His sister Cwenthryth instigated his tutor AEscberht to kill him. While hunting with the child in a wood on 17 July, AEscberht beheaded and buried him at Clent (in what is now Worcestershire). Cwenthryth acceded to the kingdom; but a dove miraculously delivered to Pope Leo III ('r'. 795-816) a parchment inscribed in English to the effect that Cynehelm was buried decapitated under a thorn tree at Clent. The pope accordingly sent legates to Wulfred, archbishop of Canterbury, and the other English bishops to have Cynehelm's body recovered and enshrined. In the event, the body was taken to Winchcombe and, as the procession bearing it approached that church, Cwenthryth stood at a window reciting the psalter backwards by way of a curse, for which she was punished by having both eyes drop out on to the page, the blood-stained psalter being later displayed at Winchcombe. 
This 'passio', although interesting as a work of hagiography, is factually unreliable. There was indeed a person called Cynehelm who appears in the witness lists of a number of reliable early charters, one granted by King Cuthred of Kent, the remainder by King Cenwulf of Mercia. If the Cynehelm of these charters in any way inspired the legend of the child-martyr, the details of his life must have diverged radically from those imputed to him in the 'passio'. The documents, which designate Cynehelm 'princeps' or 'dux', date from 803 to 811 and so make it impossible that he could have succeeded Cenwulf at the age of seven. (William of Malmesbury translated into Latin a document purporting to be an English translation of a papal confirmation in 798 of the monastery of Glastonbury to 'King Kinelm', but it is very doubtful if this is a correct record.) Moreover, the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' makes it clear that Cenwulf was immediately succeeded by Ceolwulf, making no mention of Cynehelm. Further, it gives the date of Cenwulf's death as 819 (821 is in fact correct) and this date is found also in the 'passio', suggesting that the author of that work was using the chronicle to provide a plausible context for his narrative. 
That Cynehelm was indeed venerated as a saint by the early eleventh century is shown by an entry in the later section of the list of saints' resting places, 'Secgan be pam godes sanctum pe on Engla lande oerost reston' ('Concerning God's saints who formerly rested in England'), which dates from that period. The entry states that Kenelm, referred to as 'royal child' ('cynebearn'), rests at Winchcombe, Gloucestershire, a monastery founded by the Mercian kings in the late eleventh century (Liebermann, 19). Winchcombe was restored as a Benedictine monastery by Oswald, bishop of Worcester (961-92), and it is likely that he was responsible for promoting Cynehelm's cult there. Certainly the martyr's feast day on 17 July appears in calendars from the third quarter of the tenth century, and in the sacramentary of Fleury (Orleans, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 127 (105)), which was probably written at Winchcombe at about the same time, he has proper prayers and mass and is prominent among the martyrs. As noted above, the saint's 'passio' was in existence by the mid-eleventh century, and a series of versions is found in later manuscripts and compilations as well as in the works of twelfth-century historical writers such as William of Malmesbury and John of Worcester. From that time onwards, Cynehelm became a widely known saint, commemorated at various ecclesiastical centres, and more popularly by an Old English couplet relating to his place of burial: 'In Clent Cow-valley, Kenelm king's son lies under a thorn-bush deprived of his head' (Love, 67). By the fourteenth century, his cult was sufficiently familiar to be alluded to in Chaucer's 'Canterbury Tales'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39216


Donnan (d. 617), martyr, is earliest reliably attested in the annals of Tigernach and the annals of Ulster. In their annal for the year 617, these record: 'the burning of Donnan of Eigg on 17 April with 150 martyrs' ('Annals of Tigernach', s.a. 616; 'Ann. Ulster', s.a. 617; Adomnan, trans. Sharpe, 369). Although its date of composition is uncertain, probably the earliest fuller account of Donnan's death appears in Latin in the twelfth-century 'Book of Leinster'. This relates how a rich woman who lived on Eigg had ill feeling towards Donnan and the monastic community that he had established on the island, and persuaded bandits to kill him. Arriving on the eve of Easter, the bandits found the community chanting psalms in the oratory, 'and they could not kill them there'. Donnan, however, instructed his monks to move to the refectory, 'since as long as we remain where we have done our all to please God, we cannot die, but where we have served the body, we may pay the price of the body' (Sharpe, 370). According to this version, fifty-four companions were killed along with Donnan. The ninth-century martyrology of Tallaght puts the number at fifty-two. The account in the 'Book of Leinster' also appears in the scholia of the earliest glossed copies of the ninth-century 'Felire Oengusso'. The scholia in two late medieval copies of that work tell in Irish that Donnan wanted Columba (died 597) to be his soul-friend ('anmchara'), but Columba refused. He is supposed to have shown a preference for the white martyrdom of ascetic self-denial, rather than the red martyrdom of death, saying: 'I will be soul-friend only to people of white martyrdom; that is, I will not be your soul-friend because you and all your community with you will suffer red martyrdom' (Sharpe, 370). 
Donnan's foundation on Eigg was probably located at or near the existing ruin of the church of Kildonnan in the south-east corner of the island. The name Kildonnan (or Kildonan) was also given to a church in Sutherland, indicating some small dissemination of his cult in Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 39217


Dorbene mac Altaini (d. 713), of a less powerful branch of Cenel Conaill. The likelihood is, therefore, that Adomnan had secured the adhesion of Cenel Conaill to the Roman Easter, as Bede's story implies, and that the abbacy of Dunchad flowed partly from their desire to see Iona itself conform. They may have been in a position to put particular pressure on Iona because of an ambiguity in the law concerning family monasteries -- should, on the one hand, an outsider, such as Conamail mac Failbi, resign as soon as a kinsman of the 'patronus' appeared who was fit for the office, or should he continue to rule until he died? 


@@@@@


doc= 39218


Dunchad mac Cind Fhaelad (d. 717). Initially, therefore, one abbot seems to have succeeded Adomnan; but his unwillingness to change and the difficulties likely to have been experienced by a Hibernian abbot in coping with Columban churches in Ireland that were now Roman made it easier to have two abbots. Their backgrounds were significantly different. Conamail belonged to the Ui Moccu Uais, a client people in what is now co. Londonderry; Dunchad, on the other hand, was not merely of Cenel Conaill but also of its ruling branch: his grandfather and two uncles had been kings of Tara. Admittedly by the time he became abbot the descendants of his grandfather, Mael Coba, had lost power to those of Mael Coba's brother, Domnall mac Aeda; but none the less Dunchad's genealogical position within Cenel Conaill was the strongest of any abbot of Iona including Columba. Not only was Conamail mac Failbi likely to have enjoyed less influence in Ireland, but so also was another apparently 'Hibernian' abbot, 


@@@@@


doc= 39220


Eadgifu (d. in or after 951), queen of the West Franks, consort of Charles III, was born in Wessex, the daughter of Edward the Elder, king of the Anglo-Saxons (d. 924), and his second wife, AElfflaed, and thus half-sister of AEthelstan, king of England ('r'. 924-39). Between 917 and 919 Eadgifu married King Charles III (879-929), nicknamed Simplex ('the Straightforward', commonly but misleadingly translated as 'the Simple') of the West Franks, after the death of his first wife, with whom he had six daughters. Some time between late April and September 921, Eadgifu gave birth to a son, Louis (IV), later king of West Francia from 936 to 954 and nicknamed Transmarinus ('From-over-the-Sea', 'd'Outremer'). Widowed in 929, in 951 she married Count Heribert of Soissons, lay abbot of St Medard, Soissons. She died in Soissons on 26 December in an unknown year. 
Eadgifu's career, barely mentioned in Anglo-Saxon sources, is relatively well documented in West Frankish ones. King Charles dowered her with the royal estate of Tusey on the Meuse in Lotharingia, an apt sign of his ambitions in that region. Although Eadgifu produced the long-hoped-for son, Charles's regime collapsed soon afterwards. After his deposition and imprisonment by rebel aristocrats in July 923, and the succession of Rudolf ('r'. 923-36), Eadgifu struggled to secure her son's literal as well as political survival, and probably also, on her own account, to retain her dower. Little Louis was sent for protection 'to his uncle King Athelstan because of the hostility of Hugh [duke of Francia] and Herbert [Heribert (II), count of Vermandois]' (Richer, 2.1). Louis's departure may have occurred, as usually assumed, in 923, but perhaps happened only after Charles's death in October 929. Eadgifu is generally said to have 'taken' Louis, but Folcuin, writing 'c'.960, while mentioning that 'she too had suffered many persecutions at this time', clearly states that she 'sent her son to the English' (Folcuin, chap. 101). Eadgifu apparently preferred to stay in West Francia. She may have played some role in Duke Hugh's marriage to her full-sister Eadhild in 926, splitting the alliance between Hugh and Heribert. Another full-sister, Eadgyth, married Otto, son of the East Frankish king Henry, in late 929 or early 930, perhaps to cement a 'legitimist' alliance following Charles's death and Louis's arrival at AEthelstan's court. This could provide a plausible context for the transfer of the so-called Gandersheim gospels, a manuscript of Metz provenance, from West to East Francia, and for the addition on the last leaf of an inscription in Anglo-Saxon square minuscule: 'Eadgifu regina :- aethelstan rex angulsaxonum et mercianorum :- '. Charles's supplanter, Rudolf, died childless in January 936. Some months later, the recall of Louis to Francia 'from over the sea... by Hugh and the other magnates' (Richer, 2.4) certainly attested AEthelstan's influence but probably also the efforts of Eadgifu and her sister. In 937, as part of a successful attempt to throw off Hugh's 'guardianship', Louis gave his mother charge of the key royal stronghold of Laon, and of the rich convent of Notre Dame there. He thus acknowledged as well as enhanced Eadgifu's political importance. Eadgifu also received, perhaps at this time, the palace of Attigny. 
Louis's marriage with Gerberga, sister of Otto I, in 939 did not apparently alter Eadgifu's position at Laon. But when Louis was captured by the Normans in 946, it was Gerberga (not, 'pace' Whitelock, Eadgifu) who wrote to 'King Edmund of the English' (Richer, 2.49), Eadgifu's half-brother, to beg his intervention. In 951: 'without her son's knowledge, his mother Queen Eadgifu married Count Heribert (III), son of Heribert (II), and after leaving Laon was taken home by him. The king was furious, entered Laon with Queen Gerberga, took away from his mother estates ['predia'] and the royal palace and bestowed these on his wife. (Richer, 2.101)' Flodoard clarifies: Eadgifu left Laon 'escorted by the men of Heribert and of his brother Adalbert' (Flodoard, s.a. 951), before marrying Heribert; and Gerberga then got Notre Dame, Laon, while Louis himself kept Attigny. Both Flodoard and Richer suggest that Eadgifu took the initiative in this alliance. As lay abbot of St Medard, Heribert gave many of this rich monastery's lands and revenues to Eadgifu as dower. Although now in her mid-forties, she may have hoped for more offspring. There is no record of her alive after 951. When she died, Heribert saw to her burial at St Medard, where in the mid-seventeenth century her barely legible tomb epitaph was deciphered by Jean Mabillon. Heribert died between 980 and 984, leaving no children. 
Eadgifu's first, royal, marriage, together with her sisters' marriages, showed the new involvement of Anglo-Saxon rulers in the dynastic alliances of the late Carolingian world, and hence the new standing of Alfred's descendants. Eadgifu's second marriage, to an ambitious young noble, was her response to increasing marginalization at the hands of her son and powerful daughter-in-law: it signalled the special prestige that association with the dowager-queen conferred, yet it was no 'mesalliance', for the Vermandois family could boast, like Louis, descent in the male line from Charlemagne. Threatened with political extinction at Laon, Eadgifu preferred, understandably, to live out her days with Heribert at Soissons. 


@@@@@


doc= 39225


Ealdred (d. 933?), leader of the Northumbrians, was the son of Eadulf and lord of Bamburgh. He was the most important Anglo-Saxon in Northumbria during the early tenth century, a time of renewed viking activity, and the last representative of an independent Anglo-Saxon royal family in the north. His father, Eadulf, is styled king of the north Saxons by the tenth-century record embedded in the Irish annals of Ulster, while the contemporary 'Historia de sancto Cuthberto' describes him as 'princeps'. Ealdred, like his father before him, was prominent in efforts to unite Northumbria with the other English-ruled regions; the 'Historia de sancto Cuthberto' claims that he was as beloved by Edward the Elder as his father had been by Alfred the Great. 
Ealdred succeeded his father in 913, after the murder of Eadulf by an Eadred, son of Rixinc. Eadred led an invasion against Eadulf, killed him, and seized his wife before retiring south of the River Tyne to the sanctuary of the lands of St Cuthbert, where he resided for three years before dying in a battle fought against the vikings in 916. Ealdred came to power at the time when three vikings -- Ragnall, Sihtric, and Guthfrith -- began a campaign to bring Northumbria under their control. At the same time they were establishing themselves in south-eastern Ireland and taking control of the Irish Sea. Some time between 914 and 916 Ragnall attacked eastern Britain and occupied the lands of Ealdred, who fled north and sought aid from the Scottish king Constantine II. Seeking assistance from a Scottish rather than an English prince may not have been eccentric: Constantine had a son named Idulb, the Gaelic rendering of Eadulf, which suggests that the Scottish royal family and the dynasty of Bamburgh were allied by marriage. This alliance proved unable to halt the vikings and 'through some unknown sin', according to the 'Historia de sancto Cuthberto', Constantine and Ealdred were defeated in the battle of Corbridge. Constantine redeemed himself in a later battle when the Scots fought the vikings to a draw in 918. The death of Ragnall in 920 or 921 brought to Britain a less formidable opponent in his kinsman Sihtric, who ruled Northumbria until his death in 927. Ealdred remained powerful, however, and the contemporary version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' notes that he submitted to King Edward the Elder in 924, together with all the Northumbrians: English, Danes, and Norwegians. After the death of Sihtric Northumbria was annexed by Edward's son AEthelstan (died 939) and Ealdred submitted to him. Ealdred then disappears from the chronicle record, but reappears as a witness to several charters issued at the court of AEthelstan in 931 or 932. Those charters were all issued in the south of England, suggesting that Ealdred was in constant attendance on the royal court during that time. The absence of Ealdred from later documents suggests that he might have died in the year 933. 
Little is known of Ealdred's family, although he had a brother named Uhtred who survived the battle of Corbridge. Ealdred was probably the father of Oswulf, who later ruled in Northumbria under King Eadred (died 955). Oswulf engineered the downfall of Erik Bloodaxe (died 954), the last king of an independent Northumbria, so that the kingdom could be annexed by Eadred. Oswulf was a witness to several royal charters where he is identified as 'high-reeve of Bamburgh'. 


