@@@@@


doc= 5679


Clinton, Edward Fiennes de, first earl of Lincoln (1512-1585), military commander, was the only son and heir of Thomas Fiennes de Clinton, eighth Baron Clinton and Saye ('c'.1490-1517), and his wife, Joan, illegitimate daughter of Sir Edward Poynings (1459-1521). Thomas, whose seat was at Folkestone Manor, served Henry VIII as a captain at Tournai in 1515. He succeeded his father as eighth baron the same year, but held the title for only two years: after his death on 7 August 1517 his five-year-old son's wardship was granted to Poynings. Edward, ninth Baron Clinton, was granted possession of his father's lands in November 1535, aged twenty-three. On 27 April 1536 he was summoned to parliament by a writ addressed to 'Edwardo Fenys de Clynton et Say'. 
In the early 1530s Edward acquired a Lincolnshire estate through marriage to Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Blount and widow of Gilbert, Lord Tailboys, who had settled his Lincolnshire estate upon her ['see 'Blount, Elizabeth (c.1500-1539x)]. Clinton and Elizabeth had three daughters, one of whom, Bridget, married Robert Dymoke (d. 1580) ['see under 'Dymoke family (per. c.1340-c.1580)]. Elizabeth, a former mistress of Henry VIII, was also mother of the king's illegitimate son, Henry Fitzroy, duke of Richmond. Through the marriage Clinton appears to have won the king's favour. He attended Henry VIII at Boulogne and Calais in 1532, acted as a cup-bearer at the coronation of Anne Boleyn in 1533, and was present at Anne's trial in May 1536. Later that year, when most Lincolnshire gentlemen rebelled against the king in the Pilgrimage of Grace, Clinton raised 500 of his servants and tenants against them, joining forces with the royal army to suppress the rebels. Clinton was rewarded by the grant of the house and site of the dissolved monastery of Sempringham, Lincolnshire, which he made his principal residence, and, in addition, the houses and sites of the dissolved priories of Haverholme, Lincolnshire, Folkestone, Kent, and Flitcham, Norfolk. In June 1541 a further grant of lands was made to Clinton, but jointly with his second wife, Ursula (died 1551), daughter of William, seventh Baron Stourton, and his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Edmund Dudley and sister of John Dudley, the future duke of Northumberland. Clinton had two daughters and three sons with Ursula. The eldest son was Henry (1540-1616), later tenth Baron Clinton and second earl of Lincoln. In 1544 Clinton served in Hertford's Scottish expedition under the command of his wife's uncle, John Dudley, then Viscount Lisle and lord admiral. Clinton participated in the burning of Edinburgh and Leith, and was knighted on 11 May at Leith by Hertford. Shortly afterwards he accompanied Lisle to France; he arrived in Boulogne on 28 July with 900 men, and assisted in the siege of Boulogne, entering the town on 18 September. 
After the accession of Edward VI, when the Hertford-Lisle coalition dominated the regency council, Clinton's military association with the two, strengthened by his marriage to Lisle's niece, paid dividends. Under the 'unfulfilled gift clause' of Henry VIII's will, Hertford (now Protector Somerset) directed to Clinton a grant of confiscated Howard lands in Lincolnshire worth about $52 per annum. In June 1547 Somerset appointed Clinton admiral of the fleet that went on to co-operate with the land forces in the invasion of Scotland and in the decisive English victory over the Scots at the battle of Pinkie. Clinton was then given responsibility for the surrender of Broughty Castle and for supervising its fortification as an English garrison. He was again rewarded with a further grant of lands, mainly in Lincolnshire, worth $61 5's'. 6died per annum. By April 1549 he was governor of Boulogne, defending the garrison until the treaty of Boulogne was signed on 24 March 1550 and then supervising the English withdrawal from the town. He was rewarded by his appointment on 4 May 1550 as a privy councillor and as lord high admiral of England for life, with an annuity of 200 marks. Clinton's living was deemed insufficient to maintain him in such high office and so, on 11 May, the privy council granted him an additional $200 in land and made him a gentleman of the king's privy chamber. Clinton was also elected a knight of the Garter in April 1551 and was installed on 30 June. Later that year he was granted the former Howard estate at Tattershall, Lincolnshire, worth $83 0's'. 9died per annum, which he made his principal seat, with Sempringham as his second residence. 
In October 1551 Clinton represented the king at the baptism of Henri II's son, Edouard Alexandre, duke of Angouleme, and received the formal ratification of the marriage treaty between Edward VI and Henri's daughter, Princess Elizabeth. On 15 April 1552, 'in consideration of his expenses in his late journey in France', he received a grant of lands worth $70 per annum ('CPR', '1550-53', 363). Ursula, Lady Clinton, had died in the previous year and in 1552 Clinton married for the third time. His new wife was Elizabeth (1528?-1589) ['see 'Clinton, Elizabeth Fiennes de], widow of Sir Anthony Browne and youngest daughter of Gerald Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Kildare. They had no children. 
Despite his remarriage Clinton maintained his allegiance to his second wife's uncle, now duke of Northumberland. After Edward VI's death on 6 July 1553, Clinton seized the Tower in support of Northumberland's plot to exclude the Catholic Mary from the succession and to place Lady Jane Grey on the throne. Imprisoned after the plot failed, Clinton begged Queen Mary for forgiveness and was pardoned on 27 July, compounding for $6000. The queen would not allow him to continue as lord admiral, but Clinton was a skilful politician and within a few months had won her trust. In January 1554, hearing that Sir Thomas Wyatt's Kentish rebels threatened the capital, Clinton and the earl of Pembroke promptly raised a force of 5000 or 6000, confronting the rebels at Temple Bar. Clinton was then appointed lieutenant-governor of London and its neighbourhood, with 'troops and ample powers' ('CSP Spain', '1554', 140). Two years later he was granted lands in Lincolnshire worth $60 per annum in consideration of his service. 
Clinton attended Philip of Spain on his arrival in England in July 1554 and was rewarded with a pension from Philip of 1000 crowns per annum. That autumn Mary sent Clinton to invest the duke of Savoy with the Order of the Garter, instructing him to visit Philip in Brussels on his return journey. In April 1556 Clinton was again Mary's envoy, travelling to Blois to congratulate Henri II on the truce of Vaucelles between France and Spain. The truce was short-lived. The following March Philip sought military assistance; Henri II's support of English rebels in France provoked a declaration of war against France on 7 June 1557. Pembroke and Clinton's expeditionary force was transported to France to assist in the duke of Savoy's siege of St Quentin: it reached the town after the turning point of the siege, but joined with Philip's forces in the final assault on 27 August. 
After the surprise French attack on Calais, which fell in early January 1558, Philip tried to persuade the privy council to retake the town immediately. The council refused, but Clinton, with typical political skill, overtly supported Philip's plan. Proclaiming his confidence in Clinton, Philip advised Clinton's reappointment as lord high admiral. Duly reappointed on 12 February 1558, Clinton was also named to Mary's privy council because 'he is in favour with the Queen and knows more about military affairs than the others' ('CSP Spain', '1554-8', 349-50), and was appointed to the newly formed council of war. On 1 May the Spanish ambassador told Philip that 'I have always found the Admiral full of goodwill' (ibid., 378). Two weeks later he stressed the importance of the admiral's presence in council for the progress of the war: 'Although the Admiral is a double-dealer and principally concerned with his own interests, he has more authority than anyone else in these particular affairs, and feels more obligation towards your Majesty' (ibid., 385-7). Clinton's task was made more difficult, however, by Mary Stuart's marriage to the French dauphin: the already demoralized council was aggrieved that while Philip was demanding English contributions to his war effort, he refused to sever his own relations with Scotland. The Spanish ambassador reported that the council had 'even reproached the Admiral for not having... told you how much feeling there is about it', but that 'the Admiral says he did not mention it... because he only likes to tell people things they will be glad to hear' (ibid., 394-6). 
Despite the council's misgivings, Clinton agreed to make the English fleet available throughout the summer to assist the Spanish campaign in France. In July 1558 a joint English and Flemish fleet attacked the Breton coast, aiming at Brest, but the 7000 men landed by Clinton met with unexpected resistance. Abandoning their attempt, the fleet returned to Portsmouth, where Clinton learned of French preparations to transport troops to Scotland. Sending Vice-Admiral Winter to intercept them on their voyage north, Clinton took the rest of the fleet to Normandy; he attempted a landing, but the fleet became fogbound, losing the advantage of surprise. The fleet returned to Portsmouth, bringing the unsuccessful summer campaign of 1558 to an end. 
Within four days of Mary's death in November 1558, Clinton was appointed a member of Elizabeth's privy council. His wife, Elizabeth, had been brought up with the queen and became a member of her privy chamber, attending her between 1559 and 1585. Clinton further strengthened his position by remaining on good terms with both William Cecil and Lord Robert Dudley, siding with each at different times, depending upon the issue. In July 1559, with a renewed threat of French military intervention in Scotland after Francois II's accession to the French throne with Mary Stuart as queen, Clinton advocated early action. The queen and most councillors were uncertain but, when the French reached Leith, it was agreed to send a fleet to the Firth of Forth, with Clinton (as lord admiral) directing the operation. By early May 1560 the English had failed to end French resistance in Leith, and Clinton advocated additional forces to end the siege, passionately proclaiming his readiness to risk his own life in this venture. In early June, Clinton was at sea with the fleet, planning to intercept French reinforcements. There was no confrontation, since the French fleet was lost in a storm. The French war effort soon crumbled. Clinton again led the English fleet against the French in summer 1563, to relieve English troops besieged in Le Havre, but arrived two days after the garrison had surrendered. 
On 24 November 1569 Clinton and Warwick were appointed lieutenants-general of the forces to suppress the rising of the northern earls. Clinton's troops set out from Lincoln on 1 December, marching north and uniting with the forces raised by Warwick and the earl of Sussex, lord president of the council of the north. When the royal army approached Darlington on 17 December the rebels fled to Scotland. Clinton was rewarded for his service when, on 4 May 1572, he was created earl of Lincoln in recognition of 'his service to Henry VIII, Edward VI and Queen Mary, and to the present Queen, particularly during the late rebellion in the North; and for his service as High Admiral both to the present Queen and Queen Mary'. The following month Lincoln was sent to Paris to ratify the treaty of Blois, signed on 19 April and marking a new Anglo-French defensive alliance against Spain. This was the last major service that Lincoln (now aged sixty) performed, although he continued in the office of lord admiral and remained at court and a member of the privy council until his death. 
In his will dated 11 July 1584 Lincoln bequeathed Tattershall Castle to his son and heir, Sir Henry Clinton, and Sempringham to his wife, Elizabeth, for life. Correctly anticipating that Elizabeth might have 'some trouble or disturbance' from Henry over the will, Lincoln made detailed provisions against it. Henry contested the will, but in March 1587 it was confirmed by sentence. Lincoln died in London on 16 January 1585, aged seventy-two. He was buried in St George's Chapel, Windsor, where an ornate monument commemorates his life and the Lincoln chapel was named in his honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 5680


Clinton, Geoffrey of (d. c.1133), administrator, came of a family originating at Semilly in the Cotentin, which after 1066 seems to have acquired certain English possessions, notably Glympton ('Clintona') in Oxfordshire. Clinton may have been among those taken into the service of the future king, Henry I, while he ruled the Cotentin in the 1090s, but the first trace of him in royal service is in an attestation of 1110 to an act of King Henry's at Woodstock. The fall of Herbert the chamberlain in 1118 brought Clinton into a more prominent position in the administration of the king's treasure. He took Herbert's place, and probably in 1121 obtained in addition the shrievalty of Warwick. His acquisition of the office of sheriff was for a purpose. In 1124, Roger, earl of Warwick, was compromised in the rebellious schemes of his cousin, Waleran, count of Meulan, and at the same time Clinton acquired seventeen fees from the earl. The transfer of lands from earl to sheriff must have been a forced enfeoffment designed to lessen the king's ill will against Earl Roger, by an act of patronage towards Clinton, the king's servant. The foundation chronicle of Biddlesden Abbey notes just such another enfeoffment in his favour, on this occasion by a Bedfordshire baron who needed his support when trying to escape the consequences of a forest offence. The king enhanced his local power by grants of royal demesne at Kenilworth near Warwick. He then underlined his local dominance by the building of a castle and priory there in 1124. It was doubtless at this time of royal favour that Clinton acquired his collection of fees from several magnates: the earl of Gloucester, and the Stafford and Ferrers families, among others. In 1129 he further consolidated his local position when his nephew Roger obtained the see of Coventry (on Clinton's payment of 3000 marks, as it was alleged). 
In the meantime Clinton had brought into Warwickshire a number of Normans from the Cotentin as his tenants. The pipe roll compiled at Michaelmas 1130 gives a picture of him at the height of his power. His exemptions from danegeld reveal a great landed estate of at least 578 hides concentrated in the south and west midlands. It also illustrates why he has been taken by modern writers as the archetype of Henry I's 'new man'. He held numerous wardships, of individuals and the abbey of Evesham; he had taken up debts and farms of royal manors. During the years before 1130 he had been active as a justice in seventeen counties. He was everywhere involved in business, manipulation, and making money. No wonder that he had enemies. These engineered his temporary downfall at Easter 1130, when he was arrested at Woodstock for alleged treason. Those who charged him were not named, but are suggested to have been members of Roger of Warwick's family, which returned to royal favour in the course of 1129. Clinton escaped the charges by heavy bribes, and continued to appear in the royal entourage until 1133. He died before 1135; a late writ of Henry I survives referring to his death. 
By 1124 Clinton was married and had sons. He was succeeded by the younger Geoffrey of Clinton, who was a minor, as appears from an account of a deathbed grant in the Kenilworth cartulary. A measure of continuing royal favour after 1130 is that the younger Geoffrey was given to his uncle, William, in wardship; he ran into trouble at some time in 1137 or 1138, when the earl of Warwick attempted to reclaim the lands extorted from him by Geoffrey's father. The problem was eventually solved by a marriage treaty, by which Geoffrey married Agnes, the earl's young daughter, and received his lands back at preferential terms, with a concession of the hereditary possession of the shrievalty of Warwick. He died about 1175. Clinton also had another son, Robert (mentioned in a charter of the younger Geoffrey), and at least one daughter, Lescelina, for whom he bought the manor of Wolfhamcote, Warwickshire, as an endowment. 


@@@@@


doc= 5681


Clinton, Sir Henry (1730-1795), army officer, was born on 16 April 1730, the second of the three surviving children of George Clinton (1686-1761), naval officer, governor of New York, and MP, and his wife, Anne (died 1767), the daughter of General Peter Carle. 
To an unusual extent, Henry Clinton's early development was shaped by his father and his father's family. Captain George Clinton, a diffident man and a marginally successful naval officer, was at sea for nearly all of his son's childhood. In 1741 Captain Clinton turned to his brother's brother-in-law, the powerful first duke of Newcastle, for help with his career and mounting debts. Newcastle arranged to have him promoted admiral and appointed royal governor of New York. So it was that Henry Clinton, whose childhood had been spent in the company of a strong-willed mother and two sisters, was transported in 1743 to a remote provincial capital to live among colonists who resented his privileged status. Young Clinton was intelligent and he had the benefits of a sound, basic education -- perhaps through tutors and travel, probably through the Revd Samuel Seabury's school at Hempstead, Long Island. But his appearance -- he was not handsome -- and early experiences seem to have encouraged what his father described as a family disposition towards diffidence. He never gained the confidence in himself or the skill in working with others to match his considerable intelligence. 
Clinton's career in the army was also shaped by his father and his father's family. In 1745 Admiral Clinton obtained his son a lieutenancy in an independent company of infantry at New York and a tour of duty with a detachment sent to occupy the French fortress of Louisbourg on Cape Breton. By the autumn of 1748 Captain-Lieutenant Henry Clinton was asking for leave 'to go to France' -- presumably to study his profession (23 Oct 1748, 23 June 1749, TNA: PRO, WO 25/3191). His leave granted, and having been promoted captain, Clinton sailed for England in the summer of 1749. It seems likely that he then went to France. If so, he returned to find that the duke of Newcastle had secured him a commission in the elite Coldstream Guards (as lieutenant and then as captain, 1751-8) and, eventually, appointment as aide-de-camp to Field Marshal Sir John Ligonier. Following further promotion, as captain and then lieutenant-colonel in the 1st foot guards (1758-62), he accompanied his new regiment to Germany in June 1760 to serve against the French as a volunteer and aide-de-camp with the celebrated young commander Prince Charles of Brunswick. Clinton saw action at Korbach and Kloster Kamp in 1760, won Prince Charles's admiration, and was promoted colonel (1762). He went home after being wounded in late August 1762. Brief as his active service had been, Clinton emerged from the Seven Years' War with a reputation as a brave and knowledgeable officer and a student of the art of war. 
During the years between the Seven Years' War and the American War of Independence, Clinton advanced steadily in the army, entered parliament, and enjoyed a happy, if brief, marriage to Harriet Carter (1747-1772), the daughter of Thomas and Martha Carter, of St James's, Westminster, and Penn, Buckinghamshire. The couple were married on 12 February 1767. Clinton was colonel of the 12th foot from 1766 to 1778, took part in summer manoeuvres in 1767, accompanied his regiment to Gibraltar, where he served as second in command in 1769, and was promoted major-general in 1772. He also sat in parliament on the interest of his cousin, the second duke of Newcastle, for Boroughbridge (1772-4) and, later, Newark (1774-84). But on 29 August 1772 his wife died after giving birth to her fifth child in five years of marriage. Clinton was profoundly depressed by Harriet's death. Her parents and two sisters moved into his house in Weybridge, Surrey, to care for his children -- two of whom, William Henry Clinton (1769-1846) and Henry Clinton (1771-1829), became generals in the Napoleonic era. Clinton then sought to escape his grief by accompanying fellow officers to observe the Russo-Turkish War in 1774 and by accepting appointment as third in command of British forces in North America in February 1775. 
Clinton reached Boston on 25 May 1775 to start three years of frustrating service under generals Thomas Gage and William Howe. He made sound plans for defeating the rebellious colonists, but he was rarely successful in advocating or carrying out those plans. At Boston in 1775 he failed to dissuade Gage from launching a costly frontal attack on rebel forces on Charlestown Neck, the battle of Bunker Hill. The following year, after becoming second in command and leading an abortive expedition to the Carolinas, he also failed to persuade Howe, the new commander-in-chief, to accept plans for trapping and destroying the continental army at New York. And in 1777, after a brief winter's leave in England, during which he learned the government's plans, Clinton was unable to convince Howe that he was expected to co-operate with a British army advancing south from Canada in a summer campaign along the Hudson. Howe, ignoring Clinton's arguments and the government's plans, took his army to Pennsylvania by way of Chesapeake Bay. He left Clinton to hold New York city and to do what he could to favour the British forces from Canada. When in early October Clinton made a bold dash up the Hudson, Howe promptly stripped him of the troops he was employing to open the river. Clinton, thoroughly frustrated with Howe, asked to resign as soon as he learned that the Canadian army had surrendered. 
Rather than accept his resignation, the British government decided during the winter of 1777-8 to make Clinton commander-in-chief and to adopt a new strategy for ending the rebellion: the surrender of the Canadian army and Howe's own wish to resign had changed matters. To carry on the war with depleted regular forces, the government proposed to rely on the Royal Navy and loyal colonists to end the rebellion. Clinton was to try to engage the continental army in a decisive battle. Failing that, he was to withdraw from Philadelphia and co-operate with the navy in raiding the coasts of New England and sending a detachment of 7000 men to Georgia to join loyalists there in restoring royal government throughout the southern colonies. 
Before he could carry out this new strategy, France intervened on the side of the rebels, and Clinton had temporarily to subordinate the American war to a wider war with France. In late March 1778, after France announced it had concluded a treaty with the United States, the British government ordered Clinton to send 5000 men to capture the French island of St Lucia in the West Indies and an additional 3000 to reinforce the Floridas. He was then to evacuate Philadelphia and use his remaining forces to defend British posts from New York to Newfoundland. Clinton received these instructions at Philadelphia in May, when he became commander-in-chief. He evacuated Philadelphia in June, marched and fought his way through New Jersey (engaging the continental army inconclusively at Monmouth), and co-operated with the British navy against a French squadron that ranged along the Atlantic seaboard from July to November. Not until November, when he had at last sent a detachment to St Lucia and the French squadron had gone, was Clinton able to concentrate on ending the American rebellion. 
But, in pursuing the government's new strategy of relying on the navy and loyalists to restore royal government, Clinton was markedly more cautious than he had been while serving under Howe. In late November 1778 he made a tentative start on recovering the south, sending some 3000 regulars to assist loyalists in restoring royal government in Georgia. When that start proved unexpectedly successful, he considered detaching more regulars to capture Charles Town. But he wasted nearly five months during the spring and summer of 1779 awaiting reinforcements, in mounting a diversionary raid in the Chesapeake, and in trying to lure the continental army into a decisive battle along the Hudson river at Stony and Verplancks points, 40 miles north of New York city. By the time that a reinforcement of 3300 sickly men arrived in late August, a French squadron was on its way to North America. Clinton withdrew his forces from Stony and Verplancks points, as well as Rhode Island, and prepared to meet the French at New York. 
That winter, after the French had left American waters, Clinton undertook an expedition to South Carolina. He went south to take pressure off his forces in Georgia by capturing Charles Town and enlisting loyalists in pacifying South Carolina. On reaching Charles Town in February 1780 he saw an opportunity to do more than he had planned -- to capture at Charles Town the principal American army in the south and to carry his offensive well beyond South Carolina and Georgia. He proceeded cautiously: surrounding, besieging, and capturing (on 12 May) Charles Town with its garrison of 3371 men and 300 cannon. He then moved quickly to exploit his greatest victory. He established armed camps in the interior of South Carolina, raised loyalist units, and called upon all colonists to swear allegiance to the crown. But he was all too quick to assume that he had ended the rebellion in South Carolina and that his second in command, Charles, Earl Cornwallis, would be able with relatively few regular troops -- about one-quarter of the army in America -- to restore royal government from Georgia to Virginia. 
Clinton returned to New York in June 1780 to seek a decisive battle with the continental army and to resume raiding warfare in the north -- indeed, to make his principal effort there. Yet in the year following his return to New York, a year in which he became paralysed by the arrival of a French squadron at Rhode Island and by disagreements with his naval counterpart, Admiral Marriot Arbuthnot, he gradually shifted his army to the south and allowed Virginia to become the seat of the war. He did so because he lacked the confidence to control Cornwallis, who had the enthusiastic support of the British government. Clinton had ordered Cornwallis to restore royal government gradually, establishing loyalists in one province before going on to another. When Cornwallis chose instead to secure South Carolina by invading North Carolina, and when he suffered defeats and called for help, Clinton began sending reinforcements. Between October 1780 and May 1781 he made four separate detachments to the Chesapeake. But even then, even after three-fifths of his army was in the southern colonies, he still did not intend to concentrate there. And he was angry to learn in late May 1781 that Cornwallis had, unilaterally, taken his small army to Virginia, leaving the interior of South Carolina exposed to the rebels. 
Clinton was not angry -- or confident -- enough to take command of Cornwallis's forces or to pursue his own strategy during the critical summer of 1781. Knowing that the French were sending a powerful fleet to America and that British forces in the Chesapeake would be vulnerable to such a fleet, he had decided to leave only a small contingent of regulars in Virginia and to attack either Philadelphia or Newport. Yet when Cornwallis met his request for troops by threatening to withdraw from Virginia, Clinton allowed him to keep all of his forces and to establish a base at Yorktown. Once he had made these concessions to Cornwallis and to the British government's preference for concentrating in the Chesapeake, he had to forgo his own plans and to rely on the Royal Navy to preserve Cornwallis from the Franco-American forces gathering in Virginia. The navy tried and failed to open the Chesapeake in early September, and on 19 October Cornwallis surrendered, the victim of his own insubordination and of Clinton's inability to exercise authority. 
Cornwallis's surrender effectively ended the American war and Clinton's command -- indeed, his active military service. He returned to England in June 1782 to devote the remainder of his life to redeeming his reputation, enjoying the pleasures of a complicated domestic life, and performing occasional duties as colonel of the 84th foot (1778-82) and 7th dragoons (1779-95); he was promoted lieutenant-general (1777) and general (1793). Finding that he was widely blamed for British defeat and that the king was unwilling to reward him for his American service, beyond having created him knight of the Bath on 11 April 1777, he undertook a prolonged, lonely defence of his command. He entered a destructive pamphlet war with Cornwallis and other, anonymous, opponents; he tried and failed to get an Irish viscountcy (the government offered a barony, which he declined); and he worked intermittently on his apologia, a long manuscript history of the American rebellion that did not see publication until 1954. But he also had the good sense to enjoy his families and friends. He installed his children and sisters-in-law at Portland Place, London, and Orwell Park, Suffolk, and set up his mistress from the American war, Mary Baddeley, 'nee' O'Callaghan, the wife of Captain Thomas Baddeley (died 1782), with their five children in Paddington. He also had an illegitimate daughter from his former liaison with a Mrs Preussen. Somehow he managed, after delicate introductions, to divide his time between these households and excursions abroad to Europe. By the 1790s other friends from the American war -- the second duke of Northumberland and Clinton's second cousin, the third duke of Newcastle -- had found him a seat in parliament (for Launceston, 1790-94), an offer of active service (which he declined), and the governorship of Gibraltar (1794-5). He died, before going to Gibraltar, at Portland Place, on 23 December 1795. 
Clinton's reputation rests almost entirely on his service in the American War of Independence. His performance was sometimes energetic and inspired, usually sound, and almost always marred by his inability, by what historians have come to see as a disordered personality, to work well with other generals and admirals and to carry out his own plans. He clearly understood the war as a whole: the importance of gradually enlisting the support of the American people; of gaining control of lands that could provide food, fuel, and shelter for British forces; and of maintaining control of the seas about the colonies. He also understood the importance of avoiding costly defeats, of pursuing strategies and tactics that minimized risks to British regular forces. Yet he was so unsure of himself, so hesitant in exercising authority, that he could not translate his insights into British victory. Nor could he avoid being blamed for Lord Cornwallis's climactic defeat at Yorktown. Clinton was a brave, knowledgeable officer who was unsuited by temperament to high command -- especially in the long, difficult American War of Independence. 


@@@@@


doc= 5682


Clinton, Sir Henry (1771-1829), army officer, was born on 9 March 1771 in Weybridge, Surrey, the younger son of General Sir Henry Clinton (1730-1795) and his wife, Harriet (1747-1772), daughter of Thomas Carter. Henry and his elder brother, Sir William Henry Clinton, were brought up by their aunt, Elizabeth Carter, following the premature death of their mother at the age of twenty-six. In 1782, while his father was commanding the British forces in the United States, Henry was sent to Eton College, where he joined his brother. In 1785 Henry left Eton with William, and soon after entering the army on 10 October 1787 as an ensign in the 11th regiment took leave and set off for France and Germany. In January 1788 he was at Tours, then joined his brother in Valenciennes, where he remained from February until April. After a visit to Brussels he met up with his brother at Koblenz and from there made excursions to Mayen, Bonn (where he was presented to the elector of Cologne), Aachen, Dusseldorf, and Maastricht, among other places. In October 1788 he became a volunteer in the Brunswick corps raised by Lieutenant-General Riedesel, his father's old comrade, which was acting with the Russian army in the Netherlands. In March 1791 he was transferred to the Grenadier Guards, promoted captain into the 15th regiment in April, and transferred back to the Grenadier Guards in November 1792. In January 1793, at the beginning of the war with France, he was appointed aide-de-camp to the duke of York (a post his brother was to hold three years later) and served on his personal staff throughout the disastrous campaigns in Flanders, being promoted brevet major on 22 April 1794. On 10 May he was severely wounded at Campin. He remained with the duke until he was promoted to the lieutenant-colonelcy of the 66th regiment on 30 September 1795, at which time he went to join his regiment in the West Indies. 
Clinton was present at the landing in St Lucia under Sir Ralph Abercromby and at the siege and surrender of Morne Fortune. In 1796, after having exchanged back into the Grenadier Guards, he sailed to England from San Domingo but 'en route' was captured by a French cruiser and did not arrive home until the summer of 1797. In the following year he was made aide-de-camp to Lord Cornwallis in Ireland and was present at the surrender of the French force under General Humbert. He was attached to Lord William Bentinck's mission with General Suvorov in Italy during April 1799 when he was present at the battles of the Trebia and of Novi. On 23 December 1799 he married the Hon. Susan Charteris (1774-1816), second daughter of Francis, seventh Lord Elcho; they had no children. She insisted on following him to Switzerland when he was appointed military assistant to William Wickham in 1800. In that year he was also employed on a mission to the Austrian army in Swabia and was present at the battles of Eugen and Moeskerch. He was appointed assistant adjutant-general in the eastern district in June 1801 and adjutant-general in India in January 1802, and was promoted colonel on 25 September 1803. George III at this time praised him and his brother as soldiers of 'uncommon abilities'. 
While in India, Clinton did good service in commanding the right wing at the battle of Laswari, but he left in March 1805. He next acted as military commissioner with the Russian general Kutuzov in the campaign of Austerlitz, and in July 1806 he embarked for Sicily as commander of the flank companies of the guards. He commanded the garrison of Syracuse from December 1806 to November 1807, during which time he met Sir John Moore, who became a close friend. Clinton was promoted brigadier-general in January 1808 and, as such, accompanied Moore, to Sweden. On 21 August following he arrived in Portugal as adjutant-general to Sir Harry Burrard, but on the next day found himself under a new commander, Sir Hugh Dalrymple, whom he later described as 'unfit' for the post (H. Clinton to W. H. Clinton, 17 Oct 1808). When at last the command fell to Moore, Clinton was delighted, although he did not favour his friend's strategy in the Peninsula. Under Moore he proved himself a decisive deputy, but his imperiousness as a disciplinarian made him unpopular with some. According to one victim of Clinton's anger, Captain Cochrane, Clinton, in the presence of several other officers, 'loaded me with such a torrent of abuse as could not have been merited by the most 'worthless' individual in the army' ('Proceedings of a General Court Martial', 8). In May 1809 Clinton unsuccessfully prosecuted Cochrane in a court martial for disobedience and neglect of duty, although his real motive was to clear himself of charges of unreasonable conduct towards Cochrane following the latter's complaint against him. Clinton took charge of the embarkation procedures on arrival at Corunna, but two days before the battle he was taken ill with dysentery and was replaced by his deputy, Colonel Anderson. After Moore's death he was the first person to defend Moore's proceedings, in a pamphlet entitled 'A few remarks... explanatory of the motives which guided the operations of the British army during the late short campaign in Spain', which, along with two other publications by him, appeared in 1809. In that year he also acted as adjutant-general in Ireland. Before leaving for Sweden he had joined his brother as the duke of Newcastle's MP for Boroughbridge, Yorkshire, having the previous year failed as Lord Elcho's candidate for the Haddington burghs. When present (which was not often) he voted with ministers, and against parliamentary reform and Roman Catholic relief, until his resignation from the Commons in 1818. (He never spoke in debate.) 
After his promotion to the rank of major-general on 25 July 1810, Clinton asked to be sent to the Peninsula for active service. His request was granted, and in October 1811 he joined the duke of Wellington and was given the command of the 6th division. Although lacking the military abilities of Thomas Picton or Lowry Cole, he nevertheless made a competent general of division. After attacking the forts of Salamanca in June 1812, he played a conspicuous part in the battle that ensued on 22 July, when his division took the Arapiles valley following the failure of Pack's Portuguese troops. When Wellington went on to march against Joseph Bonaparte at Madrid, Clinton was entrusted with that section of the army that remained behind on the River Douro. He afterwards co-operated in the costly and unsuccessful siege of Burgos in the autumn of 1812. He was made a local lieutenant-general in April 1813 and on 29 July was created a KB for his services at the battle of Vitoria. In the early spring of 1813 he showed the first signs of the mysterious illness which was to plague him until his death. After a short period of convalescence in England he returned in time to command his division at the battles of the Nive, Orthez, and Toulouse, and the affairs of Caceres and Tarbes. 
At the conclusion of the war Clinton's services were amply rewarded. He received a gold cross and one clasp, and the order of the Tower and the Sword; was made colonel of the 1st battalion, 60th regiment; was promoted lieutenant-general on 4 June 1814; and was appointed inspector-general of infantry. On Napoleon's escape from Elba, Wellington applied for Clinton, who took command of the 3rd division, which was posted on the right centre at the battle of Waterloo on 18 June 1815. In this position he suffered as much from the French artillery as did the other divisions in the centre, and he also had to resist many cavalry charges. After the battle he was made a knight of the orders of Maria Theresa, of St George of Russia, and of William of the Netherlands, and on 9 August 1815 he was made colonel of the 3rd regiment (the Buffs). Two months earlier his elder brother William had applied to the marquess of Hertford for a peerage for Clinton, in the process waiving his own claims for a barony. However, his words fell on deaf ears. During the occupation of France, Clinton commanded a division of the British contingent, and in the autumn of 1815 William visited him in Paris, where he regretted that his brother's former 'open cordiality' towards him had been replaced by a formal 'courteous manner', which he attributed to Clinton's lengthy career as a commander of men. 
On 20 May 1816 the Commons, for the third time, thanked Clinton for his military service -- on this occasion for his part at Waterloo -- and he was again present to acknowledge this honour. However, following the death of his devoted wife, Susan, on 17 August, his health deteriorated rapidly and he became a recluse. In the spring of 1817 he was said to be 'very ill' at Lyons, and by 1819 his elder brother held out little hope for his recovery. In the previous year he had already resigned his seat on the grounds of ill health. The exact nature of his affliction is hard to determine, but he is known to have been severely asthmatic. He died at his country seat of Ashley Clinton, near Lymington, Hampshire, on 11 December 1829 and was buried with his wife in the parish church at Barkway, Hertfordshire. A memorial to him was erected in the church, alongside memorials to other members of the Clinton family. 


@@@@@


doc= 5683


Clinton, Henry Fiennes Pelham-, ninth earl of Lincoln and second duke of Newcastle under Lyme (1720-1794), politician, was born Henry Fiennes Clinton on 16 April 1720, either at Stourton, Lincolnshire, or at Westminster, London, and baptized on 24 April at St James's, Westminster, the second son of Henry Clinton, seventh earl of Lincoln (1684-1728), a ministerial and household office-holder, and Lucy (1692-1736), daughter of Thomas, first Baron Pelham. He succeeded his elder brother, George, who had become the eighth earl in 1728, as ninth earl on 30 April 1730. He was educated at Eton College from 1733, tutored by John Hume (later Bishop Hume), and in 1737 entered Clare College, Cambridge, where in 1749 he was made a doctor of laws. After travelling on the continent, he returned to England in late 1741 and charmed George II, who called him ''the handsomest man in' 'England'' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 30.31). 
Having come of age, Lincoln took his seat in the Lords on 1 December 1741 and followed the political lead of his mother's brothers, Henry Pelham and Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle upon Tyne, who both served as prime minister. A haughty and loose-living man, Lincoln was described by his friend Horace Walpole as 'a very dark thin young nobleman, who did not look so much of the Hercules, as he said he was himself' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 30.1). He was compared to the comte de Guise and depicted in the study 'Patapan, or, The Little White Dog' by Walpole, who also composed verses to 'Little Peggy', the daughter born in 1743 to Lincoln and his mistress of humble birth, Peggy Lee (ibid., 30.38, 76-7, 294, 307). Despite having been deeply enamoured of Lady Sophia Fermor (1721-1745), he married, on 3 October 1744, his first cousin (his uncle Henry's daughter), Catherine Pelham (1727-1760), which occasioned a quarrel between the brothers about the future control of the family's estates. Lincoln, who had already in 1742 been appointed lord lieutenant of Cambridgeshire, which he remained until 1757, and had become a lord of the bedchamber in January 1743, received from his uncles a series of lucrative offices: he was made master of the jewel office in 1744, cofferer of the household in 1747 (which he held until 1754), joint comptroller of the customs of London in 1749, and auditor of the exchequer in 1751. He was nominated a knight of the Garter on 13 March and installed on 4 June 1752. 
That Lincoln was destined to be heir to his childless uncle Thomas was confirmed on 13 November 1756, when Newcastle was additionally created duke of Newcastle under Lyme, with a special remainder to Lincoln. Yet, although the touchy Newcastle required constant attention and selfless loyalty, Lincoln was increasingly impatient with him and relations between them deteriorated. In 1757 Lincoln opposed the formation of the Pitt-Newcastle coalition and in 1762, after Newcastle had left office, he only reluctantly resigned as a lord of the bedchamber to George III. Thereafter, as Walpole wrote, ministers 'never had much reason to complain of Lord Lincoln's hostilities. His exceeding pride kept him excluded from the world, and rarely did he appear either at court or in parliament'. He soon attached himself to William Pitt, earl of Chatham, 'with constant derision of, and insult to, his uncle', who bitterly resented the 'open ingratitude' of his favourite nephew (Walpole, 'Corr.', 30.178-9). It is possible that the death of the countess of Lincoln, to whom the duke of Newcastle had been very attached, diminished his loyalty to the Pelham cause. The final breach came at the general election of 1768, when Lincoln used his influence at Newark, where Newcastle had already made over property to him, to promote his own interest at the expense of his uncle's. On 17 November 1768 he succeeded as second duke of Newcastle under Lyme, and by royal licence on 1 December that year he took the additional surname of Pelham. He was also appointed steward of Sherwood Forest and lord lieutenant of Nottinghamshire, where he inherited his predecessor's estates and extensive electoral patronage, and he was sworn of the privy council on 16 December 1768. 
Newcastle was the only peer to pronounce Elizabeth Chudleigh, duchess of Kingston, 'guilty erroneously, but not intentionally' ('State trials', 20.624-5) when she was convicted of bigamy in the House of Lords on 22 April 1776. He preferred the pleasures of sport and the country to a life of politics, although he held several local offices, including (from 1759) the high stewardship of Westminster. He died, following a paralytic stroke, at his London house in Palace Yard, Westminster, on 22 February 1794, and, although having lived mostly at Oatlands, near Weybridge, Surrey, chose to be buried in the family vault at Bamber, Lincolnshire. By his will (dated 11 May 1793) he passed over his elder son, Thomas Pelham-Clinton, the third duke (1752-1795), of whose marriage he disapproved, in favour of his grandson Henry (1785-1851), who the following year became the fourth duke of Newcastle under Lyme. 


@@@@@


doc= 5684


Clinton, Henry Fynes (1781-1852), classical scholar, was born at Gamston, Nottinghamshire, on 14 January 1781, the first of the three sons of Charles Fynes (1747?-1827), rector of Gamston and Cromwell, and his wife, Emma (died 1831), daughter of Job Brough of Newark. Charles Fynes became prebendary of St Peter's, Westminster, in 1788 and minister of St Margaret's, Westminster, in 1797. He assumed the additional name of Clinton on 26 April 1821 by royal licence for himself and his issue in recognition of descent from Henry Clinton, second earl of Lincoln (died 1616). Henry Fynes was educated at Southwell grammar school (1789-96), where Magnus Jackson instilled in him habits of intellectual discipline, and at Westminster School (1796-99). He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in April 1799. He later wrote that at Oxford then 'Greek learning was perhaps at the lowest point of degradation' ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 5: '18th-cent. Oxf.', 524), and that he was inadequately taught and gained more from discussions with friends than from his official teachers. He read voraciously and prodigiously in Greek literature and conceived the love of classical scholarship which became the passion and solace of his life. He graduated BA in March 1803 and MA by examination in 1805, and remained in Oxford until 1806 as private tutor to Francis, Lord Gower, son of George Granville Leveson-Gower, second marquess of Stafford. In 1825 he deplored the low state of classical education at Oxford and compared English research unfavourably with German. 
Fynes abandoned a planned career in the church in response to the wish of his kinsman and benefactor Isaac Gardiner of Saffron Walden, Essex, that he should become 'a country gentleman'. (On Gardiner's death in 1811 he inherited landed property in Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Cambridgeshire, Essex, and Middlesex and so acquired 'a comfortable independence'.) He was studying at Oxford when Henry Pelham, fourth duke of Newcastle, another distant relative, returned him to parliament for Aldborough, Yorkshire, by arrangement with his father at the general election in November 1806. 'Astonished at finding himself called to the duties of a Member of Parliament' and feeling himself to be 'unprepared and unqualified for such a situation', he studied history and economics in a conscientious attempt to qualify himself for a political career ('Literary Remains', 19, 45). At first he 'diligently attended the business of the House' and was 'not without the ambition of becoming a speaker', but his 'natural reserve' and 'lack of readiness of expression' defeated him; his only known contribution to debate in almost twenty years was a brief one on election petition procedure on 25 May 1821 (ibid., 25, 31). Uncompromisingly hostile to Catholic relief, like Newcastle, he opposed the short-lived Grenville ministry and supported its successor under the duke of Portland, whose offer to appoint him to a place at the Admiralty board in March 1807 was declined for him by Newcastle. He came in unopposed for Aldborough at the general elections of 1807, 1812, and 1818 and was successful in a token contest in 1820. In 1807 he published 'Solyman, a Tragedy', of which hardly fifty copies were sold. 
On 22 June 1809 Fynes married Harriott, the eldest daughter of the Revd Charles Wylde, rector of St Nicholas, Nottingham. She died in premature childbirth on 2 February 1810 and the child, a boy, lived for only a few hours. Grief temporarily kept him from parliament, but he resumed attendance late in the year to support the administration of Spencer Perceval, whom he admired, on the regency question. On 6 January 1812 he married Katherine (died 25 April 1871), third daughter of Henry William Majendie (1754-1830), bishop of Bangor; they had two sons, who predeceased him, and nine daughters, seven of whom survived him. His son Charles Francis Fynes Clinton, BA of Christ Church, Oxford, served in the Christina army in Spain, was British arbitrator under the Anglo-Portuguese anti-slavery treaty, and died at Luanda on 5 June 1844. In 1812 Henry Fynes bought the mansion and estate of Welwyn in Hertfordshire, where he chiefly lived for the rest of his life. 
Fynes's parliamentary attendance became more sporadic as his literary pursuits increasingly consumed his time and interest. He gave general support to Lord Liverpool's ministry, but cast a few wayward votes on economy and taxation in 1816. He voted consistently against parliamentary reform. By the end of 1819 he had 'entirely abandoned' any idea of making a mark in politics and, shunning the notion of taking office, which he thought would 'impair my health, waste my spirits, and withdraw me from that literature by which I am best able to be useful to myself and others', concluded that he was 'destitute of political ambition' ('Literary Remains', 140-41). A convinced believer in a revealed religion, he claimed in 1822 to be able to 'look with philosophical indifference upon the vain pursuits of ambition, and to appreciate justly the value of that safe mediocrity of station and fortune in which I am placed'. Yet in February 1824 he got Newcastle to try to obtain for him a place at one of the public boards, preferably customs or excise, but Liverpool could not oblige him. He consoled himself with the observation that 'the loss of a lucrative post is the less to be regretted, because the possession of it would have been accompanied with a sacrifice, in part at least', of his 'two great objects' of giving his children a decent education and of advancing 'learning and moral and religious truth' (ibid., 205, 221-2). At the dissolution in June 1826 he retired from parliament, reflecting that he had been, 'as far as public speaking is concerned, an inefficient Member' (ibid., 247). The greatest disappointment of his life was his failure to secure the principal librarianship of the British Museum in December 1827, when he was passed over in favour of Henry Ellis, the long-serving keeper of printed books. An application on his behalf by Newcastle for the receiver-generalship of Nottinghamshire in 1832 also came to nothing. 
Fynes Clinton achieved some measure of happiness with his literary studies, his 'consolation and peace and security against my own passions, and in the midst of many tribulations' ('Literary Remains', 292-3). Resuming them after the death of his first wife, he turned them to good account by directing his reading towards the production of works on Greek and Roman chronology. The first part of his 'Fasti Hellenici: the Civil and Literary Chronology of Greece' was published by the Clarendon Press in January 1824 and favourably reviewed. Further instalments appeared in 1830 and 1834. His publications included articles in the classical journal 'The Philological Museum'. His 'Fasti Romani: the Civil and Literary Chronology of Rome and Constantinople' was published in two volumes in 1845 and 1850. 'Epitome of the Civil and Literary Chronology of Greece' came out in 1851, and he was compiling a companion work on Rome until a fortnight before his death at Welwyn House, Hertfordshire, on 24 October 1852. It was completed and published in 1853 by his only surviving brother, the Revd Charles John Fynes Clinton, who also edited and published in 1854 his 'Literary Remains', which contains his autobiography (written in 1818), his literary journal (1819-52), and some essays on theology; his other brother, Clinton James Fynes Clinton (1792-1833), had replaced him as member for Aldborough. Fynes Clinton applied a more exacting and critical scholarship to ancient chronology than had earlier chronologists and included a 'literary chronology' with evidence for the dating of ancient authors. His major work was of long-lasting importance, though today it is rarely consulted. 


@@@@@


doc= 5685


Clinton, Henry Pelham Fiennes Pelham-, fourth duke of Newcastle under Lyme (1785-1851), landowner and politician, was the elder son of Thomas Pelham-Clinton, third duke of Newcastle under Lyme (1752-1795), and his wife, Lady Anna Maria Stanhope (1760-1834), fifth daughter of William Stanhope, second earl of Harrington. He was born at Walton, Essex, on 30 January 1785. His father held the dukedom from 22 February 1794 to his death, 17 May 1795, when Henry succeeded him. He was educated at Eton College (1796-9), where he was appalled by its irreligion; in 1829 he founded the Newcastle scholarship there as a prize for divinity and classics. In 1803 he was abroad with his mother and stepfather when war with France was resumed; he was taken prisoner and detained at Tours for three years. After his return to England in 1806 he married, on 18 July 1807 at Lambeth Palace, Georgiana Elizabeth (1789-1822), second daughter and heir of Edward Miller Mundy of Shipley, Derbyshire, and his wife, Georgiana, widow of Lord Middleton. She brought him a sum of $190,000 and $12,000 p.a. They had twelve children and she died aged thirty-three giving birth to twins, on 26 September 1822. Her death seems to have removed a stabilizing influence. 
Newcastle was appointed to the usual offices appropriate to his station: lord lieutenant of Nottinghamshire in 1809, and in 1812 knight of the Garter and steward of Sherwood Forest and of Folewood, Nottinghamshire. But he was 'a manic-depressive, prone in periods of euphoria to see himself as the saviour of his country and to take impetuous initiatives only subsequently to lapse into long periods of despondency and inaction' (Wolffe, 23). From about 1826 he was one of the leaders of the tory 'ultras' and a fervent opponent of Catholic emancipation, consequently condemning Wellington's government in 1829 and behaving like a radical agitator in trying to bring a crowd to Windsor to frighten the king with an anti-Catholic petition. He published a 'Letter to Lord Kenyon' (1829) on this subject. He saw the reform proposals of 1830 as literally catastrophic, and became the most notorious of the opponents of the government's bill. In October 1829, when reproached for evicting tenants who voted against his candidate, he wrote publicly: 'Is it presumed then that I am not to do what I will with my own?' (Brock, 63), a remark he repeated in the Lords on 3 December 1830. He was reported as making further politically motivated evictions in September 1830, which led to the rebuke from 'The Times' (29 September 1830) that his actions did much more to justify reform than to prevent it. Newcastle was already unpopular in Nottingham for leasing land only to members of the Church of England. On 10 October 1831, in one of several local incidents, a crowd burnt to the ground his mansion, Nottingham Castle (never rebuilt); he fortified his house at Clumber, and the windows of his London house in Portman Square were broken by a crowd. He complained bitterly at not being a member of the special commission to inquire into the Nottingham episode. Newcastle was one of twenty-two peers to vote against the 'Reform Bill' on its third reading on 4 June 1832. He published his views of the catastrophe in 'An Address to All Classes and Conditions of Englishmen' (1832). As a result of the bill he lost the patronage and interest of six boroughs, worth, he believed, about $200,000. 
Newcastle had used his patronage in the cause, as he saw it, of establishmentarian protestantism. After 1832 he maintained this objective. On his son Lord Lincoln's recommendation he gave the young tory W. E. Gladstone his first seat -- Newark, which was still effectively a nomination borough. He strongly opposed the grant to Maynooth College, and when Gladstone voted for the grant in 1845, withdrew the nomination, though they continued to share a detestation of concurrent endowment. He presented Protestant Association petitions to the Lords and vehemently opposed the 'Diplomatic Relations [with Rome] Bill' in 1848. In Nottinghamshire he was equally energetically establishmentarian and in 1839 was dismissed as lord lieutenant following his behaviour over the appointment of two nonconformists as magistrates. 
Newcastle had no more success as a landowner than as a reactionary. His estates, though in a prosperous and burgeoning county, declined and he left his heir a wasting inheritance. In 1833 he paid $70,000 for an estate in Cardiganshire and in 1839 $370,000 for Worksop Manor, which proved a bad investment. In two years in the 1830s he spent $450,000, most of it borrowed, on land in Nottinghamshire. He ended his life estranged from most of his children, including his heir, Henry Pelham Fiennes Pelham-Clinton, fifth duke of Newcastle and colonial secretary. Suffering from typhus in January 1851, he is said narrowly to have escaped being buried alive when in a coma. He died at Clumber Park, Nottinghamshire, on 12 January of that year and was buried in nearby Markham Clinton church on 21 January, having gained the reputation of representing all that was worst about the English aristocracy. 


@@@@@


doc= 5686


Clinton, Henry Pelham Fiennes Pelham-, fifth duke of Newcastle under Lyme (1811-1864), politician, was born on 22 May 1811 at 39 Charles Street, Berkeley Square, London, the third child but eldest son of Henry Pelham Fiennes Pelham-Clinton, fourth duke of Newcastle under Lyme (1785-1851), and his wife, Georgiana Elizabeth (1789-1822), daughter of Edward Miller Mundy of Shipley, Derbyshire. Styled the earl of Lincoln until 1851, he was educated at Eton College (1824-8), and in 1829 proceeded to Christ Church, Oxford, where he took a BA degree in 1832. While at Oxford he became a close friend of William Ewart Gladstone; both belonged to the Union Debating Society, each serving as president, and both were members of the Essay Club, founded as an Oxford equivalent to the Cambridge Apostles. He also shared Gladstone's high-church Anglicanism. 
Both Lincoln and Gladstone entered parliament as Conservatives in December 1832 through the influence of the fourth duke of Newcastle, the former, without a contest, for South Nottinghamshire and the latter for Newark. On 27 November 1832, shortly before his election, Lincoln married Susan Harriet Catherine (1814-1889), daughter of Alexander Douglas-Hamilton, tenth duke of Hamilton, granddaughter of William Beckford, and sister of William Douglas-Hamilton, later the eleventh duke, an Eton and Oxford friend of Lincoln. He served as a lord of the Treasury from 31 December 1834 to 20 April 1835 in Sir Robert Peel's first ministry. It was at this time that a lasting bond of friendship was established between Peel and his young subordinate colleagues, whom he had introduced to official life. 
Lincoln became first commissioner of woods and forests on 15 April 1841 when Peel formed his second administration. As commissioner he performed a myriad of tasks, including providing more public accessibility to royal buildings and parks; enacting the major recommendations of the metropolitan improvements commission, over which he served as chairman; enlarging Buckingham Palace; and superintending the work of the British Geological Survey. Following Gladstone's resignation over the Maynooth College grant early in 1845, Peel appointed Lincoln to the cabinet; and on 14 February 1846 he was made chief secretary for Ireland in Peel's reconstituted administration. The potato famine had become catastrophic by the time he arrived in Ireland. Despite opposition to large-scale state assistance from Treasury officials, especially Charles Edward Trevelyan, he helped to set in motion famine relief measures that included a programme of public works to create employment to enable the Irish people to purchase imported grain. He also became a principal proponent for larger measures to stimulate economic growth and reconstruct Irish society. Although modest, the famine relief measures prevented exceptional suffering during the first half of 1846; but his tenure as chief secretary ended when the Peel ministry resigned in June 1846. 
By the time of his appointment as chief secretary Lincoln had modified his earlier protectionist views and was in complete agreement with Peel over the necessity of repealing the corn laws. Peel acknowledged the support he received from Lincoln during the contest over corn law repeal, and the obloquy and sacrifice which this had involved. He suffered his father's wrath for supporting repeal, having already angered him by his support for the Maynooth grant. When he had to seek re-election for his South Nottinghamshire seat on accepting the Irish chief secretaryship, he was defeated by a protectionist candidate backed by his father. His father-in-law, however, helped to find him a seat, Falkirk burghs, for which he was elected in May 1846. The crisis strengthened his devotion to Peel and separated him irrevocably from many of his earlier political positions, as well as from his father. 
During the late 1840s Lincoln and the other leading Peelites tried unsuccessfully to get Peel to resume leadership of a moderate political party. Following Peel's death in 1850 Lincoln's own political ambitions were raised. His devotion to public service and his capacity for hard work earned him recognition, and a few prominent individuals, including Prince Albert, the prince consort, encouraged him to seek the leadership of a coalition of Peelites and liberal whigs. Although Lord Aberdeen, rather than Lincoln, was selected to head the coalition government when it was formed in December 1852, many regarded him as the major spokesman of Peelite political philosophy and the most likely successor of Lord Aberdeen as prime minister. A series of misfortunes, however, including his tragic marriage, prevented him from fulfilling his political ambitions and left him with shattered health and a damaged official reputation. 
Lady Lincoln ['see 'Opdebeck, Lady Susan Harriet Catherine], who bore him four sons and a daughter, had a series of affairs, which led to several separations and reconciliations between the couple. After a period of reconciliation during 1844-7, she finally left on 2 August 1848 and travelled on the continent in the company of Lord Horatio Walpole, with whom she had a child a year later. This, and the failure of Gladstone's mission to Italy in the summer of 1849 to persuade Lady Lincoln to return to her husband and children, obliged Lincoln to seek a divorce. On 14 August 1850 the marriage was formally dissolved by act of parliament (with Gladstone giving evidence). Lincoln's father, from whom he had also become estranged, died early in the following year, and he succeeded (12 January 1851) both to the title, as fifth duke of Newcastle, and to estates which were encumbered with debt. 
Newcastle was secretary for the colonies in Aberdeen's administration from December 1852 until June 1854, when the outbreak of the Crimean War necessitated the creation of a separate department for administering military affairs. His administrative difficulties began when he took over this newly created office as secretary of state for war. Newcastle laboured indefatigably throughout the summer and autumn to see that the army was as well equipped and prepared as the capabilities of the country allowed, knowing all the while that the system of military administration was in a hopeless state of disorganization and confusion. Despite these problems and administrative shortcomings, the army at the time of the Crimean invasion was more than sufficiently supplied and equipped. Nevertheless, circumstances largely beyond Newcastle's control brought near disaster to the British army in the Crimea during the winter of 1854-5. Although the duke cannot be exonerated completely, an objective review of his administration of the War Office clearly reveals that no individual was solely responsible for the failures. The mistakes and miscalculations of the civilian authorities in London were compounded by those of the military men in the Crimea. However, it was more a failure of strategy and military execution than one of logistics that nearly lost the army; and it was Newcastle's misfortune to be placed at the head of a weak and corrupt system without sufficient authority or opportunity to make it more workable. For his failures he suffered the wrath of the nation early in 1855. He resigned in disgrace on 1 February 1855. 
Even before his resignation Newcastle had effected, perhaps belatedly, many of the measures that would rectify the difficulties for the army in the Crimea, including the construction of the Balaklava railway, establishment of the Land Transport Corps, and the appointment of the hospitals commission. Lord Panmure candidly stated that 'the barometer was steadily on the rise' (Munsell, 'Unfortunate Duke', 216) when he took over the War Office from the duke and that he had little to add to the measures that had already been initiated by his predecessor for improving the condition of the army. Yet Panmure and Lord Palmerston, the new prime minister, received all the credit for the improvement of the army, and the duke continued to be pilloried by the press and subjected to parliamentary censure for conducting the war without sufficient care and forethought. Rather than remain in England to resist the motion of censure, the duke accepted Palmerston's invitation to go to the East to report on the state of the army in the Crimea and the hospitals in Turkey. 
Much of the rancour against Newcastle had disappeared by the time of his return to England late in 1855. None the less, still bitter over his past treatment, he semi-retired from politics. His close friend Lady Frances Waldegrave promoted him as a possible Liberal leader to succeed Palmerston; for his part Newcastle looked to Lady Waldegrave, then married to a third, elderly husband, as a possible second wife. In the event neither objective was achieved. He was also distracted by domestic worries. His eldest son rebelled against his strict upbringing and turned out a wastrel, fleeing the country to escape vast gambling debts. Newcastle's determination to prevent his daughter, Susan, from inheriting the characteristics of her mother, merely drove her into an elopement with a drunken and violent husband, Lord Adolphus Vane. His third son, Arthur, deserted from the navy in 1864 and died in 1870 while awaiting trial on charges of indecency in the case involving Ernest Boulton and Frederick Park. With the exception of his second son, Edward (who became master of the queen's household), Newcastle's record as a father was disastrous. 
In June 1859 Newcastle joined the Palmerston cabinet as colonial secretary, a position for which he was well suited. As a decided imperialist who administered the empire with tact and understanding in an innovative way, he became a highly regarded colonial secretary. He greatly accelerated the transfer of governmental responsibility to the settlement colonies of North America, Australia, and New Zealand, a process which he believed was necessary to save the empire. To him it was in the best interests of Great Britain to foster communities overseas (he was a member of the Canterbury Association) and to tie them to the mother country with 'bonds of mutual sympathy and mutual obligation' (Munsell, 'Unfortunate Duke', 243). His administration of the Colonial Office provided many valuable precedents that were extremely important in the evolutionary process from empire to Commonwealth. 
In 1860 Newcastle served as an official adviser and leader of the entourage accompanying the prince of Wales to British North America and the United States. The duke also chaired the royal commission on popular education (1858-61), the recommendations of which were partially incorporated in the revised code of 1862 and the 'Education Act' of 1870. Other offices and honours that Newcastle held or received included high steward of Retford (1851), lieutenant-colonel commandant of the Sherwood Rangers (1853), lord lieutenant of Nottinghamshire (1857), lord warden of the stannaries (1862), honorary DCL of Oxford (1863), councillor to the prince of Wales (1863), and a knight of the Garter (1860). 
Contemporary assessments of Newcastle varied widely. To the duke of Argyll, a fellow Peelite and ministerial colleague, 'Newcastle was an industrious and conscientious worker, but he had no brilliancy and little initiative' (G. Douglas, eighth duke of Argyll, 'Autobiography and Memoirs', 2 vols., 1906, 1.380). Frederic, Lord Blachford, long-time under-secretary of state for the colonies, described the duke as 'an honest and honourable man' who in political administration was 'painstaking, clear-headed and just', but whose abilities were far too insufficient 'for the management of great affairs -- which, however, he was always ambitious of handling'. Newcastle was also standoffish and overcritical of others, and although he respected other people's positions, he was always sensible of his own. 'It was said of him', Blachford added, 'that he did not remember his rank unless you forgot it', an expression that aptly described the duke's relations to subordinates (Rogers, 225). 
Despite these judgements, Newcastle was highly regarded by some of the most prominent of his contemporaries, including the prince consort, a close friend. In the early 1850s Gladstone and Lord Aberdeen believed that the duke would some day head a government. Gladstone always respected Newcastle and sought his opinions on political and religious matters. Only towards the end of the duke's life did Gladstone see a decline in the abilities that he believed had distinguished the duke more as a statesman than as an administrator. Lord Palmerston regarded Newcastle as an excellent colonial secretary; in 1864, when failing health forced the duke to retire, Palmerston waited as long as he could before accepting his letter of resignation. 
Suffering a rapid deterioration of health following his resignation from office in the spring, Newcastle died at Clumber Park, Nottinghamshire, his principal residence, from a cerebral haemorrhage on 18 October 1864. He was buried in the family mausoleum at Markham Clinton. He left his estates in financial disarray, which Gladstone and Frederick Ouvry, as executors and trustees, spent years disentangling. The fortitude with which Newcastle had borne accumulated misfortune and torturing disease touched those who knew him. Gladstone believed that the life of the unfortunate duke was so tragic that it was best forgotten. Fortunately, however, historians in the late twentieth century have rescued Newcastle from obscurity to place both his failures and accomplishments into historical perspective. Earlier accounts that were overly critical of his career, particularly his administration of the War Office, have been corrected, and he has now been allowed to take his place in history as an important political figure during the period of the 1840s through the early 1860s and as one of the most effective colonial secretaries of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 5687


Clinton, Sir William Henry (1769-1846), army officer and administrator, was born on 23 December 1769 in Lyons, France, the elder son of General Sir Henry Clinton (1730-1795) and his wife, Harriet, daughter of Thomas Carter. William and his younger brother, Sir Henry Clinton, spent their early childhood at the family home in Weybridge, Surrey, where, following the premature death of their mother in 1772 at the age of twenty-six, they were cared for by their aunt, Elizabeth Carter, who with her sister moved into the family home. In 1780, while his father was commanding the British forces in the United States, William was sent to Eton College. His brother joined him in 1782 and both left in 1785. Meanwhile, on 22 December 1784 William had been gazetted cornet in his father's regiment, the 7th light dragoons, and thereafter, thanks to his father's wealth and influence, promotion quickly followed. In 1786 he accompanied his father on a short tour of France and Switzerland. On 29 August they set off for the continent and early in the following month arrived at the home, near Neuchatel, Switzerland, of Monsieur Traytorrens, a member of an illustrious family who had been patrons of Rousseau. Under the care of Traytorrens, Clinton spent a year in mainly rustic pursuits, though he was frequently entertained at the homes of neighbouring English residents and travellers, who included Mark Beaufoy and his wife. He also perfected his French, began to study German, and recorded the days' events in the journal that was to run almost unbroken for nearly sixty years. From Neuchatel, Clinton travelled north to Valenciennes where, apart from a short break in England, he spent a further eight months, partly in the study of fortification. On 1 May 1788 he headed eastwards, visiting Brussels, Liege, Aachen, Cologne, Bonn, Koblenz, and Mayen, among other places. For much of his tour he was accompanied by his younger brother Henry, and the two travellers discovered that the influence of their famous father opened many doors, including those of several German electors and Count Metternich, father of the illustrious Austrian statesman. On 7 March 1787, while in Switzerland, Clinton had been promoted lieutenant. He was subsequently promoted captain into the 45th regiment on 9 June 1790 and captain in the 1st Grenadier guards on 14 July 1790. In 1793 Clinton saw his first action in the campaign in Flanders, and on his return in the following year he succeeded his kinsman Thomas Pelham Clinton as tory member for East Retford in Nottinghamshire. He retained his seat until 1796 but is known to have spoken only once in the Commons -- on the Flanders campaign, on 5 February 1795. Meanwhile, on 29 December 1794 he had been promoted lieutenant-colonel, and in August 1795 he accompanied General Doyle on his abortive campaign to the coast of France. On his twenty-sixth birthday Clinton succeeded his father in the family property and soon afterwards, in January 1796, was appointed aide-de-camp to the duke of York, in which capacity he acted, apart from a spell of duty in Ireland, until June 1799. On 14 March 1797 he had married Lady Louisa Dorothea Holroyd (1777-1854), daughter of John Baker Holroyd, first earl of Sheffield. They had two sons, Henry and Frederick, both of whom became army officers, and four daughters, Lou, Anna, Maria, and Harriot. 
In 1799 Clinton was on the continent with Colonel Ramsay and accompanied him on a secret mission to the Russian generals Korsakov and Suvorov, returning to England in October to resume his association with the duke of York at The Helder. It was Clinton's duty to bring home the news of the Alkmaar armistice. In June 1800 he was appointed acting deputy quartermaster in Egypt, on 1 January 1801 was promoted colonel by brevet, and was soon afterwards made inspector-general of foreign corps. In June of that year he was chosen to command a secret expedition, and on 23 July he took possession of Madeira, which he governed as a brigadier-general until the conclusion of the peace of Amiens in 1802. He then resumed his duties as inspector-general of foreign corps until that post was suppressed in December 1802. His success at this time prompted George III to recommend him for further employment, and he and his brother Henry were praised as soldiers of 'uncommon abilities' who were 'well respected in their profession'. In April 1803 he resumed his duties with the duke of York, this time as his military secretary. He returned to Ireland on 26 July 1804 as quartermaster-general but declined an invitation to join Lord Harrington's mission to Berlin in December 1805, informing Prime Minister Pitt that he felt unqualified for the task. He re-entered parliament in 1806, this time on the duke of Newcastle's interest at Boroughbridge in Yorkshire, and when present gave silent support to the Portland and Perceval ministries. 
In May 1807 Clinton was sent on a secret mission to Charles XIII of Sweden but arrived too late to prevent the signing of an armistice with France. He nevertheless took the opportunity of meeting the king, visiting Malmo, Stralsund, Memel, and Copenhagen (among other places), and being thoroughly briefed by the British envoy, Lord Hutchinson. He was promoted major-general on 26 April 1808 but despite frequent applications to serve abroad was neglected for nearly four years. At the beginning of 1812 he was sent to Sicily, and while commanding the division at Messina he was seriously wounded. At the end of September 1812 he proceeded to Alicante to take command of the troops on the east coast of Spain until replaced in December by Major-General James Campbell, who was in his turn superseded by Sir John Murray. On his return from leave in April 1813 Clinton commanded the 1st division at the battle of Castalla, but fell out with Murray. In June 1813 the ineffectual Murray was himself replaced by Lord William Bentinck, who in September gave the command-in-chief back to Clinton. During the autumn and winter campaigns of 1813-14 he had no great difficulty in keeping Marechal Suchet's forces in check and in forming the blockade of Barcelona that enabled Ferdinand VII of Spain to return. Part of Clinton's success was undoubtedly due to his humanitarianism as a general and especially to his fervent opposition to corporal punishment, which he later claimed to have reduced markedly among his troops in Spain, and afterwards in Portugal. 
Clinton had been made lieutenant-general in 1813 and colonel of the 55th regiment in 1814. On his return to England in that year, unsuccessful efforts were made to obtain a barony for him, as well as the governorship of Gibraltar. However, on 2 January 1815 he was made a GCB and in June astonished the marquess of Hertford by stating that he now waived his own claims to a peerage in favour of the superior claims of his brother Henry. But Henry too was passed over, and this neglect rankled with Clinton for the rest of his life. In September 1815 he journeyed to Paris with Thomas Murdoch FRS in the hope of obtaining employment from the duke of Wellington. He returned to England empty-handed and for the next ten years (he failed to obtain the governorship of Nova Scotia in October 1819) remained without employment. During this period he took a more active part in politics, attending the Commons regularly and giving silent support to Lord Liverpool's ministry. In 1818 his patron transferred him to a seat for Newark and persuaded him, against his wishes, to stand again in 1820. In 1821 Henry Bathurst, secretary for war and the colonies, proposed him for the governorship of Barbados, which he failed to get. 
Clinton's life took a new turn in November 1823, with his removal from Sheffield Lodge, on his father-in-law's east Sussex estate, to the much grander Cokenach at Barkway, near Royston, Hertfordshire, the property of Sir Francis Willes, a kinsman. He now saw himself as a gentleman farmer and, though only a leaseholder, began to invest heavily in a hitherto neglected estate. His appointment in 1825 to the lucrative post of lieutenant-general of the ordnance enabled him to continue his programme of improvement, and when, on Willes's death in 1827, he became the new owner of Cokenach he began to draw up ambitious plans for the mansion, which came to fruition in the extensive additions and alterations of 1833-6 by Henry Harrison. Meanwhile, in December 1826 he had received the command of 600 men who were sent to Portugal to keep the peace against the Miguelist and Spanish threat. His personal popularity was such that he was offered, but declined, the command-in-chief of the Portuguese army. Eventually, after over a year of occupation, the troops were brought home by their commander in April 1828. 
While in Portugal Clinton was offered the governorship of Mauritius but declined it. Soon after his return to England the finance committee voted to abolish his office at the ordnance. In February 1829 he resigned from the Commons. Although his promotion to general in July 1830 and the offer of the governorship of Madras in the same year were doubtless meant as compensation, he reserved bitter words in his journal for Wellington and his cabinet. Madras had to be declined due to ill health, and his rancour increased in 1835 when, for the second time, he was passed over for the governorship of Gibraltar. In retirement he was seldom idle, as he divided his time between Hertfordshire and London. He regularly visited and entertained, read French and German daily, rode, planted trees, and kept his (by now) voluminous journal. In 1842, at the age of seventy-three, he became lieutenant-general of Chelsea Hospital in London. He had been a commissioner at the Royal Military College at Sandhurst for many years, and it was while attending the general examination at Addiscombe College in 1845 that he caught a chill that led eventually to his death, at Cokenach on 16 February 1846. He was buried on 24 February at the parish church at Barkway, Hertfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 5688


Clipston, John (d. c.1378), prior of Nottingham and theologian, joined the Carmelite order in Nottingham. He studied at Cambridge, where he incepted as DTh and lectured in the university. On 7 December 1349 he was granted permission to hear confessions in the Ely diocese. He was prior at Nottingham for some years and died there 'c'.1378. Clipston was a noted scripture scholar and preacher, but sadly none of his works survives. Bale preserves the titles and incipits of ten of his compositions, which include a 'large work' describing the personages of the 'Bible' in alphabetical order. About 1550 Bale saw five volumes of his sermons which had once been in the possession of the monastery at Syon. 


@@@@@


doc= 5689


Clissold, Augustus (1797-1882), Swedenborgian activist, was born on 13 May 1797 at Stonehouse, near Stroud, Gloucestershire, the fifth son in the family of thirteen children (only seven of whom reached adulthood) of Stephen Clissold (1764-1834), founder of the Ebley Cloth Mills in Stroud which supplied army clothing contracts during the Napoleonic wars, and his wife, Diana Mortimer (1765-1840). Stephen Clissold was his elder brother. Augustus matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 6 December 1814, the same day as his elder brother, Henry Clissold. He took the ordinary BA degree in 1818, proceeding MA in 1821. He was ordained deacon in 1821 and priest in 1823. He held for some time the curacies of St Martin-in-the-Fields and St Mary, Stoke Newington, where he began a courtship with Eliza Crawshay (1790-1877), who lived at Newington Park House. Her father, the ironmaster William Crawshay (1764-1834), strongly disapproved of the relationship. After his death the estate passed to Eliza and the couple married. They had no children. 
Clissold withdrew from the ministry about 1840, although he remained nominally connected with the Church of England to the end of his life. Having become an enthusiastic student of the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg, he joined, in 1838, the Swedenborg Society as a life member, and in the same year was placed on the committee. In 1840 he was elected chairman of the annual meeting. In addition to publishing numerous theological and eschatological works of his own, Clissold translated and printed at his own expense Swedenborg's 'Principia rerum naturalium' (2 vols., 1845-6) and 'Oeconomia regni animalis' (edited by J. J. Garth Wilkinson, 2 vols., 1846), both of which he presented to the Swedenborg Association. The association, of which he was chosen president, was founded in 1845 for the publication of Swedenborg's scientific works, and later merged with the larger Swedenborg Society. 
In 1854 Clissold purchased for the use of the society a seventy years' lease of a house at 36 Bloomsbury Street, London, which later became the depot of New Church literature. During the stormy time through which the Swedenborg Society passed in 1859 and 1860 Clissold assisted it liberally with money, and by his will he bequeathed to it the sum of $4000. In 1870 he assisted financially in the publication of 'Documents Concerning the Life and Character of Emanuel Swedenborg', translated and edited by R. L. Tafel (2 vols., 1875-7), and during the last two years of his life he similarly made possible the publication of Swedenborg's posthumous work 'The Brain' (1882), which formed a portion of the 'Regnum animale perlustratum'. After resigning his second curacy Clissold continued to live at Stoke Newington, making occasional visits to his country house at 4 Broadwater Down, Frant, Sussex, near Tunbridge Wells. He died there on 30 October 1882. Following his death, the Stoke Newington estate reverted to the Crawshay family and was sold. A campaign by the Commons Preservation Society saved it from development, and in 1889 Clissold Park was secured as a public park. 


@@@@@


doc= 5690


Clissold, Stephen (bap. 1789, d. 1863), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born at Reading and baptized there on 25 September 1789, the son of Stephen Clissold (1764-1834), owner of a cloth mill in Stroud, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Diana Mortimer (1765-1840). Augustus Clissold was his younger brother. He matriculated from Clare College, Cambridge, in 1815, proceeding BA in 1819 and MA in 1822. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 11 May 1819. However, he abandoned the law for the church, being ordained priest in 1828. He was rector of St Nicholas, Wrentham, Suffolk, from 1830 to 1853, and honorary canon of Norwich Cathedral. Clissold dabbled in political economy, publishing 'Letters of Cincinnatus' (1815), 'Considerations on the Trade, Manufacture, and Commerce of the British Empire' (1820), and 'National Piety the Source of National Prosperity' (1828). He also published the 'Official Account of the Parochial Charities... Belonging to the Blything Union, Halesworth' (1838). On 17 June 1824 Clissold married Charlotte Matilda (1798-1852), daughter of Sir Thomas Sherlock Gooch, fifth baronet, of Benacre Hall, Suffolk; they had at least two sons, Edward and Stephen. He died at Wrentham on 12 May 1863 and was buried in the parish churchyard there. 


@@@@@


doc= 5691


Clitherow, Sir Christopher (1577/8-1641), merchant and politician, was the only son of Henry Clitherow (died 1608), a merchant, of the parish of St Andrew Undershaft, London, and his first wife, Bridget, the daughter of Thomas Hewett. He was presumably descended from Richard or William Clitheroe, both of whom migrated to London and Kent towards the end of the fourteenth century from the Lancashire town from which they took their name. His paternal grandfather became a junior warden of the Merchant Taylors' Company in 1521, while his father, who traded in cloth, wine, and cordage and invested in privateering, achieved the distinction of being elected master of the Ironmongers' Company on four separate occasions. 
Clitherow entered St John's College, Oxford, in 1593 at the age of fifteen, and followed his father into the Ironmongers' Company in 1601. In the same year he was admitted to the newly formed East India Company, in which he invested $240, and from which he undoubtedly made a handsome profit. Membership of the revived but short-lived Spanish Company (1604) soon followed, and after his father's death he joined the Virginia (1609), French (1611), and North-West Passage (1612) companies. It is not known when he entered the Eastland, Muscovy or Russia, and Levant companies, but he served as one of the Levant Company's assistants in 1616. The only major trading company to which Clitherow did not subscribe was the Company of Merchant Adventurers, whose interests he opposed; he joined instead the New Company of Merchant Adventurers in 1615, the body briefly established in its place by Sir William Cokayne. Both his marriages were to daughters of fellow merchants. Catherine Rowland (died 1606), whom he had married by 1601, was the daughter of Thomas Rowland (died 1593), a London draper. Sir Thomas Cambell, to whose daughter Mary (died 1646) Clitherow was married by 1608, was a leading figure in the Ironmongers' and East India companies. 
Although Clitherow was obliged to disburse more than $215 towards settlement of the Muscovy Company's debts in 1624 and lost whatever money he sank into the ill-fated Virginia Company, trade evidently made him rich. In 1615 he bought the Essex manors of Highams and Follifaunts for $1680, and in 1630 he purchased the Oxfordshire manor of Bensington for $386. Further acquisitions included the Middlesex manor of Ruislip, with a house at Pinner, and the lease of various tenements in Finsbury from the corporation of London, on which he may have spent as much as $600 in making improvements. His London properties also included a town house in Leadenhall Street, for which he paid $60 a year in rent. The house served as his normal residence -- it was where at least ten of his twelve children were born -- and from 1638 until his death it provided the venue for meetings of the board of directors of the East India Company at an annual fee of $150. Income from rents, and the profits of commerce, enabled Clitherow to raise fairly substantial sums in cash. In 1640 he provided the king with $500 as part of a larger City loan, while in the following spring he contributed $1000 towards a second City loan to pay off the defeated English army in the north. 
Clitherow's commercial success was reflected in the fact that he was often called on to hold office in the companies of which he was a member. Elected warden of the Ironmongers' Company in 1611, he became master in 1618 and again in 1624. In 1615-16 he served as treasurer of the New Company of Merchant Adventurers. Perhaps his most prestigious appointments were in the East India Company, where he achieved office as deputy governor (1624) and governor (1638). He also served as governor of the hardly less significant Eastland Company (from at least 1632). James I considered him suitable to fill the post of treasurer of the Virginia Company in May 1622, despite the fact that he initially failed to contribute towards the Palatine benevolence, but though he stood for election he was trounced by Henry Wriothesley, third earl of Southampton. 
As a leading figure in the City, Clitherow was naturally involved in its government. At parish level he served as churchwarden of St Andrew Undershaft in 1612 and was one of the feoffees of the parish until at least 1617. He was a governor of Christ's Hospital by 1616, and was elected its president in 1637 after Sir Thomas Moulson declined to serve. A member of common council by 1623, he served as sheriff in 1625-6 and was admitted to the aldermanic bench in 1626. His promising career in City government was seemingly placed in jeopardy in February 1628, when his opposition to the forced loan prompted London's citizens to elect him to parliament in preference to the corporation's nominees, even though he had never served as mayor and was not then of knightly status. However, his commercial interests made him an ideal spokesman for the City's diverse mercantile interests. He had grown particularly concerned at the ailing Danish war effort and the concomitant increase in imperial power in the Baltic, and when on 26 March the secretary of state, Sir John Coke, advanced a fourteen-point plan for military action to bolster the Danes, Clitherow, who was in communication with Coke over Baltic affairs, offered his warm support. In his maiden speech, delivered on 4 April, he drew on his own experience of the Eastland and Muscovy trades to argue that nothing 'more nearly concerns us... than... the King of Denmark and the defence of the Baltic sea' (Johnson and others, 2.305). Though his claim that English merchants would be 'altogether confined to our own country' (ibid.) were the Baltic to fall into the hands of the Holy Roman emperor was undoubtedly exaggerated, he correctly pointed out that maintaining access to the Baltic was vital for the continued supply of naval stores, such as pitch, tar, and cordage. It was therefore reasonable to suppose that, if the emperor succeeded in dominating the Baltic, 'he will master us all' (ibid., 2.300). 
Perhaps Clitherow's most important speech to the house, because it touched on the interests and fears of every shipowning merchant and not just those trading to the Baltic, was delivered on 9 June. Speaking immediately after Moulson, his fellow member for London, Clitherow informed his listeners that 'I have been desired by the merchants of London to inform you of the miserable losses at sea' (Johnson and others, 4.200). He then proceeded to detail the loss of valuable shipping and cargoes to the Dunkirk privateers over the last few years, illustrating his case with the example of one vessel laden with masts worth $80,000 which had been recently captured. Complaining that the merchant marine was afforded inadequate protection, he also observed that the navy served only to worsen the situation by its heavy demands for mariners and ships. In view of all these difficulties, he added, it was hardly surprising that 'all merchants are disheartened' (ibid., 4.201). Despite the importance of Clitherow's contribution to the trade debate, he appears to have been added to the committee appointed to prepare a schedule of lost shipping only as an afterthought. This schedule was included in the remonstrance submitted by the house to Charles I on 17 June, but Clitherow was aware that action rather than mere words would be needed if commerce was not to suffer further depredations, and he was therefore dismayed to learn that the king intended to prorogue parliament. In his final speech to the house, delivered on 24 June, he asserted that 'Now is the time to think on trade', and he warned that, if parliament went into recess, 'I fear not a decay only but an utter extirpation' (ibid., 4.456). Parliament was powerless to act, however, and the war with Spain was not brought to an end until 1630. 
During the later 1620s and throughout the 1630s Clitherow and his fellow directors of the East India Company came under attack from a number of disgruntled shareholders for the losses sustained by the company. In the course of the 1628 parliament, Clitherow, who was the senior member of the company in the Commons, endeavoured to counter a petition presented by the aggrieved shareholders. He later proved a loyal ally of the governor, Sir Maurice Abbot, whom he replaced on the latter's resignation in 1638. He was appointed a royal commissioner in 1628 to collect the arrears owed by various City companies towards the cost of the Algiers expedition of 1620-21, and was named a commissioner to raise contributions for the repair of St Paul's Cathedral in 1633. He served as lord mayor of London in 1635-6, and was knighted during his term of office (15 January 1636). A leading member of London's elite, he evidently entertained a low opinion of Charles I, and refused to admit one man to the Eastland Company despite the king's letter of recommendation. When the man's brother-in-law told Clitherow that Charles had promised to do the company a favour in return for the man's admission, Clitherow is said to have replied 'in an unseemly, slighting manner, that they all knew well enough what the king's good turns were when they came to seek them, or words to that effect' ('CSP dom.', '1637-8', 549-50). In January 1641 Clitherow, as governor of the East India Company, was bullied by Charles into ordering the withdrawal of a petition to parliament complaining of the activities of one of his favourites, Endymion Porter, whose associates had allegedly committed acts of piracy in the Red Sea in 1630. Despite the obvious strain in relations between Clitherow and the king, the former may have shared the latter's conservative religious leanings, as a Paul's Cross sermon was dedicated to Clitherow while lord mayor by the Arminian preacher John Gore in 1635. Moreover, during the mid-1630s Clitherow's daughter Rachel married one of the king's chaplains, Dr William Paule, later bishop of Oxford. In 1668 the royalist writer David Lloyd recalled Clitherow as being 'a great stickler for the Church', and 'a great honourer of clergymen in the best of times, to whom some of his nearest relations were married in the worst'. It has been suggested that Clitherow was 'probably part of a... London group of Arminian sympathisers' (Tyacke, 221) which included his brother-in-law and fellow aldermen Henry Garway and Anthony Abdy. 
Clitherow drew up his will on 14 April 1640, died at his house in Pinner on 11 November 1641, and was buried seven days later at St Andrew Undershaft, where a monument was erected in his memory. Although he had at least seven sons, only his son James prevented the various branches of his family from becoming extinct in the male line. His daughter Judith married Thomas Cory (d. 1656). 


@@@@@


doc= 5692


Clitherow, Margaret (1552/3-1586), Roman Catholic martyr, was born in York, the youngest of the four children of Thomas Middleton (died 1567), wax chandler and freeman of York, and his wife, Jane ('c'.1515-1585), daughter of Richard Turner, innkeeper. She was almost certainly baptized at the church of St Martin, Coney Street, where her father was churchwarden between 1555 and 1558. She was eighteen when she married John Clitherow, a widower with two sons, on 1 July 1571. Clitherow, a prosperous butcher who had become a freeman in 1560, was elected a chamberlain in 1574. Upon her marriage Margaret moved to the Shambles, the butchers' street in York, where she assisted her husband with his business. Although John Mush, the priest who wrote the biography which is the principal source for her life, described her as 'a plentiful mother' (Morris, 368), the number of children she had is unknown. In addition to her stepsons William (1563-1636) and Thomas (died 1604) we know of Henry ('b'. 1572) and Anne (1574-1622). In 1576 she was reportedly pregnant, and in 1581 she was released from prison to give birth, but the names of these children and their survival are uncertain. 
Margaret Clitherow's life changed immeasurably when she took the bold step of converting to Catholicism about 1574. She was apparently drawn towards the faith by stories of the heroic suffering of priests and lay people for their beliefs. Inspired by their example Margaret accommodated fugitive priests and provided her neighbours with facilities for regular access to the Catholic sacraments. The high incidence of recusancy in her parish of Christ Church during the 1570s and 1580s perhaps reflects her missionary success. Inevitably her actions drew official censure, and from 1576 John Clitherow incurred regular fines for her recusancy. He remained a protestant, and is said to have railed against Catholics when drunk at a banquet, upsetting his wife. He then tried to reassure Margaret that he was not referring to her, since she was a good wife in all but two things -- her excessive fasting, and her refusal to go to church with him. Margaret was imprisoned several times for her nonconformist behaviour, serving three separate terms in York Castle (August 1577 - February 1578; October 1580 - April 1581; March 1583 - winter 1584). In prison she learned to read, and apparently relished the semi-monastic regime of prayer and physical deprivation that incarceration offered. 
Despite this punishment and increasingly punitive anti-recusancy legislation, which in 1585 made harbouring clergy a capital felony, Margaret Clitherow maintained her activities. On 10 March 1586 the Clitherow premises were searched and a frightened child revealed the priests' secret room, replete with items of Catholic worship. The priest was safely hidden in the house next door, thus avoiding capture. Margaret was taken to prison and on 14 March appeared at the assizes, charged with harbouring. Although repeatedly asked to plead, she refused trial by jury, thereby incurring the penalty of 'peine forte et dure'. During the next week she was visited by protestant preachers and kin, who in vain urged her to submit, or to admit that she was pregnant and thereby obtain a stay of execution. On 25 March 1586 Margaret was taken to the toll-booth on Ouse Bridge and pressed to death under 7 or 8 hundredweight. Six weeks later John Mush and other friends found her body and buried it in an unknown location in accordance with Catholic rites. 
Margaret Clitherow maintained that she died for the Catholic faith, attributing her refusal to plead as a device to prevent her children and servants having to testify against her, and to protect the souls of the jury which would find her guilty. It is more likely that she wanted to shield other recusants who had assisted her, whose identity would inevitably have been revealed in her trial. However, her biographer affirmed that she was also attracted to martyrdom, which she believed would secure her salvation. Her apparent calm, even joy, at the prospect of death, led some contemporaries to suggest she was mad. Indeed she was not without her detractors, including her stepfather, Henry May, the lord mayor of York, who accused her of committing suicide, and fuelled rumours of an improper relationship with her confessor. Most people could not comprehend her apparent disregard for her husband and children. To counter such views she sent her hat to her husband in acknowledgement of his authority, and her hose and shoes to her daughter, Anne, as a signal that she should follow her mother's virtuous steps. 
After Margaret's execution John Clitherow remarried, still a protestant. However, the children inherited their mother's recusant legacy. Anne Clitherow ran away from home and was imprisoned at Lancaster on account of her religion in 1593. She became a nun at St Ursula's in Louvain in 1598. Henry Clitherow studied at the English colleges in Rheims and Rome, and temporarily joined the Capuchins in 1592, then the Dominicans, dying either insane or unconvinced of his vocation. Of her stepsons, William became a seminary priest in 1608, and Thomas, a draper, was imprisoned for his recusancy, and died in Hull prison in 1604. 
Margaret Clitherow was beatified in 1929 and canonized on 25 October 1970 as one of the forty English martyrs. A relic, said to be her hand, is held at the Bar Convent in York. 


@@@@@


doc= 5693


Clive, Caroline (1801-1873), novelist and poet, born at Brompton, London, on 30 June 1801, was the second daughter of Edmund Wigley (1758-1821) -- who later changed his surname to Meysey-Wigley -- barrister and, for a short time, MP, and his wife, Anna Maria Meysey (died 1835), the daughter and heir of Charles Watkins Meysey. She was brought up at Shakenhurst in Worcestershire, the home which her mother had inherited. At the age of two she contracted a disease, possibly poliomyelitis, which left her permanently disabled. She was educated by governesses, and after the deaths of her brother Edmund and her mother she became a wealthy heir. On 10 November 1840 she married the Revd Archer Clive, rector of Solihull, near Birmingham, the second son of Edward Bolton Clive MP. She had been in love with him for nine years and had lived alone at Solihull for five years in order to be near him. They had two children: a son, Charles Meysey Bolton, and a daughter, Alice. In 1845, following the death of his father, Archer Clive inherited Whitfield, the family estate in Herefordshire, and in 1847 he took his family to live there. 
Caroline Clive's first book, a slim volume of religious meditations entitled 'Essays on the Human Intellect as Constructed by God...', had been published in 1827 under the pseudonym Paul Ferrol. Earlier, signing herself George Ferrol and P. Ferrol, she had sent poems first to Isaac D'Israeli, then to the philosopher Dugald Stewart, who passed them on to the poet Thomas Campbell. Campbell's response was encouraging, but it was not until 1840, a few months before her marriage, that her first book of verse, 'IX Poems by V.', made its appearance. Appreciatively noticed by Henry Nelson Coleridge in 'Modern English poetesses', an article in the 'Quarterly Review' (September 1840), as well as by other reviewers, the book established her reputation as one of the leading female poets of the day. A second edition, with nine additional poems, came out in 1841. Most of the poems are conventional late Romantic lyrics, gloomy and graceful, but George Saintsbury, in 'A History of Nineteenth Century Literature' (1876), which remained in print until well into the twentieth century, remembered them as 'really good' (Saintsbury, 310). Over the next twelve years she had five long poems published, as well as 'Saint Oldooman: a Myth of the Nineteenth Century' (1845), a prose satire on Newman's 'Lives of the Saints'. The best and most admired of the poems was 'The Queen's Ball: a Poem by V.' (1847), based on a report that 150 dead people had been invited to a ball given by Queen Victoria; the poem contains a few good lines and many poor ones. 'V.', the pseudonym which Clive adopted for nearly all her poetic works, was short for Vigolina, Archer Clive's dog-Latin translation of Wigley, her maiden name. In 1847 she met both Mary Russell Mitford and Elizabeth Barrett Browning but was not impressed with either; Browning spoke slightingly of Clive's poetry and personality. 
Clive's minor celebrity as a poet was spectacularly eclipsed by the fame and notoriety resulting from her first novel, 'Paul Ferroll: a Tale by the Author of 'IX Poems by V.'', published in 1855. A forerunner of the sensation novel, it shocked many readers by its apparent amorality. The eponymous hero not only murders his first wife without any perceptible qualms of conscience but also shoots down a rioting workman in cold blood; yet his doting daughter from his marriage to his second wife does not recoil from him when she hears of the murder of the first, and the author herself, in describing the two killings, shows no sign of repugnance towards the killer. Clive was perhaps trying to imitate the 'cynicism' of Balzac, whose novels she read avidly; the fact that she had on several earlier occasions used Ferroll or Ferrol as her 'nom de plume' suggests that she identified closely with the hero of her novel, just as Balzac identified with his character Vautrin. In both 'Paul Ferroll' itself and its sequel, 'Why Paul Ferroll Killed his Wife' (1860), the hero is even credited with the authorship of well-known poems by Clive herself. 'Paul Ferroll' was translated into French twice, in 1858 and 1859, and into Russian in 1859. 'Why Paul Ferroll Killed his Wife', probably written partly in the hope of appeasing readers who had been scandalized by 'Paul Ferroll' itself, explains that just before he murdered her Ferroll had found out that his first wife had tricked him into marrying her by telling him, falsely, that the woman he really loved -- who later became his second wife -- had gone off with another man. Clive's only other published works of fiction, 'Year after Year: a Tale' (1858) and 'John Greswold' (1864), aroused much less interest than 'Paul Ferroll' and its sequel. Collections of her poems were issued in 1856 and 1872; after her death a further collection appeared in 1890, with an introduction by her daughter Alice Greathead. 
Accidents in 1860 and 1863 left Clive permanently confined to a wheelchair, and in 1865 she suffered a stroke. She died on 14 July 1873 from injuries received two days before when her dress caught fire in her library at Whitfield. She was survived by her husband. New editions of 'IX Poems by V.' and 'Paul Ferroll' were published in 1928 and 1929, both with introductions by Eric Partridge. 'Paul Ferroll' was reissued in the 'Oxford Popular Fiction' series in 1997, with an introduction by Charlotte Mitchell. 


@@@@@


doc= 5694


Clive, Catherine (1711-1785), actress, was born on 5 November 1711, according to a letter she wrote to a fellow actress, Jane Pope, in 1782. According to William Chetwood's 'General History of the Stage' (1749), Clive was the daughter of William Raftor, a Kilkenny lawyer of considerable estate who ruined his fortunes by aligning himself with James II during the latter's campaign in Ireland in 1690. After a period of exile, he was pardoned and returned to London to marry a Mrs Daniel, 'Daughter to an eminent Citizen on Fishstreethill with whom he had a handsome Fortune' (Chetwood, 126). Chetwood further claims that the couple had numerous children, but the names of these brothers and sisters are unknown, except for James (died 1790), who joined Kitty in a stage career, and a sister whose married name was Mrs Mestivyer. There is evidence that Kitty Clive supported her father once she was working, so whatever handsome fortune was in place when her parents married evidently dwindled over time. 
Chetwood also tells the story of the actress's advent to the stage in 1728, when he was serving as prompter at Drury Lane. A friend of Jane Johnson, the first wife of Theophilus Cibber, Kitty was introduced to both Cibber and Chetwood. They, in turn, impressed with her 'infinite Spirits, with a Voice and Manner in singing Songs of Pleasantry peculiar to herself' (Chetwood, 127), recommended her to Colley Cibber, who added her to his list of performers at Drury Lane. Chetwood indicates that she had a few minor appearances in the spring of 1728, but once the full 1728-9 season opened she began appearing regularly in increasingly large and important roles. Throughout that season and those that followed she moved from supporting roles in tragedy to singing in afterpieces and playing the first-ranking characters in the farces popular in the period. 
The fashion of musical comedy and burlesque suited Kitty's vocal and comic talents perfectly, and she shone in parts such as Nell in Charles Coffey's 'The Devil to Pay', in which she portrayed a cobbler's wife transformed into the lady of the manor. Henry Fielding wrote several parts for her that highlighted her skills, including Chloe in 'The Lottery' and Lappet in an adaptation of Moliere's 'The Miser'. In the summer of 1732 she was given the most sought-after female role in musical comedy, Polly in John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera', and received a tribute to her portrayal from the 'Daily Journal', which called her the 'Darling of the Age' (25 July 1732). 
During the rebellion of the players in 1733, Kitty remained with John Highmore's company at Drury Lane. One of the most popular actresses to do so, she earned the ire of hack writers who supported the alternative company at the Haymarket. Their squibs provide some insight into her character and to the position she had attained on stage. 'The Theatric Squabble' (1733) described her as: '
A pleasing Actress, but a Green-Room Scold 

Puffed with Success, she triumphs over all 

Snarls in the Scene-Room, Curses in the Hall. 

' Henry Fielding, who also remained loyal to Drury Lane, praised her acting talents and the alternative view of her character. In his preface to 'The Intriguing Chambermaid' (1734), in which she played the title role, he compliments her as 'the best Wife, the best Daughter, the best Sister, and the best Friend' (Fielding). Although to some degree both descriptions are coloured by their authors' intentions, they do indicate the personality traits and acting skills which would remain consistent throughout her long career. Kitty Clive was both quick-witted and quick-tempered. She would prove a generous friend but a dangerous enemy. She maintained a reputation for chastity in her personal life, yet she sparkled on stage when 'personating the foolish and vitious' (Fielding) of her sex. Her best roles were particular comic types: the silly country miss, the wiser and more fashionable version of the same, and the pert and resourceful servant. These remained her strong suit for much of her career. 
Few details are known about Catherine Raftor's marriage to George Clive (died 1780), a barrister and second cousin to Robert Clive 'of India', but she appeared as Mrs Clive in the bills for the first time in October 1733. The name change suggests that the pair had just married or had done so during the summer, when she would not have been performing regularly. Evidence about the couple's married life is also slight, but the two did not live together for very long, separating some time in 1735. Chetwood, ostensibly declining to comment on marital affairs, declares, 'I never could imagine she deserved ill Usage' (Chetwood, 128), implying that was just what she received. Years later, in a letter to David Garrick, Clive herself commented, 'You are very much mistaken if you imagine I shall be sorry to hear Mr. Clive is well; besides, it is so long ago since I thought he used me ill, that I have quite forgot it' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). George Clive was less forgiving and, in his will, made a point of excluding her from any benefit at his death, 'it being my will and intention that she have nothing to do with my executors & representatives nor they with her' (ibid.). 
Although Clive herself did not contribute to the pamphlet war during the theatrical rebellion of 1733, in 1736 she had reason to believe that the acting manager, Theophilus Cibber, was trying to claim some of her roles for his second wife, Susannah. Clive published her side of the controversy in the press in order to defend her position on the stage. The question of which actress was to play Polly in 'The Beggar's Opera' provoked a storm in the papers, and the dispute received regular mention in the 'Daily Gazetteer', 'London Evening-Post', 'Grub Street Journal', and 'London Daily Post and General Advertiser'. This 'Polly war' also inspired a farce, 'The Beggar's Pantomime, or, Contending Columbines', which was performed regularly at Lincoln's Inn Fields. Given its long run, the afterpiece probably made more money for its producers than the original's limited revival at Drury Lane, regardless of who played Polly. 
It seems likely that Theophilus Cibber, a notorious puffer, was behind some of the attacks against Clive, who, by 1736, was a well-established comic actress and vocalist. At the same time she did not shy away from defending herself in print and on the stage: 'It is my consolation to think, that as I have always endeavor'd to please them [the town] as an Actress, to the best of my Abilities, whatever has been urged to the contrary by the Malice of my Enemies, will have no weight or Influence upon my Friends. ('London Daily Post and General Advertiser', 19 Nov 1736)' When Clive's appearance as Polly was finally presented, she addressed herself to the house, apologizing for the disturbance and offering to play the secondary part of Lucy instead. This apologetic tone and willingness to appease her audience secured both her popularity and the role of Polly until she herself was ready to bestow it on a younger actress of her own choosing in 1745. 
Although publicly Clive decried and apparently regretted bringing theatrical matters notoriety in the press, the lesson she learned during the Polly war served her well in 1744. After the failure of Charles Macklin and David Garrick to open a third theatre to break the monopoly held by the patentees, Clive found herself unemployed. Rather than relying on others to defend her position and livelihood, that October she printed a pamphlet, 'The Case of Mrs. Clive Submitted to the Publick', explaining her position and that of other performers. Particularly galling to her was the loss of her annual free benefit, a privilege she had held for nine years, and how she discovered her lack of a job -- by finding other actresses listed in her roles in the bills. This 'unprecedented Act of Injustice' ('The Case of Mrs. Clive', 14) did not allow her the time to find work in Dublin, where she had met with success during the summer of 1741. Following the publication of her pamphlet, Clive held a benefit concert at the Haymarket on 2 November by command of Frederick, prince of Wales, and Augusta, princess of Wales. The royal couple had commanded Clive's benefits in the past, and their continued patronage of her expressed their personal dismay at the lord chamberlain's ruling in favour of the patentees. Theophilus Cibber confirmed that the audience at the benefit had been a notable one, by describing the affair as having 'many Persons of the first Distinction... in the Pit and Boxes' (Cibber, 76). The manager, John Rich, no fool, recognized Clive's drawing power, and rehired her the next month at Drury Lane, although not at the salary level she had previously attained. As in the Polly war, Clive found that humble approaches to the theatregoing public could push theatrical management to some semblance of civility towards players. At the same time there was some cost to her reputation, and she maintained the dubious distinction of being a demanding and even temperamental actress. Samuel Foote best described the equivocal nature of her character and defended her actions: 'This lady has now and then perhaps... expressed herself behind the Scenes in too loud and forcible a Manner... But... this Vehemence is assumed in order to procure a more decent Entertainment' (Foote, 42-3). 
Once David Garrick attained the patent for Drury Lane in 1747, Clive's career settled down considerably. Printed appeals to the public were no longer necessary, except for a skirmish with the actor Ned Shuter over benefit performances in 1761. She continued to shine in her best venue, the stage. She retained many of the parts that she had made famous, including Nell in 'The Devil to Pay', but moved out of 'ingenue' roles into those more suited to her maturing voice and figure. Flora in Susanna Centlivre's 'The Wonder', Mrs Cadwallader in Foote's 'The Author', the Fine Lady in Garrick's 'Lethe', and Lady Wishfort in William Congreve's 'The Way of the World' were typical of these later roles. Comedy remained her forte, but she also continued her facility in speaking prologues and epilogues. Garrick was especially proficient at presenting aspects of her reputation in these short speeches, which provoked the audience to laughter. During the competition between Drury Lane and Covent Garden over 'Romeo and Juliet', Garrick wrote an epilogue for Clive, although she held no role in the production; 'What! All these janglings and I not make one!' highlighted her irascible reputation and was typical of these short pieces in which the actress essentially played herself. Clive's comic opera song, in which she made fun of Italian singers and their exorbitant salaries, continued to please audiences. Although she was never successful in tragedy, her Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice', in which she imitated the speech and mannerisms of the lord chief justice, William Murray, Baron Mansfield, was popular with audiences but disdained by critics. 
A dedicated performer, and one with full appreciation for the transience of theatrical life, Clive continued to seek new roles for herself and new ways to supplement her income. She tried her hand at writing farces, which became a feature of her benefits. Her first, 'The Rehearsal, or, Bays in Petticoats', was first presented at her benefit in 1750. There were scattered additional performances, and it was eventually published in 1753. Clive wrote at least three more farces, 'Every Woman in her Humour', 'A Fine Lady's Return from a Rout', and 'The Faithful Irishwoman', but none received even the limited fame that her first had done and none was published. Indeed, the second of these was rebuked in the 'Theatrical Review' as 'Vile!' and 'Execrable!' ('Theatrical Review', 146) after its presentation in April 1763. These farces survive in manuscript at the Huntington Library, San Marino, California. 
Throughout her long career Clive remained a London actress, and except for the two seasons at Covent Garden (1743-5) she was loyal to Drury Lane. However, at some point in the 1740s it is apparent that she moved her primary residence to Twickenham and lived in lodgings in London during the theatrical season. In that small community, she and Horace Walpole became close friends. In 1749 she wrote to him requesting advice about a gardener, 'for th'o I am now representing women of qualitty and Coblers wives &c &c to Crowded houeses, and flattering applause; the Charecture I am most desierous to act well is; a good sort of Countrey gentlewoman at twickenham' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 40.61). Soon afterwards she had become a visible and cheering presence in his correspondence, and he gave her a small house on his property. Reading through the correspondence makes it clear that Walpole and Clive developed a strong, enduring, and almost certainly platonic friendship. He evidently relished her company and her insight into the theatrical world, while she enjoyed the amusing variety of company, their conversation, and the card games central to his social circles. There are jokes about the ruddiness of her complexion -- which also received notice in theatrical gossip -- and compliments to her good nature and good humour. Their relationship was misinterpreted in a 'Town and Country Magazine' tete-a-tete in December 1769, much to Walpole's amusement. His friends such as Etheldreda, Viscountess Townshend, Isabella Seymour-Conway, countess of Hertford, and Lady Anne Connolly included the actress on an excursion to see George III's coronation, while George Montagu's Christmas gift of venison left her 'up to her elbows in currant jelly and gratitude' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 10.241). Through Walpole, but because of her vibrant personality, Clive successfully moved into a social milieu that transcended the purely theatrical. 
In 1768 Walpole mentioned to a friend that Clive was preparing to leave the stage, and the bill for her benefit in April 1769 advertised that it would be the 'last time of her appearing on the Stage' (Stone, 3.1401). She performed some of her favourite roles: Flora in 'The Wonder' and the Fine Lady in 'Lethe'. After more than forty successful years on the stage, Clive had earned enough to support herself comfortably in her retirement. In her published 'Case' in 1744 she revealed that she had been making $300 annually, plus her benefit, which in her most successful years could almost double that salary -- in 1750, for example, her benefit brought her just over $250. In 1765, in a letter to David Garrick, she commented that her salary remained $300 a year. Although much of her income would have gone to support her professional life (she spent considerable sums on singing lessons and appropriate clothes) she had evidently managed her money wisely. Her pay places her among the very best actresses of her generation, although she would complain that her tragic counterparts such as Susannah Cibber earned twice as much for working fewer nights in the theatrical week. Still, both her income and the popularity she achieved over her long career prove her star quality and her comic ability. She was easily one of the most talented and most famous actresses of her generation. 
Her own correspondence, along with that of Walpole and David Garrick, reveals Clive's retirement to have been carefree, except for bouts of illness and occasional trouble from footpads and tax collectors. Her brother James and sister lived with her, and were, according to Jane Pope, supported by her. She busied herself with 'Routs either at home or abroad every night [and] all the nonsense of having my hair done time enough for my parties as I used to do for my parts with the difference that I am losing money instead of getting some' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). Her periods of illness -- self-described jaundice -- eventually grew more frequent, and after catching a chill at the funeral of Lieutenant-General Henry Lister, she died on 6 December 1785. She was buried in Twickenham churchyard on 14 December. Horace Walpole dispersed her personal possessions among her friends and relatives. 


@@@@@


doc= 5695


Clive, Sir Edward (1704-1771), judge, was the eldest son of Edward Clive of Wormbridge, Herefordshire, and Aldermanbury, London, and his wife, Sarah Key, daughter of a Bristol merchant. According to family tradition, George Clive (died 1780), barrister and husband of the actress Catherine (Kitty) Clive, was his brother. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1719, and to University College, Oxford, in 1722, and was called to the bar by the former in 1725. His first legal appointment seems to have been as steward of Newcastle under Lyme in 1724, a position which he held until 1740. In 1741 he became deputy justice of Carmarthen, and member of parliament for Mitchell, Cornwall, in the interest of Thomas Scawen. He remained in parliament until his appointment to the bench in 1745. 
During this period he sought a patent of precedence from Lord Hardwicke, without success, and he made a similar unavailing application through John Carteret, Earl Granville, with the support of Chief Justice Willes. Nevertheless, in 1745 on Hardwicke's recommendation he was appointed a baron of the exchequer, in place of Sir Laurence Carter, and in 1753 succeeded Sir Thomas Burnet as a puisne justice of the common pleas, whereupon he was knighted. In 1761 he suggested to Hardwicke that Chief Baron Parker should succeed Sir John Willes as chief justice of the common pleas, and that he might himself succeed Parker, with the explanation that 'The honour, and the ease in point of spring circuits are the temptations to me, as I am now on the worst side fifty years of age, tho' I thank God not yet sensible of any great infirmities' (BL, Add. MS 35596, fol. 92). This proposed arrangement was not, however, adopted. 
In 1745 Clive married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Symons of Mynde Park, Herefordshire. Elizabeth died in 1762, and the following year he married Judith, daughter of his cousin, the Revd Benjamin Clive; she died in 1796 at Wormbridge. There were no children from either marriage. 
Clive retired from the bench in February 1770 with a pension of $1200 a year, and was replaced by Sir William Blackstone. He died the following year, on 16 April 1771. He has been identified as the subject of one of the cruel caricatures in William Hogarth's sketch 'The Bench', which was engraved in 1758, though this is open to considerable doubt. Clive had a London residence in Ormond Street. After his death his Wormbridge residence passed to his wife's nephew, Edward Bolton Clive (1765-1845), great-grandson of Clive's eldest uncle, Robert Clive, who demolished it; the estate remained in the family in the early twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 5696


Clive, Edward, first earl of Powis (1754-1839), administrator in India, was born in Queen Square, London, on 7 March 1754, the first of the four surviving children of Robert Clive, first Baron Clive of Plassey (1725-1774), and his wife, Margaret Clive (1735-1817), daughter of Edmund Maskelyne of Purton, Wiltshire. He was educated at Eton College between 1762 and 1770 and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 28 February 1771. His education was completed by a period spent in Geneva with a tutor. 
The death of his father in November 1774 meant that Clive inherited a significant territorial and political presence in Shropshire and the border counties. The wealth acquired by Robert Clive as a result of his activities in India had been used to purchase estates and electoral power. In particular, Clive's influence had eclipsed that of Henry Arthur Herbert ('c'.1703-1772), who had been created earl of Powis (second creation) in 1748. Herbert had inherited the estates of the marquesses of Powis, which included property in Shropshire and Montgomeryshire, and had acquired political influence in the region. Relations between the Clive and Herbert families, which had been shaped by political and financial considerations, were cemented on 7 May 1784, when Edward Clive married Lady Henrietta Antonia Herbert (1758-1830), daughter of the earl of Powis. 
Clive was MP for Ludlow between 1774 and 1794, served as lord lieutenant of Shropshire from 1775 to 1798 and from 1804 to 1839 and of Montgomeryshire between 1804 and 1830, and was recorder of Shrewsbury and Ludlow. In the House of Commons he supported the North administration and, following the dismissal of the Fox-North coalition in 1783, he went into opposition. He was, however, anxious to improve upon the Irish title given to his father and therefore transferred his support to Pitt. He was rewarded with the creation of a British peerage (Baron Clive of Walcot) in 1794. 
Although Clive's experience of public office at the national level had been limited to his appointment in 1793 to the board of agriculture, he was appointed to the governorship of Madras in 1797 and took up the post in August 1798. The appointment seems to have owed much to Clive's need for additional income and to the Clive family's connection with India. Arthur Wellesley described him at this time as a 'mild, moderate man, remarkably reserved, having a bad delivery, and apparently a heavy understanding' (Archer, 25). Shortly after his arrival Clive was involved in preparations for the attack upon Tipu Sultan of Mysore, which culminated in the successful assault on Seringapatam in May 1799. The resulting settlement of Mysore greatly extended British influence in the region, and during the remaining years of his governorship Clive continued to provide able support for the policy of consolidation and expansion of the British position in south India which was promoted by the governor-general, Lord Wellesley. The East India Company took over the administration of Tanjore in 1799 and that of the territories of the nawab of Arcot in 1801; in 1803 a decisive victory was won over Maratha forces at Assaye. Clive resigned his governorship, which appears to have been conducted very much under Wellesley's aegis, in August 1803, although he had almost done so earlier on account of a perception that he had lost the confidence of the directors of the company. 
On his return to England Clive was able to add the numerous Indian curiosities that he and Lady Clive had acquired to the collection formed by his father. Clive and his wife shared an interest in natural history and collected animals, seeds, and plants. The death of Lady Clive's unmarried brother, the earl of Powis, in 1801 without an heir further strengthened the union of the Clive and Herbert families, since the Powis estates passed to Clive's eldest son, who in 1807 took the name of Herbert instead of Clive. On 14 May 1804 Clive was created earl of Powis of the third creation. 
Although nominated as lord lieutenant of Ireland in 1805, Clive did not take up the post. He died at his home, 45 Berkeley Square, London, on 16 May 1839, and was buried at Bromfield, Shropshire, nine days later. His wife having died in 1830, he left two sons, including Edward Herbert, second earl of Powis, and one daughter. Another daughter predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 5697


Clive, Robert, first Baron Clive of Plassey (1725-1774), army officer in the East India Company and administrator in India, was born on 29 September 1725 at Styche Hall, Moreton Say, near Market Drayton in Shropshire, the eldest of the thirteen children of Richard Clive ('c'.1693-1771), lawyer and MP, and his wife, Rebecca, daughter of Nathaniel Gaskell of Manchester. 
Although his family had been long established as members of the Shropshire gentry, Clive experienced a somewhat peripatetic childhood and he spent much time away from his parents, who were struggling to cope with a large number of children. Between the ages of three and seven he lived with his aunt and uncle, Elizabeth (died 1735) and Nathaniel Bayley, of Hope Hall, Eccles, Lancashire. He then attended a series of schools and educational establishments around the country: Dr Eaton's at Bostock, Cheshire; the grammar school at Market Drayton; Merchant Taylors' School, London (1737-9); and finally Mr Sterling's at Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire (1739), where he learned bookkeeping procedures. Clive was no more than an average scholar, and contemporary reports suggest that he was a boisterous and at times aggressive child who engaged in a wide range of adventurous pursuits. As early as 1728 Nathaniel Bayley reported that Clive was 'out of measure addicted' to fighting, and in his dealings with his five-year-old nephew he was endeavouring to 'suppress the hero, that I may help forward the more valuable qualities of meekness, benevolence, and patience' (Malcolm, 1.33). Clive's youthful activities and feats of daring in Market Drayton, most notably his climbing of the local church tower, earned him a certain amount of notoriety which in later years gave rise to a number of colourful local myths and legends about his adolescent behaviour. No doubt by nature and temperament unsuited to follow his father into the law, Clive's future career path was marked out for him on 15 December 1742, when, at his father's prompting, he was appointed to serve at Madras as a writer or clerk in the East India Company. Clive left London for India in March 1743 but his voyage, which was an unusually lengthy and hazardous one, lasted for almost fifteen months and was interrupted by an enforced visit to Brazil, during which time he learned the rudiments of the Portuguese language. 
By the 1740s the East India Company had established three coastal footholds in India at Bombay, Calcutta, and Madras. Each of these presidencies was administered by a governor and council, who supervised the company's 'servants' as well as a small number of licensed private merchants. Not yet a territorial power, the company was dedicated almost exclusively to the pursuit of commercial objectives and the procurement of local goods for export. Only a small number of armed men were deployed to defend the company's main fortified settlements against incursions from unfriendly local rulers or other European trading organizations. In particular, Anglo-French rivalries caused problems for those in Madras, and by the time Clive began his first term of company service the political situation on the Coromandel coast was already inflamed to the point that it threatened the stability of the entire region. 
Clive arrived in Madras in June 1744, impoverished by debts incurred during the journey and without any connections or acquaintances in the small British settlement of Fort St George. These circumstances made for a miserable existence, and in February 1745 Clive confessed that 'I have not enjoyed one happy day since I left my native country' (Malcolm, 1.145). It was around this time that he attempted to commit suicide, his life being saved by the fact that his pistol twice misfired. Although Clive appears to have believed that fate had marked him out for higher things, such aspirations to greatness were not shared by his colleagues, many of whom found him to be a difficult individual, prone to fits of black depression and melancholy. As several serious disputes and quarrels indicate, he had already developed the capacity to make lifelong enemies, and he distanced himself from all but a few of his immediate circle. Clive's official duties were initially of a secretarial nature, but in 1746 he transferred to the accountant's office, where he acquired a wide range of technical skills while dealing with the company's commercial affairs. He also sought to improve himself and broaden his education in other ways. He made regular use of the well-stocked Fort St George Library, and developed the capacity to think independently and absorb large amounts of factual information. 
A rather tedious life of routine industry was rudely interrupted by events which, after the outbreak of war in Europe, saw Madras fall to the French in September 1746. Following the sacking of the city by the forces of Joseph Dupleix, Clive escaped south to Fort St David, where he assisted with defensive duties. He formally entered the company's military service, having been awarded an ensign's commission after catching the eye of the local authorities. Clive soon enhanced further his reputation when, under the command of Major Stringer Lawrence, he helped with the successful defence of Cuddalore against Dupleix's forces in June 1748. Then later the same year, following the arrival of artillery reinforcements from Britain led by Admiral Boscawen, he performed capably and acted bravely during an ill-judged and poorly executed attempt to capture the fortified French settlement of Pondicherry. 
These actions, which represented a testing military apprenticeship, earned Clive promotion to lieutenant in the company's forces in March 1749, and helped him to forge a close working relationship with Lawrence. This partnership was strengthened during the Tanjore expeditions of 1749, when British forces were deployed in support of a displaced Maratha prince who offered the company the port of Devakottai in return for assistance with the return of his throne. Two attempts were made to take Devakottai. The first, a small-scale overland expedition in which Clive took part, ended in some disarray; the second, a seaborne operation, was successful, with Clive leading the troops who, not without considerable difficulty and losses, eventually stormed the town's fortifications. Clive, with some luck and considerable bravery, played a pivotal role in the action, prompting Lawrence later to comment that Clive's 'early genius' suggested that he had been 'born a soldier', with 'courage and judgement much beyond what would be expected from his years' (Malcolm, 1.103-4). His reward was to be appointed as Lawrence's quartermaster when Madras was returned to the English company by the French under the terms of the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle of 1748. 
By the end of 1749 Clive had returned to civil employment, although he was fortunate to obtain, through Lawrence's patronage, the lucrative position of commissary for the supply of provisions to the company's troops. The profitable opportunities opened up by the levying of commission on all goods purchased on the army's behalf were considerable, and in a short period of time Clive was able to lay the foundations of his private fortune. His entrepreneurial activities were interrupted, however, in early 1750 by illness and nervous disorders of the type that were to punctuate the remainder of his life. Intense physical pain was coupled with depression which necessitated frequent recourse to medication, and on this occasion Clive undertook a first visit to Bengal, where he recuperated in Calcutta. 
By the time Clive returned to Madras the East India Company was once more engaged in hostilities with its French counterpart, both having become embroiled in a struggle for military and political supremacy in southern India after backing local rival claimants for the position of nawab of the Carnatic. As a result, Clive resumed his company military career with the rank of captain in July 1751. His first actions were to accompany convoys and reinforcements from Madras to Trichinopoly, which, although in the hands of the British ally Muhammad Ali, was being threatened by the French-backed Chanda Sahib. The British, whose strategy was being planned by Governor Thomas Saunders of Madras, decided that relief for besieged Trichinopoly could best be effected by a diversionary action. It was agreed that a march on Arcot, the capital of the Carnatic, offered the best opportunity for such an operation. Clive, whose role in the development of the final plan is a matter for debate, volunteered to command the small, inexperienced body of troops allotted to the task. 
Clive's force of 800 men left Madras on 26 August and arrived five days later at an undefended, hastily evacuated fort at Arcot. The dilapidated fort was occupied, and Clive began to prepare it for a siege, this work only being interrupted by raids into the surrounding countryside, to where the garrison had fled. Clive's tactics had the desired effect, and Chanda Sahib was soon obliged to send a detachment of troops from Trichinopoly to Arcot. These troops, joined by French soldiers from Pondicherry, occupied the city of Arcot on 23 September, and a blockade of the fort began. The ensuing siege lasted for fifty days until it was lifted on 14 November, by which time the defenders had overcome heavy odds to prevent the enemy from breaching the walls of the fort. That the company's force was able to withstand such a lengthy assault in the face of overwhelming numbers owed much to Clive's leadership and organizational skills, and he proved able to command loyalty from his Indian and British troops alike. The final outcome was determined by stubborn resistance and the approach of a relieving force, as much as by any fighting, but Clive acquired the status of a hero and his actions did much to raise the standing of the British in the region. Building on his success at Arcot, Clive then went on in quick succession to take a number of forts, defeat the enemy at the battle of Arni, twice recapture Conjeeveram, rout a small French force during a night-time engagement at Kaveripak, and lay waste to the town of Dupleix Fatihabad. 
These actions, all important but hardly decisive in their own right, were only a prelude to a major expedition mounted to relieve Muhammad Ali, who was still besieged at Trichinopoly. Clive was recalled to Fort St David from his roving campaign to lead the expedition, which was reinforced by troops from Bengal. Because Stringer Lawrence had recently returned from Britain, however, Clive eventually found himself acting as a willing deputy to his mentor. On 16 April 1752 the company's forces began to engage the enemy troops, besieging the fort of Trichinopoly, and by fighting off relieving troops, blockading the besiegers, and capturing key positions to the north of the fort, they finally compelled the enemy to surrender on 13 June. Clive had again not only made several telling tactical contributions to the victory but, more importantly and to greater effect, had always been in the thick of the action. According to contemporary reports, he narrowly escaped death on several occasions. He often appeared to be blessed with good fortune, and this served only to enhance his growing reputation as a bold and successful commander. 
Clive remained well to the fore in the operations that followed the Trichinopoly campaign, but his health once more deteriorated quite rapidly and by the end of the year he had decided to return to Britain. Before he did so, however, he married Margaret Maskelyne (1735-1817) ['see 'Clive, Margaret, Lady Clive of Plassey]. His new wife, the seventeen-year-old sister of his close friend Edmund, had recently arrived at Fort St David, and, according to legend, Clive had been captivated by her beauty as displayed in a miniature portrait. The marriage took place at Madras on 18 February 1753. The couple sailed for Britain on 23 March, two days after Clive had arranged for all of his estate in India to be invested in diamonds. 
Clive received a warm welcome in London upon his return in October 1753, and he accepted gifts from a grateful East India Company as well as accolades from public figures. His private wealth stood at $40,000, a sum that was substantial enough to support his political and social ambitions, but it began to attract attention and criticism from those who envied his success. Clive was generous towards his friends, but at this stage of his life his spending was never reckless, and outgoings were closely monitored in meticulously kept personal accounts. Family debts were paid, including much of the $8000 mortgage on Styche Hall; allowances were settled on relatives; and property was purchased, before Clive began to seek an entry into parliamentary politics. He was fortunate that a general election was called in April 1754, and he was afforded active support by the influential though unpopular earl of Sandwich, who was patron of Margaret Clive's brother Nevil Maskelyne, the future astronomer royal. Clive stood for one of the two seats for the borough of Mitchell in Cornwall which, under the control of the Sandwich-Scawen interest, had been represented by his cousin Edward between 1741 and 1751. Clive and his fellow Sandwich-sponsored candidate John Stephenson were returned after a hotly contested poll of the fifty or so voters, but their position was threatened immediately when the result was disputed following protests from the candidates standing on the rival government interest. 
The Mitchell petition struggle was a complicated, long-drawn-out parliamentary episode which was not resolved until 24 March 1755, when Clive and Stephenson were finally unseated following a vote in the Commons which divided the house along partisan lines. Not only were Clive's immediate political ambitions thwarted by this set-back, but his electioneering had been a considerable drain on his financial resources. Perhaps with this in mind, he had already welcomed several approaches from the company about a possible return to India. With further hostilities likely against France, Clive had been offered the position of second-in-command (with a royal commission) of an expedition to be mounted from Bombay against the French-backed nizam of Hyderabad. The company's offer, made before the vote in the Commons, also included the governorship of Fort St David, a position which, by placing him as deputy to the new governor of Madras, meant that he would in due course become governor of the presidency. These were offers too good to refuse before the age of thirty, and Clive signed his commission at the end of March 1755. A couple of weeks later he and Margaret sailed for India at the end of a short and ultimately unsatisfactory sojourn in Britain. 
When Clive arrived at Bombay in October 1755 he found, somewhat to his surprise, that the Hyderabad expedition had been abandoned by the local authorities. Instead, the combined forces assembled under Admiral Watson were deployed against the pirate fortress of Gheria, which surrendered after two days of heavy naval bombardment. Clive and Watson then sailed on to Madras, and Clive formally took up his position as governor of Fort St David on 22 June 1756. He did not have long, however, to enjoy his return to familiar surroundings. In mid-August news arrived that the young nawab of Bengal, Siraj ud-Daula, fearing the growth of European strength in the region, had seized the city of Calcutta, which contained the company's settlement of Fort William. The nawab's success had been followed by the notorious 'black hole' incident in which forty or so British prisoners died during the course of a cramped and stifling overnight confinement in a small room. 
The British response was to mount a relieving expedition, led by Watson and Clive, which eventually set sail from Madras on 16 October. This combined operation was hampered by disagreements over tactics, and by disputes over prerogative between Clive, still a company soldier, and the regular naval officers serving in Watson's squadron. Clive confided to a friend in early January 1757 that 'I cannot help regretting that I ever undertook this expedition' (Malcolm, 1.156). Nevertheless, Clive's troops, after meeting resistance at Budge-Budge, recaptured Calcutta without a struggle on 2 January 1757, but then had to confront a major assault on the city from a large army led by the nawab. The effectiveness of a boldly conceived night-time counter-operation was undermined by several misjudgements made by Clive, but the action of his forces was robust enough to persuade the nawab to withdraw and open negotiations with the British. Clive, now in a position of some advantage but racked by increasingly characteristic battlefield indecision, hesitated before pressing for acceptance of his terms. Agreement was reached on 9 February 1757, when, by the treaty of Calcutta, the nawab restored to the British the position they had held before the outbreak of hostilities, and he also granted them reparations and important new privileges. 
Although arrival of news of the outbreak of the Seven Years' War suggested that Clive would soon return to Madras to meet an anticipated French offensive, continuing fears for the security of Calcutta dictated that he remain in Bengal, not least to try and prevent any alliance from being formed between the nawab and the French. Acknowledging the threat posed by the French forces stationed at Chandernagore, Clive attacked the settlement on 13 March 1757, but the arrival of Watson's ships ten days later made the decisive contribution to victory. The nawab, much alarmed by this turn of events, was in a vulnerable position, and he was also threatened by a conspiracy among followers who were aiming to remove him from power. Now fast emerging as the main power brokers in the region, the British were drawn into the conspiracy when offered the prospect of peace and stability which could be strengthened by their own active sponsorship of an acceptable candidate as nawab. After much political manoeuvring, Clive and the British authorities in Calcutta became involved in negotiations with such a candidate, Mir Jafar ['see 'Bengal, nawabs of], who was a general in the nawab's army. Acting as a go-between in the negotiations, but not trusted by the British, was the Calcutta merchant Amir Chand, who had previously enjoyed a close relationship with the nawab. Amir Chand made heavy financial demands which he wished to have settled during the course of any coup, and he appeared to be taking advantage of his influential position by insisting that these demands were met in any treaty drawn up between the British and Mir Jafar. 
These uneasy circumstances formed the background to the infamous episode in which Clive ordered two treaties to be drafted. One fictitious treaty was destined for Amir Chand and contained a clause detailing a large payment to be made to him in the event of any transfer of power, while the authentic treaty placed before Mir Jafar mentioned no such sum of money. If this action was in itself duplicitous and offered considerable ammunition to later generations of Clive's critics, then so too was the forging on the fictitious treaty of the signature of Watson, who was seemingly reluctant to put his own hand to the document. 
In whatever moral context these actions may be set, they paved the way for the overthrow of the nawab, which occurred at the battle of Plassey on 23 June 1757. In military terms, the battle was a rather desultory affair with relatively few casualties. Clive, although again courageous, was once more hesitant in the field and did not greatly distinguish himself as a tactician, even though the nawab, surrounded by disloyal officers, was defeated. The aftermath of the battle saw the British triumphant in their new role as king-makers, and Siraj ud-Daula was, as planned, replaced as nawab by Mir Jafar. In July 1757 Clive was able to report to the company's directors that 'this great revolution, so happily brought about, seems complete in every respect' (Malcolm, 1.271). 
The transfer to British-backed power in Bengal was accompanied, according to local custom, by lavish gifts or 'presents' worth over $1.2 million which were bestowed upon leading British figures by the new nawab, and the company itself was also compensated for the sacking of Calcutta. Clive was generously rewarded by a grateful Mir Jafar and, although his reasons for sanctioning the overthrow of Siraj ud-Daula in the first place cannot be ascribed to the narrow motives of personal financial gain, he certainly took full advantage of circumstances and was able greatly to enrich himself. He received presents worth $234,000 in 1757, and two years later, following the successful defence of Bengal against invasion by the son of the Mughal emperor, Mir Jafar bestowed upon Clive a much solicited 'jagir', a grant of land revenue worth around $27,000 a year to the recipient. These sums represented substantial personal gains which allowed Clive to invest $30,000 in Golconda diamonds at Madras in 1757, and during the aftermath of Plassey he was also able to negotiate the purchase of $230,000 bills to be drawn on the Dutch East India Company. Such actions later encouraged others to follow Clive's example and seek similar rewards, and they also began to attract considerable attention from those in Britain who were becoming increasingly uneasy about the ill-gotten gains being obtained by rapacious company servants, or 'nabobs' as they became known. Indeed, Clive was to spend the rest of his life seeking to preserve both his reputation and his 'jagir'. 
It had originally been intended that after the defeat of Siraj ud-Daula Clive would return to Madras, which was once more threatened by the French. In the event, however, he became 'de facto' chairman of a newly appointed governing council in Calcutta before he received news in November of his appointment as governor of the presidency of Bengal. He spent his time in office dispatching troops to beleaguered Madras and attempting to bolster the British position in Bengal, a process which, as he reported, involved 'Bullying and Keeping under the Black fellows' (Clive to Sir George Pocock, 25 Aug 1759, BL OIOC, MS Eur. G 37, box 3). In November 1759 he sanctioned Francis Forde's destruction at Badara of threatening Dutch troops who were advancing as reinforcements towards their settlement at Chinsura. 
During 1756-7 Clive had been presented with a set of circumstances in which any British conquest of Bengal was far from inevitable or unavoidable. His actions and decisions nevertheless determined an outcome which not only restored the British position after the initial loss of Calcutta but also saw company power and authority then quite systematically extended and consolidated in Bengal. As part of that process the British, through Clive, had first established political control over the nawab, and one important consequence of this was a great expansion of inland trading activity. Clive had then sought to eliminate the threat posed by the French and Dutch, and this left the British, for the time being, in a position of uncontested supremacy in the region. Neither Clive nor anybody else in the company had sought, in premeditated fashion, such an outcome, but there is no doubt that, as events unfolded before him, he had taken advantage of opportunities to establish considerable economic, political, and strategic advantages for the company. He was certainly aware of the implications of what he was doing, and this suggests that he had developed a clearer vision of the company's long-term future than many of his contemporaries. 
Clive also began to take a wider view of British interests in India. He outlined his ideas in a letter to William Pitt in 1759, and suggested that the British government should now take a fuller responsibility for the territories now under the company's control. Declaring that 'so large a sovereignty may possibly be an object too extensive for a mercantile Company', he asked Pitt to consider whether the nation would derive greater long-term advantage from the Indian territories if they were brought under the management of the state (Forrest, 2.175-7). 
Clive made significant progress towards his aims during his time as governor of Bengal. At the same time he found himself steadily becoming embroiled in acrimonious disputes not only with some of those in India, such as the regular army officer Eyre Coote, but also with the company's directors, many of whom he felt had been insufficiently swift to acknowledge his success and endorse his elevation to the position of governor. From this time on he retained a low opinion of those directors who were not members of his personal following. In particular, and despite outward displays of friendship, he came to regard the director Laurence Sulivan as a great rival whom in time he was prepared to 'hurt', 'if he attempts to hurt me' (Malcolm, 2.195). It was in these increasingly troubled circumstances that Clive resolved to return to Britain, and he set sail from Bengal with his wife in February 1760. 
Clive arrived in Britain in July 1760, in possession of a fortune worth about $300,000 and his 'jagir' income, having been lauded by William Pitt in 1757 as a 'heaven-born general' (Richard Clive to Clive, 6 Dec 1757, BL OIOC, MS Eur. G 37, box 4). Once more he received a hero's welcome and numerous official honours. Even so, he was disappointed in his attempt to secure an English peerage, receiving instead an Irish barony (as Baron Clive of Plassey) in March 1762. Two years later he was made knight of the Bath. 
Clive again devoted much of his time to politics, and was obliged in particular to defend himself within the East India Company against the charge that his 'jagir' had been obtained against the company's best interests. Although Clive eventually managed to have his right to the 'jagir' confirmed and then extended for ten years, this deeply contentious issue soon translated itself into a bitter ongoing struggle for control of the company. This saw the votes of Clive's supporters regularly being deployed in ballots and elections against those commanded by his great rival Sulivan. As a result, throughout the 1760s events at East India House, together with a vigorously contested propaganda war fought out in pamphlets and newspaper articles, regularly captured public attention and held the centre of the national political stage. 
Clive also sought a return to the House of Commons and, having had the ground prepared for him by his father during his absence in India, he was elected unopposed as MP for Shrewsbury in April 1761. He then built up around him a small group of followers, including his father (MP for Montgomery since 1759) and John Walsh, a close company associate who had been elected MP for Worcester. After initially supporting the duke of Newcastle (who had obtained his barony for him), he threw in his hand with George Grenville, prime minister in 1763-5, in return for assistance with the campaign to secure the 'jagir'. 
Clive again took great trouble to look after the well-being of his family and close friends. He did this through a series of generous gifts and settlements, providing a new house for his parents on the Styche estate. Although for a while Clive and his family lived in an enormous house at Condover near Shrewsbury, he also began to acquire a number of substantial new properties which enabled him to consolidate both his political and social position. These included a modest Irish estate, which was renamed Plassey to mark Clive's greatest triumph. Lord Montfort's 7500 acre Shropshire estate was bought for $70,000 in 1761, and the nearby 6000 acre Walcot estate and house were purchased for $92,000 in 1763. A fashionable town house, 45 Berkeley Square in London, was rented from Lord Ancram, and this too was eventually acquired for an outlay of $10,500. 
Still afflicted by ill health, Clive spent his time outside politics in a state of semi-retirement, often at Bath, but he and Margaret displayed great enthusiasm for concerts, operas, and plays. In early 1764, however, the arrival of news from India of several serious military set-backs experienced by the company at the hands of Indian forces prompted calls for his reappointment as governor of Bengal and commander-in-chief of the army. With a strong tide of popular support from a majority of the company's stockholders running behind him, Clive took advantage of the situation to assert his supremacy over Sulivan and secure his 'jagir'. Then, accepting the task of restoring the company's fortunes, Clive was charged with both settling external relations with Indian powers and bringing order to confused and corrupt internal affairs. Central to the first aim was the need to regulate private trading activity, a cause of conflict which had drawn the company into war with local rulers, notably Mir Kasim, who, with British support, had replaced Mir Jafar as nawab of Bengal in 1760. The second objective was to be achieved largely, and most controversially in view of Clive's earlier career, through the prohibition of present taking by company servants. To help him overcome any resistance from disaffected company servants in Calcutta, a new five-man select committee was established and empowered to overrule the Bengal council whenever necessary. Clive set sail for India, without his wife and children, on 4 June 1764. He was determined, as he later put it, to cleanse 'an Augean stable' (Forrest, 2.257) which, with an irony that was not lost on many contemporaries, his own earlier activities and example had in large part served to create. 
Clive's voyage to India again took longer than usual, and he was much delayed at Rio de Janeiro. By the time he arrived in India, reaching Madras on 10 April 1765 and Bengal on 3 May, the company's hitherto precarious military position had been transformed. This had been achieved largely as a result of the battle of Buxar, fought on 22 October 1764. The company's forces, led by Hector Munro, had secured a decisive victory over the combined armies of Mir Kasim (who the previous year had been overthrown when Mir Jafar had once more been installed as nawab of Bengal by the British), Shuja ud-Daula, the wazir of Oudh, and Shah Alam II, the Mughal emperor. Accordingly, not only did the company find itself firmly in control of Bengal, but it had been presented with the opportunity of a military advance as far as Delhi, the seat of the emperor. With the young Najm ud-Daula (recently installed as nawab of Bengal following the death of Mir Jafar) and the much weakened Shuja ud-Daula now seeking British support to prevent invasion of their territories by marauding Afghan and Maratha forces, there seemed every prospect that the company might extend its influence across much of northern India. 
Clive firmly rejected any ambitious expansionist schemes, preferring instead to consolidate the company's economic and political position in Bengal. To this end, the treaty of Allahabad, signed by Clive on 12 August 1765, contained a settlement which, among other things, saw the imperial authority of Shah Alam acknowledged by the British. The company was granted the lucrative office of 'diwan', or revenue collector, in the Mughal provinces of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa in return for military support and a 'tribute' payment of 26 lakhs of rupees a year to the emperor. With the 'diwani' transferred from the nawab to the company, the British gained direct access to the considerable wealth of Bengal, which enabled them to sustain the growth of their armed forces and increase the annual investment in goods for export to Britain. The nawab was almost entirely dependent upon the company even though, for the sake of outward appearances, he retained some independent control over local police and judicial functions. The collection of revenues also remained in Indian hands, but company officials closely monitored the entire operation. This division of governing responsibilities in Bengal established by Clive gave rise to what became known as his 'dual system' of government, an administrative scheme of arrangement which survived until it was superseded by reforms engineered by Warren Hastings during the early 1770s. Few contemporaries were in any doubt, however, that Clive's settlement had enabled the company firmly to secure 'de facto' control of Bengal and its adjacent territories. 
Clive's success had a profound effect upon the company's status and fortunes in Britain as well as India. Most notably, when news of the acquisition of the 'diwani' was received in London in April 1766, city speculators began to take a close interest in steadily rising East India stock prices. Clive himself played an important part in fuelling this increasingly frenzied activity, which in the long run inflicted considerable damage on the company's financial position. In September 1765 he had made use of his inside knowledge of developments in Bengal to advise friends in Britain to buy company stock, and he ordered his own London attorneys to raise large loans, liquefy his assets, and make substantial purchases on his behalf. These instructions were followed with great zeal, and by the beginning of 1767 Clive owned $75,000 India stock, although the full extent of these stock market transactions was partially concealed from public scrutiny (and later parliamentary examination) by the use of nominee holding accounts. Clive secured a generous profit from enhanced dividend payments and the timely sale at a high price of half of his accumulated stock in the spring of 1767. Thereafter he continued to conceal his East India holdings so that 'the World may not know what sum or sums of money I have in that stock' (Clive to George Clive, 9 Aug 1767, NL Wales, Clive MS 58, p. 21). Once more he demonstrated his avaricious appetite for private gain from company or public service, but he later robustly denied any wrongdoing when his stock market transactions were examined by a House of Commons committee of inquiry. Clive was not unlike many of his contemporaries when he attempted to exploit his official position and increase his personal fortune, but the extent to which he sought to line his own pockets through actions such as these gave substance to rumours about his fabulous wealth that were by now in circulation. 
As far as the company's internal affairs were concerned, Clive's second governorship of Bengal was characterized by a programme of rigorous, wide-ranging reforms. This he deemed to be necessary because he had found the company's civil and military affairs to be in a 'state of confusion beyond what I had even Reason to expect' (Clive to Robert Palk, 4 May 1765, BL OIOC, MS Eur. G 37, box 3). He aimed primarily to eliminate among his colleagues 'Rapacity and Luxury; the unreasonable desire of many to acquire in an instant' (Forrest, 2.257), his view being that substantial financial rewards from Indian service should be forthcoming only for those such as himself who had given long, meritorious service to the company. He set the general tone of his administration on 9 May 1765, when, in an action which caused considerable resentment, he insisted that, as previously instructed by the directors, members of the Bengal council sign covenants which prohibited present taking by company servants. This firmness, together with Clive's sustained and at times vindictive attempts to punish those he believed to have been recently involved in extorting presents from the new nawab, caused bitter, long-running feuds with several senior company servants. These included the councillors John Burdett, George Gray, John Johnstone, and Ralph Leycester, who, along with others, were either suspended or obliged to resign from company service. These disaffected individuals all returned to Britain nurturing deep grievances, determined to pursue personal vendettas against Clive. Moreover, in order to fill the gaps created in the council, Clive sought replacements from Madras, and this caused considerable affront to the British community in Calcutta. 
Clive's unpopularity increased yet further when, at the behest of the directors, he began to regulate the private trading activity of company employees. In the summer of 1765 reform of the 'inland' trade in salt, tobacco, and betel nut was effected through the creation of a monopolistic Society of Trade developed by William Sumner. The aim was to eliminate abuses, and with fixed prices for commodities it was hoped that the local population would no longer suffer from extortion at the hands of unscrupulous private British traders. Duties on the goods traded by the society would be paid to the company, and a fund was to be established from which regular and generous salaries could be paid to senior company officials in an attempt to dissuade them from engaging in trade on their own account. The scheme had some merits from the company's point of view, but it nevertheless served only to cause disaffection among those, especially in the lower ranks, who felt that perquisites were being denied to them without the provision of adequate compensation. At the same time it appeared that Clive and his favourites were profiting from monopoly arrangements, a charge which gained greater substance when the directors, generally uneasy about involvement in the inland trade, ordered the abolition of the Society of Trade in 1766. 
As far as the company's military forces were concerned, Clive, who had given detailed thought to the matter when last in Britain, set about reorganizing and redeploying the army in an attempt more effectively to meet a new set of defensive priorities. Serious problems were encountered, however, when Clive tackled the issue of financial retrenchment and the rationalization of the army's pay and allowance structure. In particular, an attempt to reduce field allowances for officers met with stiff opposition from those who already felt that their financial position had been undermined by the restrictions imposed upon private trade. During the early months of 1766 discontent within the company's officer corps translated itself into a campaign of active resistance against the reforms. A leading figure in this campaign was Sir Robert Fletcher, commander of a brigade stationed at Monghyr, who reported to Clive that all of his junior officers were planning to resign their commissions unless the old rate of allowance was reinstated. Having sent for additional officers from Madras, Clive tackled this dangerous situation by travelling to confront the mutineers at Monghyr on 15 May. He appealed directly to the loyalty of the company's European and Indian troops stationed there and, having won them over, reinstated most of the rebellious officers, one exception being Fletcher who was court-martialled and cashiered. Clive's actions, which were brave but also characterized by a brutal efficiency, had the effect of defusing the situation. The officers' mutiny, which had been threatening to spread throughout the army, was contained and then extinguished. Again, however, one important long-term consequence was that a number of embittered enemies returned to Britain, where, like others, they embarked on a vigorous campaign to clear their names and blacken Clive's reputation. 
Clive's time as governor was devoted to politics and administration. He spent $11,000 on 'table' expenses during his second governorship, but was often ill at ease and withdrawn in social gatherings unless they took the form of concerts, when he enjoyed listening to the works of Handel and Corelli. Indeed, he only ever relaxed and conversed freely in the company of his closest friends such as his private secretary Henry Strachey, his physician Samuel Ingham, and Edmund Maskelyne, or Mun, who was now serving as his aide-de-camp. Consequently, his countenance often seemed dark and brooding, and his appearance was increasingly defined by a heavy brow and gains in weight. Clive paid close attention to his appearance, carefully choosing his clothing and wigs, but although he was often accused of extravagance he does not seem to have indulged in ostentatious displays of his private wealth in Bengal. A contemporary Indian observer offered a general description of Clive during his times in India, and he contrasted the simplicity of his lifestyle with that of senior French figures in India, reporting that Clive 'always wore his regimentals in the field, was always on horseback, and never rode in a palanquin.... He never wore silks but in town' (Malcolm, 3.384). Clive never mastered local languages, but he did become an enthusiastic if not always discriminating collector of daggers, swords, and oriental art. He also took a collector's interest in animals, and he arranged for several different species to be shipped to Britain. 
In a hostile political climate Clive could not be seen to be profiting from present taking or private trade. Thus, in order to avoid any further charges of double standards, he gave away large sums of money to his friends, and the substantial bequest of 5 lakhs of rupees made to him in Mir Jafar's will was used to establish a fund to provide financial relief for disabled or impoverished company soldiers. 'With regard to myself', he claimed, 'I have not benefited or added to my fortune one farthing, nor shall I; though I might, by this time have received $500,000' (Clive to Richard Clive, 25 Sept 1765, NL Wales, Clive MS 236, p. 39). Even so, during his second governorship Clive was still able to remit home over $160,000, a sum arising from 'jagir' payment arrears and the final settlement of his Indian affairs. 
Clive's private papers and letter-books from this period reveal him to be a man who was engaged in the single-minded pursuit of his domestic and Indian political ambitions. He would not accept criticism or alternative points of view from anyone, and at times this was translated into extreme forms of high-handedness and arrogance. Thus while he always remained deeply affectionate and loyal towards his family and inner circle, he was often withering in his assessment of those whose qualities he deemed to be limited or flawed. He had a vengeful streak within him, and in his correspondence he often rejoiced at the political and personal misfortunes of his enemies. At the same time he displayed all the characteristics of a determined self-publicist, and he took great care to ensure that news of his successes was spread far and wide. 
During the summer of 1766 Clive continued actively to settle the company's affairs, but in the autumn he again fell ill, once more exhibiting the symptoms of acute nervous and physical disorder. He admitted to the directors that the combined effects of the climate and hard work had 'destroyed' his constitution and reduced his body and mind to a 'state of imbecility' (Clive to the directors, 6 Dec 1766, BL OIOC, MS Eur. G 37, box 3). Only large doses of opium relieved the agony, but Clive was entirely incapacitated and in much distress for several months before, having made a slight recovery, he left India for the last time, setting sail from Calcutta on 29 January 1767. 
Clive arrived back in Britain in July 1767 and was once more honoured with many official marks of gratitude. He estimated that his personal fortune now stood at just over $400,000, but public condemnation of his private wealth, as well as criticism of his actions as governor, began ever more to force him onto the defensive. His cause was not helped by the fact that, as a foretaste of things to come, in early 1767 the East India Company had been subjected to the first parliamentary inquiry into its affairs, and this had focused attention on recent developments in Bengal. 
Now a man without an official role in public life, Clive did not at once seek to play an active part in Westminster and company politics. Instead, having received George III's encouragement, he hoped to act as a detached, statesmanlike figure who would advise the government and company on East Indian affairs. This was far from easy, however, because the supporters of Laurence Sulivan and others had further fuelled hostility towards him within the higher echelons of the company. Clive in turn made no secret of his contempt for many of the directors, even though he sought to liaise with them over the development of further detailed plans for reform of the company's army. Pursuit of his political ambition was also hampered by the fact that his patron George Grenville was now in opposition. Perhaps more importantly, the return of illness eventually obliged him to seek recovery, first at Bath in late 1767 and then on the continent in 1768. 
Even so, an eight-month absence in France did not prevent Clive, through his representatives John Walsh and Henry Strachey, from playing a prominent part in the general election of 1768. A variety of schemes were floated and a large amount of money was spent in an attempt to try and increase the size of his following in the House of Commons. His $30,000 purchase, from Walter Waring, of another Shropshire estate in November 1767 had given Clive complete control over both seats at Bishop's Castle. In March 1768 an estate at Usk and Trellech was bought from Clive Morris for $43,000 in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to establish a parliamentary interest in Monmouthshire. Clive later made several smaller purchases of land totalling $5400 in the Usk area, but then, wishing to concentrate his attention on Shropshire and Montgomery politics, he abandoned his Monmouthshire venture in 1772. Always seeking to drive a hard bargain, he was nevertheless able to make a handsome profit from his brief foray into Monmouthshire when he sold all his property in the county to Lord Beaufort for $57,000. As far as the general election of 1768 was concerned, heavy expenditure was not matched by results and only three members were added to the Clive group in the Commons. Clive himself was returned, in his absence, for Shrewsbury in the face of a stern challenge from John Johnstone's brother William Pulteney. 
Clive did not seek to involve himself in parliamentary politics, often declaring that he was now above party or faction. Even so, on 27 February 1769 he took a prominent part in a Commons debate about the renewal of an agreement established with the company in 1767. Steadfastly opposing the policy of the directors and the terms of their agreement with ministers, Clive made a notable speech, during the course of which he outlined his personal view of recent events in India. He also advanced plans for the root-and-branch reform of the company's affairs. His speech was well received but did not influence the new settlement in any way, an outcome which served only to increase his hostility towards many of the company's directors. This hostility had also developed to the point that from 1768, contrary to many claims of a lack of interest in internal company politics, he renewed his efforts to carve out a position of strength for himself and his followers in the general court and court of directors. There was an urgent need to do this because of Laurence Sulivan's continuing influence within the company. At the same time Clive had to counter the increasingly concerted efforts of company factions and those individuals who were seeking to restore their reputations and once more challenge Clive's right to the 'jagir', the term of which had been extended by a narrow majority of stockholders in September 1767. As a result, Clive devoted considerable time and energy to alliance making within the company, notably with the banker Sir George Colebrooke, and his financial resources were channelled once more into company electioneering on a grand scale. 
Election expenditure was not so great, however, that it prevented Clive from spending $25,000 in 1769 on the purchase of the Claremont estate in Surrey from the widow of the duke of Newcastle. Two years later the Oakly Park estate (with its electoral influence at Ludlow) was bought from Lord Powis, and he also purchased the Okehampton estate in Devon. Indeed, Clive's wealth was now such that he sanctioned the demolition of the old, and to his mind uncomfortable, Vanbrugh-designed Palladian mansion at Claremont. In its place was built a rather more simple house designed by Capability Brown and Henry Holland. 
The struggle for supremacy within the East India Company during the late 1760s did not produce a decisive outcome, but there was a need to put the company's affairs in order. This became only too apparent during the early summer of 1769, when reports arrived in London of serious military set-backs suffered in the Carnatic at the hands of the forces of Haidar Ali of Mysore. In May this news caused a fall in company stock prices, which had remained buoyant since 1766. At a stroke many of the leading figures within the company were ruined because vote creation activity had resulted in their being caught with stock in their possession which had been bought at a high price with borrowed money the previous autumn. Clive did not get his fingers burnt to any great degree, but he did now reluctantly acknowledge the need to negotiate with Laurence Sulivan in an attempt to secure agreement on ways of addressing the company's serious problems in India. The favoured way forward, much discussed during the summer of 1769, was for the company to dispatch 'supervisors' to India in an attempt to secure compliance with the directors' orders. Clive advocated the appointment of a governor-general, but eventually a three-man supervisory commission was established, including Clive's close friend Luke Scrafton and a representative of the Sulivan 'interest', Henry Vansittart, the former governor of Bengal, who was hoping to repair his and Sulivan's recently shattered personal finances. The third member of the commission was Francis Forde, who was supposed to exert a mediating influence but was in fact well disposed towards Clive and his followers. The supervisory commission thus offered Clive the opportunity to reassert some degree of direct control over Indian affairs. But any hopes that he might have entertained about this were dashed when the frigate carrying the supervisors to India disappeared after leaving Cape Town at the end of December 1769. 
The loss of the supervisors represented a heavy blow to the company in its efforts to put its own affairs in order. The company's difficulties then mounted when, contrary to the expectations raised by Clive's settlement of 1765, its financial position worsened markedly during 1771 and 1772. At the same time news began to arrive in Britain about the devastating effects of the Bengal famine of 1769-70, and this heightened unease about company misrule. Clive, held by some to have been responsible for establishing the economic preconditions for the famine, was now routinely condemned along with other 'nabobs' in print and cartoons. Demands were also made for inquiry and reform, and it was against this background that Lord North and his ministers began to address the East Indian problem. 
Clive now found himself in a difficult political position, and he became rather isolated as friends and allies either died or were abandoned. Scrafton had been lost in 1769, George Grenville and Richard Clive died in 1770 and 1771 respectively, while old associates from India such as Stringer Lawrence and Robert Orme had long been alienated from him. Clive was gradually forced into retreat by enemies who took advantage of the prevailing public mood and pressed home legal and literary attacks upon him. The pressure increased when the directors, acting on information passed on to them by Clive's enemies, attempted to secure repayment from him of money they believed was owed to the company from the salt duties collected by the Society of Trade in Bengal during 1765 and 1766. In an attempt to set the record straight, Clive, who had been assiduously gathering materials to use in his own defence, considered writing a history of his governorship, but he was warned against this by close friends. He was, however, also being courted by ministers who welcomed his expert advice on Indian affairs, and, following the death of George Grenville, he and his followers began to gravitate towards Lord North, the new prime minister. North, through the former Grenvillite Alexander Wedderburn, made approaches to Clive during the second half of 1771 asking for his views and opinions on company matters. 
In early 1772 the company acknowledged the need for reform of its affairs and prepared a parliamentary bill which was designed to improve the administration of British justice in Bengal. When, on 30 March 1772, Laurence Sulivan announced his intention to introduce the bill into the Commons, it became clear that many MPs were not prepared to discuss any measure without a thorough inquiry into the company's affairs and recent history. Clive took advantage of these proceedings to offer a detailed defence of his conduct in Bengal, and his two-hour speech included trenchant criticism of the directors and all of his enemies. He argued that he had followed the correct course of action in 1765 and that it was absurd for him to be held in any way responsible for the Bengal famine of 1769-70. The speech was well received, and Clive's oratorical skills were widely praised, but the critics were not silenced and the house eventually agreed to establish a select committee of inquiry under the chairmanship of John Burgoyne. The terms of reference of the inquiry were such that the committee, which included Clive as one of its thirty-one members, undertook a close examination of the company's history since 1756. The committee proceedings did not take the form of a witch hunt, although Clive and many of his former allies were called as witnesses and subjected to searching interrogation. Because of this, Clive later complained in the Commons that he had been treated like a 'sheep stealer' and the committee had attempted to 'mark him' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 17, 1772, cols. 852-3), but the published reports in fact offered a reasonably objective view of events and Clive's career. The committee's proceedings dragged on for months, offering Clive the opportunity to present lengthy, if at times selective, accounts of his conduct. While Clive's tone was usually measured and controlled, he did occasionally combine defiance with attempts to claim the moral high ground from his detractors. There was no better example of this than when, recalling the riches offered to him by Mir Jafar in 1757, he made his famous remark, 'Mr Chairman, at this moment I stand astonished at my own moderation!' (Spear, 189). 
During the summer and autumn of 1772 the company lurched towards bankruptcy, a development which saw, as a prelude to government reform, a second inquiry into East Indian affairs launched in the form of a secret committee of the House of Commons. Clive received some much needed relief from his personal troubles, being at last installed as knight of the Bath in June, and he was then appointed lord lieutenant of both Shropshire and Montgomery during the autumn. But although he emerged relatively unscathed from the select committee proceedings and reports, politicians and the public continued to express concern about the state of British India. It was against a background of sustained hostility towards the East India Company that during the early months of 1773 Lord North and his ministers began to prepare regulatory legislation. 
By May 1773 a tense political atmosphere had developed. Burgoyne chose this moment to act upon the findings of his select committee, and by doing so he mounted an attack upon Clive and other 'nabobs'. On 10 May he made three motions in the Commons, two of which condemned present taking and the appropriation of money by the authorities in Bengal, and he listed the crimes perpetrated by company servants. Clive's conduct was defended with some success by Wedderburn, but Burgoyne's motions were passed and the house agreed further to consider the committee's reports. This was eventually done on 19 May, when, amid great excitement, Clive spoke for over an hour in his own defence and presented a straightforward account of his career. This action was very necessary because Burgoyne had indicated that he would make a motion declaring that Clive had illegally acquired $234,000 after the battle of Plassey. The proceedings were adjourned, however, until 21 May, when Clive made a further short speech which ended with the dramatic and celebrated plea 'leave me my honour, take away my fortune' (BL, Egerton MS 247, 131-4). Clive then left the house, and a lengthy debate took place on Burgoyne's motion. During the course of this debate it became clear that a majority of MPs were now sympathetic towards Clive, and it was eventually resolved that, although he had indeed received $234,000, he had not abused his powers to do so. Sensing the changing mood in the house, Wedderburn then pressed home Clive's advantage. He made the motion that 'Robert Clive did at the same time render great and meritorious service to this country' ('JHC', 34.331), to which members assented almost unanimously during the early hours of the morning. 
Such an outcome represented a remarkable triumph for Clive, and it was widely assumed that he had bought his way out of trouble. This was nonsense. Clive's success was based upon his own robust and sustained defence of his conduct, and Wedderburn's techniques of backstairs parliamentary management and alliance building. Indeed, the campaign had been so successful that his reputation was enhanced at the very time that many assumed and eagerly anticipated that he would be humiliated. 
Following the high drama of these proceedings, the East India Company was reformed by a series of legislative actions, most notably Lord North's 'Regulating Act' of 1773. Clive did not wholeheartedly endorse these measures, but he took a full part in the debates which shaped their final form. This was not the response of a man broken by recent events, and historians have tended to exaggerate the damaging effects that the parliamentary proceedings had upon him. Well used to hostile criticism, Clive did not withdraw from public life, and he continued to play an active part in East Indian politics. In particular, he spent some considerable time advising members of the recently appointed supreme council of Bengal, especially Philip Francis, on Indian policy. Whatever Clive's intentions, however, the outcome of this intervention was damaging to the company in the long run because Francis, when drawing on Clive's advice in India, directed a sustained campaign of criticism and obstruction against the governor-general, Warren Hastings. 
Clive spent much of the winter of 1773-4 in Italy in the company of several companions but not his wife. The purpose of the trip was twofold: to escape harsh weather and to procure works of art for the new house at Claremont, which was now approaching completion at a cost of around $30,000. The summer of 1774 was then spent in Shropshire, where guests were entertained and preparations were made for the forthcoming general election. In early November, however, Clive fell ill, as a common cold steadily worsened. He travelled first to Bath for the waters and then moved on to London. By the time he arrived at Berkeley Square on 20 November he had been in considerable pain for some time, and his old ailments had returned with a vengeance. He resorted to large doses of opium, which brought some respite, but on 22 November, having abandoned a game of cards being played with friends, he was found dead on the floor of an adjoining room. 
Mystery long surrounded the circumstances of Clive's death, and both contemporary and historical accounts offer a variety of often lurid versions of his final minutes. Most modern biographers, drawing on contemporary rumour and speculation, have argued that he died by his own hand, having sought escape from acute pain by plunging a penknife into his throat. However, a recent well-documented and convincing counter-claim (Prior, 345-7) suggests that Clive, in great discomfort, took an excessively large dose of opium which led ultimately to a fatal seizure or epileptic fit. The arrangements for his funeral were conducted along normal lines, which does not suggest that the family entertained any great concern about the religious consequences of death by suicide. Clive was buried inside the parish church of St Margaret at Moreton Say on 30 November, and his presence there was marked by a small plaque bearing the words 'Primus in Indis'. 
With assets worth over $500,000 at the time of his death, Clive left his family well established as members of the landed elite, and by securing this he had undoubtedly achieved one of his major ambitions. He was survived by his wife, who lived until 1817, and by two sons and two daughters. His eldest son, Edward Clive (1754-1839), later became governor of Madras and earl of Powis. 
Clive's career and achievements were matters for great debate during his lifetime, and a process of re-evaluation and revision has continued ever since. Always a figure of great controversy, his reputation has changed as the tides of British imperial fortunes have ebbed and flowed, and as attitudes towards the empire have altered over the last 200 years or so. Adopting often quite different moral perspectives and critical standards, successive generations of biographers from diverse historiographical traditions have seldom been neutral in their attitudes towards him. Their verdicts have ranged from wholehearted praise for the bold man of action through to outraged condemnation of his greed, corruption, and double standards. If these contradictory views reveal anything at all, they demonstrate that he was simultaneously a man of many qualities and shortcomings who was very much a product of his time and the unique situation in which he found himself. These views have also ensured that he has remained prominent in popular consciousness, a position sustained through fictional and cinematic representations of his life. That his thoughts and actions were decisive in shaping the early expansion of British India is beyond any doubt, but so too responses to the events of 1756-9 and 1765-7 served to determine imperial attitudes and policy long after his death. For these reasons Clive was more than simply a soldier and statesman: he was an architect of empire whose influence has cast a lengthy shadow over the history of Britain and India. 


@@@@@


doc= 5698


Cloete, Sir Abraham Josias (1794-1886), army officer, second son of Peter Laurence Cloete, member of the council of the Cape of Good Hope, was born in Cape Town on 7 August 1794. He was educated in Holland and at the Royal Military College, Marlow. Appointed to a cornetcy in the 15th hussars on 29 January 1809, he was promoted successively lieutenant (1810), captain (1812), brevet-major (1822), lieutenant-colonel (1837), colonel (1851), major-general (1856), lieutenant-general (1863), and general (1871). Joining the 15th hussars in England soon after its return from Corunna, Cloete served with it during the Burdett riots of 1810 and the Luddite disturbances in the midlands and Lancashire of the following years. 
On 28 October 1813 Cloete exchanged to the 21st light dragoons at the Cape, and returned as aide-de-camp to the newly appointed governor, Lord Charles Somerset. He commanded a military detachment of volunteers from regiments at the Cape, sent to occupy the desert island of Tristan da Cunha soon after the arrival of the emperor Napoleon at St Helena. Leaving the detachment there, Cloete resumed his duties as aide-de-camp. In 1817 Cloete accompanied his regiment to India, and served with a squadron employed as a field force in Cuttack, on the frontiers of Orissa and Bihar, during the Pindarri war of 1817-19. The 21st dragoons (a party at St Helena excepted) was disbanded in England in May 1819, and Cloete was placed on half pay. In 1820 he was employed, with the rank of deputy assistant quartermaster-general, in superintending the landing and settling on the eastern frontier of Cape Colony, in the districts of Albany and Somerset, of a large body of government immigrants, known as the 'settlers of 1820'. In 1822 he was sent home with important dispatches, after which he was appointed town-major of Cape Town, a post he held until 1840. He served in the Cape Frontier War of 1834-5. In 1836 he was made KH, and at the time of his death was the last surviving knight companion of the Royal Guelphic Order in the 'Army List'. 
In 1840 Cloete was appointed deputy quartermaster-general at the Cape, and retained the post until 1854. In 1842 he was sent with reinforcements from Cape Town to relieve a small force under Captain Smith, 27th Inniskillings, which was besieged by Boers near Durban, when his firm and judicious action not only prevented a war with the Boers but also prepared the permanent settlement of the colony of Natal. He was quartermaster-general in the Cape Frontier War of 1846-7 and was mentioned in dispatches, and in 1848 was made CB. He was chief of the staff with the army in the field in the Cape Frontier War of 1850-53, including the operations in the Basuto country, and the battle of the Berea, where he commanded a division. He was mentioned in dispatches in the 'London Gazette' (4 May 1852), and knighted for his services in 1854. As major-general on the staff he commanded the troops in the Windward and Leeward islands from 1855 to 1861. He was made colonel 19th foot (later the Princess of Wales's Own Yorkshire regiment) in 1861, and KCB in 1862. He was placed on the retired list in 1877. 
Cloete had married on 8 May 1857 Anne Woollcombe Louis (died 1906), granddaughter of Rear-Admiral Sir Thomas Louis, bt; they had a son and a daughter. As a young man, he had fought a duel with the surgeon James Barry over his future wife's aunt. He died at his home, 88 Gloucester Terrace, Hyde Park, London, on 26 October 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 5699


Clogie, Alexander (1614-1698), Church of England clergyman and biographer, was born in Scotland and may have attended Trinity College, Dublin. He was admitted to holy orders by Bishop William Bedell of Kilmore in 1636 and collated to the vicarage of Dyne, co. Cavan, on 12 November 1637. The same month he married Bedell's stepdaughter Leah Mawe, daughter of a recorder of Bury St Edmunds and his wife, also Leah Mawe, but she died within a few weeks. On 7 May 1640 Clogie became vicar of Urney or Cavan. Resident at the episcopal palace at Kilmore, by his own account he assisted Bedell with his translation of scripture into Irish. Following the outbreak of the 1641 rising Clogie, together with the bishop and several others, was seized by the insurgents in December 1641 at Kilmore and conveyed to the nearly ruinous castle of Cloughoughter, where the party was kept for three weeks in severe winter weather. Released in a prisoner exchange, they remained in the area residing at the home of a clergyman, Denis O'Sheridan. Bedell became seriously ill and Clogie remained with him until his death on 7 February 1642. After officiating at Bedell's funeral he joined refugees who departed Cavan for protestant-held Drogheda in June 1642. He moved on to Dublin and later reported that he had served for fifteen months as a deputy commissary to Sir Philip Perceval, responsible for the receipt of bread and biscuit from the Dublin bakers. In late 1643 he travelled to England with the troops dispatched by the marquess of Ormond to serve the king, acting as chaplain to the cavalry. By September 1646 he was minister at Beely, in Worcestershire, and by the following year was officiating as minister at Wigmore, in Herefordshire, a living in the hands of the parliamentarian Harley family. 
Clogie remained at Wigmore for the rest of his life. His early praise for the populace seems to have been reciprocated, for in 1650 inhabitants of the parish successfully petitioned in his favour against an act banishing Scots from England. He married Susanna Nelme (died 1711), the daughter of John Nelme, at Ludlow on 11 December 1655, and the baptism of two sons and four daughters of their marriage are recorded at Wigmore between 1656 and 1671. At some point before 1679 he wrote 'Speculum episcoporum, or, The apostolique bishop, being a brief account of the lyfe and death of that reverend father in God, D. William Bedell'. Though it was the foundation for the much more influential life of Bedell published by Bishop Gilbert Burnet in 1685, Clogie's work was not published until 1862, then again in 1902. He published 'Vox corvi, or, The Voice of a Raven' (1694, perhaps with a first edition in 1691), a sermon prompted by an incident where his grandson heard a raven 'that thrice spoke these words distinctly; 'Look into Colossians the 3rd, and 15th'' (Jones, 219), a command which Clogie related to a family dispute in the parish. He died in 1698 at Wigmore, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 5700


Clopton, Hugh (c.1440-1496), merchant, mayor of London, and civil benefactor, was the younger son of John and Agnes Clopton, of Clopton, near Stratford upon Avon, where the family had been settled since the thirteenth century. Apprenticed to John Roo, mercer of London, in 1456/7, he became a member of the company in 1463/4, serving as warden in 1479, 1484, and 1488. He was elected alderman for Dowgate ward on 15 October 1485, and had moved to Bread Street by 1495. He was elected sheriff of London in 1486, and mayor in 1491. After serving with the delegation sent by Edward IV to Archduke Maximilian in Flanders in 1482, he was also elected one of four members for the City of London in the parliament which sat from 20 January to 18 February 1483. Contrary to previous assertions, Clopton was never knighted, describing himself in his will as 'citizen, mercer and alderman' (Shakespeare Birthplace Trust, ER 1/121). 
Although he made his career in London and abroad as mercer, stapler, and venturer, Clopton retained close links with Stratford upon Avon, where he built a 'praty howse of brike and tymbar', later known as New Place and purchased in 1597 by William Shakespeare. Leland also credits him with the building of the stone bridge over the river at Stratford which still bears his name, replacing 'The bridge ther of late tyme... very smaulle and ille, and at hygh waters very harde to passe by' ('Itinerary', 2.49). He is also said to have repaired and improved the highway from London near Aylesbury. Hugh Clopton died, unmarried, in London on 15 September 1496 and was buried, according to his directions, in the chapel of St Katherine in the church of St Margaret's, Lothbury. 
Clopton made two wills, one dated 8 March 1496 and enrolled in the husting court of London, and the other dated 14 September 1496 and proved in the prerogative court of Canterbury on 14 February 1497. The wills provided, in addition to conventional pious bequests to the poor and to religious houses in and around London and Warwickshire, 200 marks for the marriage of twenty poor maidens in London and the same number in Stratford. Clopton also endowed three exhibitions for five years for poor scholars at Oxford, and the same at Cambridge; and ensured the completion of building work -- the nave, tower, and porch -- at the chapel of the Guild of the Holy Cross, Stratford, for which 'of late I have bargayned with oon Dowland and divers other masons' (Shakespeare Birthplace Trust, ER 1/121). The amount bequeathed for this work is unspecified, but a sum of $50 was also left towards the building of a cross aisle in the parish church of Holy Trinity, Stratford. His regular travels between London and Stratford may be deduced from his bequests towards the 'repayring and amending of perilous bridges and weyes within the space of x myles of Stratford upon Avon' (Shakespeare Birthplace Trust, ER 1/121), and the fact that, at the time of his election as mayor of London, he was 'nowe in Warwickshire' when the Mercers' Company determined that twenty-four of their number should meet and escort him the last 10 miles into the city (Lyell and Watney, 220). Total financial bequests and provisions came to more than $1700 and in addition real estate was devised in Stratford and Wilmcote in Warwickshire and at Calais in France. The separately enrolled husting will bequeathed a freehold tenement in Bow Lane, Vintry, to Whittington College, for the benefit of the testator's soul, with a request that preference should be given to a graduate of Oxford for any vacancy in the mastership. The inquisition 'post mortem', taken at Stratford on 1 November 1497, specifies nine properties in Stratford upon Avon, together with the manors of Little Wilmcote and Clopton, which he may have held as guardian of his great-nephew William, whose father, John, son of Thomas, Hugh's elder brother, had died in 1486. The wardship of William was granted in 1498 to Hugh Clopton's executors. William, aged fifteen in 1497, was served heir to his great-uncle on 20 July 1504. 


@@@@@


doc= 5701


Clopton, Walter (d. 1400), justice, was probably a member of a family established at Clapton, near Crewkerne in Somerset, and which also held lands elsewhere in Somerset and in Dorset. Little is known about his early career, but he was appointed a king's serjeant in 1376. A patent was issued for his appointment as one of the justices of the king's bench on 27 November 1377, but for reasons that are not clear the appointment did not take effect, and he continued as a king's serjeant until 1388. He served as a justice of assize and gaol delivery on the south-western circuit between 1377 and 1380, and on the home circuit between 1382 and 1387. He was on the commission of the peace in the south-western counties in the early 1380s, and he also served as a commissioner of array in Somerset in 1377 and 1380. He had links with William, earl of Salisbury, acting as one of his feoffees in 1381 and 1382. In these years he acquired more property in Somerset and Dorset -- a life tenancy of the manor of Shepton Beauchamp (Somerset) and the manor of Kingston Russell (Dorset); he also held land at Long Sutton (Somerset) and Bromley (Dorset). By grant of Margaret, countess of Devon (died 1391), he was tenant of the manor of Corston, Somerset, for her life, and in 1385 he acted as a feoffee for her grandson, Edward, earl of Devon. By the 1390s he was sufficiently wealthy to make a loan to the king of 500 marks in August 1396, and he was required to contribute a further 500 marks to Richard II's forced loan in October 1397. 
In the political crisis of November-December 1387 the chief justice of the king's bench, Sir Robert Tresilian, was appealed of treasons by the lords appellant, and on 31 January 1388 Clopton was appointed chief justice in his place. He was created knight-banneret in the following April. He presided over the impeachment in the Merciless Parliament (February-June 1388) of four of Richard's closest associates, Simon Burley, John Beauchamp of Holt, James Berners, and John Salisbury, and pronounced sentence of death on them. Despite Clopton's part in the condemnation of his friends, Richard II reappointed him as chief justice of the king's bench when he resumed power in May 1389. During the 1390s Clopton's gaol delivery work was increasingly concentrated on Newgate prison, but he was still appointed from time to time as a justice of the peace and commissioner of gaol delivery in his native west country. As chief justice of the king's bench he was regularly summoned to parliament, and served as a trier of petitions in every parliament until his death. In the parliament of September 1397 the earl of Arundel was arraigned on a charge of treason for his part in the opposition of the lords appellant to Richard II between 1386 and 1388. Arundel pleaded a royal pardon, but was told that the pardon had been obtained by deceit and was null and void. The king then ordered Clopton to warn the earl of the penalty he faced if he could make no better plea, and Clopton went on to inform Arundel that if he had nothing else to say he would be convicted and attainted. The earl's conviction and execution duly followed. 
When the second session of this parliament opened at Shrewsbury on 28 January 1398, its first business was to annul the proceedings of the Merciless Parliament of 1388 and to reaffirm the validity of the judges' answers of 1387, which Clopton's predecessor, Tresilian, had helped to formulate and which had constituted one of the counts against him at his trial in 1388. William Thirning, chief justice of the common pleas, was asked his opinion of the answers, and replied that declaration of new treasons was a matter for parliament, but if he had been a lord or peer of parliament and had been asked his opinion he would have replied in the same manner. Clopton, when asked his opinion, offered the same tactful if evasive reply. Clopton was evidently confirmed in office at the accession of Henry IV (though the confirmation was not enrolled), and in the first parliament of the new reign (October-November 1399) he was involved in the inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the death of the duke of Gloucester at Calais in September 1397. On 17 October John Hall was brought before parliament and interrogated by Clopton about a statement he had made admitting his complicity in Gloucester's murder. Hall was condemned to death and executed the same day, but there remains much doubt about the truthfulness of his confession. On the following day (18 October) Clopton was required to cross-examine his fellow judge Sir William Rickhill about the latter's part in obtaining the duke of Gloucester's confession. Rickhill maintained that when he was ordered to go to Calais he believed that the duke was already dead, and that in interviewing him and receiving his confession he was doing no more than the king and the captain of Calais, Thomas (I) Mowbray, had required of him. He was duly exonerated. 
Clopton died on 21 October 1400. He and his wife, Edith, had no surviving heirs, and his brother Robert, aged over fifty, was named as his heir. He was succeeded as chief justice of the king's bench by Sir William Gascoigne. 


@@@@@


doc= 5702


Close, Sir Barry, baronet (1756-1813), army officer in the East India Company and political officer in India, was born on 3 December 1756 at Elm Park, co. Armagh, the third son in the family of four sons and five daughters of Maxwell Close (died 1793) and his wife and cousin, Mary, daughter of Captain Robert Maxwell of Fellows Hall, co. Armagh. The protestant ascendancy family had come to Ireland from Yorkshire under Charles I. After early education in Ireland he was entered as a cadet in the Madras army in 1771 at the age of fifteen, and was commissioned an ensign in the Madras native infantry on 3 September 1773. He was appointed adjutant of the newly formed 20th battalion in 1777, which joined the British garrison of Tellicherry on the Malabar coast, to be attacked and besieged by the forces of Mysore under Haidar Ali in 1780. Close's personal courage and talent for leadership were revealed in this action, and his treatment of the sepoys' followers and families ensured that his battalion remained steady when adjacent battalions mutinied after promises over leave and allowances were broken. The 1780 mutiny and subsequent inquiry prepared him for later experiences in an army whose loyalty was notoriously volatile. He acquired a reputation as an excellent linguist, invariably conducting his business with the sepoys in their own language. 
In 1781 Close was appointed aide-de-camp to Major-General James Stuart, the commander-in-chief of the Madras army, and saw that officer summarily dismissed by the governor, Lord Macartney, for refusing to accept orders concerning the deployment of troops of the king's army against the French. Close was in attendance on the one-legged general throughout the drama of his arrest and forcible embarkation for England on 17 September 1783. His diplomatic handling of these highly contentious events enhanced his reputation among the British community in Madras. Gazetted a captain on 18 December 1783, he was selected to conduct boundary negotiations with the representatives of the new ruler of Mysore, Tipu Sultan. His career as a staff officer continued as deputy adjutant-general of the Madras army under Lord Cornwallis during the Third Anglo-Mysore War (1790-92), against Tipu Sultan. On his return to Madras he was appointed adjutant-general and gazetted a lieutenant-colonel on 29 November 1797. 
Barry Close was an active member of the European community in Madras, gaining the respect of his fellows for speaking out against inflated food prices, bad roads, and general street lawlessness. He was instrumental in the formation of a permanent police committee on 29 December 1797, and in the establishment of the Madras military fund for the relief of widows and children. 
Lord Wellesley's policy of aggressive expansion once more brought the Madras army, in combination with elements from Bombay and the nizam of Hyderabad, to the gates of Seringapatam in May 1799. Close, as adjutant-general, played the leading role in the planning and conduct of the successful assault in which Tipu Sultan died and the substantial kingdom was brought under British control. He was appointed to the commission which supervised the partition of Mysore, and drafted the subsidiary treaty which defined the terms under which the ancient Hindu dynasty of Mysore rulers would be restored to the throne from captivity. The governor-general, Wellesley, described Close as 'by far the ablest man in the army of Madras, and few more able officers exist in the world. He was the life and soul of the campaign. In addition, he is the ablest scholar in Persian, and in several of the native dialects. He is a man of extraordinary general knowledge and talents. His integrity is irreproachable; and he is a very amiable and pleasant man, with a rather warm temper. (Ingram, 170)' Close was appointed the first resident at the Mysore court, with the task of supervising the young raja and settling the new state. But, before this could be achieved, he was dispatched to negotiate the annexation of all the territories in the Carnatic ruled by the nawab of Arcot, who was accused of having secretly plotted with Tipu against the British. During the negotiations (15 July 1801), the nawab died, and Close's mission was extended to settle the disputed succession. His mission successfully completed, in the same year he was appointed resident at the court of the peshwa at Poona in anticipation of further British expansion under Wellesley. He was responsible for concluding the treaty of Bassein with the peshwa on 31 December 1802 which permitted British intervention on the latter's behalf to coerce the princes of the Maratha confederacy. Subsequently, the initial subordination of the confederacy was completed by Arthur Wellesley's victory over Daulat Rao Sindhia at the battle of Assaye in 1803. 
Close was promoted colonel of the 20th Madras native infantry on 27 August 1805, and, while nominally still resident at Poona, held a roving commission to maintain the uncertain peace among dissident elements within the Maratha states by negotiation and swift military action. But perhaps his most significant contribution to the East India Company's affairs was to intervene in the mutiny of British officers which paralysed the Madras army for eight months in 1809. In July that year his personal exhortation to the officers not to defy the Madras authorities, and, in their own language, to the sepoys not to follow their dissenting officers, caused the disaffected Hyderabad regiments to give up their protest and eventually led to the collapse of the mutiny throughout south India. 
Close returned to Britain on leave in 1810 after almost forty continuous years of service in India. He was immediately promoted major-general (25 July 1810) and, through the influence of the earl of Buckinghamshire (then president of the Board of Control), was created a baronet by the prince regent on 12 December 1812. He died, unmarried, in London on 12 April 1813, and was buried on 23 April with full company honours in Marylebone church, Middlesex. His baronetcy became extinct. 
Barry Close gained neither the fame nor the fortune which came to later soldier administrators in India, such as Sir John Malcolm and Sir Thomas Munro, who profited from the consequences of the Wellesley period of intervention and expansion. Rather, he was representative of those men who enabled the East India Company to transform itself from an armed merchant to the agent of empire. It was a substantial change, which relied upon the uncertain talents of an expatriate community where the necessary skills were not imbued by formal training, but were found to a lesser or greater extent in the character and personal abilities of those on the spot who had sufficient ambition to respond to the demands of the moment. 


@@@@@


doc= 5703


Close, Francis (1797-1882), dean of Carlisle, was born at Corston, near Bath, on 11 July 1797, the youngest of four boys and five girls of the family of the agriculturist the Revd Henry Close (1753-1806) and Mary Waring (1754-1843). Close was educated at Midhurst grammar school (1806-8) and Merchant Taylors' School (1808-12). In 1813 he experienced an evangelical conversion during his four years as a private pupil of the Revd John Scott of Hull. Close entered St John's College, Cambridge, where he continued to identify himself with evangelicalism and came under the influence of Charles Simeon, whom he described as 'my affectionate father, my generous patron, and my wise and helpful counsellor' (manuscript at Ridley Hall, Cambridge). He graduated BA in 1820 and MA in 1824; he was awarded a Lambeth DD in 1856. In 1820 Close married Anne Diana Arden (1791-1877); they had a family of five boys (one of whom died in infancy) and four girls. 
Close was ordained deacon in 1820 and priest in 1821. He was successively curate of Church Lawford, near Rugby (1820-22), Willesden and Kingsbury (1822-4), and Holy Trinity Church, Cheltenham (1824-6). On the sudden death of Charles Jervis, Simeon appointed Close to succeed him as perpetual curate of Cheltenham parish church. He was also chaplain to Lord Decies from 1828, and rector of Hatford, Oxfordshire (1832-5). Close consolidated and expanded the work of Jervis, and as Cheltenham increased in population from 13,396 in 1821 to 35,051 in 1851 he developed the spa town into a leading evangelical centre, which Simeon described as 'a heaven upon earth' (W. Carus, 'Memoir of Charles Simeon', 1847, 783). Close erected four district churches each with its own infant and national schools. In 1853, with other evangelicals who objected to the outlook of the National Society, Close formed the Church of England Education Society. Educational establishments in Cheltenham were founded (like Cheltenham College in 1841) or revived (like Cheltenham grammar school) while Close was incumbent; he was actively involved in their running, considering them to be 'his right hand and his left hand' (A. Harper, ed., 'The History of the Cheltenham Grammar School', 1856, 43). Close was chairman of the directors of Cheltenham College, and its evangelical stance was lost only after the constitution was changed in 1862. After his death the Dean Close Memorial School (opened in 1886) continued the evangelical tradition no longer evident at Cheltenham College. Close's greatest and most lasting achievement was in the provision of teacher training. By the mid-1840s several hundred teachers had been trained in the Cheltenham schools, and in 1847 the Church of England Training School was opened. Three years later it moved into purpose-built premises which had been financed by fund-raising engagements mainly conducted by Close. 
Close appointed evangelicals as curates, as incumbents to the district churches, and as members of staff in the educational establishments. This brought a critical response: Alfred Tennyson, who lived for a short time in Cheltenham, called Close a parish pope, and those who objected to the activities of Close and his military friends referred to 'the Lieutenant-General Close brigade' ('Cheltenham Free Press', 25 Dec 1847). Yet the town became known as one of the most sober and religious places in the whole of the United Kingdom. Close had the support of at least half of the inhabitants, and his forceful preaching attracted large congregations and numerous female admirers. Many of his sermons were published (the first anonymously in 1822) and several of them were highly critical of Romanism within and outside the Church of England, most notably 'The Restoration of Churches is the Restoration of Popery' (1844) and his five November sermons, 'The Footsteps of Error' (1863). Close supported missions at home and overseas, was a convinced sabbatarian (particularly opposing Sunday trains), and was an outspoken critic of horse-racing and the stage. 
After a boating accident in Switzerland in 1855 Close became slightly paralysed and, in addition, suffered from gout, but in 1856 he was appointed dean of Carlisle in succession to A. C. Tait. In Carlisle Close took on a new lease of life and extended many of his earlier concerns, apart from education. As dean he worked with bishops Henry Montagu Villiers and Samuel Waldegrave, and they made Carlisle the most protestant of the English dioceses. In the city Close regarded himself as the 'rector of Carlisle' and as such took a lead in its affairs. He was concerned with the spiritual destitution of the poor and opened mission rooms and a temporary wooden church. He erected two city churches (St John's and St Mary's) and was involved in the erection of a third. At Cheltenham he had been known as the poor man's friend and, in Carlisle, alarm at the effects of drink among the working classes turned him into a convinced teetotaller. His concern for total abstinence earned him the sobriquet of the teetotal dean. His opposition to Anglo-Catholicism continued, and much of his energy was directed against the English Church Union. At the cathedral he dismissed the precentor, and in the city he led a movement to close an Anglo-Catholic oratory. He was an active member of the Church Association, and like his more conservative contemporaries was critical of the early Keswick Movement. 
Close was a big man, tall with a commanding voice. He modelled his preaching and teaching on those of Simeon and constantly expressed his indebtedness to him. Close had a good sense of humour and was extremely fond of his pets. Though he was much criticized, contemporaries admired his staunch commitment to the gospel in Cheltenham and Carlisle. 
On 22 December 1880 Close married Mary Antrim Hodgson (1806-1899), daughter of John Mabanke and widow of David Hodgson. He resigned as dean in August 1881 and settled in Penzance at Morrab House, where he died of heart failure on 18 December 1882. He was buried in Carlisle cemetery and a marble effigy was erected in the cathedral in 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 5704


Close, John (1816-1891), writer of doggerel, was born at Gunnerside, Swaledale, Yorkshire, and baptized there on 11 August 1816. He was the son of Jarvis Close (died 1853), a butcher and Wesleyan preacher, and his wife, Elizabeth. While assisting his father in the butchery trade, Close began to issue verse-tracts and fly-sheets in the 1830s, including 'The Satirist, or, Every Man in his Humour' (1833). In 1846 he established himself as a printer in Kirkby Stephen, and 'The Poetical Works... of John Close' appeared in 1860. 
Close's assiduity in writing verse about people and affairs in his neighbourhood attracted the patronage of the local nobility, despite his lack of any real literary talent. Owing to the support of Lord Carlisle, Lord Lonsdale, and other gentlemen, in April 1861 Close was awarded a civil-list pension of $50 on the recommendation of Lord Palmerston. The award provoked a question in the House of Commons ('Hansard 3', 162, 2 May 1861, 1375-6), and much amused comment in the London press; on 3 June 1861 it was cancelled, and by way of compensation Close received $100 from the Royal Bounty Fund. 
Close was married, and had a daughter and two sons. After the events of 1861 he continued to issue 'pamphlets of metrical balderdash, interspersed with documents relating to his wrongs' ('DNB'), selling them from a bookstall at Bowness-on-Windermere. Among his subsequent works were 'The Wise Man of Stainmore' (1864) and 'Bowness Church Bells and other Poems' (1872). He died at Kirkby Stephen, Westmorland, on 15 February 1891, and was buried in the local cemetery. He is referred to as Poet Close in 'Ferdinando and Elvira, or, The Gentle Pieman', one of W. S. Gilbert's 'Bab Ballads' (1869). 


@@@@@


doc= 5705


Close, Nicholas (d. 1452), bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, was probably a member of a minor Westmorland family, and most likely began his ecclesiastical career in the diocese of Carlisle. Stephen Close, a master of arts of Cambridge and a chaplain of Bishop Lumley of Carlisle in 1448, who acted as Nicholas's proctor in Rome in respect of both his episcopal promotions, was surely a kinsman. 
Close's career was established during his time at Cambridge University, where he was acting as a proctor in 1433-5 and obtained the degrees of BTh by March 1441 and DTh by 1445. More especially, he was nominated on 13 February 1441 by Henry VI as one of the first six fellows of King's College. The accounts of the college show Close's heavy personal involvement in the consolidation of the new foundation, and in 1447 he became its official master of works. On 22 March 1446 he had actually been appointed warden of the older King's Hall, remaining so until 1452, but on 30 November that year was appointed warden of King's College, or at least granted the reversion. By 22 March 1446 he had been appointed a royal chaplain, a sign of favour he still held on 9 January 1448, when the pope described him as 'continually commensal' with the king ('CEPR letters', 10.11). In early July 1449 Close was serving as chancellor of the university when he was commissioned to treat for a truce with the Scots. Probably on 30 January 1450 he was granted arms by the king 'for the laudable services rendered by him in many diverse ways, both in the work of building our college royal and in other matters' (Bouch, 117). 
Close was admitted as vicar of St Zachary's, Cambridge, on 16 May 1445. On 22 March 1446 he was granted the wardenship of St Nicholas's Hospital, Carlisle, for life, and he was archdeacon of Carlisle by 9 January 1448. The then bishop, Marmaduke Lumley, an impressive treasurer of the realm, was already being vigorously supported by the government for promotion to some greater see, at this time London. It can be no coincidence that Close was made archdeacon of Colchester in that diocese on 15 February 1449. Given the king's personal favour, his own local birth and preferment, and perhaps even the personal goodwill of his predecessor, Close's papal provision to Carlisle on 30 January 1450, when Lumley finally secured Lincoln, is no surprise. The temporalities were restored on 14 March, and his metropolitan, Cardinal Kemp, consecrated him at York House in Westminster on the following day. 
Close had secured permission from the pope to make formal visitations of his diocese by deputy for life and to receive procurations in cash, 'he being much hindered by the service of [the king], that he cannot do so in person, and it being more burdensome to be visited by the bishop than by his officials' ('CEPR letters', 10.57). If the second reason was brazenly disingenuous, the first may have been rendered redundant by circumstances even before the bull was issued, although Close's service to the king had not been political. A satirical ballad of the summer of 1450 calls upon the bishop of Carlisle to 'sing 'Credo' full sore, 'to such false traitors come foule ending'', but possibly its author still had Lumley in mind (Wright, 2.234). Close's whereabouts during 1450 are quite unknown; there is no sign of him in Cambridge, his diocese, or with the king. The loss of his Carlisle register hides his whereabouts throughout his episcopacy. In 1451, however, he was appointed a commissioner to investigate the performance of the conservators of the truce with Scotland, which suggests that he would be at least visiting his diocese. 
It is clear, however, that the king retained a high opinion of Close, who on 30 August 1452 was translated to the more considerable see of Coventry and Lichfield, with restitution of temporalities being made as early as 8 September. In the event, he barely lived to enjoy his advancement, and again no evidence survives of his initial administrative arrangements. He died on 24 November 1452, intestate. King's College none the less came to possess his library. As he had already given it a number of valuables, this would no doubt have been to his satisfaction. It had been the corner-stone of his achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 5706


Close, Thomas (1796-1881), antiquary, was born in Manchester on 12 February 1796, the son of John Close, a Manchester merchant, and his wife, Mary. He was a keen antiquary who specialized in genealogy and heraldry. He drew up elaborate pedigrees of the Tattershall, Wahe, and other prominent families. In several peerage cases he gave important evidence, including that of the Shrewsbury and Talbot succession in 1856-8. In 1866 he published 'St. Mary's Church, Nottingham: its probable architect and benefactors, with remarks on the heraldic window described by Thoroton'. Close was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, a chevalier of the order of Leopold in Belgium, and a member of other foreign orders. He was also grand master of the masonic province of Nottingham, and one of the founders and original members of the Reform Club (1836). For many years he served as the auditor of the London and South Western Railway. He died at his home in St James's Street, Nottingham, on 25 January 1881, three days after the death of his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 5707


Closse, George (fl. 1571-1621), Church of England clergyman, is of unknown origins. First recorded in 1571, when he matriculated as sizar at Trinity College, Cambridge, he was incorporated as BA from Oxford and proceeded MA in 1579. In 1581 he attempted to become vicar of Cuckfield, Sussex. This benefice had recently been the subject of much controversy, culminating in the deprivation of its incumbent, who was also Bishop Curteys's brother. Closse tried to take advantage of this by persuading Archbishop Grindal to present him on the grounds of the living's vacancy, even though Curteys had already presented one Alexander Southwick. Grindal's chancellor instituted Closse on 14 June 1581, but he was unable to take effective possession, and by 14 September 1582 he had been deprived, having also been summoned before the privy council. It is probable that Closse's next move was to the relatively wealthy parish of Black Torrington, Devon, in 1582, although his payment of first fruits did not commence until 1586. In the intervening years he appears to have been preacher at St Magnus the Martyr, London. Called upon at short notice to preach at Paul's Cross on 6 March 1586, Closse took the opportunity to reprove the lord mayor, Sir Wolstan Dixie, for partiality in a cause which he had been instrumental in placing before Dixie the previous Friday. Dixie summoned Closse to answer for this at Guildhall, and it was concluded that a complaint should be laid before Archbishop John Whitgift, who ordered Closse to preach again on 27 March to make submission. 
Before a large auditory Closse explained that his previous attack on bribery did not apply to the city magistrates, and explained the cause of his earlier outburst. He was seeking to help the wife of a Flemish resident who wanted to retain her servant boy, whom his mother wished to reclaim by sending a city officer to seize him: violent actions and words had ensued and with Closse's help all parties had gone to the magistrate's house, where the mother's case was upheld. It was this seeming injustice which had aroused Closse's earlier wrath, and he made no real apology in this later sermon. Although the six examining clergy agreed there was no further case against Closse, Dixie took the matter to privy council, which after some prompting judged that Closse had indeed insulted him and should be suspended from preaching in London diocese for a year. Closse's own account of the affair, prepared for a new edition of Holinshed's 'Chronicles', claims that he would have accepted the council's wish for a private reconciliation, but that Dixie insisted on pursuing the matter. 
In October 1585 Closse's wife bore him a daughter, who, however, died in June 1586; following this loss and his suspension, the couple retreated to his Devon parish, where eight more children were born, three of them dying in infancy. In 1606 Closse published a pamphlet, 'The Parricide Papist', describing a Catholic son's murder of his protestant father at Padstow. He also became incumbent of the neighbouring parish of Bradford in 1591, and offered employment there to another clergyman, William Rickard, allegedly as a bribe: Closse wished him to deny that while Rickard was a prisoner in Exeter gaol Closse had entered the prison in disguise to consort with Jane Beaton, another prisoner. Many statements were made in Star Chamber over this and related matters between 1608 and 1621. There were accusations by Closse at an assize sermon of venality among the judges and false charges against him aided by falsified letters, charges that Jane Beaton had a child by Closse, who had bought drugs to kill it. The result was Closse's deprivation and degradation in 1615 while in the Fleet prison under a two-year sentence. No more is known of Closse after his final answers in Star Chamber in 1621. While there are no proven links between the Cambridge graduate, the intruder at Cuckfield, the Paul's Cross preacher, and the minister of Black Torrington, the name and provocative behaviour would seem to be a common factor. 


@@@@@


doc= 5708


Closterman, John (1660-1711), history and portrait painter, was born in Osnabruck, a prince-bishopric in north Germany, from 1648 ruled alternately by a Roman Catholic bishop and a Hanoverian Lutheran prince. 'Mr. Tiburing', a fellow townsman, gave George Vertue Closterman's place and year of birth (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.44). Houbraken stated in his biography of 'Kloosterman' that he was born at Hanover in 1656 (Houbraken, 3.284). This may be the birth date of John Baptist Closterman ['see below'], John's brother, also a painter, who was alive in 1713 when Houbraken visited England. 
In his outline biography of John Closterman, Vertue gives his death date as '171..' and only once cites 'Bapt. Closterman [face painter]', as a subscriber to the 1711 London Academy (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.140, 6.168). Certainly after Houbraken's biography John and John Baptist Closterman were conflated. This became apparent only in 1964 with the publication of John's will leaving the bulk of his estate to 'my Deare and Loveing Brother John Baptist' (Stewart, 'John and John Baptist Closterman', 307). 
John Closterman was the 'son of a painter' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.44), perhaps Hermann Cloisterman, elected burgher of Osnabruck on 22 December 1656, who died on 27 January 1682 and whose wife died on 14 June 1669. Tiburing and John Closterman went 'in... 1679. to Paris, where they staid about 2 years & wrought for de Troyes [Francois de Troy]'; 'by some of [Closterman's] portraits done after his first coming into England, it is very apparent he had much studyed [de Troy's] manner' (ibid., 1.44, 3.29). In de Troy's 'Marie-Anne de Bourbon, Princesse de Conti' (Musee des Augustins, Toulouse), we see the draperies with flickering highlights, ivory flesh tones, and an elegant sprightliness, all characteristics of Closterman's best early English work. 
Doubtless Closterman and Tiburing went to England because of the death of Sir Peter Lely, principal painter to Charles II. Vertue states that they came in 1681 (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.61). He also mentions Closterman's portrait of John Saunders, master of the Painter-Stainers' Company, London, dated 1680, implying that the painter may have arrived late in that year (ibid., 2.30; Rogers, no. 84). The picture survives, but is in poor condition. A signed pair of oval busts of an unknown man and woman of 1682 (ibid., nos. 109, 120) and the three-quarter-length 'Sir William Petty' ('c'.1683; no. 76) show the impact of the dourness of late works by Lely. 
Closterman went into partnership with John Riley: 'had not Riley died [in 1691] he [Closterman] might have been in debt & the other grown rich because Riley did 10 heads to one whole lenght. or two half lenghts. & for each head Closterman was only to have 30 shillings for the Drapery' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.61). This garbled account seems improbable. Closterman knew the portraiture market, and later displayed a shrewd head for business. There are independent works by him through the 1680s; and in 1688-9 the painter Jacques Parmentier (1658-1730) did work (presumably drapery painting) for him (ibid., 3.46). 
Yet the partnership seems confirmed by the composite character of portraits like the three-quarter-length of Katherine Elliott (died 1688) -- in the Royal Collection -- described in a Queen Anne inventory as 'Ryley ye Head Closterman ye Drapery' (Millar, no. 331). Also in the Royal Collection is the remarkable full-length of another royal servant, Bridget Holmes (1686), waving a broom at a backstairs page-boy, who dodges behind a curtain. The humour recalls Dutch genre pictures. The 'Bridget Holmes' bears a strengthened Riley 'signature', yet as Christopher Lloyd has noted: 'the drawing is unusually accurate for [Riley]' (Lloyd, no. 33). The figures have volume and weight and move easily in space whereas Riley's signed three-quarter-length portrait of a scullion (Christ Church, Oxford) shows a flat, cramped static figure. The 'Bridget Holmes' also contains an urn with a relief of dancers borrowed from Polidoro da Caravaggio, and an unidentified relief of Roman soldiers on the plinth below it. 
The composition, forms, learned allusions, and humour of the 'Bridget Holmes' seem beyond Riley's powers. But they are found in Closterman's works, such as his mid-1680s full-length '1st Earl Poulett' (Paul Mellon Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut; Rogers, no. 78). Dressed elegantly like the royal page, Closterman's smiling boy stands in a landscape, nonchalantly cradling a flint-lock musket, his dog at his side. The picture recalls Lely's Arcadian child portraiture, but Closterman uses contemporary dress. Yet the classical portico behind suggests that the painter also knew the mythological origin of hunting: 'Game and hounds are the invention of gods, of Apollo and Artemis' (Xenophon, 367). 
Closterman's three-quarter-length 'John Dryden' (priv. coll.) was painted about 1683. Behind the bulky, powerfully modelled, smiling sitter is a relief of Poetry being garlanded, an adaptation from Cesare Ripa's allegorical handbook 'Iconologia'. The painting was engraved as a small illustration in a 1709 edition of Dryden's 'Virgil' (nearly a decade after Dryden's death) as the work of Riley. But its quality, style, and learned accessories seem more consistent with Closterman. 
Closterman's first piece 'that gain'd much Credit' was his three-quarter-length portrait of Grinling Gibbons, the woodcarver, and his wife, Elizabeth (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.61), now known only from John Smith's mezzotint (1691; Rogers, no. 38). It is a complex composition, with an elaborate curtain, dramatically foreshortened columns, and a relief of putti (whose meaning is enigmatic). Yet there is lively informality in the crossing diagonal poses of the sitters. 
An oblong three-quarter-length (an unusual format) portrait of Mary Morrice, wife of Sir John Carew, bt (Antony House, Cornwall), presently attributed to Riley, is surely also by Closterman. The lighting, drapery forms, learned accessories, and diagonal pose recall the Gibbons portrait. Lady Carew leans on a draped funeral urn carved with cupids, one caressing a dog (symbol of faith); she grasps part of a cupid-and-dolphin (the latter a symbol of resurrection) fountain at the right. Her mourning posture and the images of consolation suggest that the portrait was commissioned after her husband's death in 1692. 
The three-quarter-length portrait of Sir Christopher Wren (Royal Society, London) was once attributed to Riley. But its easy, dynamic composition, elegant drapery forms, firm modelling, and (again enigmatic) putto relief proclaim it as Closterman's work of the mid-1690s. Closterman's portrait of Henry Purcell is lost, but known from an engraving of 1698 and a powerful black chalk, life-size head study (NPG), the only identifiable drawing by Closterman. The large-scale head study was reintroduced into England by Kneller in the 1680s, and Closterman's use of this type shows contact with his studio. Both artists came from north Germany; and by 1692, symbolic of his new eminence, Closterman had moved into The Piazza, Covent Garden, where Kneller also rented a house from 1682 to 1703. 
In 1689 Riley was nominated steward of the St Luke's Club feast, an occasion founded by Van Dyck 'for men of the highest character in Arts and Gentlemen Lovers of Art' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.120) ['see 'Society of the Virtuosi of St Luke]. But Riley 'then being much indisposed of an illness of which he died [March 1691; his place] was supplyd by his friend and companion Mr. John Closterman' (Vertue, BL, Add. MS 39167B, fol. 75). 
Closterman inherited much of Riley's clientele, including Charles Seymour, sixth duke of Somerset, who, says Vertue, 'took Closterman with him [to auctions] to have his judgment on the pictures' (Vertue, 'Note books', 4.21). On Closterman's advice the duke bought a Guercino for 200 guineas 'when Guineas was raising [from 20] to 26 shillings a piece' (ibid.). When the picture was delivered the auctioneer demanded more money, which the duke refused to pay. Closterman himself bought the painting but Somerset 'became his greatest enemy and from him went to [Michael] Dahl' (ibid.). Of the duke and his duchess (the latter with a child) Closterman painted full-lengths, and also a large, lively group portrait of their children (Petworth House, Sussex; Rogers, nos. 89, 90, 92). Although these works have been said to be of the mid-1690s, they must have been completed by 1694, the year the guinea peaked in value. 
Of 1696 is Closterman's 'Children of John Taylor' (NPG; Rogers, no. 97), a picture of rhythmic grace and ravishing colour: harmonies of green and gold, deep orange and silver, mauve and grey. The colour shows Closterman's French training but the composition reflects Van Dyck's 'Pembroke Family'. The picture illustrates the family motto: 'Fame is sweeter than a white rose'. The oldest boy, Brook, is seated at the left (the heraldic right), being crowned by two sisters who hold trumpets of fame; another sister distributes white roses. Brook Taylor holds a recorder, doubtless an allusion to his grandfather Nathaniel Taylor, recorder (judge) of Chester. The Taylor group demonstrates the period's love of witty allegory, and Closterman's light-hearted brilliance at expressing it. 
In 1699 Samuel Pepys named only two artists for his proposed gift of a picture of the mathematician Dr Wallis to the Bodleian Library, Oxford, 'Sir Godfry Kneller' and 'Cloysterman' ('Letters and the Second Diary', 274). (In the event, Kneller was chosen.) Closterman's eminence in literary-artistic circles is further demonstrated by his subscription to Dryden's 'Virgil' (1697). The 100 first subscribers, mostly nobility and gentry, paid 5 guineas, and each received the dedication of a plate inscribed with his name and arms. Plate 85 was dedicated to 'Mr John Closterman'; his 'arms' (which also appear on his 1702 bookplate; Franks Collection, BM) show a unicorn rampant. They were perhaps 'canting' arms, wittily alluding to the painter's name and place of birth. Closterman (literally cloistered man) is close to the word 'Closterbruder', German for monk, whose vow of chastity would make the unicorn an appropriate emblem. Yet the unicorn, save for its horn, recalls the heraldic white horse of Hanover. Kneller was the only other artist who was a first subscriber. Both were 'gatherers' of second subscribers, being indebted to Dryden for publishing his 'Parallel between Painting and Poetry' together with his own translation of Roger De Piles's French version of C.-A. Du Fresnoy's 'De arte graphica' in 1695. Second subscribers paid 2 guineas and just had their names listed. 
According to Vertue, 'having a desire further to distinguish himself in the Art [Closterman] went to Spain' (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.139), the first artist from England to go there. He is documented in Madrid between November 1698 and April 1699 in letters from his host, the British resident, the Hon. Alexander Stanhope, to his son James, afterwards Earl Stanhope (Stewart, 'John and John Baptist Closterman', 307). (As 'Col. J. Stanhope' he was a second subscriber to Dryden's 'Virgil'.) As a present for James, Closterman painted the father, full-length in Spanish court dress, with a page (compositionally a re-working of the 'Bridget Holmes'). Through the resident Closterman gained introduction to court, where he painted, in competition with Luca Giordano, a dwarf, and full-lengths of Carlos II and his queen, Maria Ana of Neuberg, 'in a rich hunting dress, a gun in her hand', a present for his host (ibid.). Sadly only the portrait of Alexander Stanhope survives (Chevening, Kent). Also missing are letters which Closterman wrote to Richard Graham 'concerning paintings in Spanish palaces' (Vertue, 'Note books', 5.61). 
From Madrid Closterman travelled to Rome, stopping at Florence, where he wrote on 19 August 1699 to Lord Ashley, a friend of James Stanhope's, and also a second subscriber to Dryden's 'Virgil'. Ashley had asked Closterman to obtain statues of virtues for a monument, probably to his grandfather, the first earl of Shaftesbury. Closterman said that he had been unable to find anyone 'in all Lombardy... for your purpose' because 'the[y] all want drawing'. However, he hoped to be in Rome 'the first of october where I shall in mediatly see for a master for your ocasion... I hope to stay in rome six mounths and to see them [the statues] done' (O'Connell, 159). 
Closterman wrote to Lord Ashley again from Rome ('where I did long for these manny years'), enclosing drawings of Prudence and Justice by the sculptor Domenico Giudi, but was lukewarm about them. The painter confessed that 'my eyes see so many noble things of the ancients that I cant like nothing else', although he was also enthusiastic about Bernini's works. Ashley had evidently written 'his thoughts for a family pictor, and that I shall perform it as sune I come home... and to goe into the contry is better still then we shall have howly our thought together' (Wind, 67-8). 
In Rome, Closterman met the leading painter Carlo Maratta (perhaps through Kneller, who had studied with him in the 1670s) and painted Maratta's portrait (Richard Graham's sale, 6 March 1712; Rogers, no. 63). Closterman gained access to Maratta's drawings collection, which included 1800 sheets by Domenichino (then considered to be a second Raphael) and drawings by the Carracci and Raphael himself. Furthermore, Closterman negotiated the purchase of this remarkable collection for a deposit of 1000 scudi, and 4000 scudi on receipt of the drawings. By a dramatic 'avviso' (28 April 1703) Pope Clement XI (Albani) bought the drawings himself, refunding the deposit to the 'inglese'. Houbraken told the story in 1718, stating that Closterman was acting for an 'English Lord' (probably either the second duke of Devonshire or Lord Somers; Houbraken, 2.236-7); Jonathan Richardson also published an account in 1724. Despite his failure Closterman deserves great credit for his enterprise in furthering the taste for old master drawings, then still relatively novel in England. In 1762 James Adams bought the Albani collection for George III, since when it has been one of the great jewels of the Royal Collection. 
John Closterman is recorded on 23 July 1700 in the day book of the third earl of Shaftesbury (as Lord Ashley had become in November 1699) at his Dorset estate, Wimborne St Giles. Vertue says that Closterman: 'went to Italy returned to England brought over several fine pictures. & went again to Italy. & made an additional Collection to his Pictures. came back & livd with great splendor at his house in Covent Garden haveing improvd his Fortune [considerably]. (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.139-40)' Closterman's second Italian trip is confirmed by an auction catalogue of a sale of eighty-nine lots of pictures on 26 December 1702 at the painter's house in Covent Garden. Had Closterman brought the pictures from Rome in 1700, it is inconceivable that he would have waited for nearly two years to sell them. To obtain the latter collection of pictures, he must have gone to Rome again, probably in the summer of that year. 
John Closterman was doubtless at Lord Shaftesbury's Dorset estate in July 1700 to paint the 'family pictor' referred to in the painter's letter from Rome, a double full-length portrait of the earl and his brother Maurice (NPG; Rogers, no. 86) dressed in neo-Greek tunics and caps. The brothers' pose derives from the Hellenistic sculpture of Castor and Pollux (mythical twins of transcendent virtue), now in the Prado, Madrid, but then in the Odeschalchi collection, Rome. 
Closterman also painted separate full-lengths of Lord Shaftesbury and his brother (priv. coll.; Rogers, nos. 87, 5). The earl in a gown, representing contemplative life, holds a book; Maurice (active life) appears in a landscape, flintlock in hand, with a groom below holding a horse. The portraits are linked by a figure behind Shaftesbury carrying the peer's parliamentary robes, illustrating the Neoplatonic doctrine that 'active righteousness is only the prerequisite of contemplative illumination' (E. Panofsky, 'Studies in Iconology: Humanistic Themes in the Art of the Renaissance', 1962, 192). The robes may commemorate a rapid journey to London which the earl made in February 1701 to vote on the second partition treaty. Shaftesbury leans on a plinth on which are more volumes, two labelled Plato, and another Xenophon, who wrote treatises in praise of hunting (noted above), but also on horsemanship and statesmanship (the 'Cyropodeia', which Maurice had translated). The twin portraits develop a theme begun in England with Van Dyck's 'Lords Digby and Russell' (also indebted to the 'Castor and Pollux') which Closterman must have known. 
Another picture, also possibly painted for Lord Shaftesbury, is the three-quarter-length Lady Ashe as St Cecilia (priv. coll.; Rogers, no. 4), startling in its grisaille colouring -- sober greys and browns, subtly relieved by pinks. Vertue says that 'about the beginning of Queen Annes Reign [Closterman] lost him self much; especially as to colouring. for from a strong lively manner. he fell into a grey uncertain colour entirely disagreeable' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.29). Actually Closterman was following Pliny the younger's doctrine of a restricted palette -- an idea cited with approval in the seventeenth century by Junius, Kneller, and Lord Shaftesbury, and later by Benjamin Haydon. Yet among English baroque painters, only Closterman seems to have applied the doctrine consistently throughout a whole painting. 
In his fourth treatise Shaftesbury revealed his unbounded enthusiasm for Closterman. He dismissed the 'face painter... (as Cooper, Sir Godfrey Kneller, Riley, etc.)', because the patron (supposedly) saw everything -- 'nothing when their back is turned': 'But when a subject is given to a real painter, a heroic great subject: Good heavens! what toil! What study!... What restless nights! What... 'rabiosa silentia' [mad silences]! Here remember what said of Michelangelo. Domenichino... so my painter [Closterman] going into his picture when in the dark and standing long before it. (Shaftesbury, 'Second Characters' 131-2)' Vertue says that: 'being a Man of great Ambition. [Closterman] was by some disgust against Sir G Kneller. sett up by a party of his [Closterman's] Freinds in Oppossition. & recommended to... Queen [Anne] -- [at Guildhall a large Picture painted by him] the 'Duke of Marlbro'' [a large Picture on Horseback with Aligroriall figures] whose pictures he drew & many other people of Quality. (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.139)' The London Guildhall commission was won in May 1702 in competition with four other painters, including Kneller and Jonathan Richardson. Perhaps because of Closterman's second Italian trip, the painting was not delivered until February 1703 (Stewart, 'John and John Baptist Closterman', 308-9). It is known only from a three-quarter-length studio version (NPG) and John Faber junior's mezzotint. From these it seems to have been a stiff, even clumsy composition, showing the queen standing in robes, holding the sceptre and orb. Yet it impressed the Dutch painter J. C. Weyerman, who was in England in 1709 and later wrote enthusiastically that the viewer 'heard the golden fabrics and other costly silk stuffs crackle' (Weyerman, 3.190). 
In October 1703 Kneller nearly lost another commission to Closterman. The diarist Luttrell noted that the archduke Charles was visiting and 'Mr. Closterman, the famous picture-drawer, is goeing to Portsmouth to take his picture' (Stewart, 'John and John Baptist Closterman', 309). In the event the archduke sat to Kneller (the portrait is in the Royal Collection), but the fact that it could even be mooted that this distinguished visitor would be painted by anyone other than the principal painter shows the seriousness of Closterman's rivalry. 
The equestrian 'Duke of Marlborough' cited by Vertue was engraved (head and shoulders only) with the date 1705 and is now at the Chelsea Royal Hospital, London, having been given first in 1852 to the London Drapers' Company by 'Mr William Lyle', when it was stated to have been painted for 'a Duke of Buckingham' (Rogers, no. 66). Perhaps this was the second duke of Buckingham and Chandos (son of a daughter of the last duke of Chandos) who went bankrupt in 1848 and sold many of his possessions at Stowe. The 1725 inventory of Cannons, the Chandos house, lists only one picture on the staircase wall, 'the Duke of Marlborough by Closterman' (Simon, 'English Baroque Sketches'), almost certainly the equestrian portrait. 
The design of the 'Marlborough' derives partly from Rubens's 'George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham' (owned by Closterman's client Sir Francis Child) though vertical, rather than horizontal, and more open and airy. The colour, much of it pale, anticipates the rococo, although the handling of paint has none of the brilliance of Kneller's at this date. Above at the right of Marlborough flies Fame; directly above him is an eagle with a laurel wreath; at the left is Victory, extending a palm to the duke and a profile medallion of Queen Anne. The last motif was a French practice, known as 'le portrait en tableau' (a portrait in a painting). 
About 1705 Closterman painted the 'Unknown Hunter' (priv. coll.; Wilton, no. 22), a full-length wrongly inscribed as by Kneller, and representing the duke of Marlborough. The design is a reworking of the portrait of Maurice Shaftesbury, but the pose is more energetic and the lighting more dramatic. The sublime, wild, brightly lit rocky scenery derives from Salvator Rosa, whom Closterman had copied in Italy for Sir John Cropley. Similar rocky backgrounds occur in Closterman's 'Duke of Argyll' (1704; priv. coll.) and another three-quarter-length, of about the same date, identified as his work only towards the end of the twentieth century, probably representing Sir Richard Temple, afterwards Lord Cobham (Fairfax House, York). 
The enthusiasm for Rosa may have been inspired by Henry Cooke ('c'.1642-1700), who had been Rosa's pupil. Cooke made his 'loveing friend John Closterman' an executor of his will; Closterman in turn named Henry Cooke junior an executor of his own will. Closterman's sale in 1702 included three Rosas, two of which, nos. 17 and 26, because of the subjects and sizes, are almost certainly the 'Drunkenness of Noah' (priv. coll.; Salerno, no. 223) and 'Landscape with Bathers' (Yale University Art Gallery, New Haven, Connecticut; Salerno, no. 147). In furthering the taste for Rosa, Closterman was again in the van; Rosa was to become extremely popular with English collectors as the century progressed. 
On 6 August 1705 Closterman advertised that: 'being obliged at Christmas next to go to Hanover, and afterwards to several Courts of Germany; so that it is uncertain whether he will ever return to England. Such Persons of Quality and others, as have lately sat to him, are desired to take notice, that their pictures will be finished out of hand, and deliver'd as they shall best please to order them.('Daily Courant', 6 Aug 1705; Ashton, 281)' In April 1706 Closterman advertised again that he, 'being oblig'd to leave England very suddenly, will sell all his pictures by Auction' (ibid.). 
Closterman's decision to go to Hanover may have been connected with events there. In August 1705 the duke of Celle died, his heir being his nephew George Louis, the elector prince of Hanover, whose increased income led to further artistic patronage. As a Hanoverian, Closterman may have hoped for a share of this. Whether he went, and for how long, is unknown. 
However, Closterman did paint Richard Newdegate, who had died aged less than a year on 18 March 1706. The child is shown at length, asleep on a cushion, with angels' heads above (priv. coll.; Rogers, no. 71). The design appears to derive from an engraving by Pieter Jode the younger, after Artemisia Gentileschi's 'Child Sleeping' (Bissell, fig. 113). 
In 1708 Closterman acted again as steward for the St Luke's Club feast (Vertue, BL, Add. MS 39167, fol. 75'v'). One of Closterman's latest datable pictures is a portrait of Mathew Prior (priv. coll.), presently called 'School of Kneller'. It is a sombre-coloured yet boldly lit work, showing the poet in cap and open-necked shirt, with his hand on an upright volume labelled 'PRIOR', presumably his 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1709). He continued his picture-dealing career, advertising a sale for as late as 28 February 1711 (Ashton, 281). 
Closterman's last days were tragic, something hinted at by Vertue: 'sometime before he died he was a little delirious & [not rightly in his senses]' (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.140). Closterman had buried his wife, Hannah, on 27 January 1702. Later, according to J. C. Weyerman, he took a beautiful mistress who, while he was away in the country, robbed him of his valuables and disappeared, actions which drove the painter into madness. He was buried in St Paul's Church, Covent Garden, on 24 May 1711. His will of 19 August 1710 was probated on 11 June 1711. It shows that he had a sister 'Margareta Catherina Gruter', wife of his 'Servant' (assistant) 'Philipus ffranciscus fferdinandus Gruter'. Probably the Gruters lived in the Closterman house in Covent Garden. Another sister, 'Anna Maria Muino', was 'liveing at the Hague' (Stewart, 'John and John Baptist Closterman', 306). John Closterman left his assistant $100 and each sister $500, the residue of the estate going to his brother 
John Baptist Closterman is known from two full-lengths, '1st Duke of Rutland' ('c'.1703), signed 'J. Baptist Closterman', and the portrait of the second duke, signed 'J. Baptista Closterman, Pinxit Ano 1703' (both priv. coll.). The draperies of the former are painted in a coarsened version of John Closterman's style, and neither shows the sense of structure or handling of space seen in John Closterman's work. John Baptist was clearly a very inferior painter. 
Several other documents mention John Baptist Closterman, the earliest recording him in July 1700, with his brother, at Wimborne St Giles. With Margaret, his wife, he had a daughter, Catherine, who was baptized at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 15 November 1711. The month before, in Amsterdam, Egbert and Abraham Edens, art dealers, were instructed by 'Jan Baptiste Closterman painter' of London to go to the house of Matheus Crackau, open some boxes left there for safe keeping by 'Mons. Frans de Gruter also painter at London', and make a list of the contents (Bredius). The pictures listed are mostly copies after Poussin and Jacques Courtois, known as Borgognone, and Closterman portraits. The latter included a copy of a portrait of the 'dead Closterman'. This was perhaps after one of the self-portraits recorded by Vertue: 'Mr John Closterman his picture painted by himself in the hands of Mr. Cope. Another in possession of Mr. Tiburin' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.29). No portrait of either brother is known to have survived. 
John Closterman's tragic end presaged that of his reputation. For over 250 years his identity and 'oeuvre' were conflated with those of his brother. John Closterman's early partnership with John Riley further confused the situation. From late twentieth-century research it is clear that John Closterman was an extremely fine painter, with considerable range. The '1st Earl Poulett', the Shaftesbury portraits, and the 'Unknown Hunter' are equal to Kneller's best full-lengths. The Chelsea 'Duke of Marlborough' is the only equestrian portrait of the period to rival Kneller's, while Closterman's 'Children of John Taylor' is undoubtedly the finest group portrait of the period. Closterman also deserves recognition for his enterprise as an art dealer, especially for furthering an English taste for Salvator Rosa, and for his near acquisition of the Maratta drawings collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 5709


Clotworthy, John, first Viscount Massereene (d. 1665), politician, was the son and heir of Sir Hugh Clotworthy (died 1630), descended from the Devon family of that name, and Mary, daughter of Roger Langford of co. Antrim, Ireland. His father, a soldier-adventurer of Massereene, co. Antrim, served as sheriff of the county, and his mother was the 'worthy matron' from whom Clotworthy appears to have inherited his religious principles (Adair, 191). Nothing is known of his education but he was a representative of the new generation of settlers in Ireland and was knighted in 1626. He was closely associated with the plantation of Ulster and his kinsmen Edward Rowley and Tristram Beresford were two of the leading agents for the investment of the guilds of London. Clotworthy himself owned a 61-year lease of the Drapers' proportion, and possessed an extensive estate in Antrim, which county he represented in the Dublin parliament of 1634. Before 1643 he married Margaret ('fl'. 1638-1683), daughter of Roger Jones, first Viscount Ranelagh. This union confirmed his position among the New English opponents of Viscount Wentworth, lord deputy of Ireland. His father-in-law was a close political ally of Richard Boyle, earl of Cork. His wife, like Sir John himself, was a presbyterian, and suffered imprisonment at the lord deputy's hands for her beliefs. Clotworthy was a leading patron of hardline protestant ministers, and was said to have once remarked that 'the conversion of the papists in Ireland was only to be effected by the 'Bible' in one hand and the sword in the other' ('DNB'). His close friendship with leading Scottish preachers and planters, and his refusal to relinquish his private monopoly of licensing taverns, wines, and whiskey in counties Down and Antrim, set him and Wentworth further at odds. Their differences only deepened when the lord deputy refused to grant Clotworthy a commission in the company of horse previously commanded by his father, aggravating a long-running grievance which Clotworthy nurtured in the face of repeated failure on the part of the government to make good on promises of a military command. So uncomfortable was his situation by 1635 that Clotworthy apparently discussed emigration to Massachusetts with John Winthrop's son. In 1637 he put together a bid for control over the Londonderry plantation which had been forfeited to the crown in 1635. Blocked by Wentworth nothing came of it, and ultimately Clotworthy found himself stripped of his interest in the Drapers' lands to boot. 
Clotworthy's landed interests in Ireland brought him into close contact with Scottish presbyterian interests, and it was reported by Wentworth in 1638 that when Clotworthy went to the king to promote his scheme for the resettlement of Londonderry he had in fact travelled first to Edinburgh 'to see what becomes of the kirk' (Donald, 191). It would appear that he acted as a conduit between the Scottish covenanters and the puritan circles in England by helping to organize the opposition to the personal rule. When eventually he made it to London, he wrote letters of intelligence -- and, at the behest of his English contacts, advice and encouragement -- to his friends at Edinburgh, some of which were intercepted. Clotworthy was back in Dublin in August 1639 and in the following year he was returned to the Short Parliament for the Cornish borough of Bossiney (perhaps on the interest of Francis Russell, earl of Bedford). In September 1640 he took a prominent role in organizing the circulation of the petition of the twelve peers calling on the king to summon a new parliament. In November he took his seat in the Long Parliament as one of the representatives for the Essex borough of Maldon, possibly on the interest of the local magnate Robert Rich, the earl of Warwick. In February and March 1641 he lobbied hard for the appointment of Warwick's half-brother, the earl of Holland, as lord deputy of Ireland in place of Wentworth, now the earl of Strafford. 
Within days of the Long Parliament's sitting, on 3 November 1640 Clotworthy had seconded his kinsman Pym's motion for the appointment of a committee of the whole house to consider Irish affairs, and had given a speech alerting parliament to the dangers threatening from Ireland, warning that a popish army was 'ready to march where I know not' (D'Ewes, 13-14). He 'became the principal intermediary between the English, Scottish and Irish malcontents' (Ohlmeyer, 'Strafford', 226) and was very prominent in the attack on Strafford, helping to orchestrate the case against him while testifying himself several times, particularly in connection with Strafford's attempt to improve Irish linen manufacture. Archbishop Laud dubbed him 'a firebrand brought from Ireland to inflame this kingdom' (ibid.). The Irish plot to seize Dublin Castle was discovered when an attempt was made to recruit Clotworthy's own servant, Owen O'Connolly. Sir John adventured $1000 for the recovery of Ireland and in 1645 he sat on the parliamentary committee for the relief of that kingdom. He fought against the rebels in person at the head of his own regiment in 1642-3, relieving the English held captive at Moneymore, co. Londonderry, and capturing Mountjoy, Tyrone. His men were also involved in an atrocity which was investigated at the Restoration, when Clotworthy justified the execution of 100 MacDonnell rebels on the grounds that many of his troops were Campbells, the clan's sworn and unswerving enemies. 
In 1643 Clotworthy moved the inclusion of Ireland within the solemn league and covenant. But having helped engineer the Anglo-Scottish alliance he became disaffected from the war party leadership when command of the British forces in Ireland was entrusted to the Scotsman Robert Monro. From 1645 Clotworthy sat on the committee of both kingdoms and took part in the prosecution of Laud, goading the former archbishop on the very scaffold where he died. In October 1646 he went to Dublin to negotiate with Ormond for the city's surrender to parliament, but returned unsuccessful in February 1647. He was a commissioner to negotiate with the army that spring. It was he who brought to the Commons a copy of the soldiers' petition which led to the declaration of dislike and the New Model Army's entry into politics. His association with the presbyterian faction at Westminster brought down on him charges of embezzlement, obstructing the lord lieutenancy of Viscount Lisle, and treacherous dealings with Ormond, as part of the army's impeachment of the eleven members. Clotworthy and his fellow targets sought unsuccessfully to vindicate themselves. Taking flight for the Netherlands, he was intercepted just outside Calais by a frigate under parliamentary command and brought back to Dover. However, he was then 'dismissed, and reached the Continent in safety' (Reid, 2.81). On 28 January 1648 he was disabled from sitting in the Commons any longer. But his expulsion, and the election of a successor, Henry Mildmay, were reversed on 26 June amid the presbyterian revanche which coincided with the second civil war and Clotworthy's return to England. Purged once more in December, his expulsion was renewed and he was subsequently placed under arrest on a charge of complicity in the Scottish invasion the previous summer. He remained a prisoner until November 1651, and after his release lay very low. In 1653 he was living at St Martin-in-the-Fields, and that year over 11,000 acres of the forfeited estates of the marquess of Antrim were allotted to him in requital of his original investment in the Irish adventure. He then promptly doubled his landholdings, principally in the baronies of Massereene and Dunluce, by the purchase of further lots in the latter. In all, he spent $5441 acquiring the greatest estate in the county. On 6 August 1654 Cromwell appointed him one of the committee established to determine differences among the adventurers for Irish land, and in the same year Clotworthy personally interceded with Fleetwood and the council at Dublin on behalf of the presbyterian ministers of Antrim and Down. This initiated a series of talks which resulted, after the arrival of Henry Cromwell, in the ministers' acceptance of government salaries in November 1655. The tide of affairs now turned. Clotworthy resumed prominence on the county benches of Antrim and Down. In 1655 his presentation to livings in Antrim marked the revival of lay patronage in the appointment of ministers in Ireland. In 1656 he proposed the establishment of a college at Antrim -- perhaps a reflection of his association with the fringes of the Hartlib circle -- to be headed by a prominent Scottish presbyterian. 
Clotworthy was instrumental in promoting the Stuart restoration. Elected to represent co. Antrim in the Irish convention, in March 1660 he was sent to England (where the council of state had itself appointed him a commissioner for the government of Ireland) to represent the interests of the adventurers and the soldiers settled in the kingdom. He proposed an act confirming all estates of soldiers and adventurers as they stood on 7 May 1659. The order that he return to Ireland to take up his responsibilities there was a rebuff for this proposal. Back in Dublin he obtained a new appointment as a messenger to England. Once there he sought to influence the drawing of the convention's 'Act of Indemnity and Oblivion' in order to exclude from its provisions all Catholic rebels in Ireland, thereby tying the hands of a monarch he and others rightly suspected of a desire to indulge influential papists in Ireland such as the marquess of Antrim. On 21 November 1660 Clotworthy was created Viscount Massereene and Baron of Loughneagh. On 1 December he entered the Irish privy council. He was a commissioner for the court of claims, but was unable to prevent a ruling in 1663 restoring Antrim's estates to him. Riots in the region of Dunluce ensued, possibly instigated by Massereene's kinsman Tristram Beresford. Massereene remained resolute in his opposition to the restoration of episcopacy 'though he knew well that his vote would signify nothing towards it' ('DNB'), and staunchly defended the presbyterians of Ulster before his colleagues in the privy council at Dublin. Clarendon commended his sincerity, which was unquestionable, as also his 'generous and jovial' character, and his loyalty to the royal service ('DNB'). Massereene was 'custos rotulorum' in co. Londonderry in 1663, and became a fellow of the Royal Society on 20 May that year. He and the earl of Anglesey held a contract for the reclamation of marsh lands around Dublin, and shortly before his death Massereene secured for the town of Antrim the right to hold fairs, and to return two burgesses to the Irish parliament. He died at Dublin on 23 September 1665; his widow was still alive in 1683. Their only child, Mary, married Sir John Skeffington, bt, to whom the title of Massereene descended in 1665. 


@@@@@


doc= 5710


Clough, Anne Jemima (1820-1892), college head and promoter of women's education, was born in Liverpool on 20 January 1820, the third child and only daughter of James Butler Clough (1784-1844), cotton merchant, and his wife, Anne (died 1860), daughter of John Perfect. In 1822 the family moved to Charleston, South Carolina, as her father endeavoured to build up his business; Anne wrote vividly of a lonely childhood there in recollections set down for the memoir of her brother, the poet Arthur Hugh Clough (1819-1861). When the family returned to Liverpool in 1836 she settled into the conventional pattern of visiting the poor and assisting at local day and Sunday schools. In 1841 the failure of her father's business led her to try keeping a small girls' school on a more systematic basis. 
Anne Clough herself had been educated entirely at home by her mother. In part because of this, she developed a passionate and lifelong concern with processes of teaching, a concern in which her brother encouraged her, although when working with younger children she doubted her capacity to keep either order or her temper. In 1849 she spent three months in London as an observer, at first the Borough Road and then the Home and Colonial training schools. She would have liked to remain in London but her mother clung to familiar surroundings, and Anne returned to Liverpool to work with an informal, domestic group of middle-class pupils. In 1852 they moved to the Lake District, to Eller How just outside Ambleside. Once again Anne gathered round her a group of pupils, including Mary Arnold, the future novelist Mrs Humphry Ward. The group developed gradually the more formal structure of a school, with between twenty and thirty pupils, mostly day, with boys as well as girls to the age of eleven, and girls to the age of sixteen. Anne was joined by an assistant, Mrs Fleming, who took over the school when she left; it continued at least until the end of the century. 
Mrs Clough died in 1860. A legacy from her brother to Anne had removed financial anxieties, but family duty of another kind now intervened. The early death of Arthur Hugh Clough in November 1861 left his widow, Blanche, with three small children, and in 1862 Anne gave up the house by Ambleside and went to live with her sister-in-law to help with the upbringing of the children. 
The main family bases were the Clough house in London and Combe Hurst in Surrey, the house of Blanche's parents, the Samuel Smiths; this brought Anne into contact not only with the great cousinage of Smiths, Nightingales, and Bonham Carters but also with the Langham Place circle, who all encouraged her in her educational schemes. She was a signatory of the memorial asking the schools inquiry commission to investigate girls' schools as well as boys' and submitted to them a note of suggestions for action, which she then expanded into a brief article for 'Macmillan's Magazine' in 1866. While acknowledging the force of traditional arguments for educating girls either at home or in small schools -- the school as home model -- she contended that there was 'always a need of superior guidance and the excitement of collective instruction and companionship to call forth the higher intellectual powers' (A. Clough, 'Hints on the organization of girls' schools', 'Macmillan's Magazine', 14, 1866, 438). To raise standards and mobilize resources economically she advocated combination between schools to share specialist teachers, and suggested that these local networks might also arrange courses of lectures by distinguished visitors, 'as a means of creating a taste for higher studies and collective instruction' (ibid.). 
In 1867 Anne Clough chose Liverpool as her base for a pilot project on these lines. It rapidly became clear that specialist lectures would command more support than attempts to persuade schools to combine; the North of England Council for Promoting the Higher Education of Women, of which Anne was a founder member and secretary in 1867-70, brought together associations in five cities, Liverpool, Manchester, Sheffield, Leeds, and Newcastle, to commission a first course of lectures on astronomy from James Stuart, fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. 
Having inspired a host of associated and competing enterprises and sown the seed of the university extension movement, the council, under Anne's presidency in 1873-4, wound up its activities. By then she herself was fully engaged in the enterprise which brought together all her aspirations, enthusiasms, and energies. In May 1871 she accepted an invitation from the philosopher Henry Sidgwick to take charge of a house which he had rented in Cambridge where five young women who wished to come from a distance to attend the recently established lectures for women were to reside. Demand rapidly outstripped supply, and a larger house and then a second one were leased. In October 1873 Anne Clough opened negotiations with St John's College to lease a field on which to build, and she and the committee of management who supported her turned themselves into a limited company, the Newnham Hall Company, to raise funds. The new hall admitted its first students in October 1875. Such was the buoyancy of demand that more building was soon contemplated; in 1879 the Newnham Hall Company and the association which had launched the lectures combined forces to form the Newnham College Association for Advancing Education and Learning among Women in Cambridge to build, to organize lectures and teaching, and to raise and administer funds for scholarships and bursaries. The gestation of Newnham College was complete, and Anne Clough became its first principal, serving throughout without a salary. 
Raising money was hard and unremitting work, but more straightforward than dealing with the other newly founded women's college, Girton, or the hostility with which many members of the university regarded the women. Despite the quickness of her temper, Anne Clough was temperamentally opposed to confrontation, always soothing, and infinitely creative in seeking ways round difficulties. She was not a good draughtswoman, often began an argument in the middle, and seemed to fuss; but this of itself was disarming, and her own modest view of her capacities made it easier for her to draw heavily on the strategic guidance of Henry Sidgwick and the administrative and financial abilities of Eleanor Balfour, who became his wife. Together they did much to secure the formal admission of women to university examinations in 1881, and in 1887 the grand opening of the third Newnham hall, Clough Hall, was graced by the prince and princess of Wales with the royal children and the prime minister, Lord Salisbury, Eleanor Sidgwick's uncle. 
Anne Clough's lack of self-consciousness and pretension also eased her relationships with students. She could and did admit frankly to her mistakes, whether of policy or of human relations. Some were initially disconcerted by her homeliness or made fun of her lack of style: as her niece Blanche Clough put it, she 'dressed like a bundle' (BL, Add. MS 72830B, fol. 53). Her most striking features were her great dark eyes, framed by hair which had turned prematurely white. In repose her eyes were hooded and she might seem tired. The full force of her gaze was startling in its penetration and few failed ultimately to respond to the transparent sincerity and warmth which lay behind it. As Blanche again wrote, 'she showed to innumerable people the sort of tender, understanding kindness which only a few people can show to more than a few' (Clough, 'Memoir', 211). 
Nor was Anne Clough uncertain or unclear about her fundamental objectives. Newnham, unlike Girton, did not immediately insist on its students going through the same academic hoops as the men. Some of the earliest students came for less than three years -- or stayed for longer -- doing work at a level which matched their particular situations. She argued successfully for the retention of this flexibility longer than Sidgwick had initially thought appropriate from a sharp, first-hand awareness of the variability of the education offered to girls in the first three-quarters of the century. However, in 1889, drafting a reply to Alfred Marshall who was fussing about the implications of a meeting held at Newnham to discuss the suffrage, she was clear that her work and that of the college was directed 'towards the opening out of new careers & a broader life for women' (A. J. Clough MSS). 
Anne Clough was wholehearted too in her commitment to Newnham's absence of religious affiliation. Having endured her own period of intense evangelical self-examination in the 1840s and watched with distress her brother's agonies of doubt she developed a considerable distaste for denominational rivalries, and her bequest to Newnham was conditional upon its non-sectarian status. She was not, however, agnostic. She died from heart disease in her rooms at Newnham on 27 February 1892 and was buried, by her own wish, in the churchyard at Grantchester on 5 March 1892, following a service in King's College chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 5711


Clough, Arthur Hugh (1819-1861), poet, was born on 1 January 1819 at 5 Rodney Street, Liverpool, the second son of James Butler Clough (1784-1844), a Liverpool cotton merchant of Welsh extraction, and Anne Perfect (died 1860), the daughter of a Yorkshire banker. In December 1822 the Cloughs, with their four children, emigrated to Charleston, South Carolina. The family continued to reside in America until 1836, but Arthur was taken back to England in 1828 and for a year attended a school in Chester. In 1829, with his elder brother Charles, he entered Rugby School; there he formed a great admiration for the headmaster, Thomas Arnold, who welcomed him into his family circle where he formed lifelong friendships with the two eldest boys, Matthew and Thomas. He was taught by Arnold to take life with great seriousness and imbued with a sensitivity of conscience which in later life he came to regard as excessive. During his time at Rugby he lived up to Arnold's ideals, working hard in class and winning many prizes, editing a school magazine, and taking a significant part in school government, and in spite of a frail constitution achieving renown in football, swimming, and running. 
In November 1836 Clough won a scholarship to Balliol and went into residence in October 1837. Balliol was now beginning to compete with Oriel as the centre of academic distinction in Oxford, and Clough had as fellow students Arthur Stanley, Benjamin Brodie, Benjamin Jowett, John Duke Coleridge, and Frederick Temple. Among his tutors were A. C. Tait and W. G. Ward; the latter became a very close and possessive friend during his undergraduate days. Partly through Ward, Clough was attracted by the Oxford Movement and fell for a while under the influence of John Henry Newman. He had been brought up in an evangelical tradition by his mother, and had imbibed liberal Christianity at Rugby, and it was the devotional and ascetic rather than the dogmatic and sacerdotalist aspects of Tractarianism that attracted him. His diaries at this time show the great strain caused by enduring the pull of conflicting theological traditions, and by bearing with patience the intellectual and emotional demands of Ward. Though he kept up an increasingly lively social life, and was active in student societies such as the Union and the Decade, Clough's academic work suffered; he postponed his final examinations, and when he sat them in 1841 he obtained only a second class. He walked to Rugby to tell Arnold that he had failed. 
While a schoolboy Clough had written copious but indifferent verses, publishing many of them in the 'Rugby Magazine' over the alias T. Y. C. (Tom Yankee Clough). He began to write again with greater maturity in his second year at Balliol, and submitted competent poems in two successive years as entries for the university's English verse prize. During his undergraduate years he also wrote a number of shorter verses in a variety of metrical forms. They display the influence of Wordsworth, particularly a sequence entitled 'Blank Misgivings of a Mind Moving in Worlds not Realised' which follows the theme and imitates the diction of the immortality ode. Most of these early verses are of biographical rather than poetic interest. 
In November 1841 Clough sat the examination for a Balliol fellowship, but was again disappointed. However, two things brought him comfort during the academic year: Matthew Arnold was now a scholar at Balliol, and his father, Thomas Arnold, was lecturing in Oxford as regius professor of history. In March he sat examinations again, this time for the great prize of an Oriel fellowship; and this time he was successful, being elected on 1 April 1842. His happiness during the succeeding months came to an abrupt end when, in June, Arnold was struck down by a heart attack. Clough tried to console himself by a month of solitary walking in Wales. By Easter term 1843 his spirits had recovered somewhat, and his diary records him enjoying, with the two Arnold brothers, the Oxfordshire excursions later described so engagingly in Matthew's 'Scholar-Gipsy'. 
At Oriel, Clough found himself a colleague of Newman, but by this time he had ceased to feel any attraction to the Tractarian movement, which had now reached a point of crisis. In 1841 Newman had published 'Tract XC', which claimed that it was possible to subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' of the Church of England (as Oxford undergraduates and MAs were obliged to do) without rejecting anything of Catholic belief. Hebdomadal council condemned the tract, and at the behest of the bishop of Oxford, Newman brought the series of tracts to an end. Ward, at Balliol, wrote pamphlets in defence of the tracts and as a result had to resign his tutorship. Clough had his own problems with the 'Thirty-Nine Articles': if he was to proceed to his MA he would have to subscribe to them once again, and by 1843 he had begun to feel that subscription was a crippling bondage. In 1844 he did sign, stifling his doubts, but they were not suppressed for long. He may have been encouraged to subscribe by the need to support his family: his brother George had died in November 1843 and his father in October 1844. 
Meanwhile Ward, having written a Romanizing book that gave great scandal, was degraded by the university in 1845, and resigned his Balliol fellowship in order to marry. He and his new wife became Roman Catholics in June, and Newman followed shortly afterwards. Many liberals in Oxford found Newman's departure a liberation; but Clough, partly under the influence of Carlyle and German biblical scholarship, had now moved so far from orthodoxy as to find the Anglicanism even of post-Tractarian Oxford burdensome. He began to seek alternatives to his Oriel tutorship, even though Matthew Arnold had joined him as a fellow in spring 1845. During his years as a tutor he was a conscientious teacher, and in the summer vacations he took reading parties of his pupils to Braemar and Loch Ness in Scotland. 
In the years following 1845 Clough's attention turned to political matters. He wrote a number of letters in 1846 on political economy, which were published in a journal called 'The Balance'. In the same year he made his first continental tour, visiting Germany, Switzerland, and the Italian Lakes. In 1847 he wrote a pamphlet on the Oxford Retrenchment Association urging, in spite of 'laissez-faire' economists, that conspicuous consumption in England, and especially in Oxford, should be curtailed in order to help the Irish poor during the famine. By the end of his time at Oriel he had acquired a reputation as a political radical. 
Clough's religious doubts, especially about the historicity of the gospels, persisted and increased, despite the patient but uncomprehending remonstrances of Provost Hawkins of Oriel. To the disturbing influence of Carlyle was added that of Emerson, whom he first met in November 1847. At the beginning of 1848, while his fellowship still had eighteen months to run, he resigned his tutorship, telling Hawkins that he could no longer adhere to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. 
1848 was a year of revolution throughout Europe. 'Citoyen Clough' spent the spring in Paris, witnessing the French revolution at first hand. Emerson was there too, and they saw each other daily during May and June. When Emerson left Liverpool for America in July, Clough saw him off. He lamented his departure: Carlyle, he complained, had led everyone out into the desert and left them there. Emerson, in reply, laid his hand on Clough's head, and told him he was to be bishop of all England. 
Clough's next act, however, took both his Anglican and his Emersonian friends by surprise. He spent the summer writing, not a religious or socialist tract, but a narrative poem 1700 verses long, entitled 'The Bothie of Toper-na-Fuosich' (changed in later editions to 'The Bothie of Tober-na-Vuolich'). The poem was published in November: in the previous month Clough had finally resigned his fellowship at Oriel. 
The poem is set in the context of a Scottish reading party, in which the tutor and his pupils bear a strong resemblance to Clough and his young friends. The characters are skilfully differentiated, and the holiday exuberance of youth is vividly portrayed; the poem is rich in colourful descriptions of natural scenery. The student hero is a radical poet, Philip Hewson, who combines a belief in the dignity of labour with a keen susceptibility to feminine beauty. After two abortive flirtations, he falls in love with a crofter's daughter, Elspie, and emigrates with her to New Zealand, whither, in reality, young Tom Arnold had emigrated in the previous December. The poem contains some pointed criticism of the relationship between the sexes and the classes in Victorian Britain, but it is at the same time a nostalgic farewell to the life of an Oxford tutor. 

'The Bothie' is written in hexameter verses, in an imitation of the metre of Homer, but with the feet measured by stress, in accordance with the conventions of English verse, instead of by length, as in Greek. In most positions in a verse of this kind, the poet is free to place either one or two syllables between each stressed syllable, and this allows the kind of flexibility that Gerard Manley Hopkins later claimed for his newly invented sprung rhythm. Clough exploited the possibilities by writing in a variety of registers, ranging from colloquial and slangy dialogue, through lyrical natural description, to abstract political and philosophical theorizing. He imitated Homer not only in metre but also in features of style: the use of identifying epithets and stylized repetition, for instance, and the positioning of powerful, self-standing, similes at key points in the narrative. 
Though some critics judged the narrative too inbred an Oxford production, and others found the hexameters too rough and irregular, most reviewers acclaimed 'The Bothie' from the outset. The poem sold well and quickly established its author's reputation as a poet. Hard on its heels followed a second publication: in January there appeared 'Ambarvalia', a collection of verse by Clough and his Cambridge friend Thomas Burbidge. 
This collection contained Clough's choice of the poems written during the years at Balliol and Oriel. Most are short poems, recalling the trials of student years and the journeys of the religious doubter. ''Qui laborat, orat'', admired by Tennyson, expresses the tension of prayer to a God who is ineffable; 'The New Sinai' dramatizes the conflict between religion and science. There are poems of love and friendship in various moods and metres, and there is a surprisingly frank celebration of fleeting sexual impulse in ''Natura Naturans''. 
From April to August Clough was in Rome where, since the expulsion of Pius IX in 1848, Mazzini had presided over a short-lived Roman republic. Clough's letters give a vivid account of Garibaldi's defence of the city against the besieging French army under General Oudinot. With astonishing speed he exploited this experience in poetical form, writing an epistolary novel in five cantos, 'Amours de voyage'. This poem, which is the most enduringly popular of his works, tells the story of Claude, a supercilious Oxford graduate who is initially contemptuous of Rome, and of a young English woman he meets on the grand tour, Mary Trevellyn. By the end of the story Claude has fallen in love both with Mary and with the Roman republic, only to lose them both, as the Trevellyns travel north without him and the French restore the rule of the pope. The first draft was finished shortly after his return to England, but the final version was not published until 1858 when it appeared in an American journal, the 'Atlantic Monthly'. 
Like 'The Bothie', the greater part of 'Amours de voyage' is written in hexameters; Clough is now more at home with the metre, and there are fewer of those rugged lines which bring the reader up short, uncertain where to place a stress. Each canto is preceded and followed by a short poem in an English approximation to an elegiac distich. The characterization is not as vivid as in 'The Bothie', but there is a dramatic energy in the narration of episodes in the siege of Rome. The personality of the anti-hero, and the downbeat ending of the poem, puzzled some contemporary readers (including Emerson) but gave it an unusual appeal to twentieth-century taste. 
In summer 1848 Clough visited Naples. While there he wrote the most successful of his poems on religious topics, 'Easter Day'. It is an unblinking denial of the resurrection of Jesus, the central Christian doctrine, in words taken from the Christian scriptures themselves; it accompanies the denial with an unflinching vision of the hopes that are given up by one who abandons Christianity. Believers and unbelievers alike have admired its emotional and intellectual power. 
In October of the same year Clough became the head of University Hall, London, a non-sectarian collegiate institution for students attending lectures at University College. He was not happy there, finding it no easier to accommodate himself to the principles of the Unitarians and Presbyterians who governed it than to the articles of the Church of England which had troubled him at Oriel. His principal consolation at this period was the friendship of Carlyle. From 1850 he held simultaneously a professorship of English language and literature at University College, and wrote a number of lectures on poets and poetical topics which have survived and were published posthumously. 
The most productive period of these years was a visit to Venice in 1850 in which he started a dramatic poem, 'Dipsychus'. This is a Faust-like dialogue between a tormented youth, in two minds (Dipsychus) about his future career, and a spirit (named in one version Mephistopheles) who represents the temptations of the world, the flesh, and the devil. The scenes of the dialogue are set, often not very convincingly, in different locations in Venice; the text was often revised but never completed, and there has been little agreement among posthumous editors about the best way of presenting its fragments. None the less, in its unfinished and uneven state it contains the most impressive embodiment of Clough's mature thought on religious topics. The dialogue is conducted in many different metres, from solemn quasi-Shakespearian blank verse to Gilbertian patter-songs. 
At the end of 1851 Clough left University Hall. He applied in vain for a professorship of classics in Sydney. It had become important for him to find alternative employment, because he was now in love with Blanche Mary Shore Smith (1828-1904) of Combe Hall, Surrey, a cousin of Florence Nightingale, to whom he became engaged in 1852. In October 1852 he sailed with W. M. Thackeray to America, where he spent nine months in a vain search for a suitable job. He was warmly welcomed by Emerson, Longfellow, Charles Eliot Norton, and other members of the Boston literary society that he described vividly in letters to his fiancee and to Carlyle. He undertook some private tutoring and worked on a revision of Dryden's translation of Plutarch, but had no success in finding a permanent job. 
Meanwhile, however, Clough's friends in England found him a post as examiner in the education office, which enabled him to marry Blanche on 13 June 1854. She was a devoted wife, and bore him at least four children, including Blanche Athena Clough (1861-1960), college principal and educational administrator, but she never fully entered into his aesthetic and intellectual concerns. In 1860 Clough's mother died; he remained close to his sister Anne Jemima Clough (1820-1892), later to become the first principal of Newnham College, Cambridge. What time he had to spare from his exertions in the education office was now spent in assisting Florence Nightingale in her campaign to reform military hospitals. It was he who had escorted her to Calais in 1854 on her first voyage to the Crimea. 
By 1861 Clough's health had broken down, and he was given sick leave for a foreign tour. He went to Greece and Constantinople, and began to write his last long poetical venture, a series of tales entitled 'Mari magno'. In this work a young Englishman, a returning American, a lawyer, and a clergyman entertain each other on an Atlantic crossing by telling stories that illustrate different conceptions of marriage and the relationship between the sexes. The seven tales of this suite, though they contain a few skilful and moving passages, in both content and expression fall far short of the standard set by the hexameter poems of 1848-9. 
After a few weeks at home in June 1861 Clough went abroad again, and spent some time in the Pyrenees with the Tennysons. The attempt to recover his health was vain, and he died on 13 November in Florence, where he was buried in the protestant cemetery. His death was mourned by Matthew Arnold in his elegy 'Thyrsis' which, like 'The Scholar-Gipsy', recreates the Oxford companionship of the two poets. 
Besides 'Dipsychus' and 'Mari magno' many of Clough's best shorter poems remained unpublished at his death. Among them are a number of biblical lays based on the book of 'Genesis', a Browning-like monologue on Louis XV ('Sa majeste tres Chretienne'), and the two poems most often anthologized, 'Say not the struggle naught availeth' and 'The Latest Decalogue'. 
An edition of Clough's poems was published by his wife in 1862, with a memoir by F. T. Palgrave in England, and one by C. E. Norton in Boston. In 1865 a volume of 'Letters and Remains' contained the first printing of 'Dipsychus' and of 'Easter Day'. A new collection, 'Poems and Prose Remains', appeared in 1869 with a memoir by his wife. 
Critical response to these posthumous publications was mainly very favourable. From the 1860s it was not uncommon to regard Clough as an equal partner of a poetic fraternity whose other members were Tennyson, Browning, and Arnold. A reaction against his poetry, however, set in during the 1890s, with Swinburne and Saintsbury. In the first half of the twentieth century Lytton Strachey sniggered at Clough's association with Florence Nightingale, and Leavis exalted the talents of Hopkins above all four of the original Victorian quartet. 
In 1941 Winston Churchill, anxious to secure American co-operation in the fight with Hitler, broadcast some lines from 'Say not the struggle naught availeth' which ended 'Westward, look, the land is bright'. This brought some at least of Clough's poetry back to the national consciousness, and in the post-war years several critics were willing to hail him as the most modern of Victorian poets. The first modern edition of the poems appeared in 1951, and a fuller, critical edition, in 1974. The 1960s and 1970s saw a series of biographies and literary studies appear on both sides of the Atlantic. Changing fashions in English departments in universities have led, since 1980, to comparative neglect of Clough's 'oeuvre', though popular editions of the principal poems have continued to appear regularly. The start of the twenty-first century has seen welcome signs of a renewed interest in this most intelligent of Victorian poets. 


@@@@@


doc= 5712


Clough, Richard (d. 1570), merchant, was the fifth and youngest son of Richard Clough, a Denbigh glover, who by two advantageous marriages, first to the daughter of Humphrey Holland and then to a Whittington of Chester, rose in fame and fortune. Of the younger Richard's early life little is known apart from certain possibly apocryphal stories. In his boyhood he allegedly went to be a chorister in the city of Chester, but lacking an outlet for his musical talents there, made his way, probably in his early teens, to London. From there, in the fervour of youthful zeal, he is said to have made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, where it is related he was created a knight of the Holy Sepulchre, a title which, if actually awarded, he probably never used in the atmosphere of religious intolerance which pervaded the London to which he returned possibly about 1545. As an apprentice mercer in London from about 1545 to 1552 Clough seems to have developed a protective facade, presenting himself when required as that deferential and rather pedestrian creature who from 1552 moved easily in the circles of the newly appointed royal agent in the Netherlands, Thomas Gresham. 
Clough's appointment to the 'House of Gresham' was occasioned by the departure of Robert Berney, who, having served William Read and then Gresham faithfully at Antwerp for at least ten years, in 1552 decided to establish his own mercantile house. In taking up residence at Antwerp, Clough thus became the new boy in a long-established network of factors and agents serving Gresham in his joint capacities as merchant and financial agent for the crown. His counterpart at the opposite end of the Antwerp-London axis, which formed the main highway for the house's business transactions, was John Elliot, who continued during the years 1552-7 to oversee the firm's business at its London office in Lombard Street. They were assisted by Francis Tomazo, who from 1549 to 1554 carried the company's dispatches between the two commercial centres, and William Bindlowe and John Spritewell, who from 1547 to 1554 and from 1550 to 1555 respectively were entrusted with the much more delicate task of accompanying supplies of bullion and armaments during their often illicit passage from Antwerp to London. 
From 1557 changing circumstances raised Clough's position within the firm. Against a background of major personnel changes, which made him one of the longest serving members of the team, the temporary closure of Gresham's Seville office brought the Anglo-Netherlands trade to the forefront of the firm's commercial activities. His position was strengthened by the subordination of that trade to Gresham's increasingly important financial business on behalf of the crown. In the aftermath of the 1557 imperial bankruptcy, Antwerp's money markets underwent a major transformation. The city was no longer subject to the depredations of the Habsburgs, who henceforth secured their funds from dealings on the Sevillian-Genoese financial axis, and its financial prosperity now rested on the provision of commercial investments. Clough's mercantile connections, developed in his capacity as both private merchant and factor for the House of Gresham, could now be exploited by his master in his commercial and in his financial dealings. They could also be used and extended by Gresham's mentor, Sir William Cecil, as from 1558 he began to build an intelligence network to report on political conditions in the increasingly troubled Low Countries. Clough was rapidly becoming the central figure in a completely remodelled network. His new counterpart at the opposite end of the Antwerp-London axis, along which now passed a flow of political intelligence as well as news of mercantile-financial transactions, was Richard Candeler, a member of a respectable Norfolk family, who from 1557 to 1566 acted as Gresham's factor in the English capital. The two men utilized the services of another of Gresham's servants, John Spritewell, the company's carrier of dispatches. Gresham thus had at the core of his business a formidable team, headed by Clough, which was quite capable of handling not only his increasingly important financial business on behalf of the crown but also his residual commercial activities in the city on the Scheldt. As the House of Gresham became a front for Cecil's intelligence operations, Clough became a key figure in an extended network of agents scattered throughout the Low Countries. 
The years 1557 to 1569 thus witnessed Clough's assumption of a central role in the operations of the House of Gresham. They also saw a growing intimacy pervade his relations with his master. Yet at no stage during these years did he display any executive abilities in the work he undertook for Gresham. In his continuing capacity as an independent mercer-adventurer he performed small commercial favours for his master or the latter's political patrons. No more taxing were his duties as bookkeeper in relation to his master's increasingly important financial business on behalf of the crown. On occasion he was required to store at Antwerp munitions and other items bought from the proceeds of loans, but their subsequent transmission to England was undertaken on Gresham's personal responsibility. In relation to Clough, as with his other servants, Gresham was singularly incapable of devolving managerial responsibilities. It is thus surprising to find that in 1560, having undertaken preliminary negotiations for a loan worth some $75,000 with Hans Keck, the agent of Herzog Christoff Albrecht of Mansfeld, Gresham dispatched Clough to Saxony to conclude the deal. His factor's singular inability to perform this task, and Gresham's resulting discomfiture, ensured that the latter would never again entrust the hapless Clough with such weighty responsibilities. Throughout the final decade of his employment by Gresham, Clough was restricted to the pedestrian duties associated with the running of his master's Antwerp office. 
For fifteen years (1552-67) Clough thus served his master, and latterly Sir William Cecil, with diligence but little imagination, and in due course was suitably rewarded for his efforts. He obtained in 1564 a substantial grant of leaseholds in Wales to augment the income from those Denbigh properties on which he had commenced to build the mansion at Bachegraig and the smaller but more elegant Clough Hall (Plas Clough), which were both completed in 1567. By his mid-thirties he had become a man of substance in his native country, his newly acquired wealth giving him some degree of independence and allowing him to dispense with that facade which he had so carefully constructed some twenty years earlier. 1567 saw the romantic, sensitive young man of the stories reappear to public view as he commenced on a completely uncharacteristic course of action. In three short weeks, between 16 April and the 7 May 1567, this pedestrian servant was transformed. He made only a cursory duty call on Gresham before departing post-haste for Wales where, after a whirlwind romance, he married the beautiful and recently widowed Katherine Tudor (died 27 Aug 1591), the sole daughter and heir of Tudor ap Robert Fychan of Berain and his wife, a granddaughter of Henry VII. The couple then immediately left for London, pausing briefly at Gresham House before continuing their journey to Antwerp. Over the next three years, whether acting as Gresham's factor at Antwerp (May 1567-March 1569) or serving in an independent capacity the following year as deputy of the Company of Merchant Adventurers at their new Hamburg mart, to which the English traders had moved on being ejected from Antwerp, Clough found his lifestyle utterly changed. His household in these cities, presided over by the beautiful Katherine, included Richard and Winefrid Clough, whom their father mentions as his 'base children, forren born', and Thomas Dutton and Thomas Denne, kin-related 'gossips' of the principal factor. It was augmented as Katherine gave birth in rapid succession to two daughters -- Anne in 1568 and Mary in the early part of the ensuing year. Supported by a loving wife and revelling in the company of his children and associates, Clough in his actions during the last three years of his life manifested a personality change. His correspondence, previously controlled and somewhat pedantic in character, now displayed a marked volatility in style related to his rapidly changing moods. Thus, laid low during a serious illness shortly after his return to Antwerp in December 1567, he was certainly prepared for the first time to neglect his work and excuse himself to his master on the grounds of his health. On the occasion of his next and final illness, during the period February-March 1570, he did not even bother to excuse himself when important diplomatic dispatches went missing. These were difficult times when his letters to Cecil were uniformly dark and mysterious. There were also good times, however, as when in September 1568 he declared he was 'in right good health and merry'. 
Yet the past was not easily swept away, as the compilation of Clough's will reveals. First composed on 20 September 1568, when he was enjoying both good health and considerable prosperity, the document reflected his present concerns, as, in a happy frame of mind, he left his possessions to his wife and children. Yet health and cheerfulness were but transient states, and, as from February 1570 his health finally deteriorated, something of his associated change of mind may be discerned in the proliferation of codicils and the creation on the 26th of that month, with death imminent, of a new document. In his adversity the past weighed heavily on him and, forgetting his recent happiness and remembering 'the time of [his] service under and with [his] master', he disinherited his family and gave to Gresham all his moveable goods. He died in Hamburg in March 1570 and was buried there. To Gresham's credit, he renounced the last will, allowing the earlier will to be proved to the benefit of Clough's family. 


@@@@@


doc= 5713


Clover, Joseph (1725-1811), veterinary surgeon and farrier, son of a blacksmith, was born in Norwich on 12 August 1725. He benefited from some early schooling and learned his trade working alongside his father. When he was seventeen his father died and Joseph took over the family business, providing support for his mother and three siblings. About 1750 he attracted the notice of Kirvin Wright, an eminent physician, by whom he was encouraged to apply himself to the investigation and treatment of the diseases of horses. By dint of extraordinary application he mastered Latin and French and was able to read the best contemporary authors on farriery and horse medicine, particularly Vegetius and Etienne La Fosse. He also became a good mathematician, and was a member of the Bilbean Society of Norwich where 'men of original minds and with small incomes [met], for improvement in mathematics, experimental philosophy' ('GM', 191), natural history, and botany, under the direction of Peter Bilby. 
From 1765 Clover devoted himself entirely to veterinary practice. In this he was assisted by many well-known medical men, especially Benjamin Gooch, the surgeon, who inserted in his 'Cases and Practical Remarks in Surgery' a letter from Clover which gave his description and drawing of a machine he had invented for the cure of ruptured tendons and fractured legs in horses. As early as 1753 he had discovered the manner in which the larvae of bots are conveyed from the coat of the horse into the stomach and intestines, and he had demonstrated this fact at several meetings of the Bilbean Society. 
Gooch, writing in his 'Chirurgical Works', gave Clover an excellent testimonial: 'Mr Clover's character, by all who know him, is that of having a great superiority of knowledge in his profession, and his moral character is not less excellent'. Clover was tall and with 'a strong muscular frame of body' ('GM', 192). However, for many years he suffered from giddiness and head pains. He died, aged eighty-five, at Norwich, on 19 February 1811. 


@@@@@


doc= 5714


Clowes, Butler (d. c.1788), engraver and print seller, lived, and kept a print shop, in London at 18 Gutter Lane, Cheapside, from about 1760 until his death (his address has been recorded on prints by James Watson and others). The business was subsequently carried on by a John Clowes, presumably his son, at the same address. Clowes engraved a number of small-scale, modest mezzotint portraits after his own designs, which usually show the sitter half-length and enclosed in an oval or roundel. These include a self-portrait in a cap of 1771, and portraits of John Glas, founder of the Sandemanian sect, of the jeweller Thomas Liddiard, of a Mr Atwood, writing master to Christ's Hospital, and of other 'middling' folk drawn from his family, acquaintance, or general social milieu. 
Larger, more ambitious mezzotints by Clowes consist of theatrical scenes and fancy pictures. His best-known theatrical subject is probably the portrait of the playwright Charles Dibdin, 'Mr Dibdin in the Character of Mungo, in the Celebrated Opera of The Padlock', after his own design, published in 1769 and later retouched and republished by Carington Bowles. Clowes's fancy pictures include a Chardinesque 'School Boy' at a table with writing instruments, after William Elmer of Dublin, and a female figure on a terrace engaged in 'Domestick Employment, Starching' of 1769, probably after, or at least reminiscent of, the works of Henry Morland. A large mezzotint after Colson of a man firing a miniature cannon, entitled 'The Engineer', is described in a pencil note on the print as 'very scarce'; an impression is held in the British Museum. At the Free Society of Artists, between 1768 and 1773, Clowes exhibited a total of sixteen mezzotints of a largely comical or theatrical content, such as 'The Hen-Pecked Husband' and 'The Dying Usurer, or, The Wife the Physician', after William Dawes (both 1768), and 'The Female Bruisers', after John Collet (1771), as well as portraits (1771, 1772, 1773), a print after Heemskerck (1772), and a scene from rural life (1769). 
According to a contemporary trade directory, Mortimer's 'Universal Director' of 1763, before his activity as a mezzotint engraver from the late 1760s, Clowes seems to have been known primarily as an 'engraver of heraldry, ornaments &c', and the production of furniture designs and engraved ornament continued to occupy him at least until the late 1770s. He etched the majority (forty-one of fifty-three plates) of untitled designs for carved furniture by Thomas Johnson (1758); this collection was later reissued by Robert Sayer under the misleading title 'One Hundred and Fifty New Designs' (1761). The influence of Johnson's vivid, spiky rococo style is very obvious in a set of nine heraldic bookplates designed and etched by Clowes about 1760 for the dukes of Beaufort, Bolton, Cleveland, Grafton, Leeds, Norfolk, Richmond, St Albans, and Somerset. In 1762 Clowes etched nine plates for carvers' pieces for the third edition of Chippendale's 'The Gentleman and Cabinet-Maker's Director', and a decade later he produced, after his own designs, a set of eight plates with six monograms (AA-ZA) each. In a complete stylistic departure (together with a J. A. Clowes), he engraved a set of twenty small-scale designs, moderately neo-classical and relatively simple, for chimney-pieces after the sculptor Richard W. Westmacott (died 1808), which were published in 1777. 
Clowes married Susanna Matthews on 7 January 1753. He died about 1788. A copy after his 1771 self-portrait shows 'a man past the prime of life, with a round, jovial, and doubtless rubicund countenance' ('DNB'). Henry Bromley's unfavourable account of Clowes's work, published soon after the latter's death, influenced the majority of nineteenth-century critics -- with the notable exception of John Chaloner Smith -- who considered Clowes's mezzotints amateurish and incompetent; his engraved ornament (and thus his brilliant etching technique and his versatility) were ignored. 


@@@@@


doc= 5715


Clowes, John (1743-1831), Church of England clergyman and Swedenborgian preacher, was born at Manchester on 20 October 1743 and baptized at St Ann's Church there on 17 November, the fourth son of Joseph Clowes, barrister, and Catherine, daughter of the Revd Edward Edwards, possibly curate of Llanbedr, near Ruthin. Clowes was only seven or eight years old when his mother died but she laid the foundation of his religious education, which was continued by his equally devout father. He was subsequently schooled at the Revd John Clayton's academy at Salford, and possibly also at the grammar school there. At the age of eighteen, in 1761, he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, where his tutor was Dr Richard Watson, future bishop of Llandaff, with whom he remained on friendly terms in later life. In January 1766 he graduated BA. During the next three years, while working as a private tutor, he took two prizes for Latin essays and was elected fellow of Trinity; he proceeded MA in 1769. Having abandoned his original idea of entering his father's profession he had prepared for holy orders and was ordained in 1767 by Bishop Richard Terrick. Illness meant that he could no longer continue tutoring, and when on 13 August 1769 he was offered the rectorship of St John's, Manchester, a position he had previously rejected, he accepted. St John's Church had only recently been built by his relative Edward Byrom, son of the poet John Byrom. 
Still in delicate health Clowes felt himself unprepared for his vocation in other ways. In this diffident state of mind he one day came across a copy of William Law's 'Christian Perfection'. The book had a profound effect on him and led him to study Law's other works as well as the writings of sundry English, French, and German mystics. In 1773 he was introduced to the writings of Emmanuel Swedenborg by Richard Houghton of Liverpool, who advised him to purchase a copy of Swedenborg's 'True Christian Religion'. Through Houghton, Clowes became acquainted with the Revd Thomas Hartley, rector of Winwick, Northamptonshire, and the earliest translator into English of any of Swedenborg's works. The study of Swedenborg's writings proved a lifelong commitment for Clowes and he spent many years translating them. His first published translation was the 'Vera Christiana religio' (1781), which was followed by four other works. 
Soon after his conversion Clowes consulted with Hartley in London as to the propriety of remaining an Anglican clergyman. This was the only meeting in person between the two men and Hartley urged him to remain in the Church of England. Clowes followed his advice and remained rector of St John's, in spite of occasional opposition from his own curate, among others. Several pamphlets were published against him, and finally an appeal was made in 1783 to his bishop, Dr Beilby Porteus. The bishop dealt very gently with Clowes and dismissed him with a friendly caution to be on his guard against adversaries. However, Clowes remained involved in controversies over his Swedenborgian doctrines throughout his life. As well as preaching these doctrines from his pulpit he organized twice-weekly meetings, from which there sprang up in the manufacturing towns and villages around Manchester many popular Swedenborgian societies. In 1782 he founded a Society of Gentlemen, renamed the Manchester Printing Society in 1801 (which still exists as part of the North of England New Church House), for the purpose of printing and circulating the writings of Swedenborg and tracts on his teaching. 
In 1787 at a meeting in London the followers of Swedenborg resolved to separate from what they called the old church and in 1792 the New Jerusalem Church in Peter Street, Manchester, was opened. This action was taken against Clowes's wishes and he made several trips to London to speak against it, but it did not prevent him from continuing to hold communion with his fellow believers. He became closely associated with the meeting at Hawkstone Park, Shropshire, held from 1806 by those who chose not to separate from the established church. He was a firm monarchist, who believed that 'governors should derive their rank and authority, not from the people whom they govern, but from the Head under which they govern' (Compton, 167). He was thus indignant when Abbe Barruel identified Swedenborgianism with Jacobinism; Clowes wrote his 'Letters to a Member of Parliament' (1799) specifically to refute this claim. In 1804 he declined a bishopric offered to him by William Pitt on the recommendation of Baron Graham, although he did accept the chaplaincy of the Manchester Volunteers. The fiftieth anniversary of his induction to St John's was commemorated by the erection in the church of a bas-relief tablet, sculptured by John Flaxman, himself a Swedenborgian and a personal friend of Clowes, and by the painting of a portrait by John Allen, which was placed in the vestry. 
Clowes was taken ill in 1823 while visiting Birmingham and was unable to return to Manchester. He died at Leamington on 29 May 1831 in his eighty-eighth year, and was buried at St John's, Manchester, on 9 June. The records of the Manchester Printing Society in 1828 showed that nearly 200,000 copies of sermons, pamphlets, and tracts by Clowes had been published. Among them were many reflecting his early interest in the Sunday schools movement. Many of his tracts for children were collected together as 'Religious Instruction for Youth' (1812). 


@@@@@


doc= 5716


Clowes, William (1543/4-1604), surgeon, born at Kingsbury, Warwickshire, was the son of Thomas Clowes and his wife, Emma Beauchamp. He described himself in 1585 as being then forty-one years old. Of his early life nothing is known, and although for much of his life he practised in London his career did not follow the usual pattern of apprenticeship to a member of the Company of Barbers and Surgeons, followed by examination and a licence to practise within the City and suburbs. He eventually became a member of the company on 8 November 1569, but it was by translation from another, unknown company, and his subsequent relations with the Barbers' Company were far from harmonious. 
Clowes is now regarded as one of the most eminent surgeons of his day as well as an outstanding writer on this topic. He wrote, abandoning precedent, in English, and from the many incidental remarks in his works it seems he was at odds with the surgical establishment which he tended to despise. His deepest criticism, and also his strongest invective, was, however, reserved for the ignorance of quack surgeons and the generally deplorable standards of surgical practice of his day. He was in addition, perhaps because of his lack of formal qualifications, highly sensitive to adverse comment, which he thought arose from envy or malice, and by way of defence gave details of his life, achievements, and methods which incidentally provide much insight into the surgical world of his day. Clowes became part of the shift towards Paracelsianism in the writings of surgeons during the period 1570-90. He went on to become 'a leading proponent of chemical therapy' and, along with George Baker and John Banister, one of the leaders of the profession who 'not only advocated chemical therapy but also projected themselves as allies of the Paracelsian' (Webster, 327). 
Clowes claimed to have studied surgery under a George Keble, also a physician, of whom nothing is known. Clowes praised him highly, and states specifically that he (Clowes) had studied and practised surgery since 1563, asserting that this was 'well known to most men'. In that same year, when he was only nineteen, he served as a surgeon in Warwick's expedition to Le Havre, where he met John Banister, acknowledging their long friendship in an introduction to the latter's 'An Antidoterie Chyrurgical' in 1589. On his return in 1564 and until about 1570 he served as a naval surgeon in Portsmouth, where he acquired a fund of experience and skills which he was able to communicate to his younger colleagues in his subsequent books. Clowes is known to have served on the 'Aide', which escorted in 1570 the emperor's daughter through the channel on her way to marry Philip II of Spain, and he describes an operation on this voyage to remove a splinter of bone from the lung of the boatswain's mate whose ribs had been fractured. The patient made a full recovery by the tenth day, an impressive achievement on a small vessel at sea. 
Clowes was then in his own words 'employed in the hospitals in London', but it was not until March 1576 that he secured a permanent post as one of the surgeons at St Bartholomew's Hospital at a salary of $20 yearly. His previous service and devotion to his patients were acknowledged in his appointment, and a happy relationship lasted until March 1585 when he resigned with the goodwill of the governors to join, for nine months, Leicester's expedition to the Low Countries. From 1576 Clowes also treated sick children at Christ's Hospital as apothecary-surgeon, and although he appears to have maintained a harmonious relationship with both hospitals this was certainly not the case with the Company of Barbers and Surgeons. The company's minutes record continuous friction with the governors and other members, leading on one occasion to a commitment to ward for some misdemeanour and at least two accusations of taking money from patients without a cure, though to be fair to Clowes this was, at that time, a common occurrence. In February 1575 there was a complaint that he had abused the masters 'with scoffing words and jests', but not for the first time he was forgiven on the promise to conduct himself properly in future. These incidents culminated in March 1577 when he fought with George Baker, one of the queen's surgeons, in Moorfields, and the court once again 'pardoned this great offence in the hope of amendment'. The dispute must soon have been forgotten as Baker and he remained on friendly terms thereafter. Clowes's behaviour was therefore tolerated, probably because he was too important a man to ignore, but it was not until July 1588 that he was finally taken into the assistance, or governing body of the company, and it is noteworthy that while he rose to middle warden in 1584 he never became master. Clowes was granted a bishop's licence to practise in 1580 at the direct request of the queen. 
About 1586 Clowes was appointed surgeon to the fleet and also one of the queen's surgeons, an honour which he claimed occurred solely through the queen's 'favour and good-liking'. It was, in his own mind, a vindication against his enemies: 'I am not so barren or gross-witted or unlearned in the art', he said, 'as some have termed me to be'. He was appointed by Howard to serve on his flagship the 'Ark Royal' during the Armada campaign, though he left no record of his activities during this period, probably because there were few casualties resulting from engagement with the enemy. The more pressing need in 1588 was for physicians to deal with sickness and disease caused by poor sanitation and bad food. This was a common problem on all sea voyages, and Clowes from his experience was well aware that there was little the naval surgeon could do for such cases as he could by law treat only external injuries and was prohibited from practising internal medicine. He therefore believed naval surgeons should have some knowledge of physic and the right to practise it as they 'cannot always have physicians at the elbows to counsel them'. A highly principled man he would use all means, lawful or otherwise, rather than allow his patient to perish through want of help. 
As a naval surgeon Clowes encountered the ravages of scurvy which he rightly associated with the seaman's diet and as a preventative, long before Cook's use of lime juice, recommended fresh fruit and vegetables, watercress, or scurvy grass though he could not legally prescribe them. Scurvy was not, however, exclusively a maritime complaint and he noted that it was prevalent among the children at Christ's Hospital where he treated twenty or thirty cases at a time. He recognized also the tendency of gunshot wounds to become gangrenous and advised amputating where possible well above the affected area to avoid the spread of infection. His advice on the technique of amputation, using the tourniquet as tightly as possible as an anaesthetic as well as to minimize the flow of blood, remained standard for many years. So too did his technique for closing wounds. He was always ready to adopt the recommendations of others, and, for example when Guillemeau in 1594 advised tying the arteries to reduce blood loss after amputation, he was the first in this country to adopt the technique. 
For the remainder of his professional life Clowes was in practice in London, where, as he pointed out, he encountered the best and most skilful surgeons. He was certainly successful enough to acquire two houses in Fenchurch Street and an estate in West Ham, then becoming a fashionable suburb, to which he later retired, describing himself as a gentleman. He married twice, but in both cases the dates are unknown and little is known of his first wife except that she came from the Godwin family of Kent and had two sons. The first, William Clowes (1582-1648), also a surgeon, benefited from the bequest of his father's surgery chest with its pewter boxes, a silver salvatory and plaster box, and his instruments and books. The other son, Richard, was left only $20 in Clowes's will and then only after his daughters had received their legacies on majority or marriage. His second wife, Katherine, 'nee' Smith, had another son by him, Henry, later described as 'of Cornhill', who was admitted to the company in January 1626. There were also two daughters of this marriage, Katherine and Marie. Three other daughters are also mentioned in his will, though it is not clear from which marriage: Margaret, Friswith, and Johanne, who married a William Gregorie. The last was left a clock in Clowes's will, and $3 10's'. 'which I owe him'. 
Clowes died in 1604 at West Ham, reportedly of the plague, and was buried in the parish church. He was survived by his wife. In his lifetime a successful career followed from his energy, practical skill, and great experience, though his aggression towards those who, he believed, envied and wished to discredit him 'as though I had spent all the days of my life in the rude woods or wild forests of ignorance' would not have made him a popular figure, except among his patients, and those of his contemporaries he admired. Undoubtedly a difficult man he was driven nevertheless by the highest motives, principally the welfare of his patients and the need to improve the status of the profession by adherence to the best clinical practice based on past experience and teaching. He would not, he said, refuse anything that would benefit his patients from whatever quarter, even infidel, but be thankful for it. 
Well read in Latin and French, Clowes was not an innovator but in many ways a conventional figure, who looked back for guidance to Galen 'prince of physicians and surgeons', Hippocrates, Vigo, and de Chauliac, and, in his own day, the Frenchman Ambroise Pare, whose influence survived until well into the eighteenth century. He should also be remembered as an early advocate of Paracelsianism in England. A further mission was to remove the abuses perpetrated by incompetent surgeons, mountebanks, and quacks who did so much harm and lowered the standing of the profession in the public eye. During Leicester's expedition he believed that there were more killed by the ignorance and incompetence of surgeons than by the enemy, and he was especially enraged by naval surgeons who, once appointed, absconded with their imprest money, given to buy surgical supplies, which could amount to $40. 
The first of Clowes's published works was 'A short and profitable treatise touching the cure of the disease called morbus gallicus, by unction', first published in 1579. Years of practice at St Bartholomew's and in the navy had led to a thorough acquaintance with syphilis and its treatment; he estimated that 50 per cent of those who entered the hospital suffered from the disease and that he and three colleagues treated a thousand cases a year. His second publication, and the most influential, was 'A Proved Practice for All Young Surgeons', published in 1588. Its aim, as its title suggests, was practical guidance for the young practitioner based on what was known, by experience, to be successful, and it included a series of case studies with methods of treatment as well as various compounds and preparations, some of them his own which he generously shared with the reader and some inherited from his master, Keble. Both books ran to several editions. Towards the end of his life, in 1602, he published a work on struma, or the king's evil. 
Clowes published these works 'for the good of the country', and the tenor of his writing shows him to be immensely patriotic with a strong sense of nationhood and belief in his country's religion and constitution. Perhaps for these reasons he wrote in vigorous and usually colourful English, pointing out that the great writers of the past had always written in their native tongues while those who criticized him for doing so feared only that the art would become 'too common, whereby every bad man and lewd woman is become a surgeon'. In other words, Clowes believed that surgery was too exclusive, concealing its mystery in the Latin in which most of the literature was written and which few could read. Clowes's importance perhaps lies in his vigorous attempts to impose higher professional standards and open up the profession to a broader spectrum of the public by the use of plain English. In doing so he no doubt incurred the hostility of which he complained so often. 


@@@@@


doc= 5717


Clowes, William (1582-1648), surgeon, was the son of the distinguished surgeon William Clowes (1543/4-1604). He was apprenticed to his father and admitted to the Barber-Surgeons' Company of London on 22 January 1605. When called to the livery of the Barber-Surgeons' Company on 13 December 1615 he was already surgeon to the prince of Wales and because of his royal duties was allowed to attend lectures and company functions only when convenient to him. He became sergeant-surgeon to the king on the prince's accession as Charles I in 1625 and subsequently declined to serve as renter warden (in seniority, the fourth warden of the Barber-Surgeons' Company), considering the office to be too lowly for a king's surgeon. 
The records that survive of Clowes's career mainly concern matters of controversy. In 1626 he was chosen to be master of the Barber-Surgeons but his election was called into question because by convention it was the turn of a barber that year. The election was allowed to stand, but the wardens of the company's yeomanry were fined for not carrying the standing cups before him, suggesting that some opposition remained. 
One of the duties of the king's surgeon was to examine all persons brought to be cured by the royal touch and in this capacity Clowes complained of a man called Leverett, a gardener, who claimed to be able to cure the king's evil (scrofula). Clowes was directed by the court of Star Chamber to refer the matter to the College of Physicians of London, and Leverett appeared at the college on 3 November 1637, claiming to be able to cure just by touch a range of diseases. When Leverett failed to cure cases given to him Clowes presented a memorial stating that Leverett slighted the king's sacred gift of healing, enticed lords and ladies to buy the sheets he had slept in, and deluded the sick with false hopes. Clowes also produced further evidence that Leverett was an impostor, including the proof that he was a fourth, not a seventh son. The college duly reported its findings to the Star Chamber. 
Clowes's second term as master, in 1638, also began controversially. The election was unable to proceed because the first set of barber electors could not agree and were therefore discharged. Six more electors were chosen but two refused to serve. After fresh electors were chosen Clowes and the new wardens were sworn in. Just prior to Clowes's mastership the famous anatomy theatre designed by Inigo Jones had been added to the company's building in Monkwell Street. Clowes was a substantial contributor to the building fund. The new theatre was required because of the increased demand for lectures and dissections, stimulated by William Harvey's discovery of the circulation of the blood, as well as advances in surgery. 
In April 1641 it was reported in the court minutes of the Barber-Surgeons that Clowes, following a complaint by one of the wardens, had been ordered to acknowledge that in his anger and passion he had spoken 'some words to the wrong' of the court. Later in the same year, on 30 September, Clowes was one of the seven examiners in surgery who made various orders concerning the reading of lectures, perhaps aimed at raising or maintaining standards; these included the requirement that surgery lectures were to be read by approved surgeons only, and that the lecturers were to have a month's notice to prepare. Clowes's last appearance in the Barber-Surgeons' Company was on 14 September 1648 and he died later that year. By his will of 28 March 1630 he left his property to Sara, his wife, and to his three children, James, Ann, and Sara. 


@@@@@


doc= 5718


Clowes, William (1779-1847), printer, was born on 1 January 1779 at Chichester, Sussex, the elder of the two children of William Clowes (1738- 'c'.1782), schoolmaster in Chichester, and his wife, Elizabeth Harraden (died 1816), schoolmistress. At the age of ten William was apprenticed to Joseph Seagrave, printer, in Chichester and in 1802 he went to London as a journeyman. 
While working as a compositor for Henry Teape at George Street, Tower Hill, Clowes met William Winchester, a cousin of his mother, who took an interest in him. Winchester was a stationer in the Strand who had become one of the principal contractors to the government for the supply of stationery and printing of all kinds. Clowes borrowed money from his mother and from Winchester to start up his own business and on 21 October 1803 he began to trade on his own in 22 Villiers Street, Strand, employing just one man. His first book appears to have been 'A full and genuine history of the inhuman and unparalleled murders of Mr. William Galley, a custom-house officer, and Mr Daniel Chater, a shoemaker, by fourteen notorious smugglers', printed by Clowes for J. Seagrave and Longman and Rees. Through Winchester, he gained a share of government printing work. In December 1804 Clowes married Winchester's niece, Mary Winchester (1774/5-1836); they were to have four daughters and four sons. Her dowry enabled him to take more rooms in Villiers Street and to employ three more men and buy more equipment. Three years later the firm moved to larger premises in Northumberland Court, Charing Cross, which allowed him to bind books on site and to take on twenty more staff. 
Clowes's early ventures proved successful. By 1813 he was dealing directly with a number of government departments, printing the casualty lists of the Peninsular War, stationery for the militia, and the 'Navy List', as well as work for the Religious Tract Society, British and Foreign Bible Society, and Royal Academy of Arts. At the time of Waterloo he opened a military bookshop at 14 Charing Cross and issued 'Cannon's Historical Records of the British Army'. His financial position was so secure that when that same year he suffered a fire at his Northumberland Court premises and was forced to rebuild he was in a position to buy the freehold of the property. 
In 1823 Clowes installed a powered press specially designed by Applegarth and Cowper on the site, digging a well and installing a steam engine in the building. His neighbour the duke of Northumberland brought an action for nuisance caused by his machinery. Although the duke lost the action, he bought out William who, having lost an estimated $25,000 after the failure of Archibald Constable had rocked the industry in 1826, was then able to move in the following year to take over Applegarth's business premises in Duke Street, Blackfriars, where he formed what became the largest printing works in the world. By 1839 the London Union of Compositors reported 186 compositors working for Clowes, 86 more than Hansard, the second largest employer. (A description of the works, including the unique on-site type and stereotype foundries, was published in the 'Quarterly Magazine' in December 1839.) Although Clowes suffered another financial set-back in 1840, the firm recovered its financial footing and by 1843 he employed twenty-four Applegath and Cowper perfectors and twenty-four hand-presses to print 1500 reams a week. 
Clowes was constantly looking for technical improvements and innovative working practices which would improve his business. For instance in 1820 he was one of the first employers to start a benevolent fund for his workforce and he also was probably the first to use double sheets in bookwork, which became common after 1828. He experimented with the printing, in 1840, of the Mulready envelopes for the Post Office and he also produced the works of all the major book and magazine publishers of the day including George Henry Bohn, John Murray, Rivington, Routledge, and Longman and Rees. However, perhaps his most famous technical achievement was the printing, with Thomas De La Rue, of the gold coronation edition of 'The Sun' published on 28 June 1837. 
Clowes believed that steam-powered presses opened the way to cheapen the production of books and expand the market for the printed product. Working closely with Charles Knight, one of the leading figures concerned with the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge (SDUK), he printed from 1832 the 'Penny Magazine' and the 'Penny Cyclopaedia', among other publications. They held similar beliefs in the importance of the new developments: 'What the printing press did for the instruction of the masses in the fifteenth century, the printing machine is doing for the nineteenth. Each represents an aera in the diffusion of knowledge; and each may be taken as a symbol of the intellectual character of the age of its employment,' stated Knight in the first number of the 'Printing Machine' (1834), printed by Clowes. The great contribution of Clowes was the unprecedented level of accuracy, speed, and output from his presses; it was this that gained the admiration of Samuel Smiles, who held him up as an icon of energy and enterprise in his biographical sketches 'Men of Invention and Industry' (1884). 
In 1824 Clowes was honoured by his native town when he became a freeman of Chichester, although until the year before his death he lived in Parliament Street, Westminster, London. He died in London on 26 January 1847 at his home, 68 Wimpole Street, Marylebone, and was buried in Norwood cemetery. In 1839 he had changed the name of the firm to William Clowes & Sons, and at his death he left his three sons, William Clowes (1807-1883), Winchester (1808-1862), and George (1814-1886), to run the business. 


@@@@@


doc= 5719


Clowes, William (1780-1851), a founder of the Primitive Methodist Connexion, the son of Samuel Clowes, potter, and Ann, daughter of Aaron Wedgwood (a member of the illustrious ceramics family), was born at Burslem, Staffordshire, on 12 March 1780, and employed during his early years as a potter. He was considered one of the finest dancers in his neighbourhood and for many years led a dissipated life, but on 20 January 1805 he was converted during a prayer meeting. He soon established a prayer meeting in his own house, became the leader of a Wesleyan Methodist class, and joined a society which endeavoured to promote the keeping of the sabbath. He was one of the attendants at the first camp meeting ever held in England, at Mow Cop, near Harriseahead, on 31 May 1807, and was joined in this meeting by Hugh and James Bourne and others. In October 1808 he preached his trial sermon near Ramsor on the Staffordshire-Derbyshire border and was duly appointed a local preacher with the Wesleyan Methodists, but, continuing to associate with the Bournes and to attend camp meetings, his name was omitted from the preachers' plan in June 1810. In September his quarterly ticket as a member of the society was withheld from him by the Burslem Wesleyan authorities, who were angered by his 'irregular' methods of evangelism. 
After this Clowes made common cause with the Bournes and James Crawfoot, and with them was one of the founders of the Primitive Methodist Connexion, which dates its commencement from 14 March 1810. From this time he became one of the best-known, most forceful, and confident preachers of the new society, and his vigorous labours in most of the northern counties of England, as well as in London and Cornwall, were most successful in adding members to the church. In 1819 he visited Hull, where Primitive Methodism was as yet unknown, and such was the impact of his preaching that within six months 300 people had joined the society. Hull became one of the major centres of Primitive Methodism. On 10 June 1842 he was placed on the superannuation fund, but still continued his ministry as before, and was at his work until a day or two before his death, from paralysis, which took place at Hull on 2 March 1851. He was buried at Hull. Clowes, who was twice married (he left his first wife after an argument with his mother-in-law), was a man of strong common sense and of great persuasive powers. 


@@@@@


doc= 5720


Clowes, William, the younger (1807-1883), printer, was born on 15 May 1807, the eldest son of the eight children of William Clowes (1779-1847) and his wife, Mary Winchester (1774/5-1836). He entered his father's printing business in 1823 and later worked alongside his brothers Winchester (1808-1862) and George (1814-1886) in the firm. He married Emma Lett in 1835 and they had four sons and five daughters. 
Around 1840 Clowes became interested in the possibilities of mechanical composition and bought the patent of a Polish invention for a typesetting machine. Two years later he endeavoured to print the 'Family Herald' on a Young-Delcambre composing machine, but the experiment was not a success. By 1875 the technical difficulties had largely been resolved and Clowes installed Hooker's electric typesetting machine linked to a distributing machine in the Duke Street factory. It was one of the first composing machines to be of practical use, yet, although he installed four more, they were never popular with other printers. He soon realized that the United States was ahead of Britain in their development and he sent his nephew Edward Arnott Clowes (1851-1911) to America to bring back the most modern machinery. The Monotype machines which followed were widely used among British book printers and the firm became renowned for its expertise in composition. William Clowes made improvements especially in music printing and the firm became experts in printing in a range of different alphabets and languages. 
In 1839 Clowes's father changed the name of the firm to William Clowes & Sons. His sons, William and his brother George, added to their father's impressive client list, which included the government and the military, the Council of Law Reporting, and the Royal Academy, as well as all the major book and magazine publishers. Their biggest coup was to win the contract for the official catalogues of the Great Exhibition (1851), which was a considerable logistical exercise as they had to co-ordinate and typeset the entries from the various exhibitors from different countries around the world and to print the illustrative colour plates and engravings. The firm became a recognized authority and was consulted by the organizers of many exhibitions. This success was followed, in 1881, by the 'General Catalogue of Printed Books in the British Museum Library', which took nineteen years to complete. The firm also took a leading role in the production of 'Hymns Ancient and Modern', which originally came out in 1859 and was revised and enlarged several times before the popular 1875 edition. 
While Clowes ran the business in London, his eldest son, William Archibald Clowes (1843-1904), and his nephew William Charles Knight Clowes (1838-1917), independent of the main firm, went into partnership with William Moore of the Caxton Press at Beccles, Suffolk, a small concern valued at less than $5000 with four power presses. When Moore suddenly disappeared with all the money leaving considerable debts, the firm was re-established as Clowes and Clowes. It prospered and by 1876 was valued at over $20,000 and had fifteen power printing presses. Four years later Clowes and Clowes and William Clowes & Sons, the Beccles and London firms, were amalgamated and a limited company was formed. 
William Clowes was well known for his benevolent and active interest in the welfare of printers and craftsmen. In 1844 he became a trustee and nine years later the treasurer of the Printers' Pension Corporation and was concerned in the building and endowment of the printers' almshouses at Wood Green, London. He died on 19 May 1883 at his home, 51 Gloucester Terrace, Hyde Park, London, and was buried in Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 5721


Clubbe, John (c.1703-1773), satirist and Church of England clergyman, was one of the sons of the Revd George Clubbe (died 1711), rector of Whatfield, Suffolk. Clubbe entered King's College, Cambridge, as a sizar in 1721, and took his BA in 1725. Ordained deacon in September of the same year, he was priested two years later. His subsequent clerical career was unexciting: vicar of St Clement's, Ipswich (1729), vicar of Debenham, Suffolk (1730), and rector of Whatfield (1735). (Whatfield had been held by his father from 1703 until his death in 1711.) 
Clubbe's most impressive work was the anonymously published 'History and Antiquities of the Ancient Villa of Wheatfield' (1758). Ostensibly aimed at Philip Morant's 'History and Antiquities of... Colchester' (1738), Clubbe's main target was, in fact, a whole genre of contemporary writing. Clubbe burlesqued the solemn self-importance of Georgian local historians and topographers: 'The ancient villa or parish of Wheatfield lies in the South-west part of the county of Suffolk, in the 52d Degree, 12 minutes of Northern Latitude, and distant from London 66 miles' (Clubbe, 'History', 15). He also poked delicious fun at prim morality. Viewing the classical 'Scamna or Benches' in the parsonage garden at Whatfield, he noted that they used to have on them 'many imperfect Letters and Words... which more than hint to us that [the] obscene God Priapus had a Statue erected to him in one of the Fruit Quarters' (ibid., 19). The offending words, Clubbe assures the reader, have been removed by the current rector. 
Clubbe's other works -- all of them ephemeral -- were published in two volumes of 'Miscellaneous Tracts' (1770). The best of these was 'A letter of free advice to a young clergyman'. Ahead of its time, 'A letter' breathed a spirit of real social sensitivity and concern: 'carry not a rich man into the church, and read over him the whole burial service, and huddle a poor man into his grave with a small portion of it' (Clubbe, 'Miscellaneous Tracts', 2.27). Clubbe married Susannah Beeston on 8 August 1732. He had twelve children, eight of whom survived him. Among the survivors were John Clubbe, an Ipswich physician, and William Clubbe (bap. 1745, d. 1814), a cleric and poet. 
Clubbe kept his sense of humour to the end. The night before his death he was visited by his doctor, who remarked that his pulse was much more even than it had been on his last visit. 'My dear friend, if you do not already know, or have not a technical expression for it, I will tell you what it beats -- it beats 'the Dead March'' (Nichols, 2.378). Clubbe died on 2 March 1773; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 5722


Clubbe, William (bap. 1745, d. 1814), Church of England clergyman and poet, was the seventh son of the Revd John Clubbe (c.1703-1773), rector of Whatfield, Suffolk, and his wife, Susannah, 'nee' Beeston. He was baptized at Whatfield on 16 April 1745, and attended schools at Lavenham and at Hackney, Middlesex. He matriculated in 1762 at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he was a scholar from 1762 to 1768 and graduated LLB in 1769. In the same year he was instituted to the rectory of Flowton, and in the following year to the vicarage of Brandeston, both in Suffolk. He married Mary, daughter of the Revd William Henchman of Brandeston; they did not have any children. 
In addition to performing his pastoral duties, Clubbe also composed poetry, and his works include: 'The Emigrants' (1793), 'Six Satires of Horace' (1795), and 'The Epistle of Horace to the Pisos on the Art of Poetry; Translated into English Verse' (1797), as well as other miscellaneous translations from the classics, and translations of English works into Latin. He also produced a miscellany entitled 'The omnium; containing the journal of a late three days tour in France;... and other miscellaneous pieces, in prose and verse' (1798), and published two works on education, 'A Plain Discourse on the Subject of National Education' (1812) and 'A Plain Discourse on the... Establishment of a Sunday School' (1812). 
Clubbe continued to live at Brandeston until the death of his wife in 1808, when he moved to the home of his youngest brother, Nathaniel, an attorney at Framlingham. Clubbe died on 16 October 1814 at Framlingham and was buried in the churchyard at Brandeston. 


@@@@@


doc= 5723


Clulow, William Benton (1802-1882), Congregational minister and author, was a native of Leek, Staffordshire, and, after receiving a preliminary education in the grammar school there, entered Hoxton Academy. He became pastor of the Congregational church at Shaldon, Devon, where he remained for twelve years. In 1835 he became classical tutor at Airedale College, Bradford, but in 1843 he left in consequence of a disagreement with some influential supporters of the institution. He turned to writing, and published 'Aphorisms and Reflections, a Miscellany of Thought and Opinion' (1843), 'Essays of a Recluse, or, Traces of Thought, Literature and Fancy' (1865), and his most successful work, 'Sunshine and Shadows, or, Sketches of Thought Philosophic and Religious' (1863), which ran to three editions over the next twenty years. After residing at Bradford for forty years he retired to Leek, where he died on 16 April 1882. 


@@@@@


doc= 5724


Clunie, John (c.1757-1819), Church of Scotland minister and songwriter, was educated for the Church of Scotland and licensed by the presbytery of Edinburgh on 29 December 1784. He then became schoolmaster at Markinch, Fife, where possessing a fine voice and some musical skill he acted as precentor in the parish church. In 1790 he was presented by the duke of Buccleuch to the parish of Ewes, Dumfriesshire, and on 12 April 1791 to that of Borthwick, Edinburghshire; he was also chaplain of the eastern regiment of Edinburghshire volunteer infantry. On 31 October 1790, at Ewes, he married Mary, daughter of Alexander Oliphant, minister of Bower. He and Mary soon began a family. 
Clunie's reputation for the rendering of Scottish songs led to an acquaintanceship with Burns, who highly appreciated his singing. Clunie also composed several songs of his own to the old tunes, but did not take the trouble to publish them. The first two stanzas of the song 'I lo'e na a laddie but ane' are attributed to him by Burns, a better authority than Ritson, who in his 'Collection of Scotch Songs' prefixes to them the initials J. D.; the four supplementary stanzas beginning with 'Let others brag weel o' their gair' were added by Hector MacNeil. The song 'Ca' the yowes to the knowes' was taken down by Stephen Clarke when he and Burns were spending a night with Clunie in 1787. Writing to George Thomson in September 1794, Burns says: 'I am flattered at your adopting 'Ca' the yowes to the knowes', as it was owing to me that it ever saw the light. About seven years ago, I was well acquainted with a worthy little fellow of a clergyman, a Mr. Clunzie, who, sang it charmingly; & at my request, Mr. Clarke took it down from his singing' ('Complete Letters', 655). Burns added two stanzas to the song and made several alterations in the old verses; these old verses, as taken down by Clarke, are printed in Stenhouse's edition of Johnson's 'The Scots Musical Museum'. Clunie was the author of the account of his parish in Sinclair's 'Statistical Account of Scotland'. He died at Greenend, near Edinburgh, on 13 April 1819, in his sixty-second year. 


@@@@@


doc= 5725


Clutterbuck, Henry (1767-1856), physician and medical writer, was born at Marazion, Cornwall, on 28 January 1767, the fifth child of Thomas Clutterbuck (1728-1781), a solicitor, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Christopher Masterman, a merchant of Truro. After attending the local grammar school Clutterbuck was apprenticed to James Kempe, a surgeon in Truro, whence, aged twenty-one, he entered the United Hospitals of Guy's and St Thomas's in London. On 7 August 1790 he passed as a member of the Company of Surgeons and settled to general practice at Walbrook in the City of London, where he soon prospered. This was helped by his publishing the 'Medical and Surgical Review' between 1794 and 1807. In the journal, which appeared in alternate months, he 'proposed to give a summary view of all the books in the different branches of medicine in Great Britain and Ireland' (1794, 1.v). About twelve books were reviewed in each issue, and all the editorial work was done by Clutterbuck himself. In appearance Clutterbuck was above middle height with a striking florid complexion. He married, in 1796 at Walbrook church, Harriet Matilda (died 1852), daughter of William Browne, a solicitor of Kirby Street, Hatton Garden. They had ten children, of whom four survived infancy. 
Wishing to leave general practice and become a physician Clutterbuck spent 1802 studying in Edinburgh, but then transferred to Glasgow, where he graduated MD on 16 April 1804. He returned to London, setting up in practice at 17 St Paul's Churchyard. He wrote much about fevers, which he considered to be primarily an affection of the brain. His doctoral thesis was 'Tentamen pathologicum inaugurale quaedam de sede et natura febris proponens' (1804), and he followed this with other books on the nature of fevers. Among his other writings was a youthful 'Account of a New Method of Treating Affections which Arise from the Poison of Lead' (1794), 'Remarks on some of the Opinions of the Late Mr John Hunter Respecting the Venereal Disease' (1799), and memoirs on Nathaniel Hulme (1810) and George Birkbeck (1842). 
On 1 October 1804 Clutterbuck was admitted licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians and because of the regulations had to pay $22 to disenfranchise himself from Surgeons' Hall. He moved to 1 The Crescent, New Bridge Street, Blackfriars, in 1808, and the next year was elected physician to the General Dispensary, Aldersgate Street, where he started a lucrative career as lecturer in medicine and materia medica. 'The Lancet' (1850, 2.213) described his style as 'plain, forcible and unadorned'. It is said that one year his lecturing earned him more than $1000. With the foundation of the Aldersgate school of medicine in 1826 he transferred his lectures there, several of which were subsequently published. These included 'On the Proper Administration of Blood-Letting for the Prevention and Cure of Disease' (1840) and 'Series of Essays on Inflammation' (1846). 
An individualist, in his youth Clutterbuck resigned from the Aldersgate dispensary when the governors tried to remove some voting privileges of the physicians. In 1809 he led a group that objected to the presidency of the Medical Society of London being perpetual, and late in life he declined a fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians on the grounds that many worthy people had not been elected. 
Clutterbuck was very friendly with Lettsom, and inherited much of his practice. This flourished among the merchants and middle classes of London. He also attended several dispensaries and the Peckham Lunatic Asylum. Lettsom introduced him to the Medical Society of London, of which he was a member for more than fifty years and which he served as librarian and council member, and as president on three occasions. He was a model debater, who said nothing that he could not substantiate, who treated young members well, and who never lost his temper. On leaving the anniversary meeting of the society on 8 March 1856 he was run over in the street and died at his home at New Bridge Street, Blackfriars, on 24 April 1856. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 5726


Clutterbuck, Robert (1772-1831), local historian and landowner, was born and baptized at Watford House, High Street, Watford, in Hertfordshire, on 28 January 1772. He was the eldest surviving son of Thomas Clutterbuck the younger (1744-1791) and Sarah Thurgood (1749-1788), daughter of Robert and Sarah Thurgood, brewers of Baldock, also in Hertfordshire. Clutterbuck was educated at Harrow School and was gentleman commoner of Exeter College, Oxford, from 1791 until 1794, when he graduated BA. Admitted to Lincoln's Inn, London, in 1791, he was described as being a member in 1794. However, he abandoned law for chemistry and painting, taking lessons in the latter from James Barry (1741-1806), and possibly living in London until his marriage, on 10 January 1798, to Marianne (1774-1856), eldest daughter of James Capper (1743-1825), a retired East India Company colonel. Clutterbuck and his wife were living at Cathays, near Cardiff, when their children Robert and Marianne were born, in October 1798 and March 1800 respectively. In 1799 the Thurgood brewery at Baldock, with eleven inns and beerhouses, which Clutterbuck had inherited from his grandfather, was sold for $8842. From July 1801, when another son was born, the Clutterbucks' home was at Watford House, which was set in spacious grounds with a maltings nearby (the family brewery was at Stanmore, Middlesex). Between 1817 and 1830 Clutterbuck travelled in Europe, making many sketches. In 1823-4, as a magistrate and deputy lieutenant, he helped to unravel the mysterious murder of William Weare. 
Clutterbuck's claim to fame is his monumental work 'The History and Antiquities of the County of Hertford', published, in three massive volumes, in 1815, 1821, and 1827. Thomas Leman supplied the early history in volume 1 (pp. vi-xvii); three volumes of Thomas Blore's manuscripts, acquired in 1811, proved invaluable. The subtitle of Clutterbuck's history claimed that the text was 'compiled from the best printed authorities and original records preserved in public authorities'; it is vast and comprehensive. J. E. Cussans used the text for reference when visiting churches to research for his 'History of Hertfordshire', but claimed that Clutterbuck 'visited but few of the parishes he describes.... He trusted entirely to assistants of greater or less accuracy' (Deacon and Walne, 39). Since much of both histories consists of inscriptions on church memorials this is important. Branch Johnson alleged that 'if the most austere in manner Clutterbuck is the most lavish in production' (p. 9), and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' claimed that 'the plates have never been surpassed in similar productions; several were from sketches of his own'. Some were by Thomas Blore's son, Edward. While Clutterbuck produced a monumental record of manors, churches, and the landed gentry before the early nineteenth century, 'the short and simple annals of the poor will be looked for in vain' (Johnson, 'Local History', 9). In 1828, however, Clutterbuck published 'An Account of the Benefactions to the Parish of Watford'. 
Robert Clutterbuck died at Watford House on 25 May 1831, following a sudden 'inflammation in the stomach before medical aid could be obtained' ('GM', 566). He was buried on 1 June in the family vault at Watford House. There is an extraordinary claim by Cussans that Clutterbuck 'committed suicide by cutting his throat', for which there is no supporting evidence (Deacon and Walne, 39). At his death he owned land in Aldenham, Ashwell, Bushey, and Hinxworth, in addition to the family property at Watford. This was all left to his wife, Marianne, with reversion to his sons. His will mentioned eight shares in the Sun insurance company, $800 in 3 per cent bank annuities, and a debt of $2400 for enclosing Hinxworth. According to one historian of Watford 'He stood 6'6", was of imposing presence, looking what he was -- a gentleman' (Jones, 21). 


@@@@@


doc= 5727


Clyffe, William (d. 1558), civil lawyer, is of unknown parentage. He was educated at Cambridge, where he graduated LLB in 1514 and LLD in 1523. Clyffe had an active legal career. He was admitted as an advocate of Doctors' Commons on 15 December 1522, and was commissary of the diocese of London between 1522 and 1529. He built a reputation as an expert on the law of marriage and divorce, and convocation sought his advice regarding Henry VIII's divorce from Katherine of Aragon in 1533. He continued to take similar cases throughout his career, and was named in several royal commissions and grants to hear and determine divorce cases, such as that between John and Elizabeth Atherton, alongside other notable civil lawyers, such as Henry Harvey, master of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and Richard Cox. 
Clyffe also became the subject of some controversy as well, however. Thomas Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, wrote to Sir Thomas Cromwell, principal secretary and vicegerent in spirituals, in October 1533 asking him to summon Clyffe for retaining the registers of the late Nicholas West, bishop of Ely. According to the complaint of Dr William May, Cranmer's vicar-general in the diocese of Ely, Clyffe hindered him from administering justice. In 1533 he was involved in litigation with Thomas Stanceby and Elizabeth Lutton, who claimed that Clyffe had wrongfully interfered with their case before the court of chancery. Clyffe was granted a preferment to the deanery of Chester and was immediately thrown into the Fleet prison at the instance of Sir Richard Cotton, comptroller of the king's household, because he refused to lease chapter lands to him at a rate far below their worth. He was released only after he changed his mind. 
Clyffe held several ecclesiastical posts and, in addition, was among the authors of the celebrated treatise on 'The Godly and Pious Institution of a Christian Man', commonly known as the 'Bishops' Book', and published by the authority of the king in 1537. He was instituted as prebend of Twyford in the diocese of St Paul, London, in 1526; was appointed archdeacon of London three years later; and held the prebend of Fenton in the archdiocese of York in 1532. In 1533 he resigned the archdeaconry of London to take up the post of archdeacon of Cleveland, Yorkshire. He became precentor of York in 1534, treasurer of York in 1538, and in 1547, when that office was suppressed, he was made dean of Chester. He was prebend of Noxton, Middlesex, from 1548. Clyffe died on 13 December 1558. 


@@@@@


doc= 5728


Coates, Charles (bap. 1746, d. 1813), antiquary, was baptized in St Laurence's Church, Reading, on 27 March 1746, the son of John Coates, watchmaker in the City of London, and his wife, Elizabeth. He was educated at Reading School for a record nine years, under the Revd John Spicer, being admitted as a sizar at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, at the age of sixteen in May 1762; he became a scholar that same year. He obtained the degree of bachelor of medicine five years later. 
Having chosen the church as his profession, Coates was ordained deacon at Salisbury in 1770 and priest a year later in London. After a curacy at Ealing, under the Revd Charles Sturges, in 1780 he was presented to the living of Preston, Dorset, with the help of John Spicer, then the prebendary there. In 1788 the bishop of Salisbury permitted him to take the nearby living of Osmington, and he received a Lambeth LLB. 
In 1791 Coates issued proposals for a work on 'The History and Antiquities of Reading', and embarked on some intensive research. He studied the relevant manuscripts in the British Museum and the Bodleian Library and the records at the Tower of London, the rolls and augmentation offices, and those with the corporation of Reading. The 500-page quarto volume, handsomely illustrated, did not appear until 1802, when the 'Gentleman's Magazine' commented ironically that 'those subscribers, who have been so lucky as to live long enough to reap the benefit of their subscription-money, have very sufficient reason to be satisfied with the work' ('GM', 72/2, 1802, 620). In 1810 he published 'A Supplement... with Corrections and Additions by the Author'. His history gives an unrivalled portrayal of the town, as well as its memorials and remains, at the beginning of the nineteenth century. Unfortunately it has no index. Coates was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1793. Having been appointed chaplain to the prince of Wales, he dedicated the history to him. In 1808 he was made prebendary of Wells. 
Coates had many friendships in Reading. He was the benefactor of Mrs Ann Latournelle, the needy widow of a nonconformist minister, until her death in 1780. Although he would have welcomed preferment, or one of the Reading parishes that were in the gift of the crown, he never left Dorset. His later decades were clouded by his wife's chronic ill health, and it brought on a severe paralytic attack, which ended his literary career. He had been working on a new and enlarged edition of Elias Ashmole's 'History of Berkshire', which he did not complete. He had also collected documents for a continuation of John Le Neve's 'Lives of the Protestant Archbishops'; these he presented to Alexander Chalmers for insertion in a new edition of the 'General Biographical Dictionary'. 
Mrs Coates died on 27 November 1812, leaving no children. The 'Reading Mercury' published a tribute to her by him. However, it did not record Coates's own death at Osmington four months later, on 7 April 1813. 


@@@@@


doc= 5729


Coates, Robert (1772-1848), actor, was born in Antigua, the only survivor of the nine children of Alexander Coates (1734-1807), a merchant and sugar planter, and his wife, Dorothy. When he was about eight Coates was brought to England, where he received a liberal classical education. After returning to Antigua he first showed his taste for the theatre by taking part in amateur theatricals. His father's death in 1807 left him in possession of a vast fortune and a large collection of diamonds, and he settled at Bath in England as a man of fashion. He soon became well known by the first of his series of nicknames -- Diamond Coates. In consequence of his ostentatious manner of living, which included dressing in furs and diamonds, and driving in a curricle in the shape of a kettledrum with a large, brazen cock on its bar and the motto 'Whilst I live I'll crow', he was also called Cock-a-doodle-doo Coates. 
Coates's habit of declaiming Shakespeare over breakfast attracted attention, and the Theatre Royal, Bath, was taken for 9 February 1810 for a production of 'Romeo and Juliet', with Coates in the part of Romeo and professional actors in all the other roles. He was laughed from the stage by the end of the fourth act, so the audience was on this occasion spared his death scene, in which, mindful of his clothes and desirous of presenting his best aspect to the audience at all times, he would take out his handkerchief, dust the stage, place his hat on the outspread handkerchief, and arrange himself into a becoming attitude for death. Inevitably, he became known as Romeo Coates. 
On 9 December 1811 Coates presented himself before a London audience for the first time, in the part of Lothario in Nicholas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent' at the Haymarket. Again the performance did not pass the fourth act, as the crowing of the audience would not be quieted even by the direct plea of Coates from the stage. Despite public ridicule and critical panning, Romeo Coates continued to perform on the stage (including appearances at the Haymarket and at Drury Lane) until 1816. He always retained his amateur status, and his performances were invariably in aid of charitable causes: his own preferred sobriquet was 'the Celebrated Philanthropic Amateur'. Indeed, he was sufficiently celebrated to be the subject of an impersonation by Charles Mathews in his Covent Garden 'At Home' in February 1813. His pretensions were the victim of a cruel hoax in 1813, when Theodore Hook sent him an invitation which purported to be to attend a ball at Carlton House; Coates was turned away from the door, but his face was saved by the angry prince regent, who invited him to view the decorations the following day. 
By 1816 the public had tired even of laughing at Coates, and theatre managers refused him the use of their premises. He eventually fell into financial difficulties and retired to Boulogne. There he met his future wife, Emma Anne, the daughter of Lieutenant William McDowell Robinson RN. Having reached an arrangement with his creditors he returned to England, married Emma Robinson on 6 September 1823, and lived soberly and respectably on the wreck of his fortune. On 15 February 1848 he attended Allcroft's grand annual concert at Drury Lane, and, after the performance, was crossing Russell Street, when he was crushed between a hansom cab and a private carriage. He died from the effects of his injuries on 21 February 1848 at his residence, 28 Montagu Square; the coroner recorded a verdict of manslaughter by person or persons unknown. Later in the same year his widow remarried, her second husband being Mark Boyd. 


@@@@@


doc= 5730


Coats, Thomas (1809-1883), thread manufacturer and benefactor, was born at Ferguslie, Paisley, Renfrewshire, on 18 October 1809, the fourth of at least six sons of James Coats (1774-1857), one of the founders of the Paisley thread industry, and Catherine Mitchell (died 1857). He trained as a textile engineer at Johnstone, near Paisley, and after his father's death became a partner in the family firm with his brothers James (the managing partner) and Peter (in charge of finances); Thomas was production manager (also dealing with technical matters and training). Expansion was continuous, capacity doubling in the 1840s, and again in the 1850s, stimulated by demand from America. After James died in 1845 Thomas became managing partner, and during his tenure the firm became the most important in the world market. By 1860 Coats employed 1100 workers and sold annually over $200,000 worth of thread, 80 per cent in America, where Andrew Coats, a younger brother, lived. To offset the effects of competition and increasing tariffs in the 1860s and 1870s, Coats bought an established company, Conants of Pawtucket (Rhode Island), and greatly expanded its American mills. 
Coats's marriage to Margaret, daughter of Thomas Glen, a miller, was a stable and happy relationship; they had six sons and five daughters. In 1872 Coats bought Ferguslie House to accommodate his large family. An active Baptist in Paisley, he made many gifts to Baptist churches. A Liberal in politics, he was chairman of the town's school board (1872-83) and gave $1000 to each of the four local schools; the site for Ferguslie School and the sum of $1000 were also his donations. He made a number of gifts to Paisley: the fountain gardens (1868) and the observatory (1882) were the most significant. He served as chairman of the Philosophical Institution (1862-4) and on the committee of management of the free public library and museum which his brother, Sir Peter, had given to the town in the late 1860s. Thomas Coats was an enthusiastic numismatist, and his vast Scottish coin collection was the basis for Edward Burns's 'The coinage of Scotland illustrated from the cabinet of Thomas Coats esquire of Ferguslie and other collections' (1887). At a municipal banquet in November 1881 Thomas and Peter Coats were presented with their portraits, painted by Sir Daniel Macnee, president of the Royal Scottish Academy. 
At the time of Coats's death the assets of the firm were estimated at over $2 million; it employed about 6000 people, of whom 3000 worked in Paisley; the value of his estate in the UK was $1,308,734 17's'. 6died Coats was a great production manager, with outstanding technical knowledge; his management style was gentle and firm; he recognized the significance of quality control and was quick to adopt new ideas and new technology. He was also chairman of Clan Line Association Steamers and a director of the British and African Steam Navigation Company of Glasgow. Survived by his wife, Coats died on 15 October 1883 at Paisley and was buried there. The town square was presented with a statue in his memory, but the most substantial gift was the Thomas Coats Memorial Church, funded by his family in 1894. 


@@@@@


doc= 5731


Cobb, James (1756-1818), playwright, entered in 1771 the secretary's office of the East India Company, in which he rose to the post of secretary (1814). He sent anonymously, for the benefit of Jane Pope (Drury Lane, 30 March 1773), an occasional prologue, which was recited with some slight alteration by Garrick, to whom it was submitted. He also produced at Drury Lane, on 5 April 1779, his first dramatic piece, 'The Contract, or, Female Captain', for Pope's benefit. All the popularity of the actors could not galvanize the play into life, but under the second title it was acted at the Haymarket on 26 August 1780. This was followed by many operas, farces, preludes, and comedies, most of which served, more or less, a temporary purpose, and are now forgotten. 
Such interest as any of Cobb's pieces possess arises generally from association with actors or composers. In 'The Humourist' (Drury Lane, 27 April 1785), which owed its production to the application of Burke to Sheridan, John Bannister made a great hit as Dabble, a dentist. This piece was burned in the fire at Drury Lane in 1809. Genest, not too good-naturedly, says that if the whole of Cobb's pieces -- about twenty-four in number -- had shared the same fate, 'the loss would not have been very great'. In 'Strangers at Home', an opera (Drury Lane, 8 December 1785, published in 1786), with music by Linley, Dorothy Jordan is said to have made her first appearance as a singer, and to have played her first original character. 'Doctor and Apothecary', a two-act musical farce (Drury Lane, 25 October 1788), introduced to the London stage Stephen Storace, from whose 'Singspiel' -- 'Der Doctor und der Apotheker' -- performed at Vienna on 11 July 1786, music and plot were taken. 'The Haunted Tower' (Drury Lane, 24 November 1789), also with music by Storace, served for the debut in English opera of his sister, Anna Selina Storace. It was very successful, and frequently revived. On 28 December 1799 at St Mary's, Portsea, Hampshire, Cobb married Mary Starfell of Fratton, Hampshire. 
Of the twenty-four works published by Cobb, some others include: 'The First Floor', a farce (Drury Lane, 13 January 1787); 'Love in the East', a comic opera (Drury Lane, 25 February 1788); 'Ramah Droog, or, Wine does Wonders', another comic opera (Covent Garden, 12 November 1798); and 'A House to be Sold', a musical piece in two acts (Drury Lane, 17 November 1802), which is a clumsy expansion of 'Maison a vendre', a one-act opera by Duval, with music by D'Aleyrac, first played in 1800. Other works include 'The Wife of Two Husbands', a musical drama (Drury Lane, 1 November 1803), a translation of 'La femme a deux maris' by Guilbert de Pixerecourt (Paris, 1803); 'Cherokee', an opera (Drury Lane, 20 December 1796); and 'Paul and Virginia', a musical drama (Covent Garden, 1 May 1800). In addition to the composers previously named, Joseph Mazzinghi, Michael Kelly, and Samuel Arnold also supplied music to Cobb's pieces. In William Gifford's 'Maeviad' 'Cobbe' ('sic') is mentioned in contemptuous terms. Cobb died in 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 5732


Cobb, Samuel (bap. 1675, d. 1713), schoolmaster and author, was baptized on 17 October 1675. His father, Samuel Cobb, a cooper and citizen of London, died before April 1683, when the former lord mayor John Moore sponsored the boy, then of St Andrew's, Holborn, for admission to Christ's Hospital, London. Among the 'blue-coat boys' Cobb advanced to Grecian. Upon his discharge on 27 February 1694 Christ's Hospital sent him and one classmate for advanced education, providing $12 toward his BA (1698) and $15 toward his MA (1702) at Trinity College, Cambridge. Cobb gave his tripos speech on 19 February 1702; on 11 March he became 'under grammar master' of Christ's Hospital. He was granted residence in 1704, and although school records report him 'often disguised with strong liquors', he kept his place until his death. 
Cobb's earliest experience with the London literary establishment was unpropitious. While still a pupil at Christ's Hospital he wrote 'A Pindarique Ode... [in] Memory of... Queen Mary' (1694), only to see it printed as if 'written by J. D. Gent'. In his thoroughly entitled 'Bersaba, or, The love of David... written by Samuel Cobb, student of Trinity College, Cambridge' (1695), he protested that 'the Ode was snatch'd from me... abruptly and unfortunately'. Readers acquiesced: 'J. D. Gent proves only Blue-Coat C[obb]' (H. MacDonald, 'John Dryden: a Bibliography', 1939, 183). Continuing to aim appropriate sentiments in the proper direction, without approaching Dryden's success, Cobb churned out 'Pax redux... on the Return of His Majesty and the Happy Conclusion of the Peace' (1697), 'The Portugal Expedition' (1704), 'Honour Retriev'd... [re] Victories Obtain'd over the French and Bavarians' (1705), and the like. The same year that Dryden died, however, Cobb published a work with implications beyond the occasions of his truncated lifetime. 'Poetae Britannici: a Poem, Satyrical and Panegyrical' (1700) surveys English literary history, emphasizing 'simplicity of style and beauty of content' in ways that anticipate mid-century developments of visual and sublime effects in poetry (E. Rothstein, 'Restoration and Eighteenth-Century Poetry', 1981, 183). 
Cobb's work gained further respect with the publication in 1780-82 of John Nichols's 'Select Collection of Poems', which included seven poems by Cobb (7.238-66). Nichols further acclaimed 'The female reign: an ode, alluding to Horace, B. 4. od. 14... attempted in the style of Pindar, occasion'd by the wonderful successes of the arms of her majesty and her allies' (1709), recommending that Robert Dodsley republish it as adapted by Isaac Watts ('GM', 23, 1753, 282-5) rather than as admired by Joseph Warton (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 1812-16, 6.170; R. Dodsley, ed., 'A Collection of Poems', 4 vols., 1748-9, 1.69-81). 
Despite scholars' appreciation for that ode's Greek-derived verse form and Roman theme applied to current events, the book-buying public preferred two less scholarly items. In 1712 Cobb published both his modernization of Chaucer's 'Miller's Tale' and his translation of Edward Holdsworth's 'Muscipula' (1708), a Latin mock-heroic that inspired frequent reprints and ten other translations. Cobb's 'Mouse-Trap' was separately published five times, and included in John Torbuck's 'Collection of Welsh Travels' (1738). The only rival to Cobb's 'Miller's Tale' was never reprinted, whereas Cobb's version reappeared at least eleven times in miscellanies and collections including 'The Canterbury Tales of Chaucer, Modernis'd by Several Hands' (ed. G. Ogle, 3 vols., 1741). Only the equally bawdy 'Reeve's Tale' modernized by Thomas Betterton (pseudonym for Alexander Pope) rivalled Cobb's 'Miller's Tale' in frequency of republication. Thus, because few readers before 1775 overcame the barriers of Middle English editions, Cobb shares responsibility for the prevalent eighteenth-century impression of Chaucer as 'a comic poet chiefly remarkable for the scurrility of his verses' (C. Spurgeon, 'Five Hundred Years of Chaucer Criticism', 3 vols., 1925, 1.liii). 
An anecdote and two published letters allow glimpses of Cobb's personality. His Cambridge professor Richard Bentley 'found his criticisms upon a Greek exercise, which Cobb had presented, refuted one after another by Pindar's authority, [whereupon Bentley] cried out at last, 'Pindar was a bold fellow, but thou art an impudent one'' (S. Johnson, 'Lives of the English Poets', ed. G. B. Hill, 3 vols., 1905, 3.227). Audacity would seem to echo in Cobb's 'Discourse on Criticism and the Liberty of Writing', prefacing 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1707) and addressed to his former classmate Richard Carter at his home in Barbados. With enthusiasm Cobb writes of 'secret Springs of the Soul, and those sudden Emotions, which excite illustrious Men, to act and speak out of the Common Road', and with cynicism of a war that has produced only 'What battles generally do; bad Poets, and worse Criticks'. Rushing for the mail ship, Cobb closes by promising Carter 'the rest on the Pindaric Style'. He published the rest with 'The Female Reign', addressing 'a gentleman in the University' and shrugging, 'Whether you will call the following lines a Pindaric ode, or irregular stanzas, gives me no disturbance'. Such comments accord with contemporary appreciation for Cobb's 'sound Learning, ready Wit, and good Humour', so described by Giles Jacob, who singles out 'Clavis Virgiliana, or, New Observations upon the Works of Virgil' (1714). 
Cobb's other posthumous publication likewise documents esteem both for his learning and wit. 'News from both Universities' (1714) preserves his 1702 tripos speech, plus a Latin mock-heroic with English translation dated four months after his death. Perhaps its author was his friend from Barbados, for a Richard Carter was writing life insurance pamphlets in London between 1711 and 1715. Cobb, though, had many literary contacts. With John Ozell, Nicholas Rowe, and others he collaborated to translate from Greek 'The Works of Lucian' (4 vols., 1710-11); from French 'Boileau's Lutrin' (1708), and 'The Works of Monsieur Boileau' (3 vols., 1711-13); and from seventeenth-century Latin the 'Callipaedia' (1710) of Claude Quillet, whose writings on 'Eudoxus' and 'Gassendus' Cobb alone translated (both 1712). 
School responsibilities motivated other works. For Christ's Hospital Cobb translated 'A Synopsis of Algebra' (1709) from the Latin of Joannes Alexander of Bern. He composed lyrics to John Barrett's music for every extant Easter anthem during his years in residence. He also wrote 'The Oak and the Briar' published in 'English Gratitude, or, The Whig Miscellany' (1713), and translated Robert Freind's Latin epitaph for the Westminster Abbey monument to Philip Carteret (J. Crull, 'Antiquities of St Peter's', 3rd edn, 2 vols., 1722, 2.101-2). 
Cobb died, unmarried, at Christ's Hospital on 18 September 1713, and was buried in the cloisters. 


@@@@@


doc= 5733


Cobbe, Charles (1687-1765), Church of Ireland archbishop of Dublin, was born in Winchester, the youngest son of Thomas Cobbe, governor of the Isle of Man, and of his wife, Veriana, daughter of James Chaloner MP. He was first educated at Winchester College. He afterwards matriculated, on 12 November 1705, at Trinity College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1709 and MA in 1712. In August 1717 he went to Ireland as chaplain to the lord lieutenant, Charles, duke of Bolton. He married Dorothea, widow of Sir John Rawdon and daughter of Sir Richard Levinge, speaker of the Irish House of Commons and lord chief justice of the Irish court of common pleas. 
Cobbe's first ecclesiastical preferment was the rectory of Skryne and Ballymagarvey in the diocese of Meath. Afterwards he was appointed dean of Ardagh (22 January 1719), whence he was promoted to the sees of Killala and Achonry by patent dated 30 May 1720. He was translated to the see of Dromore by patent dated 16 February 1727, and thence in March 1731 to Kildare, with which latter appointment he held, 'in commendam', the deanery of Christ Church, Dublin, and the preceptory of Tully, co. Kildare. On 19 July 1734 he was sworn of the privy council. He took the degrees of BD and DD at Dublin in 1735, and he was created DD at Oxford by diploma dated 9 July 1744. He was translated to the archiepiscopal see of Dublin by letters patent dated 4 March 1743. 
Cobbe died at St Sepulchre's, Dublin, on 14 April 1765 and was buried at Donabate, co. Dublin, where he had a country seat. Historians have disagreed in their assessment of the vigour with which he performed his ecclesiastical duties. John Wesley met with him in 1747 to discuss Cobbe's opposition to lay preachers, but praised him for encouraging his clergy to distribute religious books to the poor ('Works of John Wesley', 187-9). 


@@@@@


doc= 5734


Cobbett, William (1763-1835), political writer and farmer, was born on 9 March 1763 in Farnham, Surrey, the third of four children of George Cobbett, publican and farmer, and his wife, Anne Vincent. 
As a youth Cobbett worked chiefly as a ploughboy and gardener: he frequently boasted in adult life that he was 'bred at the plough-tail' ('A Year's Residence in the United States of America', 1818, general preface, paragraph 8). Although he vaguely recalled attending school for a brief period during his youth, Cobbett learned his letters at home, chiefly from his father. In 1783, longing for new horizons and adventure, he attempted to enlist in the Royal Navy, though by inadvertence he found himself in a marching regiment, the West Norfolk 54th foot. For the first year of his enlistment Cobbett was stationed at Chatham, where he worked at his military exercises and read voraciously: 'novels, plays, history, poetry, all were read', he later wrote, 'and nearly with equal avidity' ('Life and Adventures of Peter Porcupine', ed. G. D. H. Cole, 1927, 33). Between 1785 and 1791, while stationed in New Brunswick, Cobbett put his knowledge of English grammar and letters to good effect, quickly becoming clerk to his regiment and rising from the rank of corporal to sergeant-major. In his office as clerk Cobbett believed that he encountered instances of peculation by the officers of his regiment, and upon returning to England and receiving his military discharge in 1791, wrote an anonymous pamphlet entitled 'The Soldier's Friend' (1792), a passionate indictment of the harsh treatment and poor pay of the common soldier. At the same time Cobbett attempted to launch a court martial against the offending officers, and when this threatened to rebound on Cobbett himself, he and his new wife, Nancy Anne Reid (1774-1848) -- an English woman whom he had first met in New Brunswick and married at Woolwich on 5 February 1792 -- fled to France for six months and subsequently to the United States, where they remained from 1792 to 1800. 
For the first eighteen months of his American residence Cobbett was employed tutoring French emigres in the English language, but in the summer of 1794 he ventured into the American public press by authoring a pamphlet that vehemently denounced the scientist and democrat Dr Joseph Priestley, who had recently fled Britain and been jubilantly received by republican and democratic supporters at New York. For the next five years, usually under the pen-name of Peter Porcupine, Cobbett wrote numerous pamphlets and newspapers articles (he subsequently collected and reprinted his American writings in 'Porcupine's Works', 12 vols., 1801) which vigorously condemned the French Revolution as well as other expressions of democratic and republican thought -- he characterized Thomas Paine, for example, as 'an unconscionable dog', 'a wretched traitor and apostate', and 'a man famous for nothing but his blasphemy and his hatred of England' ('Porcupine's Works', 4.79, 4.87; 5.165; 'Political Register', 8 Jan 1803, 2). As an anti-Jacobin polemicist, Cobbett identified his politics most closely with the federalists -- the pro-British and anti-French faction under the leadership of Alexander Hamilton -- while taking angry aim at the pro-French, Jacobin-sympathizing democratic faction led by Thomas Jefferson. Yet despite his high profile in the United States, Cobbett always remained ambivalent towards American culture and society, and when pressed by a severe libel case in 1800, he and his family, which now included a daughter, Anne, and a son, William, packed their belongings and set sail for England. Cobbett's farewell message to Americans observed that 'when people care not two straws for each other, ceremony at parting is mere grimace' ('Porcupine's Works', 12.109-10). 
The government of William Pitt, delighted with Cobbett's contributions to the anti-Jacobin cause, immediately offered him control over a government-owned newspaper, but Cobbett declined the offer, preferring to launch his own daily newspaper, and thus to maintain at least the appearance of independence. Cobbett's daily paper 'The Porcupine', bearing the motto 'Fear God, Honour the King', was duly launched on 30 October 1800, but circulation remained low, and late in 1801 he sold his interest in it. Within a few months, however, he began the 'Political Register', a periodical which was published, almost without exception, every week between January 1802 and Cobbett's death in 1835. Totalling eighty-nine volumes, or some 42,000 pages, the 'Political Register' is the most important and detailed record of Cobbett's career. Most of his twenty books were serialized in the 'Register' in whole or in part, and in almost each issue he set forth his political and social viewpoints in the leading article -- an editorial innovation that Cobbett himself introduced to English journalism. Between 1809 and 1812 Cobbett was jointly involved in the editing and publishing of 'Cobbett's Complete Collection of State Trials', and between 1804 and 1812 he was active in collecting and printing parliamentary debates from the Norman conquest onward. Owing to financial difficulties he sold his shares in both projects in 1812 (as the purchaser of the latter was T. C. Hansard, it might be said that the official record of parliamentary proceedings that today is called 'Hansard' could justly be termed 'Cobbett'). 
Cobbett's political commentary in the early numbers of the 'Register' was thoroughly anti-Jacobin, but by 1804 he began questioning the financial and political policies of the government. Under William Pitt's administration, Cobbett complained, the growing national debt and numerous awards of unmerited sinecures were beggaring the country and heightening animosity between those who paid taxes and those who lived off taxes. At first Cobbett's answer was to support the election of more independent country gentlemen to parliament, but by 1807 he was lending his support to Francis Burdett, John Cartwright, and other campaigners for parliamentary reform. At the same time Cobbett became increasingly obsessed with financial issues, especially the national debt and the government's increasing reliance upon paper money. He opposed these trends for the rest of his days, regularly decrying government debts and paper currencies in his writings, notably in his 'Paper Against Gold' (1815). By the early 1820s Cobbett was convinced that the debt was too large ever to be paid off, and accordingly vowed to roast himself on a gridiron if the government could restore payment in specie without defaulting on the debt (henceforth Cobbett and his critics included sketches of gridirons in their writings and cartoons). 
During the early 1800s the 'Register' focused chiefly on metropolitan politics but gradually from 1805 onwards Cobbett became increasingly concerned with rural England, particularly the economic hardship of farmworkers. In 1805 he purchased a farm at Botley in Hampshire, and it was here that Cobbett (save for the years 1810-12, which he spent imprisoned in Newgate after he was prosecuted by the government for publicly criticizing the flogging of several militiamen at Ely), together with his wife and four children, made his primary residence between 1805 and 1817. Life at Botley was happy for the Cobbetts. Political reformers were frequent guests and the Cobbett family became deeply involved in Hampshire rural society and in the daily routine of farming. As Mary Russell Mitford observed in 1806, Cobbett's ready hospitality, together with his ruddy complexion, red waistcoat, ample mid-section, and twinkling eye, gave him the appearance 'of a great English yeoman of the old time' ('Recollections of a Literary Life', 1883 edn, 200-01). Similarly, William Hazlitt saw in Cobbett a Georgian gentleman farmer who 'speaks and thinks plain, broad, downright English' ('The Spirit of the Age', ed. E. D. Mackerness, 1969, 244-56). Cobbett's countryman appearance came as a surprise to some observers, such as the tory adversary at a Hampshire county meeting in 1813 who nearly mistook Cobbett for 'one of the innocent bacon-eaters of the New forest'. Wisely, this same commentator went on to observe that 'when I knew that it was Cobbett, you may believe I did not allow his placid easy smile to take me in' (Letters of Timothy Tickler, esquire, 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', 14, 1823, 329). 
The years 1816-17 were important but difficult ones for Cobbett. The massive demobilization which followed the end of the Napoleonic wars in 1815, together with the disastrous grain harvest of 1816, brought acute hunger and unemployment to the countryside. Cobbett's response was to launch a mass-circulation, broadsheet edition of the 'Political Register' (priced at 2died it was derisively labelled 'two-penny trash' by its detractors, a title that Cobbett gleefully adopted for the new venture), in which he urged English workers not to riot but to pursue parliamentary reform as the great answer to their economic plight. The election of radical reformers to parliament, he argued, would ensure lower taxes, fuller employment, and increased earnings for all working people. The first cheap 'Register' alone sold 44,000 copies in the first month, and Home Office records for 1816-17 indicate that its distribution was sufficiently widespread to cause great concern to the government, particularly to the home secretary, Lord Sidmouth, who early in 1817 rushed several acts through parliament in an attempt to reverse the growth of public support for parliamentary reform. Fearing incarceration because of the new measures, Cobbett set sail for the United States, and arrived in New York on 5 May 1817. Having taken a lease on a Long Island farm, Cobbett lived a quieter life than during his first American sojourn, but he continued the 'Political Register' from abroad as well as writing more books and tracts, most notably the agricultural treatise 'A Year's Residence in the United States of America' (1818) and his widely selling 'Grammar of the English Language' (1818). This latter work, which Cobbett saw as a testament to the intellectual capacity of himself and of the common people as a whole, was intended especially for the use of 'soldiers, sailors, apprentices, and plough-boys'; accordingly Cobbett cheekily drew his examples of faulty grammar from the writings and speeches of such renowned political leaders as the duke of Wellington, Lord Castlereagh, and George III himself. The English 'Grammar' continued to be used in English schools into the 1920s and 1930s; Cobbett's 'French Grammar', first published in 1824, enjoyed rather less success, though even it had passed into fifteen editions by 1862. 
When Cobbett returned from the United States in October 1819 his personal and political fortunes were at a low ebb. He was bankrupt and lost his farm at Botley as a result. The flight to America had damaged his relations with other leaders of the radical movement, most notably his erstwhile ally Henry Hunt, who had remained in Britain during Sidmouth's repressions and stoically endured a prison sentence. None the less, Cobbett believed that he brought with him -- in the form of the bones of Thomas Paine -- a powerful and emotive symbol around which all parliamentary reformers could rally. But it was not to be. After the Peterloo massacre of August 1819 a new cast of radical leaders began to emerge, and Cobbett himself proved uncomfortable on the hustings during his unsuccessful candidacy in a Coventry by-election in March 1820. During the latter half of 1820, however, Cobbett's fortunes began to improve, chiefly because of the increased circulation of the 'Register' which resulted from his involvement with the Queen Caroline affair. Cobbett devoted numerous 'Registers' to Queen Caroline's cause as well as writing some of her public statements, including the letter to the king which was published in prominent newspapers shortly before her trial in 1820. Happier times were also ushered in when Cobbett resumed his gardening and agricultural interests by beginning a 4 acre seed farm in Kensington. At the same time he wrote several 'sermons' (so-called to avoid the stamp tax), which were in part intended as answers to the conservative and moralizing tracts of Hannah More and the Cheap Repository Tract Society, and also his little manual 'Cottage Economy' (1821), a delightful and highly readable book which instructs English workers in how to brew their own beer, keep bees, and fatten hogs. 
The distressed state of English farming was Cobbett's single greatest concern throughout the 1820s. Sometimes to the irritation of local landlords and farmers, Cobbett would make uninvited appearances at county meetings, where he sought to convince landholders that the only solution to their post-war economic distress lay in a radical reform of parliament, which by 1820 he saw as entailing nothing less than universal manhood suffrage. It was partly to spread this message, and partly to strengthen his knowledge of rural England, that Cobbett now undertook his celebrated rural rides, most of them between 1821 and 1826. Describing his purpose as to hear 'what gentlemen, farmers, tradesmen, journeymen, labourers, women, girls, boys, and all have to say; reasoning with some, laughing with others, and observing all that passes' ('Political Register', 14 Dec 1822, 686), Cobbett rode on horseback through most of the southern counties, attending county meetings, conversing with villagers, and then putting his observations into writing for the 'Political Register'. A separate volume of his travel writings, entitled 'Rural Rides', first appeared in 1830 and the 'rides' have subsequently appeared in many different versions and editions on account of their accurate and colourful presentation of the English countryside and rural society of Cobbett's time. Late in the 1820s and early in the 1830s, Cobbett periodically ventured into the midlands, but owing to his frequently expressed disdain for 'northern' diets and Scottish 'feelosofers', he made only one trip to the north and only one to Scotland (he made his first and only trip to Ireland during the last year of his life). It was Cobbett's great boast that he was a 'South-of-England' countryman who disliked factories, industrial cities, and even the metropolis itself. He characterized London as the 'Great Wen' on account of its tendency to consume the lion's share of the produce of the countryside and, through its absorption of tax revenues, to deprive rural workers of their traditional fare of bread, bacon, and beer. Meanwhile, from 1827 Cobbett resumed large-scale farming upon leasing an 80 acre farm on the south side of the Thames at Barn Elms. Here he experimented with crops of maize (which he encouraged for human consumption) as well as growing a special straw, which he hoped would allow England to rebuild its straw-plait industry and thereby provide more winter employment for country workers. The results of his experiments are duly noted in his agricultural writing of these years, most notably 'The Woodlands' (1825), 'Treatise on Corn' (1828), and 'The English Gardener' (1829). 
Cobbett's rural involvements left him well placed to represent the interests of England's farmworkers, with whom he identified more and more closely during the last fifteen years of his life. It came to Cobbett's notice during his rural rides that the agricultural workers were barely subsisting, especially in the southern, south-eastern, and western counties. From 1828 until 1830 he frequently warned the government that a major rural revolt was in the making, and that steps should be taken to ensure that rural workers were amply provided with employment opportunities, a living wage, and the full protection of the poor law. True to Cobbett's predictions, the southern rural workers arose in rebellion during the Captain Swing disturbances of 1830-31. The new whig government of Lord Grey, suspecting that Cobbett had helped to foment the rising, put him on trial in 1831 for inciting rural workers to commit acts of violence and incendiarism. But Cobbett, conducting his own defence, received an acquittal when the twelve-person jury could not agree on a verdict. Cobbett's national reputation was now enhanced. Even some of his supposedly quirky opinions, such as his claim that the rural workers of southern England would rather be hanged than live on potatoes and tea, were now found to constitute part of the platform of the Swing rioters. Immediately in the aftermath of the revolt Cobbett used his political momentum to agitate for the 'Reform Bill' of 1832, though on this matter he enlarged his constituency to include anyone -- whether landlord, farmer, banker, or merchant (he worked closely in 1831-2 with the Birmingham banker Thomas Attwood) -- who was prepared to support the terms of the bill, even though the proposed enlargement of the suffrage fell far short of what Cobbett and other radical leaders had hoped for. 
The passage of the 'Reform Act' in 1832 paved the way for Cobbett to realize his long-standing quest to be elected to the House of Commons. After unsuccessfully standing for Manchester in December 1832, he joined his friend and political ally John Fielden in a successful contest for the two seats representing the new parliamentary borough of Oldham. Cobbett had a short but distinguished career in parliament, frequently bringing on his head the ire of the house by such daring moves as his unsuccessful motion that the king be asked to dismiss Robert Peel from the privy council for gross mismanagement of the nation's finances. As he knew himself, he was more adept at representing the interests of southern agricultural workers than those of northern industrial labourers, a matter which brought praise from southern rural counties but complaints from some of Cobbett's Oldham electors. Opportunities to federate agricultural and industrial concerns were taken up by Cobbett from time to time, most notably in his support for the Tolpuddle Martyrs and in his unsuccessful but profound opposition to the 'Poor Law Amendment Act' of 1834. The eventual passage of the 'Poor Law Amendment Act' by the whig government demoralized Cobbett to the point where, for the first time in his public life, he called clearly and unequivocally for popular insurrection against the government. Two of his last books, 'Legacy to Labourers' (1834) and 'Legacy to Parsons' (1835), much like his earlier treatises 'The Poor Man's Friend' (1826-7) and his best-selling 'History of the Protestant Reformation' (1824-7), describe at length the means employed by the state to dispossess the English poor, beginning with the crown's appropriation of church lands during the Reformation. 
Cobbett, though, was nearing the end of his long and varied career. Plagued by unhappy conflicts with his wife and the rest of his family during his final years, he continued to write and to farm until his death. In 1832 he agreed to rent a farm of 130 acres at Normandy, near Ash in Surrey, some 7 miles from his birthplace at Farnham. It was here, surrounded by family members, that he died on 18 June 1835. Nine days later, on 27 June 1835, he was buried in the graveyard of St Andrew's Church in Farnham. Leaving a bankrupt estate, Cobbett was survived by his wife, Nancy, three daughters (Anne, Eleanor, and Susan) and four sons (William, John, James, and Richard). There are no direct descendants remaining. 
There are now a dozen biographies of Cobbett, and he has attracted interest and accolades from an enormous variety of thinkers and writers, including persons of such diverse political views as Karl Marx, Matthew Arnold, G. K. Chesterton, A. J. P. Taylor, Raymond Williams, Michael Foot, and E. P. Thompson. Cobbett's writings can appeal to both left- and right-wing thinkers on account of his populist style: he was conservative and backward-looking in many of his social and cultural ideals (one of his most resounding aims was to see a return to the rural England into which he was born in the 1760s) but at the same time he devised and fiercely promoted a thoroughly radical and democratic agenda in politics and economics. Unlike his mentor Thomas Paine, Cobbett was not interested in pursuing a republican programme for Britain; nor was he much interested in international politics. Cobbett was a 'Little Englander' who liked to boast that he was not a 'citizen of the world', for 'it is quite enough for me to think about what is best for England, Scotland and Ireland' ('Political Register', 20 Aug 1831, 495). Never forgetting his origins as a self-taught ploughboy, Cobbett sought to rest his platform and writing upon popular English ideals, perhaps most notably in his enthusiasm for fair play, old-style hospitality, manly sports, and preference for a vigorous rural culture over the supposedly effeminate and degenerative environment of the towns. Cobbett retained to the last a strong sense of national identity, frequently chiding the United States and other rival powers that they had better not 'swagger about and be saucy to England' ('Political Register', 2 June 1832, 545-6), and he stated that his attachment to the Church of England was partly motivated by the fact that it 'bears the name of my country' ('Life and Adventures of Peter Porcupine', ed. G. D. H. Cole, 1927, 33). Altogether Cobbett wrote and published some 30 million words over the course of forty years (perhaps more than any other English writer), and while many of these words can be exposed as contradictory and self-serving, it can be said wholeheartedly with Karl Marx that Cobbett was 'a plebeian by instinct and sympathy' (K. Marx, letter to 'New York Daily Tribune', 22 July 1853). 
For Cobbett the essence of England was its countryside, not the 'wen' of London or the industrial cities of the midlands and north. Although his agrarian and rural devotions sometimes drew criticism from even his fellow radicals, Cobbett's response was fair, simple, and personal: 'Born amongst husbandmen, bred to husbandry... it is natural that I should have a strong partiality for country life, and that I should enter more into the feelings of labourers of husbandry than into those of other labourers' ('Political Register', 5 May 1821, 343). Non-agricultural workers were also of concern to Cobbett, but it became his great mission to articulate the wants and aspirations of the 'chopsticks' (as he fondly called the rural labourers) because they were in his estimation, 'the very best and most virtuous of all mankind' ('Political Register', 29 Jan 1831, 288). Numerous commentators during the past century and a half have sought to measure or understand Cobbett in relation to urban and industrial models of politics, culture, and society. As a result Cobbett has too often been presented as anti-urban, anti-industrial, anti-modern. He was, in some ways, all of these things, but he was also a positive and original writer who sought to unite English workers, whether of town or country, on a national reform platform that would bring about a new democratic order. 


@@@@@


doc= 5735


Cobbin, Ingram (1777-1851), Congregational minister, was born in London in December 1777, and educated at Hoxton Academy. He became minister at South Molton in 1802, and afterwards officiated at Banbury, Holloway, Putney, Crediton, Worcester, and Lymington. For some time he acted as secretary to the British and Foreign School Society, and in 1819 he was appointed the first secretary of the Home Missionary Society, which he had helped to form. Ill health compelled him to retire from the ministry in 1828, and from then on he devoted his energies at his residence in Camberwell to writing. His extensive publications included school textbooks on arithmetic and English grammar, both of which ran to many editions, and a number of commentaries on the 'Bible', including 'The Bible Reader's Hand-Book' (1844) and 'The Child's Commentator on the Holy Scriptures' (1846). He also dealt in three works with the subject of popery, concluding with 'Scripture Light on Popish Darkness' (1851). He died at Denmark Cottage, Cold Arbour Lane, Kennington, London, on 10 March 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 5736


Cobbold, Elizabeth (1765-1824), poet and artist in cut paper, was born on 11 February 1765 and baptized at St Olave, Silver Street, London, on 6 March 1765. Her parents, Robert Knipe ('c'.1731-1801) and Alice Waller ('c'.1737-1797), were married at St Lawrence Jewry on 20 April 1758. In 1783 the family was in Manchester and Elizabeth's first collection of poetry was published there. She met Sir Joshua Reynolds in a London bookshop and dedicated her third work, 'Six Narrative Poems', to him in 1787; four years later, when her fourth work appeared, the Knipes were at Liverpool and there Elizabeth married William Clarke ('bap'. 1731, died 1791) at St Ann's Church on 16 November 1790. Clarke, an ailing sixty year old, was comptroller of customs at Ipswich, a portman who had been five times bailiff (joint mayor) there. Elizabeth was new to Ipswich and had only three months to taste the nonconformist and whig world that her husband inhabited before he died on 28 February 1791. She had less than six months to adapt to the idea of marrying again on 7 August 1791, but there was time that year for a two-volume novel, 'The Sword' by Eliza Clarke, to be published in Liverpool. Her second husband, John Cobbold (1746-1835), was a prosperous Ipswich brewer and banker, a pillar of the established church and the blue party and only twenty years her senior. Elizabeth was the ideal person to take on his fifteen children aged under seventeen from a first marriage and they had six more sons and a daughter over the next ten years. Her hands were too full for much writing, but for Ann Candler's benefit, she did edit 'Poetical Attempts', with a memoir, in 1803. Recognizing a rare vocal talent, she encouraged the Ipswich girl Mary Ann Goward, later Mrs Robert Keeley, to a successful stage career. She corresponded with the Bonapartist Capel Lofft and with Sir J. E. Smith PLS over his 'Flora Anglica'; George Sowerby the elder named a 'rare, and withal, elegant shell' (G. Sowerby, 'Mineral Conchology', 2.177, pl. 180) from the cragpits of the Suffolk coast 'Nucula Cobboldiae'. 
The Cobbolds moved from the Manor House on St Margaret's Green in Ipswich (where Margaret Catchpole served them) to Cliff House beside the brewery on the Orwell by 1798, then in 1814 to Holywells, newly built in the park whose healing springs fed the brewery below. At all their homes Elizabeth and the family entertained a wide circle of friends, generally including officers from the garrison -- especially the King's German Legion commanded by her friend Count Linsingen -- with genuine warmth and generosity. She wrote several dramatic pieces for the children (and even the officers) to perform, but none was published. An engaging speaker, Elizabeth founded, presided over, and raised funds for her Ipswich charities: the lying-in charity, the Society for Clothing the Infant Poor, and the annual charity bazaar. 
From 1806 the highlight of each year at Cliff House was the valentine party for which Cobbold employed her greatest skill in advance: designing and making up to eighty scissors-cut valentines to present to each of the unmarried guests and mounting them with an appropriate poem on red or blue paper. By folding the paper first she could make two or three copies at once; one always went into albums for eventual presentation to her own children. There is a collection of thirty-six of her designs from 1811 in the Suffolk Record Office, and the recently discovered albums that she made for her sons Robert Knipe and Richard Cobbold, each containing over a hundred examples, display great dexterity and originality. 
The valentine parties ran until 1822 when Elizabeth Cobbold was prevented by illness from holding one as usual, and two years later she was struck down by 'an alarming illness' in July, which, returning in October, rendered her unconscious for the week before she died on 17 October 1824. She was interred six days later in the Cobbold vault in St Clement's Church, but subscribers paid for an imposing mural monument in the civic church, St Mary le Tower, as 'a public testimony of respect for exalted talents and unwearied exertion in the cause of benevolence and charity'. Her 'Cliff Valentines' (poems only) for 1813 and 1814 were published in those years, and her 'Ode to Waterloo' in 1815. A memoir by Laetitia Jermyn (later the wife of James Ford) prefaces the posthumously collected 'Poems' (1825), which includes many unpublished pieces, to which members of the family added poorly etched reproductions of some of her cuts. Her prolific writings, often witty and generally addressed to a friend on a particular occasion, illuminate the provincial social scene in which she was such a genial and romantic influence. Much of her verse stoops to doggerel, only inappropriate when she attempted epic subjects. Her son Richard, curate to his uncle Thomas Cobbold at the Tower church, continued to organize exhibitions of his mother's valentines as well as public dinners and balls to raise funds for her charities; his own illustrated 'Valentine Verses' (1827) was published to promote the work further. Elizabeth's portrait conveys a comfortable, lovable personality; posthumous tributes praised her very diverse skills, but it is only the productions of her scissors that have enduring merit. 


@@@@@


doc= 5737


Cobbold, John Spencer (1768-1837), Church of England clergyman, son of the Revd Thomas Cobbold (1742-1831) and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Rust, was born at Occold, Suffolk, on 24 July 1768. He attended school in Ipswich and matriculated from Caius College, Cambridge, in 1786. He graduated BA as seventh wrangler in 1790, MA in 1793, and was a fellow of Caius, 1790-98. He taught at the Perse School, Cambridge, 1793-4, and at Nuneaton School from 1794. He was curate at Wilby, Suffolk, to his father, and followed him in 1805 to Woolpit, also as curate; on his father's death he became rector of Woolpit, where he spent the remainder of his life. He also held the vicarage of Shelland, Suffolk, to which he was instituted in 1793. In December 1798 he married Dorothy, daughter of Henry Homer, rector of Birdingbury. Cobbold published several sermons, two essays -- on immortality (1793) and on revelation (1797) -- and discourses on predestination (1801), which reject both predestination and religious enthusiasm. He died at Woolpit, Suffolk, on 3 April 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 5738


Cobbold, Richard (1797-1877), novelist and Church of England clergyman, was born on 9 September 1797 at the manor house in St Margaret's parish, Ipswich, just opposite the church where he was baptized on 8 November. He was the twentieth of twenty-two children of John Cobbold (1746-1835), brewer and banker of Ipswich, and fifth of seven by his second wife, Elizabeth Cobbold, nee Knipe (1765-1824). Cobbold was educated at Bury St Edmunds under Charles Blomfield, father of the bishop, and went on to spend seven years at King Edward VI Grammar School. He then moved to the Paston School at North Walsham. Here for three years he studied under W. T. Spurdens, proceeding to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in 1814. There two years later he won a scholarship and graduated BA in 1820, the year he was ordained deacon. He served as curate to his uncle Thomas Cobbold, resident rector at Woolpit, but absentee incumbent at St Mary-le-Tower, Ipswich. 
At Hollesley on 27 November 1822 Cobbold married Mary Anne ('bap'. 1801, died 1876), the only daughter of Jephtha and Mary Anne Waller. In 1824 John Cobbold purchased the right of presentation of the rich living of Wortham near Diss to provide for them, and Bishop Bathurst licensed Richard Cobbold's absence in Ipswich for the lifetime of the long-serving curate there. Cobbold was popular at the Tower church and enjoyed the social life of Ipswich, so that when in September 1828 the time came to move his wife and young family to the rectory he had built for them at Wortham they felt almost in exile. There they spent the rest of their lives. Their third son, Thomas Spencer Cobbold (1828-1886), became a scientist, but the two elder sons followed their father into the church. From 1844 to 1869 Cobbold was rural dean of Hartismere. 
Much influenced by his late mother's interests and charitable impulses, Cobbold published 'Valentine Verses' illustrated with his own naive lithographs in 1827 to benefit her favourite charities, but he came to be embarrassed by the critical reception of both poems and pictures. He is best known for his novel 'The History of Margaret Catchpole' (1845), which romanticized and distorted the already adventurous life of a woman who had been a servant of his parents at about the time of his birth. It was a best-seller, and went into many editions, but Richard had parted with the copyright for only $1000. He wrote and published much else in poetry and prose, none of it great nor for him remunerative, but some in good causes. The novel 'Mary Ann Wellington, the Soldier's Daughter, Wife and Widow' (1846) did benefit the real Mary Ann. 'Freston Tower' (1850) is a shallow fictional account of the early days of the Ipswich-born Thomas Wolsey. Cobbold edited 'John H. Steggall: a Real History of a Suffolk Man' (1857), useful as social history. 
Well into middle age, Cobbold indulged in the active pursuits popular with country clergymen. Fiercely partisan for his church, he would employ both inducements and sanctions to keep his flock loyal and his Sunday school full. Because he was nationally celebrated as an author, Cobbold attracted the interest locally of incognito sermon-tasters and journalists who wrote scathingly of his performance. Preaching in 1858, his voice was 'deep and very powerful; but his manner we could not help remarking is more pompous than impressive'. 'The exordium [of his sermon] was a trite collection of recurrences in Scripture of the words at the commencement of the text'. 'He grew verbose and proportionately feeble' (Gowing, 'Suffolk pulpit'). Despite the critics, he worked with devotion among his parishioners. 
In 1977 the work likely to prove Cobbold's most enduring monument was published by Batsford in a copiously illustrated edition by Ronald Fletcher, 'The Biography of a Victorian Village: Richard Cobbold's Account of Wortham, Suffolk, in 1860'. The original manuscripts, illustrated with Cobbold's charming amateur watercolour drawings, are preserved in the Suffolk Record Office. A sense of Cobbold's own isolation is combined with genuine understanding of and affection for all conditions of his parishioners. There is Old Soldier Smith who died in his wheelbarrow, sad Noah Fake, 'the Village carpenter -- the Village politician -- the Village factotum -- performing almost all offices and knowing himself to be but a poor performer' (Fletcher, 131), and Mrs Balding, a 'very nice little woman who jumped out of her garrett window deranged and ran over the fields in a state of nudity' (ibid., 94). 
The inspiration for Cobbold's record of his parish was a tragic one. In September 1860 his younger brother Edward, rector of Long Melford, burdened with personal problems, took his own life in a hotel room in Piccadilly. Reflecting on the many times he had walked from rectory to church on duty, Richard felt that as 'he was my youngest brother, so I must not expect to walk down many more times' (Fletcher, 69). It saddened him two years later when he felt bound to sell his right to the living of Wortham to King's College, Cambridge, to raise funds to help his sons to marry. He had another fifteen years to serve, and he left over $12,000 at his death, so ultimately the sale had been unnecessary. For the last year of their lives he and his wife suffered ill health, so that when on 26 December 1876 Mary Anne died aged seventy-five he was not told, and died himself on 5 January 1877. Each was buried after seven days in the churchyard at Wortham. 


@@@@@


doc= 5739


Cobbold, Thomas Spencer (1828-1886), helminthologist, was born at Ipswich on 26 May 1828, the third son of the Revd Richard Cobbold (1797-1877), novelist, and his wife, Mary Anne Waller ('bap'. 1801, died 1876). He was educated at Charterhouse School, and in 1844 became a pupil of J. Green Crosse, surgeon to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital. In 1847 he went to Edinburgh University, where he was assistant to professors Hughes Bennett and Goodsir; he graduated in medicine (as a gold medallist) in 1851. On 19 February the following year he married Frances Philippa Amys, daughter of John Hewitt Amys, gentleman, of Palgrave, Suffolk. 
After a short visit to Paris Cobbold returned to Edinburgh, where he became curator of the anatomical museum. While in post, in 1854 he attended the lectures of Edward Forbes, which further aroused his interest in natural history and geology. In 1857 he moved to London, where he was appointed lecturer on botany at St Mary's Hospital. In 1861 he obtained a similar post at the Middlesex Hospital, where for thirteen years he lectured on zoology and comparative anatomy. During this period Cobbold became devoted to helminthology, especially the study of parasitic worms. Many memoirs on the subject were contributed by him to the learned societies, and he was elected FRS in 1864. 
The following year financial considerations pushed Cobbold into medical practice in London but by specializing as a consultant on cases where the presence of internal parasites was suspected he continued to build his reputation in helminthology. In 1868 he was, through Sir Roderick Murchison's influence, appointed Swiney lecturer on geology at the British Museum. His lectures proved popular and achieved a total cumulative audience of some 15,000 over the course of his five-year appointment. In 1873 he received an appointment as professor of botany at the Royal Veterinary College, which shortly afterwards instituted a special professorship of helminthology for him. 
Cobbold's work, which was original and painstaking, successfully elucidated many obscure features in the history of animal parasites. His principal books included 'Entozoa: an Introduction to the Study of Helminthology, with Reference more Particularly to the Internal Parasites of Man' (1864; supp. 1869), 'The Internal Parasites of our Domesticated Animals' (1873), 'Tapeworms' (1866; 4th edn, 1883), and 'Parasites of Meat and Prepared Flesh Food' (1884). He was also a contributor to numerous encyclopaedias and dictionaries, and to journals including the 'Annals of Natural History', the 'Journal' and 'Transactions' of the Linnean Society (of which he was a fellow), the Zoological Society's 'Proceedings' and 'Transactions', and the 'Intellectual Observer'. 
Cobbold died of heart disease on 20 March 1886 at his home, 74 Portsdown Road, Paddington, London. He was survived by his wife. In 1887 she and one of their sons offered to institute a gold medal in his memory at the Linnean Society, but the conditions were too restrictive and the society declined. 


@@@@@


doc= 5740


Cobden, Edward (1683-1764), Church of England clergyman and writer, the son of William Cobden, a gentleman, and his wife, Kathern, was born in July 1683 at Haslemere in Surrey and baptized there on 15 July. He was educated at Winchester College, and matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, on 19 November 1702, graduating BA in 1706 and proceeding BD and DD in 1723. In 1713 he incorporated at Cambridge, taking the MA degree as a member of King's College. After entering holy orders he became chaplain to Edmund Gibson, bishop successively of Lincoln (1715-23) and London (1723-48). From 1711 to 1727 he was vicar of Sandon, Hertfordshire, a position which he held in plurality with that of Buckden, Huntingdonshire (1720-27). In 1721 he was advanced to the prebendal stall of Erpingham in the cathedral church of Lincoln, and he remained a canon of Lincoln until his death. Following the translation of Bishop Gibson to London Cobden acquired further preferments in rapid succession: the rectory of Acton, Middlesex, in 1726; a canonry of St Paul's Cathedral in 1727; and the rectory of St Augustine with St Faith, London, in 1730. He succeeded Dr Tyrwhitt as archdeacon of London in 1742, and became president of Sion College in 1751. He married a daughter of the Revd Thomas Jessop, of Tempsford, Bedfordshire; she died in 1762. 
Cobden gained an early reputation as a poet. Several of his school compositions survive, among them 'Duodecim scruporum lusus, Anglice: a Game at Draughts' (1701), and in 1703 he published an encomium upon the recently completed chapel of Trinity College, Oxford. His tributes to 'Spot, a Favourite Cat' (1715) and to Joseph Addison (1720) were executed with feeling. However, he soon became better known as a fashionable preacher, who often addressed topical subjects, including the reformation of manners, hospital building, and the religious education of children. Cobden's pronounced high-churchmanship is evident in his first published theological work, 'A Letter from a Minister to his Parishioner, upon his Building a Meeting-House' (1718), in which he warned sternly that 'separation from our Established Church is contrary to the Laws of God' (Cobden, 'Discourses', 1.305) and that wilful schism remained sinful, notwithstanding the legal indulgence provided by the 'Toleration Act'. He was a friend of Dr Daniel Waterland, whom he described as 'alterum Athanasium' (ibid., 2.269), and in 1739 he published 'The Instruction Afforded by the Church of England Considered', a sermon preached in St Mary-le-Bow at the Hutchins lecture, an annual high-church forum. Cobden maintained a high doctrine of episcopal ministry, pointed deliberately against the dissenters, in an address, 'Sacerdotii delegatio, officium et dignitas', delivered to the London clergy in 1752. Several of his later published poems celebrate the memory of King Charles I, the royal martyr, and Queen Anne, founder of the bounty to the clergy. 
Despite these sympathies, and despite unwavering loyalty to his old schoolfellow Edward Holdsworth, whose open refusal to take the oath of allegiance to King George I was praised in 'A Letter to the Author of the 'Muscipula'' (1718), Cobden was personally no Jacobite. He glorified the house of Hanover in verses of 1715 and 1727, and dismissed the Jacobite rising of 1745 as 'an insolent and dangerous rebellion' (Cobden, 'Discourses', 1.288). After his appointment as a chaplain-in-ordinary to King George II in 1730 Cobden became a noted court preacher. His sermon 'Of waiting for our change' was delivered in December 1737, only three weeks after the death of Queen Caroline, but in 1748 he forfeited royal favour by preaching 'A persuasive to chastity', a sermon on 'Genesis' 39: 9, which many thought was intended to reflect on the king himself. Unmoved by fierce criticism Cobden duly published the text, contending that 'nothing in the sentiment or expression will be found unworthy of the sacred Function of a Preacher of the Gospel, or the serious attention of a Christian Assembly' (Cobden, 'Persuasive'). He was never forgiven, and although he continued to preach at court, and gave one notable final sermon, 'A Dissuasive Against Popery' (1751), advancing years and mounting resentment at the meagreness of his reward led him in 1752 to resign his place. In 1757 he printed 'Discourses and Essays, in Prose and Verse', dedicated to his parishioners at Acton and at St Augustine with St Faith: this included several previously unpublished sermons, including a group of nine on the beatitudes, and a large quantity of verse, previously collected as 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1748). Cobden died on 22 April 1764. 


@@@@@


doc= 5741


Cobden, Richard (1804-1865), manufacturer and politician, was born on 3 June 1804 in a small farmhouse at Dunford near the village of Heyshott in Sussex, the fourth of eleven children of William Cobden (1775-1833) and his wife, Millicent, 'nee' Amber (1775-1825). 
The Cobdens had been small farmers in the Midhurst area of Sussex for several centuries. In 1809 William Cobden bought a small farm at Guillard's Oak, but it fared badly and in 1814 he was forced to sell and move to Hampshire, Surrey, and finally Barnet. He later established a shopkeeping business, but this too failed, in 1826. When the Guillard's Oak farm was sold relatives took charge of the eleven Cobden children, and Richard was sent to school at Bowes Hall in Teesdale, Yorkshire. On finishing school at the age of fifteen, Cobden joined his uncle's warehousing business in Old Change, in the City of London, where he started out as a clerk, before becoming a commercial traveller, seeking muslin and calico orders in Ireland, Scotland, and the north of England. He was not particularly happy in this position. He tried to escape the firm by getting a job in the Southern Netherlands in 1823, and in 1826, following the collapse of his uncle's firm, he joined his uncle's partner's new firm, Partridge and Price. 
In partnership with his friends Sheriff and Gillett, Cobden set up his own business in 1828 in Watling Street, not far from Partridge and Price, having raised $2000 to do so, some of it from John Lewis, the Regent Street retailer. The firm's initial business came from acting as London commission agents for Fort Brothers, the Manchester calico printers. In 1831 the duty on calico was repealed and Cobden and his partners leased a factory from Forts in Sabden, a small village near Burnley in Lancashire, and began printing their own calicoes. In January 1832 Cobden moved from London to Manchester, and bought a house there in Mosley Street shortly afterwards. Cobden's business thrived. By 1836 the firm had an annual turnover of $150,000, with profits of $23,000. It was not all plain sailing, however. In 1840 Cobden claimed the firm lost $20,000 in the 1837 trade crisis, and throughout the 1840s the firm's fortunes continued to fluctuate. However, in the mid-1830s the outlook was sufficiently stable to allow Cobden time to devote to other concerns, and in 1839 his elder brother Frederick (whose own business had failed in 1831) was put in charge of Cobden's interest in the firm. 
Although Cobden's formal schooling ended at the age of fifteen, he read widely during his early adulthood, and broadened his horizons through travel in his early thirties. His diaries record acquaintance with Shakespeare, Burns, Washington Irving, and Cervantes among others, and from the library he left on his death it is clear that throughout his life he enjoyed works of history and political economy, especially those connected with France and America. But the earliest and most lasting impressions were made by the work of the Scottish rationalist writer and phrenologist George Combe (who became a friend) and of Adam Smith. Cobden's lifelong faith in individual improvement was derived initially from Combe's 'Essay on the Constitution of Man' (1828), and his positive approach to economic development (often at odds with the political economy of the day) came from his reading of Smith's 'The Wealth of Nations' (1776). 
Cobden's first intervention in public affairs came as tensions worsened between whigs and radicals at Westminster. In September 1834, using the pseudonym Libra, he wrote a letter to the 'Manchester Times' in which he defended Lord Brougham from the attacks of the London 'Times'. Archibald Prentice, the manager of the 'Manchester Times', was clearly impressed by Libra's contribution, although the paper's editorial did wish that Libra's 'abilities had been occupied on some matter of more national importance' (27 Sept 1834, 3). Prentice later claimed that Cobden went on to write a series of letters for his paper in 1835. However, neither Cobden nor Libra reappeared in the paper in the ensuing months. Instead, Cobden did indeed turn his attention to national affairs, and using another pseudonym, this time A Manchester Manufacturer, wrote a pamphlet entitled 'England, Ireland and America', which was published by the London publisher Ridgway in the spring of 1835. In this pamphlet Cobden attacked David Urquhart, the secretary to the British embassy in Constantinople, who, along with some sections of radical opinion in the House of Commons, was calling for British intervention to prevent Russian encroachment on Turkey. Cobden argued that instead of costly intervention in the unstable affairs of the continent, Britain should look to her own problems, notably Ireland, and also strengthen the Atlantic economy. 
In the summer of 1835 Cobden visited America for the first time, spending three months touring the eastern seaboard and travelling through Pennsylvania, upstate New York, and Massachusetts. The visit confirmed his earlier impressions of America's infinite capacity for the development of wealth and commerce, and made him realize that unless Britain changed its commercial policy America would soon outstrip all the old economies. In 1836 Cobden returned to his polemic with Urquhart, writing the pamphlet 'Russia', which was published in July, and which analysed the Russo-Turkish dispute in much more detail, attempting to play down the Turcophilia that was rife in Britain in the 1830s. In October Cobden embarked on a long tour, sailing via Lisbon, Gibraltar, and Malta to the eastern end of the Mediterranean, as far as Constantinople, meeting Mehmet Ali in Egypt, before returning via Greece in April 1837. 
Despite the pamphlets, Cobden remained relatively unknown in national political circles. He did continue the polemic with Urquhart in 'Tait's Edinburgh Magazine' during 1837-8 (Cobden probably came into contact with William Tait through Combe), but these contributions were not signed. In Manchester, however, Cobden became increasingly prominent in local affairs, and it was on the basis of this activity that he became more widely known in London. Cobden's initial involvement was in the field of education and social enquiry. He supported the founding of an infant school in Sabden, established a phrenological society in Manchester, joined the Manchester Literary Society (becoming vice-president in 1836) and the Manchester Statistical Society (in 1835), and helped found the Manchester Athenaeum (1836). Cobden played a leading role in the local Friends of Education, which in October 1837 organized a large public meeting in favour of national education. Through this particular organization Cobden first met John Bright, when the latter invited him to speak on educational reform in Rochdale two months later. Cobden was also very active in municipal politics. He became a police commissioner, and in 1836 was elected to the board of the Manchester chamber of commerce. As a member of the chamber of commerce, he gave evidence to two important parliamentary select committees -- on the postage in May 1838, and on banks of issue in April 1840, when he called for there to be only one bank of issue, though not necessarily the Bank of England. 
In 1836 Cobden was called to serve as a juror on the court leet of the manor of Manchester, the main parochial body responsible for municipal administration in Manchester. The court leet had become increasingly ineffectual, and Cobden and other local Liberals (mainly dissenters) decided to avail themselves of the 'Municipal Corporations Act' and gain incorporation for Manchester and for nearby Bolton as well. To do this meant not only defeating entrenched tory opinion in the city, but also winning the moderate and extreme wings of local radicalism, who were suspicious of what were seen as whig centralizing measures. With this in mind, at the end of 1837 Cobden wrote a pamphlet entitled 'Incorporate your Borough', in which he urged his fellow citizens to use incorporation to end landed dominion over the towns. Cobden's involvement in the campaign for incorporation took him to London, and there he met up with the leading radicals of the day, including Joseph Parkes (who knew of Cobden by reputation). Parkes masterminded many of the incorporation campaigns and became a lifelong friend. Through these metropolitan contacts, Cobden was put in touch with James Coppock, the prominent Stockport Liberal election agent, and he stood for that constituency in the general election of July 1837, appearing on a platform alongside Daniel O'Connell, but was unsuccessful. Manchester gained its charter of incorporation in September 1838, with Cobden promising that the flunkeyism of the old system -- 'the maces, cloaks, chains' -- would be done away with. He became one of its first aldermen, although he rarely attended council meetings after 1839. 
Later in 1838 Cobden began his involvement with the campaign to repeal the corn laws, a campaign that was to occupy virtually all his time for the next eight years. Inspired largely by J. B. Smith, several Manchester merchants and manufacturers set up the Anti-Corn Law Association in October 1838. Cobden, who had left the country in August for a three-month tour of the German states, Austria, Switzerland, and Belgium, was not among the initial members, but did join later in the same month. Influenced by Smith, and also by G. R. Porter, the Board of Trade statistician, whom he had met at the British Association meeting in Manchester in 1837, Cobden had come round to believing the case for total repeal. However, as with the campaign for incorporation, Cobden and the other members of the Anti-Corn Law Association found that the rest of Manchester was reluctant to be dragged into an agitation for total repeal, and its sitting MPs were anxious not to do anything contrary to the whigs. In a move that anticipated the later tactics of the Anti-Corn Law League, Cobden, Smith, and others converted local opinion by acting on the electoral process. In December 1838 the anti-cornlaw advocates dominated the town council and mayoral elections, and in 1839 they purged the Manchester chamber of commerce of its moderate elements. The chamber of commerce then orchestrated the local petitioning campaign in support of C. P. Villiers's Commons motion for repeal in March 1839, and Cobden also sought to enlist Lord Brougham's support. When this motion was defeated, Cobden realized that more direct action would be required to convert parliament to repeal. MPs, he declared, needed to be 'made uncomfortable in their seats' (Edsall, 72). On 20 March 1839, the day after the defeat of Villiers's motion, the Anti-Corn Law League was formed at a meeting in Manchester. 
Although still based in Manchester, the Anti-Corn Law League embarked on a national campaign, which had little impact initially. J. B. Smith gave up the league's leadership in 1841, owing to illness, and Cobden along with John Bright spearheaded the league's public agitation, especially during 1841-4, attending meetings in London and nationwide, in both rural and urban areas. Bright's first wife died in September 1841, and, encouraged by Cobden, he buried his grief by working flat out for the league, and the friendship between the two men intensified. They did hold different opinions on some subjects -- notably education (they voted against one another over the Maynooth grant) -- and had different priorities when it came to financial as opposed to parliamentary reform (a difference of view particularly evident after 1848). On several occasions Cobden also privately criticized Bright's direct, sometimes vituperative, style of public speaking. But such differences were seldom aired in public. 
Cobden's contribution to the league was significant in several respects. Schooled in the municipal battles of the 1830s, Cobden understood the importance of organization, lecturing, and above all, election tactics, and his voice became one of the most influential when the council of the league determined strategy. The league's agitation changed constantly. The initial foray into the countryside, using paid lecturers, was a disaster, but the tactic, recommended by Cobden and adopted towards the end of 1840, of targeting electoral registers in the boroughs and fighting by-elections proved more successful, although it did alienate moderate whig supporters in the towns. In the latter stages of the league's campaign Cobden was the principal inspiration behind the move to create freehold votes in the large county electorates, which proved especially effective in south Lancashire and the West Riding of Yorkshire. 
Cobden's rural background was also a great asset, particularly when the league devoted its resources to campaigning in the countryside from 1843 onwards. On many occasions Cobden styled himself as the friend of the farmer, telling the Commons in February 1843 that his 'ancestors were all yeomen of the class who have been suffering under this system... and I have therefore as good or a better right than any of you to stand up as the farmer's friend, and to represent his wrongs in this House. ('Speeches', 1.32)' His knowledge of husbandry and the actual conditions of land tenure, both at home and on the continent, were vital in getting the league's message across in rural areas and, perhaps more importantly, in assuaging the fears of landowning Liberals in parliament. 
However, perhaps the most important aspect of Cobden's contribution to the league came through his economic arguments. During the 1830s opposition to the corn laws had come mainly from those who wanted to reduce all indirect taxation, or from those who wanted to negotiate reciprocal commercial treaties with other European powers. Cobden gave the anti-cornlaw movement a more coherent ideology, by attacking the corn laws as a check on consumption, and, drawing on Adam Smith's ideas, as an obstacle to the balanced progress of both manufacturing and agriculture. Cobden argued that free admission of foreign corn would increase European demand for British manufactures, and the lifting of protection would make agriculture more competitive, leading to improvements in drainage and crop rotation, and increase investment in the land. Free trade would also enhance Britain's comparative advantage by discouraging the growth of manufacturing on the continent. 
On 14 May 1840 Cobden married a Welsh woman, Catherine Anne Williams (1815-1877), who had attended school with several of Cobden's sisters before becoming a governess; among their six children were (Julia Sarah) Anne Cobden-Sanderson, socialist and suffragette, and (Emma) Jane Catherine Cobden Unwin. Cobden and Kate (as she was known in the family) made a ten-week honeymoon tour of Switzerland, taking in the French Alps and Savoy, before returning to London via Cologne and the Netherlands. Never one to miss an opportunity to proselytize, Cobden sent back accounts of the state of farming and industry in France, Switzerland, and along the Rhine which were published between June and December as a series of letters in the 'Anti-Corn Law Circular'. In 1841 Kate Cobden moved into lodgings in Leamington Spa, and later in Tunbridge Wells, and Cobden kept in almost daily contact while on speaking tours, or from his own rented accommodation in London. In 1845 Cobden bought a new house in Victoria Park, Manchester, and the family, now including two children (another child had died in infancy), moved there and stayed for three years. 
At the general election of 1841 Cobden stood again at Stockport and was this time successful. He had also been courted by the Bolton Liberals, and Prentice had tried to get him selected in Manchester. In parliament Cobden initially cut rather a lonely figure. Few of the other league leaders or orators were MPs at this time, and parliamentary radicals were less influential than they had been when the whigs were in office. Cobden was reluctant to stand forth in the Commons as the spokesman for the league. In his first speech, in August 1841, he couched much of his argument against the corn laws within a Christian framework, alluding to the concern at the distress in the manufacturing districts which had been expressed at a meeting of religious leaders in Manchester. Bright joined Cobden in parliament in 1843, and gradually from then on the two became more active there. 
In 1842, as the economic distress spread and the league expanded its organization, the anti-cornlaw campaign gathered momentum. Headquarters were set up in London, a free-trade newspaper, 'The Economist', was established in the capital, and the league's 'Anti-Bread Tax Circular' was renamed 'The League' and it too began publication from London. The growing influence of the league brought with it more active opposition and notoriety, however. Many Chartists saw the repeal of the corn laws as a device to benefit those merchants and manufacturers involved in export industries, and suspected that wages might be driven down as a result. Some of this criticism fed into the question of factory legislation, with Cobden's opposition to statutory control of the length of the working day coming under attack. During the corn law debates in parliament in February 1842 Cobden's reputation as a factory master was attacked by W. B. Ferrand, the Knaresborough MP. The Anti-Corn Law League also came under fire as its opponents attributed violent language and tactics to the league's lecturers. Cobden did toy with the idea of a campaign of civil disobedience, involving refusal to pay taxes, and the closing down of factories, but such plans never left the drawing board. None the less, there was widespread suspicion that the league might have been involved in the 'plug' plots in Lancashire, and the Home Office authorized the opening of Cobden's personal mail. Leading whigs and Conservatives joined in as well. J. W. Croker published one such attack in the 'Quarterly Review' in December 1842, and at the beginning of the parliamentary session that followed Lord Brougham denounced the methods of the league (although he was careful not to attack the league leaders in person). Matters came to a head on 17 February 1843, when Cobden stated in the Commons that he held Sir Robert Peel personally responsible, as head of the government, for the country's economic distress. This accusation, following a recent assassination attempt on Peel, touched a raw nerve and Peel charged Cobden with using language that might invite personal outrage. 
During the remainder of 1843 and through the winter of 1843-4 the league turned its attention to the countryside, employing more effective rural lecturers and activists such as Alexander Somerville (the 'Whistler at the Plough') and Andrew Bisset. Along with Bright, Cobden travelled the length and breadth of the nation. In 1845 Cobden was more active in parliament, calling in a memorable and influential speech on 13 March for a select committee to inquire into the effects of the corn laws on the agricultural community. Cobden's reputation in parliament now reached a high point, but his business concerns plummeted. In June he contemplated retiring from public life and was dissuaded by Bright, who suggested he borrow money to prop up his firm. 
By the following autumn, with the onset of the famine in Ireland, it was clear that corn law repeal or at least suspension of the corn duties was necessary. Cobden made sure the league maintained the pressure for total repeal. Peel's administration resigned in December, after defeat on the 'Irish Coercion Bill', but Lord John Russell was unable to form an administration (Cobden was offered the position of vice-president of the Board of Trade). Peel resumed office, proposing a phased total repeal (barring the retention of a duty of 1's'.), a measure which Cobden supported, and which was passed before Peel resigned once more in June. 
As repeal was enacted, Peel greatly offended his own supporters by praising the contribution of Cobden, and Cobden in turn privately urged Peel to now head a new party -- a 'mixed progressive party' -- based on further practical reforms. In July Russell formed his administration and wrote to Cobden leaving open the question of his joining the cabinet. Cobden's influence and role in the repeal of the corn laws were thus widely recognized, although he himself was more sanguine. In 1853 he told Prentice, who had completed writing the first history of the league, that 'it was but a blundering unsystematic series of campaigns, in which we were partly indebted for our triumph to the stupidity of our foes, and still more to the badness of their cause' (Prentice, 53). 
The league campaign left Cobden almost ruined financially. As the agitation drew to a close a public subscription was organized on his behalf, which raised $76,759. The sum was used to pay off debts he had incurred; some was later invested in the shares of the Illinois Railway Company and in the Safety Life Assurance Company. A major part of the testimonial was used to purchase and renovate property at Dunford in Sussex, where he had been born. In 1848 Cobden sold his Manchester home, moved to Westbourne Terrace in London, and spent weekends at Dunford while extensive building and landscaping works were going on. The family moved permanently to Dunford in 1853, although the works were only finally completed in 1856. Between 1848 and 1861 Kate gave birth to four more daughters. 
The struggle for repeal had also left Cobden physically exhausted, and at the beginning of August 1846 he and Kate embarked on a fourteen-month tour of the continent, travelling through France, Spain, the Italian and German states, Prussia, and Russia (Cobden completed the Russian portion of the trip on his own). Although the tour was intended to be recuperative, and Cobden did play the part of the tourist, he was overwhelmed by invitations to soirees, banquets, and lectures almost wherever he went (with the exception of Vienna). In France, free-traders led by Frederic Bastiat provided the acclaim, as did the free-traders of the Hanseatic ports; in the Italian states he was hosted by agricultural reformers. He met with the monarchs of France, Spain, Sardinia, the Two Sicilies, and Prussia, and statesmen such as Thiers, Narvaez, Cavour, Metternich, Canitz, and Nesselrode. The tour impressed upon Cobden the extent to which the European states were undergoing what he called a 'social revolution', based on the subdivision of landownership, and convinced him that such was the growth of prosperity and social equality that governments would no longer have to resort to war or colonization in order to contain domestic strife. He welcomed the 1848 revolutions, for, although he distrusted the republicans, he believed that the 1848 uprisings would lead to greater civil freedom to accompany the social and economic progress he had witnessed. 
Cobden returned from the continent in October 1847. In his absence, a general election had taken place, and he had been chosen for both Stockport and the West Riding of Yorkshire, where some of his Manchester friends had solicited support on his behalf. He chose to sit for the latter, at that time one of the largest constituencies in the country. Cobden occupied a pivotal place in Liberal Party politics in the late 1840s. Whig leaders were anxious lest he join forces with the Peelites, moderate London Chartists sought his backing, and radical MPs such as Sir Joshua Walmsley and Joseph Hume enlisted his co-operation in their parliamentary reform campaigns. Cobden was also by now a public celebrity: he made a cameo appearance in William Thackeray's 'Pendennis' (1850), handkerchiefs bearing his portrait were sold, and he was made a commissioner for the Exhibition of All Nations, alongside Peel. (In fact, Cobden and Peel attended a meeting of the commission only hours before Peel's fatal accident.) 
In the years after 1847 Cobden resumed many of the political campaigns with which he had been associated during the previous decade. Incurring the disapproval of his nonconformist constituents, Cobden became a leading supporter of the National Public Schools Association, believing that 'government interference is as necessary for 'education' as its non-interference is essential to 'trade'' (Cobden to James Coppock, 15 June 1847, Cobden MSS, W. Sussex RO). He continued his involvement in the freehold movement, helping to establish the National Freehold Land Society in 1850, and he pushed another organization, the National Parliamentary and Financial Reform Association, into a campaign to create freehold votes in the large county electorates surrounding London. Cobden joined the committee of the Association for Promoting the Repeal of the Taxes on Knowledge, and he also took up the cause of colonial reform, in Ceylon, Borneo, and India, writing a pamphlet on the Second Anglo-Burmese War, 'How Wars are Got up in India', which was published in 1853. 
But for all his stature in the late 1840s, Cobden's influence turned out to be limited. Joseph Parkes compared him to 'a whale on shore, alive' -- magnitude without purpose (Parkes to Charles Wood, 31 Dec 1849, Hickleton MSS, University of York). Despite his commitment to a range of reform issues, Cobden became most associated in the late 1840s and 1850s with what proved to be an unpopular campaign for retrenchment in defence spending at home and non-intervention in European affairs. Cobden unveiled this new strategy in the new year of 1849, using his 'National Budget' to call for a return to the defence expenditure levels of the mid-1830s. In June he brought in a motion in parliament calling for international arbitration, and in October he set out his views on non-intervention in an article published in the 'Westminster Review'. Cobden also became a leading supporter of the Peace Society. Its secretary, Henry Richard, became one of his main confidants, and he attended four international peace congresses between 1849 and 1853. In these years Cobden also sat on several parliamentary select committees -- army expenditure (1848 and 1851) and official salaries (1850) -- attempting to force reductions in the defence and diplomatic establishments. 
After 1850 Cobden found little support in the Liberal Party for his campaign of peace and retrenchment. This was owing partly, as Cobden suspected, to the influence of Lord Palmerston as foreign secretary and later prime minister, against whose style of 'meddling' foreign policy Cobden spoke out in the Don Pacifico debate in the Commons in June 1850. But Palmerston was not the only factor. The Lancashire and Yorkshire merchants and manufacturers who had bankrolled the league were reluctant to throw their weight behind Cobden, although they responded rapidly to the return of the Conservatives in February 1852 by re-establishing the Anti-Corn Law League. Furthermore, the resurgence of fears of French invasion which followed Louis Napoleon's 'coup d'etat' of December 1851 increased calls for greater rather than less national defence, and Cobden was left arguing a lonely case for Anglo-French co-operation in his 'South Saxon' letters to 'The Times' (January 1852) and later in his most controversial and hard-hitting pamphlet '1793 and 1853', which was published in the new year of 1853. 
The Crimean War delivered the final blow to Cobden's hopes for retrenchment and non-intervention. He was typically strident and outspoken in the months preceding Britain's intervention, arguing that British intervention on behalf of Turkey was a misguided policy, inasmuch as Turkey was a Muslim state in decline, while the interests of Russia, the perceived aggressor, lay in peaceful, commercial relations with the west. Once war was declared, Cobden fell relatively silent, reduced to 'let[ting] the flood roll on' (Cobden to J. B. Smith, 12 Jan 1854, J. B. Smith MSS, Manchester Central Library). He appeared before his constituents at Leeds in January 1855 but he was generally disillusioned by the outbreak of popular support for the war, especially that kindled by his old sparring partner the Russophobe David Urquhart. Towards the end of the war Cobden returned to active politics, writing the pamphlet 'What next? And next?' (1856) -- an attack on those wanting to continue the war at all costs -- and he was also involved in establishing the London-based newspaper the 'Morning Star'. 
In April 1856 Cobden's life was overtaken by domestic tragedy with the sudden death of his only son, Dick, aged fifteen, who was away studying at a school near Heidelberg. Kate Cobden was particularly struck by this heavy blow. Her hair blanched almost immediately, and she became over-dependent on opium to ease her bereavement. As a result Cobden was homebound at Dunford for long periods. About the same time John Bright suffered a physical breakdown. 
Public humiliation was added to private grief in the general election of 1857, which followed the British bombardment of the Chinese port of Canton (Guangzhou). John Bowring, Cobden's former friend and parliamentary colleague (the two men had drifted apart in the 1850s), had ordered this action, after the Chinese had unlawfully boarded a ship alleged to be British. Initially, Cobden assumed that Bowring had been merely carrying out the instructions of the Foreign Office, but he later found out that this was not so. In parliament Cobden sought to criticize British policy without a direct motion of censure, which he knew would play straight into Palmerston's hands, as it had in the case of Don Pacifico. So, on 26 February he introduced a motion containing two resolutions. The first stated that the papers presented to the Commons failed to establish grounds for the bombardment of Canton; the second called for the appointment of a select committee to inquire into the state of commercial relations with China. However, only the first resolution was discussed and, although carried in Cobden's favour by a majority of sixteen (with the support of the Peelites, Disraeli, and Russell), it proved a pyrrhic victory, as Cobden had feared, for Palmerston dissolved parliament and called an election. 
As the election got under way, Cobden's canvass of electors in the West Riding revealed that his chances of re-election there were slim, so he opted to stand in Huddersfield instead. At the same time he campaigned on behalf of the absent Bright in Manchester. Along with many other independent Liberal and radical MPs Cobden lost his seat in the 1857 election, and he remained absent from public life for the next two years. This respite was not altogether unwelcome. Cobden's faith in the body politic reached its nadir in 1857. He despaired at the once radical electorates of Lancashire and Yorkshire, and he told friends that he had no desire to enter a 'servile' parliament under Palmerston. There were private reasons too. Cobden's wife's grief continued unabated, and in the spring of 1858 Fred, Cobden's elder brother, died after a long illness. Cobden's financial affairs were in a poor state by this time, too, mainly as a result of his speculative investment in the Illinois Railway Company. He was forced to borrow from friends in order to meet the company's further calls on shareholders, and in 1859 a further public subscription, totalling $40,531, was required to help him out. (Another subscription was mooted in 1861 but never undertaken.) 
In February 1859 Cobden left Britain for his second visit to the United States, his main aim being to investigate the affairs of the Illinois Railway Company for himself. He spent four months there, criss-crossing between New York, Washington, and Chicago, impressed by the great progress the country had experienced since his first visit in the mid-1830s. On his return at the end of June Cobden found that Palmerston was forming a new government, and both he and Russell wanted Cobden to join the cabinet as president of the Board of Trade. From Liverpool, where he disembarked, Cobden travelled immediately to London to respond in person to Palmerston's offer. He declined the position, pointing out that to accept would be an act of inconsistency on his part as he had opposed Palmerston for so long. 
In his absence Cobden had been returned as MP for Rochdale, partly through Bright's efforts. However, he took little part in parliament during the next two years, as he spent most of that time negotiating a treaty of commerce with France. In 1856, when Lord Clarendon, the British foreign secretary, visited Paris, Michel Chevalier had suggested to Cobden that the time was right for establishing free trade between the two countries, as a treaty did not have to be steered through the largely protectionist French legislature. Nothing came of this in 1856, but in the autumn of 1859 Chevalier renewed his suggestion, and Cobden contacted W. E. Gladstone, now chancellor of the exchequer, and visited him at Hawarden on 12 September 1859, when the issue was discussed at length. Both men were convinced that a commercial treaty would not only continue the reduction of indirect tax, but could also be the means of ensuring peaceful relations between the two countries. Gladstone backed Cobden's plan to undertake a voluntary mission to Paris in order to sound out the views of Napoleon III. Russell, the foreign secretary, and Palmerston were cooler, but they allowed the mission to go ahead. 
Cobden left for Paris on 18 October, and despite ill health and the opposition of some of the emperor's ministers, he had two successful meetings with Napoleon III. It is doubtful whether the emperor was actually converted by Cobden's advocacy -- he was not opposed to tariff reform, and Chevalier had already paved the way for Cobden through his own contacts with the emperor. Once committed to the idea of the treaty, however, the emperor sought its rapid completion. In the new year Cobden was given plenipotentiary powers by the British government and on 23 January 1860 the treaty was signed by Cobden and Lord Cowley, the British ambassador, on behalf of Britain. Duties were abolished on most French imports into Britain, although some duty was retained on French wines, while duties on British imports into France were gradually reduced. 
The actual tariff schedules remained to be negotiated, and after a holiday in Cannes and a short visit to London, Cobden returned to Paris on 20 April, where he remained until November, in order to complete the task as chief commissioner. Apart from settling the details of the tariff, better postal facilities between the two countries were agreed, and passports were eliminated. Once the negotiations were over, Cobden headed south to Algiers with Kate and their eldest daughter and stayed there until the following April. The treaty was a major achievement, not so much for its actual provisions -- which many felt benefited France more than Britain -- as for the international harmony it symbolized. The treaty had been settled despite hostile protectionism in France, the emperor's vacillation, and a new invasion panic back in Britain. As in 1846, honours were now heaped upon Cobden -- by chambers of commerce, manufacturers' associations, and various cities. In April 1861 Palmerston offered him a baronetcy or the rank of privy councillor, but Cobden declined. Throughout the negotiations Cobden felt he had not had sufficient backing from Palmerston. In the spring of 1860 Palmerston had announced new coastal fortifications, despite Cobden's plea that this be delayed until the completion of the treaty negotiations. Not surprisingly, on his return Cobden resumed his attack on the Palmerstonian system, producing in October 1861 a long memorandum on the Anglo-French naval build-up and, the following year, a pamphlet on 'The Three Panics' of 1848, 1853, and 1862. 
Cobden's support for non-intervention intensified during the American Civil War, which broke out in 1861. He never doubted that morality was on the side of the Union, and that the future of America lay with the industrial and commercial supremacy of the north. However, Cobden remained suspicious of the protectionist tendencies of the Union, as manifested in the Morrill tariff of 1861, and he had a low opinion of the administrative abilities of the Republican Party: in March 1864 he commented to his friend Thomas Thomasson that 'if their [the North's] 'cause' was not so good, I should certainly back the South whose men are much more capable whether as statesmen or generals' (R. Cobden to T. Thomasson, March 1864, Thomas Thomasson MSS, BLPES). Moreover, he opposed the blockade tactics used by the North, which had led to the drying up of the supply of southern cotton to Europe. But he thought throughout the war that Britain, along with the other European powers, should remain neutral. Cobden used his contacts with leading Americans such as Sumner and Adams, within the British and French governments, and also among the Lancashire cotton manufacturers to dampen calls for armed intervention to end the blockade. And he joined in attempts to relieve the distress of cotton workers during the Lancashire famine. 
By the early 1860s it was clear that Cobden had aged considerably. He had lost much of his vigour and put on weight, and his hair was now greying rapidly. Although revered as an elder statesman within the Liberal Party, he lacked his usual fire and some of his judgement. In December 1863 he became embroiled in an acrimonious dispute with 'The Times', some thirty years after he had first stepped into public life in order to sound off against the paper. In November a 'Times' editorial had accused Bright of wanting to divide the land of the rich among the poor, and had called on both Bright and Cobden to disavow any such schemes. Cobden leapt to Bright's defence, attacking J. T. Delane, the paper's editor, for making scandalous aspersions behind the screen of anonymous journalism. 'The Times' refused to publish Cobden's reply to Delane, and a rather petty correspondence ensued. Cobden was by now an infrequent attender of parliament -- in 1864 he spoke during the Schleswig-Holstein affair and on Chinese affairs -- although he could at last draw some comfort from the waning of Palmerston's influence over foreign policy. 
In November 1864 Cobden addressed a large meeting in his Rochdale constituency. It proved to be one public speech too many. For two months he was confined to Dunford, with asthma and bronchial and throat problems. When parliament reassembled the following year he was determined to take part in the debates on Canadian fortifications and on 21 March he travelled up to London, where he suffered another asthmatic attack on arrival. He died just under a fortnight later on 2 April 1865 in his lodgings at 23 Suffolk Street, Pall Mall. Palmerston, Disraeli, and Bright gave tributes in the Commons, and newspapers throughout Britain, America, and Europe provided fulsome obituaries, praising his achievements of 1846 and 1860, but passing over his political isolation during the 1850s. Cobden was buried on 6 April in the same grave as his son in the churchyard at West Lavington, a simple grave which looks out through the woods towards the gentle rolling hills of Sussex farmland. 
As Cobden died, the principles of retrenchment and non-intervention for which he had campaigned so relentlessly in the last two decades of his life were becoming an integral part of the Gladstonian Liberal Party's philosophy. In the years after his death his reputation grew and his pamphlets and speeches were edited and expounded by the Cobden Club, and by Liberal Party luminaries such as J. E. T. Rogers, Louis Mallet, and Goldwin Smith. After 1900, when the Edwardian Liberal Party needed reminding of the first principles of free trade and anti-imperialism it looked to John Morley's 'Life of Richard Cobden' (2 vols., 1881), a book that established new standards of biographical documentation and comment. But as internationalism and free trade have declined so too has Cobden's reputation, and his modern biographers have been rather disappointed by his commitment to the peace question, and generally been more interested in his role in early Victorian middle-class culture. Cobden's work as a land reformer has not featured so largely in his changing reputation. Yet his belief in the necessity of redistribution of land ownership was arguably the connecting arch in his whole political outlook, for he was convinced that individual proprietorship of the soil, both on the continent and in Britain, was the precondition for social stability, prosperity, and peace. As he told a journalist who visited him during his last illness, 'the decrease in the number of landowners has ever been the forerunner of decay in empires' (Edge, 26). 


@@@@@


doc= 5742


Eleanor, duchess of Gloucester (c.1400-1452), alleged sorcerer, was the second wife of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and attracted notoriety when convicted and imprisoned for treasonable necromancy in 1441. The fourth child of Sir Reginald (or Reynold) Cobham of Sterborough, Lingfield, Surrey, and his first wife, Eleanor, she became about 1422, the year of her mother's death, an attendant of Jacqueline d'Hainault, who, on divorcing John (IV), duke of Brabant, had fled to England in 1421 and in 1423 married Humphrey, duke of Gloucester (1390-1447). After unsuccessfully invading Hainault to assert his wife's claims Humphrey returned to England in March 1425 and Eleanor became his mistress. When in January 1428 his marriage with Jacqueline was pronounced invalid he married Eleanor. Though condemned as a 'mesalliance', the union proved a success. Eleanor was beautiful, intelligent, and ambitious and Humphrey was cultivated, pleasure-loving, and famous. Together they developed a manor at Greenwich into a pleasure garden, La Plesaunce, encircled by a wall with walks bordering the Thames, a tower, and a conduit. Here they gathered poets, musicians, scholars, physicians, and their friends to form a miniature court. 
In the year 1435-6 when, on Bedford's death, Duke Humphrey became heir apparent and attained the height of his influence, Eleanor was accorded full recognition of her position: in November 1435 he created a jointure for her in his whole estate and in April 1436 she received the robes of a duchess for the Garter ceremony. At court she exercised some influence over the young king and became obsessed with the possibility of her husband's succeeding the unmarried and inert Henry VI. It was in this context that she began -- certainly by April 1440 -- to consult astrologers to cast the king's horoscope and to predict her personal fortunes. This of itself was neither suspicious nor unusual. Mathematical astrology had become socially and academically respectable and other great noblemen had astrologers in their employ. Those whom Eleanor consulted were Thomas Southwell, her physician, canon of St Stephen's, Westminster, and Roger Bolingbroke, principal of St Andrew's Hall, Oxford -- both men of high reputation. Unwisely, if honestly, from their reading of Henry VI's horoscope they predicted that a serious illness would endanger his life in July or August 1441. Rumours of this spread in London and reached the court. The authorities thereupon commissioned an alternative horoscope to reassure the king and took steps -- on 28 and 29 June 1441 -- to examine Southwell, Bolingbroke, and Eleanor's chaplain, John Home, canon of Hereford. Between 10 and 12 July they were arrested and charged with necromancy and heretical practices and Eleanor fled to sanctuary in Westminster. On 23 July Bolingbroke was examined before the council and named Eleanor as the instigator. On 24 and 25 July she was examined by a panel of bishops on eighteen charges of treasonable necromancy, five of which she admitted. She was committed to Leeds Castle pending trial. After further investigations Southwell and Bolingbroke were indicted for sorcery, felony, and treason, with Eleanor as an accessory. But on her insistence it was again before an ecclesiastical tribunal that she was judged on 21 October; she denied most of the charges but admitted procuring potions from Margery Jourdemayne, the Witch of Eye (Ebury, near Westminster), in order to conceive and bear Duke Humphrey's child. On 27 July she abjured her errors and on 9 November penance was imposed on her to walk barefoot to three London churches on successive market days in November bearing a taper. She was forcibly divorced and condemned to perpetual imprisonment. Her associates suffered more harshly: Southwell died in the Tower of London, Bolingbroke was hanged, drawn, and quartered, and Margery was burnt. 
Eleanor was imprisoned initially at Chester, then in 1443 moved to Kenilworth, in July 1446 to the Isle of Man, and finally in March 1449 to Beaumaris, where she died on 7 July 1452 and was buried, presumably in the parish church. How guilty was she? Although she had instigated predictions of the king's illness this fell short of devising the means to encompass his death. She admitted procuring love potions and had perhaps participated in casting spells. Such practices, common to all classes, attracted particular suspicion and alarm where women exercised influence at a high level. It is possible that her exposure was plotted by her husband's political enemies, who certainly exploited it to estrange the king from his uncle and implant suspicions which led to Humphrey's own arrest and death six years later. Finally the problem of how peeresses should be tried was resolved by a statute making them, like their husbands, judicable by the lords and judges. 


@@@@@


doc= 5743


Brooke, Sir Henry (1537-1592), diplomat, was born on 5 February 1537, the seventh but fifth surviving son of George Brooke, ninth Baron Cobham (c.1497-1558), soldier and landowner, and his wife, Anne ('c'.1510-1558), eldest daughter of Edmund Bray, first Baron Bray, and his wife, Jane. His brothers included William Brooke, tenth Baron Cobham (1527-1597), and he had four sisters, of whom one died young. He pursued a family eccentricity (or pretension) with unusual determination in using as a surname the family title rather than Brooke. 
Cobham matriculated 'impubes' as a pensioner from Trinity College, Cambridge, on 29 September 1547 but did not take a degree and entered the household of the earl of Devonshire -- presumably during Edward Courtenay's brief liberty in 1553 -- where he came to Princess Elizabeth's notice and 'liking' (Birch, 1.17). He was clearly affiliated with Elizabeth's supporters rather than with Mary I's regime and was made gentleman pensioner in 1559, a point from which he then consistently dated self-serving claims of long service to her. Family convention suggests that Cobham might have travelled in his youth. His brothers William and George Brooke (1533- 'c'.1570) went to Italy; another Mr Brooke found in the Veneto in 1555 seems to have been not Cobham but his brother John Brooke (1535-1594), later MP for the family's local seat of Queenborough in Kent (J. Woolfson, 'Padua and the Tudors', 1998, 214). If not before, Cobham learned foreign languages through diplomatic practice. Cobham is, however, a likely candidate for 'the brother of Cobham' who came in August 1559 to assure the Spanish ambassador to London, Alvaro de la Quadra, bishop of Aquila, that 'the affair of the archduke's marriage was in a very good way'. He might even be the 'one of these men called Cobham' whom Quadra reported in March 1562 as implicated in the vague if incriminating intrigues of Margaret Douglas, countess of Lennox, who therefore 'sought an excuse for going to the baths of Liege' ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 93, 231). Quadra usually conversed in Italian; Cobham may or may not yet have known much Spanish, but two decades later he could use Italian as a lingua franca with the Turkish envoy in Paris. 
Cobham accompanied Sir Thomas Chaloner to Spain in 1561, returning with dispatches later that year -- he thought the ambassador insufficiently appreciative of his efforts, particularly in light of his near shipwreck on the Irish coast. He complained that Chaloner had not provided enough money for his expenses, and succeeded in getting it out of the privy council. In 1567 he joined the embassy of Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex (1526/7-1583), to pursue the project of an Austrian marriage for the queen. Selection for this embassy may have been influenced by his knowledge of Low German. More importantly, he was connected to Sussex, who stepped in to support as 'a near kinsman of his own' yet another brother, Thomas Brooke (1533-1578), when the Spanish accused him of piracy in 1565 ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 455). Sussex's death in June 1583 made Cobham wish, 'God rayse unto me as good and noble a frend' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/9/130). 
Cobham was sent by Sussex to London in October 1567 to seek further instructions; but the answer that he brought back in December included no religious concessions to Archduke Charles and thus brought the negotiation to an end. Cobham gave a different impression by causing his 'postilion to sound the horn all the way... crying, '[Long] live Austria and England!'' ('CSP Rome', '1558-71', 267). Then, acting as a co-envoy, albeit a junior one, he went to see the archduke at Graz in Styria in February 1568. Charles reported to Maximilian II that Cobham agreed he was right not to compromise his faith: 'But he had hoped that I should go to England... he... hoped to be able to arrange matters in a manner which would satisfy both me and your majesty... All that had been said in England about your majesty and my territories was at variance with what he had seen for himself. But he would at his return give them a more truthful relation.' Cobham even offered to 'direct' 'those few who at his advice had bound themselves by oath' so 'that I should see and recognize that he had been my loyal servant and wished always to remain so' (Klarwill, 296-8). 
On 19 August 1570 Cobham set out as special ambassador for the Low Countries with messages for the governor, Alvarez de Toledo, duke of Alva, and for Philip II's new queen, Anne of Austria. These proved rather more cordial than recent tense Anglo-Spanish exchanges, and Cobham went on to visit Anne's father, Maximilian, with whom he had an audience on 12 September, at Speyer. Besides appealing to monarchical solidarity against the papal deposition of Elizabeth, Cobham sought to divert the Habsburgs with a token resurrection of the queen's Austrian marriage project. Bertrand de Salignac de La Motte Fenelon, the French ambassador in London, did not believe that 'young Coban' would make more than 'a demonstration', writing sarcastically that after Sussex's failure, 'a young gentleman of no authority, who has scarcely grown his beard... will achieve even less at this juncture' (Teulet, 3.424-5). Still peripatetic, Cobham passed through France into Spain (20 March to 5 July 1571) to explain English charges against the Spanish ambassador to England, Guerau de Spes, and to explore the idea of restoring a resident ambassador in Spain if the latter were allowed religious freedom, a suggestion that led Gomez Suarez de Figueroa, duke of Feria, to silence Cobham 'for fear he should blurt out some impertinence' ('CSP Spain', '1568-79', 316). Though he put a brave face on it, he returned dissatisfied in July 1571, opining, 'thynke theys smaule shooes [showers] to be warnyngs of greater storms to cumme, if tymme may fytt them' (TNA: PRO, SP 70/118, fol. 2'r'). 
Though Cobham claimed when convenient a need as gentleman pensioner to attend the queen, he established a base in Kentish society after his marriage on 27 January 1573 to Anne (died 1611/12), widow of Walter Haddon and daughter of Sir Henry Sutton of Nottinghamshire. She apparently brought him his main residence at Sutton-at-Hone, Kent, and they had three sons -- Calisthenes (1573-1611), who became a soldier and was knighted, John Brooke, later Baron Cobham (1574-1660), and Maximilian (1575/6-1598) -- and two daughters, Anne ('b'. 'c'.1577) and Philippa ('c'.1579-1613), who married Walter Calverley, known for the murder of their two sons and the attempted murder of his wife. 
Cobham had become part of a 'recognizable Elizabethan diplomatic cadre' (Bell, 'Men and their rewards', 208). Rumours of 1572 and 1575 had him receiving the premier diplomatic posting, France. Although his experience of the country had been only in passing, he was sent in 1571 to meet the special French envoy Paul de Foix, in 1572 to meet Francois de Montmorency, duc de Montmorency, and to escort the French envoys on the royal progress, and in 1577 to Dartmouth in Devon to meet the Marquis d'Haverie. Instead, he finally went back to Spain as special ambassador from 20 June 1575 to 10 January 1576 fortified with a knighthood. He had an audience with Philip on 26 October, despite de Spes's complaint that 'some lord or person of higher position' should have greeted the queen of Spain in 1570 ('CSP Spain', '1567-79', 273). This coincided with an increase in his diet from $2 per day to $2 10's'. 
Cobham did stay for some weeks at the Paris embassy with Valentine Dale, who apparently took him on his visits to court. In October near Blaye, in Gascony, he 'was set on' by Huguenots (ironically) 'in a wood', 'with whome we came to the proffer of the pistole, and withstanding then the first brunt we escaped with smaulle inconveniens or losse' (TNA: PRO, SP 70/136, fol. 38'v'). Arriving in Spain, he found there 'little commforte'. He complained that both customs and the Spanish Inquisition insisted on 'visiting my stuffe'. 'So muche more now curious they are become for the respect of religion' that he lacked 'those visitacions whiche the last tyme I found' (TNA: PRO, SP 70/135, fol. 248'r'). 
Cobham believed Alva to be favourable towards mitigation of the Spanish Inquisition's scrutiny of Englishmen in Spain. Even so, the negotiations were marred by 'an altercation of some sort', prompting one historian to ask 'why the government felt someone as ill-tempered as he might prove a success in that hostile country' (Bell, 'Men and their rewards', 209, 210). However, with Chaloner and the disastrous John Man dead, and Sir Thomas Chamberlain retired on health grounds, Cobham was probably the candidate with most experience of Spanish negotiations. According to Fenelon, pro-Spanish privy councillors had mooted Cobham's dispatch as early as August 1574 -- it was no sudden decision. He also believed that, building on the statements of 1571, Cobham might have become resident ambassador if the initial negotiation had been more satisfactory. The papal nuncio claimed credit for his dismissal in January 1576, and Gregory XIII was 'much gratified' ('CSP Rome', '1572-8', 250). Within a year of his mission, the English were complaining that 'nothing was performed that was promised Sir Henry Cobham at his being last in Spain' (Strype, 2/2.8). Cobham continued to write to the Spanish government personally in an abortive attempt to effect improvement in the treatment of Englishmen there, and to vindicate himself over charges of over-optimism made by the subsequent ambassador, Sir John Smythe. Cobham was allegedly 'much blamed and attacked at court' for misrepresentation ('CSP Spain', '1567-79', 543). 
Cobham remained on the look-out for offices. On the death of his kinsman Richard Verney, while accompanying him to Spain in 1575, Cobham sought his post of marshal of the king's bench -- 'the queene's majestie shoulde thearby give me a stocke to stand by in her sarvice, and with that staffe dryve from her a begger' (TNA: PRO, SP 70/135, fol. 248'r'). Soon after returning from Spain, he did become porter of the bag and keeper of the treasury. 
On 15 October 1579 Cobham succeeded Sir Amias Paulet as resident ambassador in France on a diet of $3 6's'. 8died per day. He later claimed that the principal secretaries, Sir Francis Walsingham and Thomas Wilson, had 'commaunded... that I shoold lay asyde all my juste excuses then alleaged of my insufficiency', notably lack of a 'competent yearly lyvyng of my owne, as [other] your majestes mynysters enjoyed' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/9/43; 78/9/13). Others impugned his sufficiency in other respects. Cobham perhaps held 'the record for detailed and unassimilated reporting of virtually anything that came to his attention', especially rumours concerning the activities of English Catholic exiles (Bell, 'Men and their rewards', 211). He wished, however, to hear whether his reports were confirmed, 'otherwyse I may be abused, and her majestie's money ill-bestowed' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/7/24). Walsingham warned him that the queen was critical of the expense of Cobham's sending so many reports, advising him to reduce the volume somewhat. Moreover, Cobham was not enciphering as he should have been, given that some letters were going astray. Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, not an intimate of Cobham's though inevitably petitioned by him in his quest for preferment, had already -- either helpfully or maliciously -- 'sent me worde I have very evill intelligence, and that the quene shuld be informed I caryed muche forniture for myself and... my servauntes' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/4/72). Cobham continued 'notwithstanding to report what is sent or delivered', though doubtful whether it was 'imployed to any good purpose' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/9/109; BL, Cotton MS Otho E. iv, fol. 23'r'). At least the government did make considerable propaganda use from 1580 of the articles of a purported international Catholic League given to Cobham by John Leslie, former bishop of Ross. 
Views of Cobham's French embassy have varied, from grouping him with Elizabethan colleagues with a 'wary distaste for their host country' to finding him 'a particularly effective vehicle for fostering the burgeoning friendship between the two realms' (Leimon and Parker, 1134; Bell, 'Men and their rewards', 211). The second judgement is the more true, but the first still describes Cobham's faults accurately. He regarded Henri III and Catherine de' Medici as unreliable, 'removing princes' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/5/80). As for Catherine, 'he trusteth nothinge thatt she says tyll he see yt doone' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/4/138). He regarded the half-hearted negotiation combining marriage talks between Elizabeth and Francois, duc d'Anjou, and Anglo-French alliance against Spain as a lost opportunity because the former were abandoned, effectively scuppering the latter. He was not, however, completely anti-Spanish as a result of his experiences there and recognized the need to play one Catholic power off against another. 
Cobham took a different view from Walsingham as to the subordination he owed the secretary of state. It is, however, an extreme picture painted of him by Walsingham's man Nicholas Faunt: 'If heretofore he cared little for me, and such as belong to my master, now he is become so stout and strange... that he hath been at odds with all the honest gentlemen my master favoureth, even to have chased them away; and for those, that yet remain, he hath ever in suspicion and useth these after a strange sort. (Birch, 1.17-18)' Fundamentally, though, Cobham was too dependent on Walsingham because the secretary was the most likely person to facilitate his recall and for 'the amending of my sillye estate', an obsessive concern (TNA: PRO, SP 78/4/4). Even a grant in 1582 worth $2000, when he wanted $3000, tended, in a 'staggringe sorte', to 'have dulled my courage' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/7/128). By the end of 1582, he claimed to have 'no more meanes to countenance this place, nor contentment of mynde to indure this trade' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/8/53). Unusually, he was joined on his posting by his wife, who, however, wrote to Leicester, 'I lyve a lyfe heere not so muche to my conte[nt] as I trusted I shoulde' (BL, Cotton MS Caligula E. vii, fol. 205'r'). 
On 15 September 1583 Cobham was replaced by Sir Edward Stafford, with whom, characteristically, he was reluctant to co-operate. There was, however, a history behind this -- Stafford, on a mission concerning the Anjou match, had impugned intelligence provided by William Waad, who was cherished by Cobham. It was logical if petty of Cobham to refuse to brief Stafford on reports which the latter did not value. 
Cobham's advance of $500 on departure in 1579 was one of the more generous, his diets of $280 per quarter seem to have been paid regularly, and he received extraordinary sums of at least $1382 over four years. However, by 1583 he claimed to have sold land, leaving him owing over $600 in England and 700 crowns in Paris. A younger son, it is probable that he was 'no loser' by his diplomatic career -- but, between pretension and paranoia, he might still have strained his resources, especially while in Paris (Bell, 'Men and their rewards', 113). 
In 1587 it was suggested that Cobham join his brother William Brooke in negotiations in the Spanish Netherlands and in 1589 it was proposed that he take a message to James VI. However, he had effectively retired to a country sphere. A JP for Kent by 1573, he became 'custos rotulorum' about 1584 and deputy lieutenant in 1588, when he was involved in preparations against the Spanish Armada. He was also active in dealing with recusants in Kent. He returned to parliament, this time as knight of the shire for Kent, in 1586 and 1589 and sat on key committees, including that petitioning for the execution of Mary, queen of Scots, a course he had long advocated. Cobham died intestate and apparently heavily in debt at Sutton-at-Hone on 13 January 1592. Perhaps 'embittered and improvident', nevertheless, even if unable to succeed against the odds in his Spanish missions, he had made a better impression than average for English diplomats in Austria and France and -- difficult though he could be -- was clearly regarded as one of the more versatile Elizabethan ambassadors (McKeen, 2.614). 


@@@@@


doc= 5744


Cobham, John, third Baron Cobham of Cobham (c.1320-1408), administrator, was the son of John Cobham, second Lord Cobham of Cobham (d. 1355) ['see under 'Cobham family], and his first wife, Joan, daughter of John, first Lord Beauchamp of Somerset. He came from the senior branch of the family at Cobham, Kent, noted for public service since the days of Henry II. He was first summoned to parliament in September 1355 on his father's death. His wife, Margaret, the eldest child of Hugh Courtenay, earl of Devon, and Margaret de Bohun, was betrothed to him in 1333 (when he may have been thirteen and she six years of age) and the couple probably married in 1345: records show property was settled on them at these times. Margaret died in 1395, and their only child, Joan, predeceased them leaving a daughter, also Joan. One of Cobham's brothers-in-law was William Courtenay, archbishop of Canterbury (1381-96). 
Cobham became a prominent national figure. He was frequently a judge in the court of chivalry, notably at the Scrope-Grosvenor trial in May 1389, and in 1392 in the Lovel-Morley dispute. He was regularly a trier of petitions for England from 1379 and for Gascony from 1382. In 1363 he was given safe conduct to Calais to take charge of hostages who had broken parole. Few records remain of his military career, but he served in France in 1359-60, 1366-7, and 1369 (perhaps frequently until 1377); he was probably made a banneret in 1353, and confirmed in 1370 with an annuity of 100 marks. In 1378 he was a member of the commission appointed to receive the castle of Brest from the duke of Brittany. 
Cobham frequently went on embassies. He was ambassador to the curia in June 1367 to promote the marriage of Prince Lionel with Violante Visconti and William Wykeham's appointment as bishop of Winchester, and to question the pope's deprivation of the king's clerks' benefices. He was frequently appointed to treat for peace with France: he accompanied John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, to negotiate a year's truce in February and September 1375 (remaining in Bruges over the winter), and went on similar embassies in June 1376, and October 1377, April 1379, May and December 1381, and February and June 1392. He accompanied Gaunt to treat for peace with the count of Flanders in 1383; in September 1379 and in April 1380 he was engaged in negotiations for a royal marriage alliance with France. 
Cobham's most important political involvement was as adviser to the young Richard II, to his own ultimate disadvantage. On 17 July 1377 he was elected by the lords to a continual council set up to advise the ten-year-old king and raise money for the French wars; Cobham advanced $100. He was paid $40 for his service and dropped from the council in October, but in April 1379, at the Commons' request, a committee of ten, including Cobham, was appointed, 'to examine the estate of the king' (Tout, 'Admin hist.', 3.347) and among other matters, the royal household expenses. From June 1379 to February 1380, moreover, Cobham was appointed 'to remain in the household for the safeguard of the king's person' (Tout, 'Admin hist.', 3.349). In 1385 and 1390 he was appointed to supervise payments by crown officials. His most significant appointment was to the commission of thirteen, deeply resented by Richard II, which was set up by parliament in November 1386 with powers that virtually gave it control of government for a year. 
Parliament continued to place much confidence in Cobham's discretion. He was supervisor of the collection of the subsidy of 1385 and controller of the subsidy of 1390. In the crisis of 1387-8 he was first one of the intermediaries between the king and the lords, and then one of five lords spiritual and secular appointed in January 1388 for the king's continual guidance. The Westminster chronicle claims that during the Merciless Parliament of February 1388, it was Cobham and the duke of Gloucester who dragged Chief Justice Sir Robert Tresilian from a house within the sanctuary of Westminster Abbey to parliament, where he was condemned to execution. In March, at Richard's request, Cobham interceded unsuccessfully with the Commons for the life of Sir Simon Burley, the king's former tutor, because he was so ill; however, Burley was executed in May, and Cobham signed the order. In March Cobham was appointed to a committee of five who were to attend continually on the king until parliament met again in September: Richard was to do nothing without their consent, and Cobham was to oversee the king's personal affairs. In May 1388 Cobham was appointed by the king to sell manors and goods forfeited by those sentenced in parliament. 
It has been suggested that Cobham sided with the lords appellant in 1388 because he resented Burley's growing power in Kent. But Cobham also had connections with the royal party: the father of one of his major feoffees, Arnald Savage, had been in the household of Richard's mother, Joan of Kent, and he himself had been one of her executors in 1385, while his cousin John Cobham of Hever was a king's esquire by August 1388. However, he had family associations with the appellants too; his wife's mother, like Bolingbroke's wife, was a Bohun, and in 1380 his cousin Reginald Cobham of Sterborough married into the family of the earl of Arundel. For over forty years from the 1350s Cobham was heavily engaged in local government in Kent, where he was a major landowner. He served regularly as a JP (in 1385 and 1386 alongside Geoffrey Chaucer), a commissioner of array, a commissioner of oyer and terminer, and a commissioner for the defence of the realm, responsible for protecting the Thames estuary marshes against French invasion. In 1367 he was granted an annual fair and weekly market at Cobham itself, and he financed and supervised much building work, both of his own property and elsewhere. In 1381, following the French and Spanish raid on the Thames estuary in 1379, he obtained licence to crenellate his manor house at Cooling, near Gravesend, for the realm's defence. It was completed in 1385. The architect Henry Yevele prepared plans and was quantity surveyor for the gatehouse (1381-4), on which an inscription in Kentish dialect survives: '
Knouwyth that beth and schul be 

That I am mad in help of the cuntre 

In knowyng of whyche thyng 

Thys is chartre and wytnessyng. 
(Robertson, 134)' With Yevele, Cobham supervised the restoration of the walls of Canterbury in 1385, and used Yevele's designs for restorations in 1381 to the church of St Dunstan-in-the-East, near Cobham's town house in Tower Street. 
In 1383 Cobham and Yevele were on the commission of inquiry for rebuilding the recently collapsed wooden bridge at Rochester, which was rebuilt between 1388 and 1391 in Kentish ragstone, supervised and financed by Cobham and Sir Robert Knolles. Knolles was with Cobham when Brest was taken under English control in 1378, and his London inn in Seething Lane was near Cobham's. Cobham formed a consortium including two relatives to acquire properties to endow the bridge, and at his own expense built a bridge chapel at the Rochester end in 1392, endowed as a chantry in 1395: his wife was among the deceased commemorated. In 1362 he refounded the parish church of Cobham, endowing it as a chantry college of priests; Cobham College was dissolved in 1535, but refounded on the same site in 1598 as an almshouse, still in use, by William Brooke, Lord Cobham, a descendant in the female line. 
Cobham was still attending parliament in the 1390s, and was at a great council held at Eltham in 1395. In the Shrewsbury parliament on 28 January 1398 he was impeached and accused of membership of the commission of 1386, and of sending Sir Simon Burley and Sir James Berners to execution without the king's assent and in his absence. He defended himself on both counts: he was not guilty of making the commission of 1386 and had acted on it by the king's command -- to which Richard responded that he had himself acted under constraint -- and he had been told that the executions were the king's will. Gower commends his frankness; he says that Cobham was taking 'refuge' with the Carthusians when arrested in September 1397, but he was probably at the cell of Nutley Abbey in Maiden Bradley, where his chaplain was held during his imprisonment. He was sentenced to be drawn, hanged, beheaded, and quartered, forfeited and disinherited. Richard II, however, commuted the death sentence to banishment for life, with his cousin Reginald Cobham of Sterborough, to Jersey; if he escaped, the sentence would have full effect. By this date Cobham was about eighty, and responded that eternal life meant more to him than the reprieve. Cobham's banishment was one of the articles in Richard's indictment in 1399. 
When Henry Bolingbroke returned from exile in June 1399 and claimed the throne, Cobham was recalled. The Monk of Evesham's statement that Cobham landed at Ravenspur with Henry may, however, refer to Reginald. By October John Cobham had returned, and he spoke at length in parliament of the need to punish those responsible for the evils of recent times, declaring that under Richard the English had sunk even lower than the heathens; the king had been rightly deposed and parliament should judiciously determine punishment for him and his counsellors. Disclaiming any desire for revenge for himself, according to Thomas Walsingham he observed: 'I stand for common justice and declare that if my own father who engendered me were guilty of crimes like these, I would without hesitation declare to you that he should be punished for them' ('Annales Henrici quarti', 307). He was present at Richard's abdication. 
In 1403 Cobham was executor for Reginald Cobham of Sterborough, and attended parliament in 1406 to subscribe to the entailing of the crown on Henry IV's sons. He died in the severe winter of 1407-8, on 10 January in Maiden Bradley, Wiltshire, where he had lived very simply. He was buried in Cobham church, where his monumental brass shows him in armour and bearing a model of Cobham collegiate church, with an inscription recording his role as founder. The heir to Cobham's estate, consisting of lands, rents, and advowsons in Kent, Wiltshire, Surrey, and London, was his granddaughter, Joan, in her own right Lady Cobham. She married five times. The fourth of her husbands (whom she married in 1409), was Sir John Oldcastle, the Lollard; he took the title Lord Cobham in his wife's right, and has sometimes been confused with the third baron. John Gower called Cobham 'noble, long-suffering, compassionate and kindly, efficient and fair-minded, firm in strength of character... a true friend of the realm' ('Complete Works', 326), and for Walsingham he was 'straightforward and unaffected' ('Ypodigma Neustriae', 379). 


@@@@@


doc= 5745


Cobham, Thomas (c.1265-1327), bishop of Worcester, was the sixth son of John Cobham (died 1300), of Cobham and Cooling, Kent, and his wife, daughter of Sir Robert Septvans ['see 'Cobham family]. His early career is obscure, but from 1284 he was retained by the Canterbury chapter with a pension of 5 marks. The Pauline annalist wrote that he was regent in three universities: in arts at Paris (where an elder brother James also studied), in canon law at Oxford (regent in 1291), and in theology at Cambridge (DTh by 1314). Details of his ordination have yet to be traced -- he was still a subdeacon in 1317 -- but Archbishop Pecham collated him in 1288 to his first benefice, Hollingbourne in Kent. He soon became a substantial pluralist. In 1306 he was dispensed to hold a benefice additional to his rectories of Hollingbourne, Boxley, Hackney, and Rotherfield, and his canonries of St Paul's London, Hereford, and Wells. He acquired the archdeaconry of Lewes 'in commendam' by 1301, and secured the precentorship of York in 1312. 
In the meantime Cobham had become a king's clerk, and more especially a diplomat, an expert versed in the intricacies of Gascon and French affairs. He was sent by Edward I to the papal curia in 1305-6, while following Edward II's accession he was deputed in December 1309 to examine the terms of the truce with France and on that account summoned to parliament the following February. Then in November 1310 he was appointed to join other envoys in Gascony, where he remained until the spring of 1311. In April he was one of the lawyers directed to examine articles concerning Guyenne (Gascony) and to report to the king's council. On 20 May he was instructed to travel to Paris and later associated with Gilbert Peche in assessing merchants' losses from breaches of the truce for consideration by the French king's arbitrators at Montreuil. February 1312 saw him with other councillors at York. He left London for France on 10 April, to return on 4 June. His mission was to excuse Edward II before his overlord, Philippe IV, from responding to a summons to enforce a citation of the count of Flanders. During the autumn he was given the task of preparing the English case 'vis-a-vis' Guyenne so that response could be made in the 'parlement' of Paris concerning the negotiations conducted at Perigueux in the previous year. He was in Paris in February 1313 as king's proctor with authority to deal with Gascon affairs. 
On 11 May 1313 Archbishop Winchelsey died and on the 28th the Canterbury monks assembled to elect a successor. Proceeding by way of compromise, they chose Cobham -- termed a local man born in Canterbury province -- who was then with Edward II in Paris. The elect accepted on 8 June; the king prevaricated. When a delegation of monks and the elect reached the curia they found that Clement V had reserved the see on 27 April. Bulls of 1 October 1313 provided Walter Reynolds (died 1327), the king's confidant. Contemporary chroniclers shrilly deplored Cobham's rejection, but some modern commentators, recalling Pecham and Winchelsey, regard the move as designed to promote harmony between church and king. By way of compensation Cobham was provided to Worcester on 31 March 1317 and consecrated at Avignon on 22 May. The temporalities were restored on 20 November, and he was enthroned in his cathedral on 28 October 1319. 
The Canterbury election virtually terminated Cobham's diplomatic career, but with his colleagues he sought to mediate between Edward and his opponents in England. He is numbered among the nine bishops who endorsed the conciliatory Leicester agreement of June 1318, was a signatory of the treaty of Leake (9 August 1318), and a member of the standing council appointed to advise the king. After the Westminster parliament of October 1320 he reported his impressions in letters to the curia. His tone was avuncular, almost patronizing, as he recounted how the king had shown a promising -- clearly unusual -- attention to business. He was soon disillusioned by the threat of civil war -- 'bellum intestinum'. Disorder was rampant; the very shrine of St Oswald at Worcester was desecrated. Although he was in London in July 1321 he did not take any noticeable part in the mediation of his fellow bishops between Edward and the barons. When the king sought to persuade the episcopate to attend a December convocation at St Paul's to sanction the Despensers' recall, he wrote that he could not reach London in time and that the matter would be more appropriately dealt with in parliament. In 1324 he endeavoured to intervene on behalf of those bishops whose temporalities had been confiscated, and was one of the bishops who met the nuncios at London in November to discuss peace between England and France. 
Following Queen Isabella's landing in 1326 the now-ailing bishop travelled to London to seek medical attention, to attend a convocation for papal business, to join his fellow bishops in reconciling Edward and Isabella, to press litigation in the royal court and that of Canterbury, and to fulfil a vow of pilgrimage to the shrine of St Thomas Becket. All proved vain; the king had fled; even pilgrimage was rendered impossible by the painfulness of travel. Cobham asked Bishop Adam Orleton of Hereford (died 1345), with whom he seems to have been on good terms, to make his excuses to the queen and offered her the use of his houses and goods, with the hint that remedy could be found by summoning a parliament. He joined the rump of bishops that assembled fearfully at Lambeth on 26 October 1326. Illness prevented his contributing to the revolutionary changes that ensued, but one entry in his register has been dated 11 January (1327) from London. 
As a diocesan, Cobham's performance was reasonably diligent, although political business prevented him from reaching his diocese until March 1319, two years after his provision. His protracted primary visitation was launched in November of that year. Commissaries performed most of it, but he visited many religious houses personally. It was still incomplete in 1321 when he travelled north to negotiate with Robert I of Scotland. He seldom used a suffragan for ordinations, and on the second occasion that he did so (December 1323) it was because of illness. 
Cobham died on 27 August 1327, probably at Hartlebury, after a long and painful illness. It is fair to conclude that he did not respond to political crises in the robust manner that was expected of a man of his stature. Unlike Orleton or Stratford he was not a forceful politician, though undeniably a 'good clerk'. During his lifetime he provided money for the building of a house for the university congregation north of St Mary's Church in Oxford, but it was incomplete at his death. It should have received his library, but in the event, to defray their expenses, his executors sold his books to Adam Brome, the provost of Oriel College. He bequeathed plate and vestments to his cathedral, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 5746


Cobham, Thomas (1779/1786-1842), actor, was born in London. His father, who was 'distinguished as an algebraist, mathematician, and architectural draughtsman', died young, and Cobham was apprenticed by his mother to his cousin Joseph Aspin, an eminent printer. He rose to be reader and corrector for the press, and became acquainted with Edmond Malone, an edition of whose works of Shakespeare he read for the printers. 
Cobham first appeared as an amateur in Lamb's Conduit Street as Shylock, a part in which George Frederick Cooke had greatly impressed him. His first professional performance was at Watford, Hertfordshire. Thereafter he played in various provincial towns, taking, like Edmund Kean, every part, from leading tragedian to harlequin. At Salisbury he married a Miss Drake, an actress at the city's theatre. When playing at Oxford, Cobham, with his wife, was engaged by William Penley for the theatre in Tottenham Street, London, where he appeared with much success as Marmion in a dramatization by William Oxberry of Scott's poem. He then went to the Surrey Theatre, and thence to the Royalty. About this time he became known as 'the Kemble of the minor theatres'. 
On 16 April 1816 Cobham appeared as Richard III at Covent Garden. That the experiment was a failure was in part ascribed to the supporters of Kean, and especially to the club known as 'the Wolves'. Hazlitt, however, who was present on the occasion, declared his Richard to have been 'a vile one', a caricature of Kean, and continued: 'He raved, whined, grinned, stared, stamped, and rolled his eyes with incredible velocity, and all in the right place according to his cue, but in so extravagant and disjointed a manner, and with such a total want of common sense, decorum, or conception of the character as to be perfectly ridiculous. ('A View of the English Stage', 1818, 274)' The 'Theatrical Inquisitor' (April 1816), on the other hand, said his portrayal was good and censured the audience for taking a cowardly advantage and condemning him before he was heard. The performance was repeated with some success on 22 April 1816, but Cobham then disappeared from the West End. 
In 1817 Cobham appeared at the Crow Street Theatre, Dublin, as Sir Giles Overreach, and played afterwards Macbeth and Richard. He was again in Dublin in 1821-2 as a member of the Hawkins Street stock company, dividing with Warde the principal characters of tragedy. After Warde's disappearance he performed, in the memorable engagement of Kean in July 1822, Richmond, Iago, Edgar in 'King Lear', and the Ghost in 'Hamlet'. Early in his career Cobham had played Glenalvon to the Young Norval of Kean at the Navy tavern, Woolwich. Later, at the Coburg Theatre, London, the two actors met once more, Kean playing Othello and Cobham Iago. The reception of Kean on this occasion by the transpontine audience, the faith of which in Cobham was never shaken, was unfavourable. (A full account of the scene of Kean's indignation and Cobham's speech to the audience appears in J. W. Cole's 'Life of Charles Kean', 1859, 1.161-3.) 
Cobham had some resemblance in appearance and stature to Kean, being dark, with flexible features, and about 5 feet 5 inches in height. In spite of Hazlitt's unfavourable verdict, he was a fair actor, a little given to rant, and to so-called and not very defensible new readings. In his later life he rarely quitted the south London stage. He died on 3 January 1842, leaving a son and a daughter, both of whom worked in the theatrical profession. The latter acted under the name of Mrs Fitzgerald. 


@@@@@


doc= 5747


Cochran, William (1738-1785), portrait painter and history painter, was born at Strathaven, Lanark, and baptized on 12 December 1738 in the parish of Avondale, Lanarkshire, the son of John Cochran, barber. He began his artistic training in 1754 at the academy of painting in Glasgow newly founded by the well-known printers Robert and Andrew Foulis. As one of their most promising students, he was the first to be sent to Italy in 1761 to continue his education, the academy providing expenses for a two-year period. He became a pupil in Gavin Hamilton's studio in Rome, where he painted several historical and mythological pictures, of which the best-known were 'Daedalus and Icarus' and 'Diana and Endymion' (locs. unknown). He also studied at the Accademia del Nudo in that city and was at Naples in 1763. He returned to Glasgow 'c'.1766, and devoted himself to portrait painting. He practised both in oil and in miniature, building up a thriving practice and supporting an elderly mother. Among his best-known portraits is that of William Cullen, professor at Edinburgh University, and first royal physician in Scotland (Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh), engraved in mezzotint by Valentine Green. Cochran is often described as a modest and unambitious character, never exhibiting his works, and seldom putting his name to them. He continued to live in Glasgow, and died there on 23 October 1785. He was buried in the cathedral in that city, where a monument proclaimed, 'The works of his pencil, and this marble, bear record of an eminent artist, and a virtuous man' (McEwan, 134). 


@@@@@


doc= 5748


Patrick, Robert William Cochran- (1842-1897), politician, the only son of William Charles Richard Patrick (afterwards Cochran-Patrick) of Waterside, Ayrshire, and Agnes, eldest daughter of William Cochran of Ladyland and Belltrees, was born at Ladyland, Ayrshire, on 5 February 1842. Having received his early education from private tutors, he matriculated at Edinburgh University in 1857, where he secured prizes in classics, logic, and moral philosophy, graduating BA in 1861, and passing first in metaphysics and logic. In 1861 he entered Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where his friends included Henry Fawcett, Leslie Stephen, and Robert Romer. He became captain of one of the boats of the hall, and carried off the university challenge cup for walking and other athletic prizes. As a volunteer he shot in a winning four with Edward Ross, the first queen's prizeman, and was a member of the amateur dramatic club, then under the management of F. C. Burnand. In 1864 he graduated LLB. On leaving Cambridge, he returned to Edinburgh for a year, with a view to qualifying for the Scottish bar, an idea he soon abandoned. 
On 31 October 1866 Cochran-Patrick married Eleanora, younger daughter of Robert Hunter of Hunterston, Ayrshire. She died in 1884 having borne a son, William Arthur (died 1891) and a daughter, Eleanor Agnes, who married in 1895 Neil James Kennedy, advocate. On his marriage, Cochran-Patrick settled at Woodside in Ayrshire, a property left him by his great-uncle. With a strong bent for sport and natural history, he was in his element as a country gentleman, also throwing himself with vigour into local and county business. He became a captain in the militia, chairman of the parish school and parochial boards, served as convener of the finance committee of the county, and occupied other public posts. 
Taking up the study of archaeology, Cochran-Patrick became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, and contributed many papers to the 'Proceedings' of the society. In 1871 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London, and in 1874 he was sent to Stockholm to represent Great Britain at the International Congress of Archaeology. In 1874 he was one of the founders of the Ayrshire and Wigtownshire Archaeological Association. To the collections of this society he contributed numerous articles. But it is as a numismatist that Cochran-Patrick is best known, and his collection of Scottish coins was wellnigh unrivalled. On this subject in 1876 he published his first book, entitled 'Records of the Coinage of Scotland from the Earliest Period to the Union' (2 vols.). This he followed up in 1878 with 'Early Records Relating to Mining in Scotland', in which he gave an account of the discovery of gold in Scotland, and descriptions of the lead and silver mines. In 1884 he published his third work, 'Catalogue of the Medals of Scotland', containing a learned account of Scottish medals, of which he preserved the best collection then extant. He published several other works on Scottish coins, and 'Medieval Scotland' (1892), a reprint of newspaper articles. 
In 1880 Cochran-Patrick contested North Ayrshire as a Conservative, and defeated J. B. Balfour (afterwards first Baron Kinross) by fifty-five votes. He was a frequent speaker in parliament, especially on education matters. In 1885 he was defeated for North Ayrshire by H. F. Elliot. In 1886 he became assessor to St Andrews University, and in 1887 a commissioner to inquire into the working of the 'Scottish Education Act'. Shortly afterwards he joined the fishery board of Scotland, and was granted the degree of LLD from Glasgow University for his scholarly attainments. In December 1887 he was appointed permanent under-secretary for Scotland, an office in which he rendered most valuable assistance in the promotion of Scottish business, notably the 'Local Government (Scotl.) Act', 1889. On 15 June 1892 he resigned his appointment owing to failing health, and retired to Woodside. In 1894 he acted as a commissioner to inquire into the Tweed and Solway salmon fisheries, visiting the border towns, taking evidence, and inspecting the rivers. In 1896 he became vice-chairman of the Scottish Fishery Board. As a freemason he was for many years provincial grand master of Ayrshire. On 15 March 1897, after returning from a meeting of the fishery board in Edinburgh, he died suddenly of heart disease at Woodside. His son-in-law assumed the name of Cochran-Patrick in terms of the entail of the property. 


@@@@@


doc= 5749


Cochrane, Sir Alexander Inglis (1758-1832), naval officer and politician, was born Alexander Forrester Cochrane on 22 April 1758, the ninth of eleven children (all sons) of Thomas Cochrane, eighth earl of Dundonald ('bap'. 1691, died 1778), and his second wife, Jean (1722/3-1808), eldest daughter of Archibald Stuart of Torrance, Lanarkshire. He joined the navy at an early age, and was made lieutenant on 19 May 1778 during the War of American Independence. On 17 April 1780, as a junior lieutenant in the 'Montagu' under Captain John Houlton, he was wounded in action off Martinique. Made commander on 6 December that year, he continued on the West Indian station under Sir George Rodney and on 17 December 1782 achieved promotion to post captain. 
When war ended in 1783 Cochrane returned to England; he remained unemployed on half pay until 1790, when he was appointed to the frigate 'Hind'. On 26 April 1788 he married Maria, daughter of David Shaw and widow of Captain Sir Jacob Wheate, baronet; the Cochranes had three sons and two daughters. The most notable of their offspring was their eldest son, Thomas John Cochrane (1789-1872), who, in a naval career spanning more than sixty years, was awarded three knighthoods, including a GCB and a KCB, and ended as admiral of the fleet. A daughter, Anna Maria (died 1873), married the naval officer Sir Edward Troubridge, second baronet, and was the mother of Sir Thomas Troubridge, third baronet, army officer. Under Captain Cochrane's command his nephew midshipman Thomas Cochrane (later tenth earl of Dundonald) began a colourful naval career in 1793. In that same year, when war began with revolutionary France, Cochrane cruised against enemy privateers off Norway during the spring and summer, then transferred to the 'Thetis' (42 guns), commanding her on the North American station. Accompanied by the 'Hussar', on 17 May 1795 he fought a well-contested action against four large French storeships, capturing the 'Prevoyante' and 'La Raison', two frigates armed 'en flute'. In May 1797 he wrote to the Admiralty to request that the name Forrester be dropped from future citations. 
In 1799 Cochrane was appointed to the 'Ajax' (80 guns), and in the following year he served in the Channel Fleet under Lord St Vincent, being especially engaged in the detached squadrons under Sir Edward Pellew and Sir John Borlase Warren in the expeditions to Quiberon Bay and against Ferrol. He then joined Lord Keith in 'coasting along the shores of the Mediterranean in quest of adventures', which were found in Egypt. Superintending the landing of troops on the Egyptian coast in February-March 1801 and supporting them with a flotilla of armed boats on Lake Mareotis in August, he earned high praise from Keith and General Hutchinson. At the same time Cochrane proved troublesome to Keith, organizing an opposition clique within the fleet and accusing the admiral of dishonesty (C. Lloyd and W. G. Perrin, eds., 'The Keith Papers', 3 vols., 1927-55, 2.235, 285, 311-13). 
After his ship was paid off following the peace of Amiens in 1802, Cochrane entered politics as MP for the Stirling burghs. The breakdown of the peace in 1803 reduced his effectiveness as a politician since, without relinquishing the seat, he returned to sea as captain of the 'Northumberland' (74 guns), which he retained as his flagship when advanced to rear-admiral of the blue on 23 April 1804. Commanding a squadron off Ferrol, Cochrane sent home intelligence on Spanish armament and war preparations -- information which led to the seizure on 5 October of Spanish treasure ships off Cape Santa Maria. In February 1805, still off Ferrol, he learned that Missiessy's squadron had sailed from La Rochelle for the West Indies, and simultaneously received orders to pursue. His chase was as fruitless as Nelson's later transatlantic chase of Villeneuve, but he was appointed commander-in-chief at the Leeward Islands and joined Nelson as a subordinate in the West Indies phase of the hunt for Villeneuve, continuing as commander-in-chief after Nelson left. 
Cochrane became rear-admiral of the white on 9 November 1805. After Trafalgar the French maintained a 'guerre de course' at sea, and in 1806 as second-in-command to Vice-Admiral Sir John Duckworth he fought the battle of San Domingo (6 February), the second fight against survivors of Trafalgar. The British squadron included seven ships of the line and four frigates. Three of the five French ships of the line were captured and the other two destroyed; three frigates escaped. Alexander Cochrane was awarded a knighthood of the Bath (29 March 1806), a vote of thanks from both houses of parliament, the freedom of the City of London, and a sword of honour to the value of 100 guineas; however, having been an absentee MP for over three years, he was now defeated at the polls. 
Still commander-in-chief at the Leewards, he became rear-admiral of the red on 28 April 1808. In 1809 he and Lieutenant-General George Beckwith began a joint campaign against the French in the West Indies, and on 24 February took the island of Martinique, Cochrane flying his flag in the 'Neptune' (74 guns) and leading a fleet of 47 ships and other vessels. A naval general service medal was issued to mark the event, which the participant ships were also allowed to list as a battle honour. The French regimental eagles captured on this occasion were sent back to London and were the first seen in England. Cochrane became vice-admiral of the blue on 25 October 1809; Beckwith was knighted. In the 'Pompee' on 5 February 1810, commanding a fleet of fifty assorted vessels, Cochrane captured Guadeloupe with Beckwith. This brought another naval general service medal for personnel and another battle honour for participant ships. Cochrane was appointed governor of the island, and advanced to vice-admiral of the white (31 July 1810) and of the red (4 December 1813). 
War with America had begun in 1812, and in 1814 in the 'Tonnant' (80 guns) Cochrane commanded the North American station, directing (but not actively participating in) coastal operations, including the failed attacks on Baltimore and New Orleans. His last action before leaving Bermuda for Britain on 23 April 1815 was to oversee the withdrawal of British forces from North America, handing command of the station to Rear-Admiral Edward Griffin. On his return Cochrane, who had been made GCB on 2 January 1815, was again unemployed but became admiral of the blue on 12 August 1819. In October 1815 he wrote to the Admiralty expressing his wish to be known as Alexander Inglis Cochrane, which name was adopted in subsequent Navy Lists. Although keen to re-enter parliament Cochrane's alleged interest in standing in the Westminster by-election for this year came to nothing. His last appointment was as commander-in-chief at Plymouth in 1821. He became admiral of the white on 27 May 1825, and on 26 January 1832 he died suddenly in Paris, where he is buried in the Pere Lachaise cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 5750


Cochrane, Archibald, ninth earl of Dundonald (1748-1831), chemical manufacturer, was born on 1 January 1748, the son of Thomas Cochrane, eighth earl of Dundonald (1691-1778), and Jean Stuart (1722/3-1808). His mother was keenly interested in technical matters. After brief service in both army and navy, he turned to scientific projects, applying chemical principles to manufacturing processes, though he never reaped financial rewards for his often brilliant ideas. He was married three times: on 17 October 1774 to Anne (1755-1784), daughter of Captain James Gilchrist; on 12 April 1788 to Isabella (died 1808), widow of John Mayne; and in April 1819 to Anna Maria (died 1822), daughter of the writer Francis Peter Plowden. The eldest son of his first marriage was Admiral Thomas Cochrane, the tenth earl; there were no children of the second and third marriages. 
Cochrane, styled Lord Cochrane from 1758 to 1778, succeeded to the title earl of Dundonald on the death of his father on 27 June 1778, but the family estates were severely impoverished and he had to borrow money in order to equip his son for the navy. Nevertheless, the estate of Culross Abbey in Perthshire was well supplied with timber and coal, and the Lamancha estate 12 miles south of Edinburgh contained iron ore. He also had a house in Hammersmith. His son complained that the unentailed estates were crippled by his father's extensive scientific pursuits. Contemporaries did not always appreciate Dundonald's efforts -- he was sometimes known as 'daft Dundonald' -- but the ninth earl was a man of active and enquiring mind who enjoyed the learned society afforded by Edinburgh and was on intimate terms with Joseph Black, the professor of chemistry. In literature on industrial history he is usually referred to as Lord Dundonald. 
By the late eighteenth century a shortage of soda (commonly called alkali) was affecting all countries touched by the industrial revolution. In 1790 Dundonald joined the brothers John and William Losh in experiments on the production of synthetic soda from salt at Woodside near Carlisle. Three years later the results were sufficiently promising to justify setting up a works at Bells Close, west of Newcastle upon Tyne, where Dundonald had a tar distillery. In 1797 the Losh family inherited a share in a coalmine on the Tyne at Walker in which a brine spring had been discovered. This provided a private source of salt for making soda, though to avoid the heavy duty of $36 per ton the salt had to be mixed with soot or ashes, and an exciseman lived on the site to see that the law was obeyed. Several of Dundonald's patents were worked at Walker, but all depended on the successful sale of by-products. 
Meanwhile an efficient process for converting salt to soda had been developed in France by Nicolas Leblanc, and William Losh visited Paris at Dundonald's suggestion to learn what he could. The Walker works was the first in England to work the Leblanc process, the partners being lords Dundas and Dundonald, the Losh brothers, and bankers John and Aubone Surtees. The original partnership soon dissolved and the Losh brothers, trading as Walker Alkali Works, were able to develop a profitable chemical business in which Dundonald no longer had a part. The alkali trade spread to Lancashire and Cheshire, and became the backbone of the heavy chemical industry. 
Another area in which Dundonald was a significant catalyst was coal-tar technology. During his naval service he had observed the ravages made on ships' bottoms by worms. Believing correctly that coal tar might provide a remedy which could be produced more cheaply than Stockholm tar made from dwindling supplies of wood, he designed and built retorts for the distillation of tar from coal at Culross Abbey. He also superintended the working of his adjacent collieries. He did not invent the production of tar from coal; his innovation, embodied in his 1781 patent, was to avoid the use of an external fuel, allowing coal in the retort to smoulder slowly by controlling the air intake. He envisaged a complete industrial package in which the tar would be used to protect ships' bottoms, the 'cinders' (coke) would provide a clean fuel for salt boiling, malting, and brewing, and sal ammoniac from the ammonia liquors would be sold to calico printers and metal finishers. He also foresaw, but did not develop, the possibility of gas lighting. His vision of the tar industry is presented in his book 'The Quality and Uses of Coal Tar and Coal Varnish' (1784). 
Unfortunately, the Admiralty did not embrace the tar treatment, preferring to rely on copper sheathing. With one exception, Dundonald's creditors saw the potential of the tar process and were prepared to give him leeway to develop the concern. The dissident, named Cuthbert, pressed for foreclosure. Dundonald was thus forced to spread his risk (and reduce his hope of profit) by forming the British Tar Company, whose partners were Newcastle businessmen. The coal-tar industry was destined to become an important provider of dyes, perfumes, drugs, and explosives, but not within Dundonald's lifetime. 
Dundonald was also active in a wide variety of other technological fields. He established a factory for the production of alum as a mordant for silk and calico printers. He published a 'Treatise Showing the Intimate Connection between Agriculture and Chemistry' (1795), eighteen years before Sir Humphry Davy's famous work on that topic. He proposed the use of salt residues as manure, a new process for making white lead, the malting of grain for cattle feed, an improved method for preparing flax and hemp for sailcloth, and a scheme for purifying rock salt by washing out the impurities with brine. 
Dundonald died at the rue Vaugirard, Paris, on 1 July 1831, in poverty. The Literary Fund Society had awarded him three grants (March 1815, April 1819, and April 1823; BL, Royal Literary Fund, loan 96)). His son Thomas wrote: 'His discoveries, now of national utility, ruined him and deprived his posterity of their remaining paternal inheritance' (Cochrane, 1.39). Later biographers have cast doubts both on his science and his business sense. In fact he possessed a sound knowledge of the chemical properties of common substances, and was quick to see the industrial possibilities in simple chemical reactions. The impoverished condition of the family estates when he inherited meant that he was never able to command the capital to sustain his experiments through the difficult periods of development. The examples of alkali and coal tar show that his confidence and enthusiasm were justified, though too late to mend his fortunes. 


@@@@@


doc= 5751


Cochrane, Sir James (1798-1883), judge in Gibraltar, the fourth son of Thomas Cochrane, speaker of the house of assembly of Nova Scotia, was born in Nova Scotia. He was admitted as a student in 1818, and was called to the bar at the Inner Temple on 6 February 1829. In the same year he married Theresa (died 1873), the daughter of Colonel William Haly. They had at least one son, Thomas, who later became rector of Stapleford Abbotts, Essex. 
In 1837 Cochrane was appointed attorney-general at Gibraltar, where he remained for the rest of his life. In 1841 he was made chief justice, a post he held for thirty-six years. He was knighted at St James's Palace on 12 March 1845. He resigned in 1877, four years after his wife's death. According to a speech made by General Lord Napier of Magdala, governor of the fortress, at the resignation, Cochrane had 'eminently maintained the high character of the bench'. His clarity of judgment, wisdom, and character had, according to Napier, 'commanded the respect of all classes of the community'. The general drew particular attention to Cochrane's 'firmness and perfect fairness', to his achievements with working-class people, and to his success in helping 'to dispel from the city of Gibraltar the crime of using the knife, which was unfortunately once so prevalent'. Cochrane died at Glenrocky, his home in Gibraltar, on 24 June 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 5752


Cochrane, Sir John (b. c.1604, d. in or after 1657), army officer and diplomat, was the eldest of the nine children of Alexander Blair (died 1640/41), who assumed the name Cochrane on his marriage to Elizabeth, daughter of William Cochrane of Cochrane, Renfrewshire, and his wife, Elizabeth. Alexander Cochrane purchased the barony of Cowdown in 1623, but resigned it to his second son, William. Having been educated at Glasgow University, where he graduated MA in 1623, John Cochrane entered the army, and served in Ireland, acquiring land through his marriage to Lady Grace Butler, allegedly a cousin of the duke of Ormond. 
On his return to Scotland he became an active covenanter and commanded a regiment at the sieges of Carlaverock and Threave (1639-40). He became a client of Montrose and was also linked to the Palatine-Bohemian connection. In 1640 the elector Palatine asked Cochrane to sound out Montrose about service abroad. In 1641 he was implicated in 'the incident', a plot for seizing Hamilton and Argyll, leaders of the parliamentary party; but, on his arrest, he was freed without bail on their petition (17 November). After resigning his Scottish estates (19 December 1642) to his next brother, William Cochrane, later first earl of Dundonald, he joined the king at York. Recommended to Charles by his sister, Elizabeth of Bohemia, he was sent by the king to solicit help in men or money, first to the Netherlands and then to Denmark, Christian IV being the uncle of Charles I. On his return in company with the Danish ambassador, who aimed to mediate between the king and parliament, Cochrane was arrested and imprisoned in Hull and in Windsor Castle. 
Having regained his liberty, he was put in command of Towcester, from where he complained to Prince Rupert (16 December 1643) that the town would fall unless the garrison was better supplied. After the royalists abandoned Towcester (18 January 1644), Cochrane appears at Oxford, the royalist headquarters; he soon headed north with Montrose to attempt a counter-invasion of Scotland (March). After another visit to the Netherlands Cochrane, now knighted, was sent as ambassador to Denmark (1644), but the Danish-Swedish War (1643-5) left Christian IV little opportunity to help his nephew. His estates were forfeited (1644) and parliament, in its peace negotiations with the king (1646) listed Cochrane among those to be excepted from pardon. 
For almost a decade he was employed in raising money for the royal cause in Denmark, Hamburg, Danzig, and Poland, especially from the duke of Courland (1645-50). The wordiness of his letters and his account of negotiations at Hamburg confirm the estimation of Charles I that he was a man 'having many discourses, most of his own praises' (Simpson, 144). Although successful in raising supplies, he seems to have been dilatory in explaining his dealings, and in 1650 Charles II sent an apology to Scottish merchants in Poland for Cochrane's unauthorized exactions. In 1650 he was prohibited by the Scottish parliament from returning to his own country. On 26 February 1652 his wife, who was in prison in England (probably for aiding her husband's enterprises), secured a pass for him to return to England, which he did in 1653. Until 1657 his name occurs in various political negotiations, but he probably died before 1660. 


@@@@@


doc= 5753


Cochrane, Sir John (fl. 1662-1695), conspirator, born probably at Ochiltree, Ayrshire, was the second son of Sir William Cochrane, later first earl of Dundonald (1605-1685), and his wife, Eupheme (died after 1685), daughter of Sir William Scott of Ardross, Fife. He was the brother of Lord William Cochrane (died 1679) and of Lady Grizel, who married George, tenth Lord Ross. He and his wife, Margaret, second daughter of Sir William Strickland of Boynton, Yorkshire, had three children: William (died 1728), John of Waterside ('b'. 'c'.1663), and Grizel. The Scottish privy council appointed him a militia commissioner for Renfrew and Ayrshire in September 1668. For failing to protect the minister of Auchinleck, Ayrshire, he was fined by the council in March 1672, though it subsequently cancelled the penalty. He was close to the duke of Hamilton and the earl of Cassillis in the 1670s. A presbyterian, his chaplain for a time was William Carstares; in the autumn of 1677 Cochrane agreed to work with Sir Hugh Campbell of Cessnock and others to seek an indulgence for the presbyterians. Accused of attending conventicles, Cochrane was outlawed in February 1678 for refusing to take a bond making him responsible for his tenants' behaviour, including their attendance at illegal religious services. When he was elected a commissioner for Ayrshire, the Scottish council tried to void the appointment but was overruled by the convention of estates in June 1678. As commissioner Cochrane refused to levy rates to support the garrisoning of troops in Ayrshire to quash conventicles. Although he formally repudiated the Bothwell Bridge rebels in April 1679, his younger son joined the insurgents, and Cochrane himself helped some of them escape after their defeat. 
During the spring of 1682 a group of Scots including Henry, Lord Cardross, invited Cochrane to participate in a scheme to establish a new colony, initially in New York, later in Carolina. By July that year Cochrane and Sir George Campbell were in London to purchase land from the Carolina proprietors, including the earl of Shaftesbury, agreeing to pay $36,000 per annum for eight years, with a renewal provision for a like amount. Charles II directed the Scottish council to support the plan. In the meantime, Cochrane was probably involved with the earl of Argyll's unsuccessful efforts to smuggle weapons from the Netherlands to his Scottish supporters; he was certainly raising money for Argyll. By early 1683 Monmouth's inner circle, including Lord William Russell and Algernon Sidney, had learned of the disaffection of Cochrane and his associates toward the government and dispatched the attorney Aaron Smith to invite Cochrane and others to London for discussions about co-ordinated insurrections in Scotland and England. By April, Cochrane and his younger son were in London with other Scots dissidents. Carstares came from the Netherlands to tell Cochrane that Argyll needed $30,000 to raise troops, a message Cochrane relayed to Russell. He also tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade Ford, Lord Grey, to provide horses from Northumberland for Argyll's recruits and conferred with Monmouth on at least one occasion. 
On 4 June 1683 Cochrane and his younger son were cited to appear before the justiciary court in Edinburgh. According to Gilbert Burnet, with whom Cochrane associated in London, the latter fled to the Netherlands. On 16 August the Scottish council directed the king's advocate to bring charges of treason against Cochrane for having consorted with the Bothwell Bridge rebels. In late October the government was prepared to offer Cochrane a pardon if he confessed, but early the next month ambassador Thomas Chudleigh reported that he was 'hardend beyond all hopes of reclayming him, if it be not that he hopes by the means of his freinds to make his peace without acknowledging his guilt' (BL, Add. MS 41809, fol. 137'r'). Cochrane denied involvement in the conspiracy, refused to return to Scotland where he would have no right of habeas corpus, and professed his innocence in a letter to the earl of Middleton. He spent part of his exile in Cleves, in frequent contact with Grey, until he discovered that the woman with Grey was his mistress. In the autumn of 1683 Argyll and John Locke visited Cochrane in Cleves. Thereafter Cochrane and his son went to Hanover and Luneburg in search of a place for dissident Scots to settle. Having ignored a council order of January 1684 to appear, the Cochranes were formally declared outlaws, while the younger John Cochrane was adjudged guilty of treason in April 1684 for his role in the Bothwell rebellion, and his estate at Waterside, a gift from Dundonald, was forfeited. On 3 December 1684 directions were again issued to prosecute the elder Cochrane for treason and in May 1685 he was found guilty of participation in the 1683 conspiracy and his lands were forfeited. 
A member of the inner circle that planned Argyll's ill-fated rebellion, Cochrane attended the meeting that harmonized the manifestos of Monmouth and Argyll in April 1685. Before sailing with Argyll, he left letters to Scottish officers in German armies asking them to report to Amsterdam for service in the earl's cause. Argyll dispatched Cochrane and his troops to south-western Scotland, where they enjoyed some success before Cochrane dismissed them after learning of the earl's defeat. The government issued a proclamation for his arrest on 24 June, and by 1 July he was in custody; the wife of his uncle Gavin Cochrane had turned him in because Cochrane's troops had killed her brother during the rebellion. On 3 July the hangman led Cochrane and his son to Edinburgh's Tolbooth, bound and bare-headed. According to Burnet, Dundonald offered 'the priests' $5000 to save his son; a deal was struck whereby Cochrane would confess only to James, who had a yacht transport him to London in August. He reputedly told the king about meetings with the elector of Brandenburg and William of Orange, though the latter subsequently denied having met Cochrane. He also provided information against Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbell, Lord Stair, William Spence, and others. Both Cochranes were pardoned and released from the Tower in October 1685. 
The government employed Cochrane in 1687 to negotiate with Scottish presbyterians about an indulgence for themselves and Catholics, but he did not recover his estates until 1689. Cochrane and the minister Robert Ferguson were imprisoned on 5 June 1690 for misprision of treason and treasonable activities because of their association with Sir James Montgomerie. Cochrane survived to become a farmer of the poll tax in 1693, but he failed to provide a satisfactory account of his receipts and, with three other offenders, was incarcerated by 3 September 1695. The date of his death is not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 5754


Cochrane, John Dundas (1780-1825), traveller, was a nephew of Sir Alexander Cochrane and grandson of the eighth earl of Dundonald. Having entered the Royal Navy when ten years old, he served, chiefly in West and East Indian waters, until the peace of 1814. Captain Cochrane then made a tour on foot through France, Spain, and Portugal. He returned to England in January 1820 and offered his services to the Admiralty for the exploration of the Niger, but, being refused, decided to make a tour of the world by way of Russia, Siberia, and North America. He left England in February 1820 and travelled by Paris and Berlin to St Petersburg, most of the way on foot for the sake of economy (his prodigious journeys on foot earned him the nickname the Pedestrian Traveller). He was then helped by the Russian government, who supplied him with the means to hire horses, sledges, and canoes. He reached the coast at Okhotsk in June 1821. While in Kamchatka he married a local woman and abandoned the idea of travelling further. He returned to Europe with his wife, reaching St Petersburg in June 1823. In June 1824 he left England for South America, intending to take part in the mining industry, returned to England the following year, but after a brief stay sailed again for America. He died on 12 August 1825 of a fever at Valencia in Colombia, now Venezuela, having gone to South America with the intention of crossing it on foot. His 'Narrative of a Pedestrian Journey through Russia and Siberian Tartary' (1820) passed through several editions. It is lively and contains much interesting incident, from help provided by a mysterious black stranger near St Petersburg, to robbery in Siberia. Of scientific value it is entirely destitute. The harsh judgement of his biographer, Knight, was that 'the eccentricities of this most hardy and indefatigable traveller sometimes approach to insanity', but Cochrane's courage still commands respect. 


@@@@@


doc= 5755


Cochrane, John George (1780-1852), publisher and librarian, was born at Glasgow on 21 December 1780, the son of John Cochrane, who worked in the legal profession, and his wife, Katharine, 'nee' Morison. By the time he was twenty Cochrane worked in London, where he married, on 30 March 1805, Sarah Bishop. He became a partner of John White. The publishing firm of White, Cochrane & Co. carried on an extensive business in Fleet Street, involved with the publication, for instance, of James Sowerby's 'English Botany' (1790-1816) and Alymer B. Lambert's 'Genus Pinus' (1803). Prosperity lasted until they became involved in the downturn in trade which followed the failure of Archibald Constable, and they were declared bankrupt in 1815. Cochrane wrote anonymously a pamphlet, 'The Case Stated between the Public Libraries and the Booksellers' (1813), calling attention to the hardship suffered by publishers, who were obliged, under the 'Copyright Act', to supply copies of their books, however expensive, to eleven public libraries. He and his partner were examined before the parliamentary committee of 1813. He also during this period published and edited in a limited edition of 250 copies 'The English Works of Roger Ascham, Preceptor to Queen Elizabeth, I' (1815). 
Cochrane subsequently became manager of the foreign bookselling house of Messrs Treuttel, Wurtz, Treuttel jun. and Richter of Soho Square, London, which published in July 1827 the first number of the 'Foreign Quarterly Review'. The editorship was accepted by Cochrane, who remained the sole editor until 1834, also contributing various reviews and articles. Cochrane was, in the words of the 'Wellesley index', a 'strong editor [who] gathered together an impressive, if seemingly disparate group of contributors' (Curran, 131). Richter became bankrupt on 9 December 1834, and Cochrane established 'Cochrane's Foreign Quarterly Review' (1835), only two numbers of which appeared. Cochrane was an unsuccessful candidate for the librarianship of the Faculty of Advocates in Edinburgh, and for some time acted as the editor of the 'Caledonian Mercury'. Friendship with Robert Cadell caused him to be chosen to assist George Huntly Gordon in cataloguing Sir Walter Scott's library at Abbotsford, and producing an index to the catalogue. It was necessary to print the catalogue, and extra copies were produced for members of the Maitland and Bannatyne clubs (1838). References to passages in Scott's writings connected with the books throw considerable light upon Scott's literary history. 
Cochrane afterwards lived for some time at Hertford, where he was editor of a local newspaper. Owing to the strong support of his old friend Thomas Carlyle, on 17 February 1841 Cochrane became the first secretary and librarian of the London Library, founded in the previous year. This institution was opened on 3 May at 49 Pall Mall; in March 1842 the first catalogue was issued by Cochrane, who also issued two supplements to it in 1843 and 1844. In April 1845 the committee took a lease of the premises in St James's Square, and in 1847 an enlarged edition of the catalogue appeared, recording holdings after this move. A short time before Cochrane's death a supplementary volume was compiled, in which a general classified index was announced. Following the death, on 20 August 1847, of his first wife, he married, on 22 February 1848, a widow, Maria Vaughan ('b'. 1805/6), daughter of Stephen Haines. Cochrane died at his apartments in the library, St James's Square, London, on 4 May 1852, in his seventy-second year. Thomas Carlyle and John Stuart Mill, among others, wrote in their letters sympathetically of Cochrane. Carlyle called him 'White Owl', and observed: 'Poor old Cochrane, our first librarian of London Library, and essentially the builder and architect there. The only real bibliographer I have ever met within Britain' ('Collected Letters', 22.75, n. 8). 


@@@@@


doc= 5756


Cochrane, Thomas (d. 1482), royal favourite, has left few traces in official records, and much of what is known about him is drawn from later chronicles, above all the histories of Lesley (1568-70), Pitscottie ('c'.1579), and Buchanan (1582). All these writers see Cochrane as the evil genius of James III of Scotland, a low-born favourite who turned the king against his brothers Albany and Mar, became earl of Mar on Mar's death, and richly deserved his violent death, hanged over Lauder Bridge on 22 July 1482 by an incensed Scottish nobility. The Cochrane legend grew until by the early eighteenth century Cochrane, quaintly described as 'Prime Minister' of James III, became the subject of a short pamphlet war in London, conducted by individuals seeking to attack or defend the ministry of Sir Robert Walpole. In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries a reaction set in among historians who endeavoured to rehabilitate Cochrane, praising him as an important architect in the service of an unjustly maligned Renaissance monarch -- all this on the strength of two isolated references in contemporary official records, a name on a notarial instrument, and the stories of chroniclers who, with one exception, are not contemporaries of the events which they describe and who cannot agree on Cochrane's forename, far less his occupation. 
Nevertheless, it is impossible to ignore Cochrane, for there survives one striking piece of near contemporary evidence as to his existence and closeness to James III. In the first edition of his commentary on book 4 of Peter Lombard's 'Sentences', published in Paris in 1509, John Mair, who had grown up in Haddingtonshire during James III's reign, referred to a Robert Cochrane as the victor in a single combat with one William Tor, commenting that the fight, which was much talked about in its day, occurred in that king's reign. According to Mair, it was widely said at the time that Cochrane achieved his victory through witchcraft. The witchcraft theme is also to be found in a fragmentary, and probably contemporary, chronicle which attributes the death in 1480 of James III's brother John, earl of Mar, to his association with witches and warlocks. Thus a tentative link might be made between Cochrane and Mar's death, a connection greatly exaggerated in transmission by later writers. 
The Cochrane of official record is Thomas rather than Mair's Robert, though probably the same individual. On 22 January 1480 the lords of council assigned the sum of $60 Scots to Thomas Cochrane; it had formerly been promised by four northern lords to Sir John Colquhoun, a royal usher who had been killed at the siege of Dunbar Castle in May 1479. Colquhoun's $60 Scots had been reassigned by the king to Cochrane, which suggests that he was a royal household servant who had recently come to James III's attention, perhaps through his victory over Tor. 
Chronologically, Cochrane's next appearance in contemporary records is found in an otherwise unremarkable notarial instrument of 20 May 1482 appointing procurators in a land transfer; one of the named procurators is 'Thomas Cochrane, constable of the castle of Kildrummy'. There can be little doubt that this is the same Cochrane as in the council decision of January 1480, for the surname, though common enough in Renfrewshire and Lothian, is startlingly unfamiliar in Aberdeenshire. Two months before his demise at Lauder, then, Cochrane is to be found as keeper of the principal castle in Mar, which in turn suggests that, while James III may never have given him the title of earl, Cochrane could well have had possession of some or all of the revenues of Mar, amounting in total to $505 13's'. 5died Scots. Later local evidence points to his being responsible for building the formidable tower-house of Auchindoun, 20 miles from Kildrummy; if true, this might explain his later reputation as a stonemason. 
Thus it would appear that Cochrane, a southerner, was active in the north-east as a royal agent, that he was very well rewarded by the crown for his pains, and that his presence in Mar was a snub to George Gordon, earl of Huntly, and to the earl's kinsman James Ogilvy of Deskford and Findlater. Huntly wanted Mar and the keepership of Kildrummy; Ogilvy, already in possession of Glenfiddich, near which Auchindoun stands, may have seen Cochrane as a threat. Both men were conspicuously present at the Lauder muster and hangings in 1482, and subsequently they duly acquired Kildrummy and Auchindoun. 
Cochrane's third and last appearance in the records, on 2 May 1483, describes him as 'umquhile thomas of cochran', already dead and forfeited. The main event at Lauder had been not the hanging of Cochrane and other familiars, but the seizure of the king; and Cochrane was certainly never a primary target for the opposition, unlike, for example, Archbishop William Scheves (died 1497). Cochrane's involvement in Mar's death cannot be proved. In the last analysis his real crime may have been his attempt to feather his own nest in Mar with James III's blessing, but in the teeth of implacable local hostility. 


@@@@@


doc= 5757


Cochrane, Thomas, tenth earl of Dundonald (1775-1860), naval officer, born at Annesfield, Hamilton, Scotland, on 14 December 1775, was the eldest son of Archibald Cochrane, ninth earl of Dundonald (1748-1831), and his first wife, Anne Gilchrist (1755-1784), second daughter of Captain James Gilchrist RN. Destined for the army, his father obtained a commission in the 104th regiment for him, while he was still a child, through his uncle, Andrew Cochrane-Johnstone. However from 1790 another uncle, Captain Alexander Inglis Cochrane (1758-1832), placed his name on the books of the warships under his command, possibly securing him a small advantage in meeting the regulation requiring young officers to serve six years at sea before they could be commissioned. Despite six months at Chauvet's military academy in London in 1788 Cochrane expressed a strong desire to enter the navy. His father, after initial resistance, gave way. This decision may well have been hastened by his realization that, with his finances in ruins from attempts to develop a new chemical industry on the results of his scientific experiments, he could not afford to purchase military careers for all his sons. Having defied stern parental authority, Cochrane's confidence in his own judgement and lack of respect for mere authority were established. His father's financial ruin, leading to the sale of the family home, was an equally powerful stimulus. To the end of his life Cochrane was obsessed with money; it would be at the root of nearly all his problems. 
Cochrane finally joined the Royal Navy, aged seventeen, on 27 June 1793, aboard HMS 'Hind', then commanded by his uncle. He was fortunate to receive his initial training in seamanship from the first lieutenant of the 'Hind', 'Jack' Larmour, a first-class seaman who had risen from the ranks. Cochrane, an able and enthusiastic pupil, quickly assimilated Larmour's teaching, and throughout his career he excelled in practical seamanship. The two men moved, with Captain Cochrane, into the 'Thetis' destined for the North American station. Cochrane was appointed acting lieutenant in January 1795, a rank in which he was confirmed on 24 May 1796, by which time he had acquired the necessary six years of sea-time. After service in the station flagship 'Resolution' he returned to England. He was appointed to the 'Foudroyant' and then the 'Barfleur', successive flagships of Admiral Sir George Keith Elphinstone (Lord Keith), a fellow Scot. Having already given marked evidence of his ability and independence of thought he found the atmosphere on the flagship stifling; this led to a quarrel with the first lieutenant, Philip Beaver, which resulted in a court martial for 'disrespect'. It was an early indication of the pattern of his entire career. Anxious to get to sea, Keith acquitted Cochrane but admonished him to 'avoid flippancy'. Cochrane remained with Keith during the blockade of Cadiz and his cruise into the Mediterranean, following him into the 'Queen Charlotte'. 
When the French battleship 'Genereux' was captured on 18 February 1800 Cochrane was appointed prize-master, taking the badly damaged and scratch-manned ship to Port Mahon in the Balearics, despite a gale that threatened to dismast the ship. Once given independent command his personal courage, seamanship, and leadership qualities were amply demonstrated. While on this service he missed the destruction of the 'Queen Charlotte' by fire off Leghorn on 17 March. Evidently Keith recognized his weaknesses and his qualities, for he reported to the Admiralty that he was 'wrong-headed, violent and proud' (Thomas, 84); but on 28 March he appointed him commander and sent him to the brig 'Speedy', a 158 ton vessel with fourteen 4-pounder guns, a crew of ninety officers and men, and orders to cruise off the Spanish coast. Cochrane's success led the Spanish authorities to send a frigate out to capture the 'Speedy', but Cochrane had disguised her as a Danish merchant ship. When finally intercepted, on 21 December, he flew a plague flag to keep the frigate's boat from boarding. Putting into Malta on 1 February 1801, he caused a brawl at a fancy-dress party and fought a duel before returning to sea the following day. 
Cochrane's operations on the Spanish coast continued to be successful and were crowned with an astonishing feat of arms. On 6 May he encountered the small Spanish frigate 'Gamo', a 600 ton ship of 32 guns and 319 men. Although he had only fifty-four men on the 'Speedy', Cochrane, aware that his earlier subterfuge had been criticized, decided to engage. He ran the brig alongside the larger ship, fired in several accurate broadsides from his pathetic little guns while the Spanish shot flew over his small ships, and then carried the Spaniard by boarding. The 'Speedy' lost four killed and seventeen wounded, the Spaniards fourteen and forty-one respectively. To carry his prize to Port Mahon, Cochrane confined the Spanish crew to the hold, training cannon on them. The astonishing quality of the victory led many to consider it the result of a trick, and the rewards given were both tardy and inadequate. 
In the interval Cochrane had been ordered to convoy a packet from Mahon to Gibraltar, and on 3 July fell in with a French squadron of three battleships. After a skilful defence he surrendered to overwhelming force. The French captain was so impressed that he insisted that Cochrane continue to wear his sword. The French squadron then anchored off Algeciras, where they were attacked by a squadron under Admiral Sir James Saumarez on 6 July. Cochrane witnessed the battle from the French battleship 'Desaix'. The following day he was released on parole to Gibraltar, and exchanged after Saumarez's victory in the Strait of Gibraltar on the 12th. Cochrane was court-martialled for the loss of the 'Speedy', but honourably acquitted. Over the thirteen months under his command he claimed to have taken 50 vessels, 122 guns, and 534 prisoners. After his acquittal he was promoted captain, on 8 August 1801. His request for the promotion of his lieutenant was turned down by the first lord of the Admiralty, the earl of St Vincent, on the grounds that the casualties of the 'Speedy' were too slight to warrant it. Typically Cochrane replied, and his reply was neither deferential nor polite. He observed that there were more casualties on the 'Speedy' than there had been on the earl's flagship, the 'Victory', at the battle of Cape St Vincent, for which much greater rewards had been given. 
With the peace he was not given another ship and in late 1802 became a student at the University of Edinburgh, where he attended lectures by Dugald Stewart on political economy and worked diligently at his studies. When war broke out again in 1803 he pestered St Vincent for a ship, but the earl, who had little time for any 'Scotchmen' and even less for those lacking a proper measure of respect for authority, gave him the 'Arab', a sixth-rate 20 gun French prize. The ship was in poor shape and was a poor performer at sea. Sent to join the command of Lord Keith, who was then blockading the French invasion shipping at Boulogne, Cochrane continued to complain about his ship and was 'rewarded' by being detached to cruise to the north-east of the Orkney Islands to protect the fisheries. He remained here for fifteen months, no doubt as a mark of official displeasure at his insolent and hectoring correspondence. In 1804 the tory ministry returned. Lord Melville, the political manager of Scotland and a distant relative of Cochrane, became first lord and appointed Cochrane to the new 32 gun frigate 'Pallas'. He had orders to cruise for a month off the Azores -- a very rich station, as war had just broken out with Spain. This cruise, between February and April 1805, proved to be particularly fortunate, resulting in several rich Spanish prizes as well as another of Cochrane's brilliant ruses to escape a French squadron. He brought back the 'Pallas' into Plymouth Sound, the frigate having gold candlesticks 5 feet high tied to each mast-head. 
In May the 'Pallas' escorted a convoy to the St Lawrence River in Canada, and on her return, in December, joined the squadron of Vice-Admiral Thornborough for operations in the Bay of Biscay. Between February and the end of May 1806 the 'Pallas', while generally on detached service, captured, drove ashore, and burnt a large number of merchant vessels. On 6 April her boats cut out a French sloop of war from the River Garonne, leaving the ship with only forty men on board; yet the 'Pallas' pursued, drove ashore, and burnt three French corvettes, each of which was more heavily manned. This action was reported by Thornborough, but the new ministry of the talents, which relied on St Vincent for naval advice, took no notice of it, did not purchase the sloop, and did not pay any prize or head money for the ships destroyed. On 14 May, while reconnoitring the French fleet in the Aix Roads, she was engaged by the 40 gun frigate 'Minerve', which was accompanied by three brigs. Having effectively beaten the 'Minerve' Cochrane was denied his prize by two other French frigates weighing anchor to support her, and having lost her fore-topmast and maintopsail yard the 'Pallas' had to be towed out by the sloop 'Kingfisher'. Four days later he was ordered back to Plymouth with a convoy, and he arrived home on 27 June. 
In July 1806 Cochrane stood for election at the notoriously corrupt borough of Honiton in Devon, and he refused to pay the usual bribe. After his defeat he paid 10 guineas to all those who voted for him; as a result he was elected unopposed at the general election in October but refused to pay the 10 guineas a vote his previous conduct had led his supporters to expect. He also defaulted on bills for $1200 for the customary 'treats' to the electors. He was already imbued with a deep suspicion of corruption in government, particularly at the Admiralty, and he had formed a close connection with the radical journalist William Cobbett. 
On 2 September the crew of the 'Pallas' was turned over into the frigate 'Imperieuse', which put to sea on 17 November and joined the blockading squadron in the Basque Roads twelve days later. She returned to Plymouth in February 1807, and Cochrane took a month's sick-leave in April in order to stand for the large, popular constituency of Westminster in the general election of May 1807. With the support of Cobbett he was returned alongside Sir Francis Burdett. In his election campaign he accused St Vincent of bartering naval commissions for borough influence, attacked abuses in naval administration, and called for the exclusion of government pensioners and placemen from the house. Ostentatiously refusing to adhere to any party, he launched an attack on a variety of abuses. On 7 July he called for an inquiry into places, pensions, and sinecures held by, or for, members, but it was defeated by the government. His call on the 10th for papers that would expose naval abuses did not even secure a division. It was thus hardly surprising that he was sent back to sea, on the Mediterranean station, shortly afterwards; he left Portsmouth on 12 September 1807. His constituents were so taken with his open and direct conduct that at a mass rally they gave him unlimited leave of absence. 
Cochrane captured a Maltese pirate on 14 November and finally met up with the fleet of Admiral Lord Collingwood off Toulon on the 19th. Sent to act as senior officer at Corfu, he was soon recalled when his uncompromising attitude to trading with the enemy caused more problems than it solved. He rejoined the fleet on 2 January 1808 and at the end of the month was sent on a roving commission with instructions 'to harass the Spanish and French coast as opportunity served'. Collingwood had the good sense to know how to use the talents of this argumentative and opinionated officer to best advantage, and he sent him on detached service. On this cruise Cochrane brought the art of littoral warfare to a new level of intensity. In the absence of a serious naval challenge the Royal Navy was reconfiguring itself to exploit the command of the sea. The new targets were small coasting-vessels, isolated harbours, signal stations, batteries, and lighthouses. The intention was to cripple the enemy's power of movement, destroying the logistics that underpinned operations on land. It was a form of warfare for which Cochrane was almost uniquely gifted, and of which he remained for many years the exemplar. In June the Spanish rising changed the nature of his war, and he was now instructed to 'render every possible assistance to the Spaniards against the French'. The new circumstances redoubled the effectiveness of his campaign, providing local support, positions to hold, and intelligence. He ranged along the coasts of Catalonia and France, attacking roads, bridges, and stores. The object was to hamper the movement and operations of French armies, and this included the destruction of the semaphore system that was used to control the movement of coastal shipping. The manpower of a frigate, when deployed swiftly and skilfully, was invariably adequate to overwhelm the local defences of isolated posts and stations. In October Collingwood commented that: 'Nothing can exceed the zeal and activity with which his lordship pursues the enemy. The success which attends his enterprises clearly indicates with what skill and ability they are conducted, besides keeping the coast in constant alarm, causing a general suspension of the trade and harassing a body of troops employed in opposing him. (Lloyd, 'Lord Cochrane', 50)' In late November Cochrane, for a fortnight and against overwhelming odds, defended the castle of Trinidad, outside the besieged town of Rosas; he finally evacuated the garrison and destroyed the fort when the French secured the town. 
Early in 1809 Cochrane received permission to return home. His health was suffering from the arduous service, he wished to attack the corruption of the prize court at Malta, and he wanted to command a small squadron on the west coast of France for a more extensive littoral warfare campaign aimed at denying the French the ability to keep their troops in Spain supplied. When the 'Imperieuse' arrived at Plymouth in late March, he was immediately summoned to the Admiralty. A powerful French squadron had been assembled in the Aix Roads, and the Admiralty wanted to attack it there. As the leading practitioner of littoral warfare, and with considerable experience of the Aix Roads, Cochrane was an obvious adviser, and when Lord Mulgrave, the first lord, pressed for his opinion, he produced a plan of attack using explosion-vessels and fireships, supported by the fleet. Admiral Lord Gambier, who commanded the Channel Fleet, was less certain. He recognized the utility of fireships but considered them a 'horrible mode of warfare' (Thomas, 148). When Mulgrave invited Cochrane to carry out his plan, Cochrane expressed concern that his appointment would create jealousy and resentment. Mulgrave promised to settle such difficulties but, characteristically, did nothing. Consequently, when Cochrane joined the fleet he found that Gambier was unenthusiastic, while Admiral Sir Eliab Harvey had already volunteered for the service, and considered, along with many others, that in sending Cochrane the board had insulted the Channel Fleet. However, Cochrane pressed on, persuading Gambier to prepare fireships and explosion-vessels, the latter being filled with 1500 lb of gunpowder, packed under heavy logs to direct the blast, and loaded with hundreds of shells and William Congreve's rockets. The explosion-vessels were intended, along with the fireships, to create chaos in the French squadron, leading them to put their ships ashore, where they could be easily destroyed. 
On the night of 11 April Cochrane led the attack, destroying the French boom with the leading explosion-vessel. Despite the failure of the other explosion-vessels to reach their proper positions, the French ships cut their cables and drifted ashore. However, with few fireships left and the main fleet 14 miles off, Cochrane was unable to complete the process. At daybreak he began to signal for assistance, drawing Gambier's attention to the exposed condition of the French ships and the ease with which they might be destroyed; but the admiral studiously refused to act. He moved the fleet to within 3 miles, but then anchored. Desperate to continue his action, Cochrane allowed the 'Imperieuse' to drift into the roadstead until she was able to engage some of the French ships. Only then did Gambier send in some support, which led to the destruction of four enemy ships. Gambier then recalled his ships, leaving the French to refloat most of their fleet and withdraw under the batteries. Having left Gambier in no doubt of his opinions, Cochrane was sent back to England with dispatches; he sailed on the morning of the 12th. 
Although Cochrane was made a GCB in 1809 -- only the second captain to be so rewarded, the first being his 'bete noire' St Vincent -- he was disgusted at the failure to exploit the success at the Aix Roads and to annihilate the enemy, as would have been expected of him by Horatio Nelson. He informed Mulgrave that if a vote of thanks was proposed for Gambier in the House of Commons he would oppose it, 'on the grounds that the commander in chief had not only done nothing to merit a vote of thanks, but had neglected to destroy the French fleet in Aix roads (the battle was known as Basque roads) when it was in his powers to do so'. Gambier applied for a court martial. On 29 May Cochrane was ordered to prefer his charges, but he declined, arguing that the logbooks and signal-logs of the fleet contained all the information required. This was a major tactical error, and it denied him the standing from which to direct the case for the prosecution. In consequence Gambier, tried by a friendly court, was 'most honourably acquitted' and then given the thanks of parliament for what was, under the most favourable interpretation, a gross error. The sentence of the court effectively convicted Cochrane of libelling a superior officer. Thus, his career in the Royal Navy could hardly survive. He submitted a plan to destroy the French ships and forts in the River Scheldt, but this was ignored. He was refused permission to rejoin his ship, then in the North Sea, but was ordered to do so a few months later when his speeches in parliament became embarrassing. Once again he was ordered to the Mediterranean, but he declined and went onto half pay, devoting his time to exposing abuses in the Admiralty. Although his efforts were ultimately successful, they did nothing to endear him to the government of the day, or to those officials who received all or part of their remuneration direct from those using their services rather than from the government. While this was normal practice in the eighteenth century, it had been swept away by the time Cochrane wrote his memoirs, helping to cement his 'liberal' reputation with progressivist historians. 
Cochrane's performances in parliament were rarely effective, being too violent, uncompromising, and acrimonious to gather the support his cause required. One of the best, on 11 May 1810, drew a striking comparison between the pensions awarded to wounded naval officers and seamen and the sinecures held by ministers. The following year, after a visit to Malta, he was able to publicize the corrupt practices in the Malta prize court. He also criticized the use of large armies to prop up despotic Sicilian and Portuguese regimes when a maritime strategy would be more effective and far cheaper. 
Cochrane's inventive and scientific mind led him to develop a plan to destroy the French fleets, which had long been skulking in defended harbours, beyond the reach of conventional attack, with a combination of massive bombardment from extemporized mortars, and poison gas created by burning sulphur. His plans were submitted to the prince regent, and though a committee headed by the duke of York and including Lord Keith, Lord Exmouth, and Sir William Congreve had little doubt they would succeed, they considered them inhumane and feared they might rebound to the disadvantage of Britain. When the plans were rejected Cochrane promised the prince regent that he would never allow them to fall into the hands of a foreign government. 
On 8 August 1812, at Annan, Dumfriesshire, Scotland, Cochrane secretly married Katherine Corbett Barnes (1796-1865), a sixteen-year-old orphan, daughter of Thomas Barnes of Romford, Essex, despite the efforts of his uncle Basil to marry him to a rich heiress. The marriage, though ultimately held to be legal, was subject to considerable doubt, and the couple were married twice more, in Anglican and Scottish ceremonies in June 1818 and in 1825. Although their relationship was by no means smooth, which was hardly surprising in the circumstances, Katherine accompanied her husband on his South American visit during his career. While Cochrane was in service in Greece she had an affair with Lord Auckland, who was acting as his trustee. Thereafter she spent much of her life abroad. The couple had four sons and one daughter; their third son, Arthur Auckland Leopold Pedro Cochrane (1824-1905), had a successful naval career. Lady Dundonald died at Boulogne on 25 January 1865. 
In late 1813 Cochrane's naval uncle, now Admiral Sir Alexander Cochrane, was appointed to command the North American station, then at the heart of the Anglo-American War. He went out in a frigate, leaving his flagship the 'Tonnant' to be fitted out by Cochrane, whom he had nominated as his flag captain. This was an ideal field for an expert in littoral warfare, the whole coastline of the United States lay open to sea-based attack, and Admiral Cochrane was only too anxious to carry the war to an American population he despised. However, fate once again intervened. Cochrane's uncle had agreed to take Captain De Berenger, a French exile officer, to instruct his marines in the use of rifles and explosives. However, De Berenger was also an undischarged bankrupt. On 20 February 1814, while at Dover, he sent word to the admiral at Deal that he was Lord Cathcart's aide-de-camp and was carrying news from France that Napoleon was dead and that the allied armies were advancing rapidly on Paris. This intelligence caused the value of government funds to rise rapidly, only to fall when the hoax was exposed. The opportunity was exploited by Andrew Cochrane-Johnstone, Cochrane's uncle, to net a large profit. De Berenger had posted up to London, taken a cab to Cochrane's home in Green Street after having changed out of the scarlet of a staff officer -- which he was not entitled to wear -- into his own green uniform, and persuaded Cochrane to lend him some plain clothes. He was traced to Cochrane's home, and when Cochrane learned of the swindle he informed the authorities. De Berenger, Cochrane-Johnstone, Cochrane, and others were arrested, tried before Lord Ellenborough, and found guilty. It appeared that Cochrane was ignorant of the whole affair, but the guilt of his uncle, his considerable stockholding, contact with De Berenger, and well-known interest in money, together with the evident bias of Ellenborough, were enough to convict him. He was condemned to pay a fine of $1000, to stand for one hour in the pillory, and to be imprisoned in the king's bench for one year. The pillory was remitted, probably because the government feared a riot. These penalties were as nothing compared to the indignity that was heaped upon him; he was struck off the navy list on 25 June, expelled from the House of Commons on 5 July, and from the chapel of the knight of the Bath. Within days he was returned to the House of Commons by the electors of Westminster, they having declared at a mass meeting their entire confidence that the charges were unfounded. Cochrane was imprisoned, and after escaping and being recaptured his conditions were made particularly severe. Finally, on 20 June 1815, he was entitled to be released, and after reluctantly paying the fine on 3 July, in the interests of his health, he still protested his innocence. He always blamed John Wilson Croker, the secretary of the Admiralty, for his disgrace, though there was never any proof, beyond a well-known political and personal hatred. More than thirty years later Admiral Sir Thomas Byam-Martin recalled his hearing the prince regent express his determination that Cochrane be degraded. 
Cochrane returned to the House of Commons to vote against the increased pension for the duke of Cumberland, and for two years he was an energetic promoter of reform, and a committed opponent of the government. His opposition, though based on principle and well intentioned, was coloured by personal bitterness. In August 1816 he was charged with escaping from the king's bench -- a charge which he believed was laid to punish him for his political opposition. Claiming that, as a member of parliament, his imprisonment had been illegal, he nevertheless admitted the charge and was found guilty. The sentence was deferred, but three months later, after he had spoken at another large public meeting, he was condemned to pay a fine of $100. He refused to do this, but after sixteen days' imprisonment he was released when the money was paid by a penny subscription that covered his earlier fine of $1000 and also much of his legal costs. Thereafter his radicalism shifted towards a liberal combination with the whigs. 
After such evident signs of official hostility, which Cochrane believed included spies and well-founded fears that he was involved in a plot to liberate Napoleon from St Helena and take him to South America, it was scarcely surprising that he accepted the invitation of the Chilean government to organize and command their fleet in their war of liberation from Spain in May 1817. His political sympathies and financial ambitions intersected nicely in a well-paid mercenary role which also involved fighting for freedom. After the 1818 session of parliament, during which he organized the construction of the 'Rising Star', the first seagoing steam warship, he went to France in August and then sailed for Valparaiso on a merchant ship, arriving on 28 November to an enthusiastic welcome. His arrival was timely: a powerful Spanish squadron was preparing to attack Valparaiso, and the Chilean navy comprised only seven vessels, a captured Spanish 50 gun frigate renamed the 'O'Higgins', and a collection of old merchant ships and condemned vessels from the Royal Navy. Cochrane's real strength lay not in ships but in officers and men. His name ensured that he could recruit predominantly British and American crews for his flagship and could stiffen the resolve of his Chilean crews with these experienced men-of-wars-men. Against such an admiral as Cochrane, leading experienced crews, the inexperienced and ill-prepared Spaniards did not expect to win. They had recognized this even before he had left London, then trying to buy him into their own service. Putting to sea in the 'O'Higgins' in January 1819, Cochrane blocked the Spaniards in the harbour and conducted a typical littoral campaign, scattering soldiers and capturing shipping and treasure to fund his activities. After an abortive attack on the Spaniards at Callao in Peru, he took his flagship to Valdivia; having reconnoitred the place and secured 250 soldiers from a nearby Chilean garrison, he landed and stormed the forts in his best style, which seemed impetuous but was in fact carefully planned. The garrison panicked and was driven out, leaving a hundred dead, while the Chileans lost no more than seven men. Cochrane then returned to Valparaiso and found his triumph ill-rewarded by jealous ministers. After tendering his resignation he was promised better treatment for himself and the seamen on which so much depended. The Valdivia prize money was never paid. 
Having temporarily resolved his differences with the Chileans, Cochrane joined a large combined expedition to liberate Peru. General Jose de San Martin embarked almost 4000 men aboard the fleet and sailed from Valparaiso in late August 1820. Twice the army landed at a distance from the centres of Spanish power, despite Cochrane's call for an immediate strike at Callao and Lima. He knew that the Spanish position, while outwardly formidable, was brittle and would collapse much as Valdivia had, if attacked quickly. San Martin, encouraged by his army, was convinced that Peru had to secure its own independence if the nation were to be properly established. Unable to influence these operations, Cochrane resolved, without reference to San Martin, to cut out the frigate 'Esmerelda', the last major Spanish warship in the south Pacific, from under the batteries at Callao. On the night of 5 November the boats of the fleet were able to get into the harbour and board the ship at several places before the alarm was raised. Unable to escape, the Spaniards fought furiously but were finally overpowered, though not before eleven of the 'Chilean' force were killed and thirty wounded, including Cochrane, who sustained a severe injury. Once the fighting began the shore batteries fired on the ship without troubling to ascertain whether their own men were still aboard. Cochrane, having seen that the English and American warships in harbour were using a pattern of lights hoisted into the rigging, surmised that this had been pre-arranged with the shore batteries and therefore copied it, allowing the 'Esmerelda' to escape relatively unharmed. His original intention, which was to capture or destroy the rest of the shipping in the harbour, was frustrated by his injury. This action reduced the Spanish to a hopeless position; unable to reinforce their navy on the station, and unable to operate on the coast, they could only wait to be overpowered by the forces of the new states. Cochrane, however, had other ideas. Once recovered, he persuaded San Martin to lend him 600 soldiers, with which he staged another littoral campaign of great audacity, virtually forcing the Spanish authorities at Lima to capitulate -- which they did on 6 July 1821. San Martin proclaimed himself protector of Peru and demanded that Cochrane and the fleet swear loyalty to the new republic in return for their wages and prize money. Cochrane refused and sailed off to seize San Martin's treasury, out of which he paid the men and refitted the squadron. He returned to Valparaiso in June 1822, after an absence of twenty months, to receive a popular welcome -- and the hostility of the ministers. When San Martin returned in October he was loaded with honours and rewards, despite Cochrane's denunciation of his treacherous conduct, while sums due to Cochrane and his men were unpaid. The Chilean republic was about to dissolve into anarchy, so Cochrane decided to leave rather than take sides; he took an extended leave of absence in November. He had done as much as any foreign national could. 
Cochrane's services in Chile and Peru had increased the renown of his name, and other countries seeking independence desired to secure his services. Brazil, Mexico, and Greece were all anxious to hire him, but although Greece was his preference, he took service, temporarily, with the Brazilians when he reached Rio de Janeiro on 13 March 1823. He was appointed admiral by the new emperor, Pedro I, and spent eighteen months building up the Brazilian navy, securing British and American seamen, and defeating the attempts of Portugal to re-establish control. Once again his anxiety to secure the largest prize-fund, and his outspoken attacks on corruption, ensured that he had enemies in high places. He spent more time defending his position than he did serving the state. In early 1825, after Brazilian independence had been effectively secured, he took his flagship to sea and, finding her unequal to bad weather, ended up back in England at Spithead. When the Brazilian minister in London refused to fund a refit, Cochrane refused to take her to sea and remained ashore until the peace between Portugal and Brazil was settled, on 3 November, at which time he resigned the Brazilian admiralship. 
The members of the London Greek Committee, notably his fellow radicals Burdett, Hobhouse, Bowring, and Hume, were certain that Cochrane was the only person who could secure the independence of Greece from Turkish rule. However, Cochrane was only too well aware of the petty jealousies and irresolution that had attended him in South America to enter into the project lightly. Consequently his acceptance was conditional on prior payment for his services, plus a heavy expenditure on six British-built war steamers, and two large American-built frigates. All were to be manned by British or American seamen, and he was to have complete and uncontrolled command of the Greek fleet. This was agreed, but he spent the next eighteen months trying to advance the construction of the steamers, which he had long recognized as vital for littoral warfare, and which would be especially important in the Greek archipelago, giving him a priceless advantage over the larger Turkish fleet of sailing ships. In the event only two of the steamers actually reached Greece, and neither was particularly successful -- a result of design failings, poor construction, corruption, and the intervention of Egyptian agents. Even so, the 'Karteria', under Captain Frank Abney Hastings, proved Cochrane's vision and made a valuable contribution to the war of independence. 
When Cochrane arrived in Greece on a yacht in March 1827, he found that none of the new ships was ready; only one frigate and two steamers would be completed in time to serve. He found the Greek sailors singularly lacking in patriotism and, unable to pay them, had to watch them take their craft off to conduct their own piratical campaign. Without the British and American sailors he had demanded his fireship attack on Alexandria failed, and there was little he could do before Sir Edward Codrington destroyed the Turco-Egyptian fleets at Navarino on 20 October 1827. This victory ensured Greek independence. Cochrane's contribution lay largely in the prestige of his name, which was still the terror of the oceans, and the degree of urgency his presence impressed on the European powers to secure a settlement. His rewards were negligible: much of his pay was withheld and the rest locked up in depreciating Greek stock. Even so, he was once again accused of fraud, being connected with the committee that managed to make $200,000 disappear, without benefit for Greece. He returned to England to advance work on the steamships but in September 1828 went back to Greece, where he found that the imminence of peace made his presence most unwelcome. He left for the last time, on a Russian warship, in December. If the Greek war added nothing to his fame, it was only because there was precious little room for further lustre. He remained the greatest 'name' afloat, and his efforts in South America remained the outstanding example of enlightened mercenary service, in which maritime power was used to secure the independence of three countries. 
Fortunately for Cochrane the end of his mercenary career coincided with a major change in British politics. The end of more than twenty years of tory rule, combined with the accession in 1830 of a naval monarch, William IV, enabled him to return to the Royal Navy. He had first approached William in 1828 when, as duke of Clarence, he held the post of lord high admiral, but the tory cabinet had demurred. Finally, on 2 May 1832, he was given a 'free pardon' rather than the annulment of his conviction for fraud which he had sought. He was restored to his proper rank in the navy, now that of a rear-admiral, and was received at court. But he was not given back his GCB, and his banner was not replaced in St George's Chapel at Windsor Castle. His position remained anomalous: in effect he had been excused for something he had not done, in order that his name and reputation could be wielded by the British state as a deterrent. The first occasion on which this 'Cochrane rattling' occurred was the Russian scare of that year. For the next twenty years successive first lords of the Admiralty recognized that he would be given high command in war, even if they were generally reluctant to employ him in peace. In the interval he had succeeded his father, as tenth earl of Dundonald, on 1 July 1831. The popular naval fiction of his one-time midshipman Frederick Marryat helped pave the way for his return to favour, as Marryat publicized his remarkable exploits aboard the 'Imperieuse', giving them a strong liberal twist. If it was Marryat who created the genre of naval fiction, then it was Cochrane who inspired it. His career remains at the heart of the genre, notably in the work of Patrick O'Brien. 
Once re-established in London, Cochrane turned his attention to the scientific and technical interests inherited from his father and reinforced by his experience of war at sea. The development of steam propulsion was his major interest, and he pursued several key technologies, often years in advance of the necessary metallurgical and engineering progress needed to make them practical. His work culminated in the steam warship HMS 'Janus' of 1848, which combined his hull form, rotary engines, and boilers in a promising, if unsuccessful, package. Clearly he was indulged by the Admiralty, which was only too happy to see him occupied with engines rather than returning to his old line of attacks on naval administration. 
After Cochrane had recovered his GCB from the new liberal ministry in 1847, his old friend Lord Auckland, the first lord of the Admiralty, re-examined his poison gas plans, for use against Cherbourg, and employed him afloat in 1848 as commander-in-chief in the West Indies. Auckland had long recognized Cochrane's value and considered it unwise to deny him the experience of command, if he was to be used in war. The three-year commission was interesting but uneventful. Cochrane sent in valuable reports on the colonies and their resources, and he brought back to England asphalt from Trinidad with which to pave the streets of Westminster -- a premature stroke of genius that proved incompatible with horses. On 21 March 1851 he became a full admiral, and by the early 1850s he had become a national treasure, a reminder of past greatness to replace the recently deceased duke of Wellington. He was nominated rear-admiral of the United Kingdom on 23 October 1854 and was also elected an elder brother of Trinity House. He had no further sea service, though during the Crimean War of 1854-6 he offered to deploy a version of his poison gas plan of 1812 against Kronstadt and Sevastopol. This was initially rejected in 1854 by a committee of naval officers advised by Michael Faraday -- largely, it would appear, because the plan gave a subordinate role to the battle fleet. It was taken up again in 1855, by a despairing Lord Palmerston, on the grounds that any failure would be attributed to Cochrane's age and eccentricity rather than to the government. However, Sevastopol fell before it could be put into effect. 
During his last years Cochrane wrote several volumes of memoirs. These colourful, if imperfect, accounts helped to cement his place in the national pantheon. They were intended to support his financial claims against various governments, beginning with 'Narrative of services in the liberation of Chili, Peru, and Brazil, from Spanish and Portuguese domination' (1859), followed by 'Autobiography of a Seaman' (1860-61). The series was brought to an abrupt end by his sudden death at 12 Queen's Gate, Kensington, London, on 31 October 1860. He was buried in Westminster Abbey on 14 November. 
After Cochrane's death the process of restoring his honours continued. A parliamentary committee of 1878 paid his son $5000 for his 'distinguished services'; in truth, this was the half pay he was owed for the period when he was struck off the navy list. The process went so far that Lord Ellenborough became the villain of the piece, and his side of the case had to be defended in print by the end of the century. The navies of Chile, Peru, and Brazil continued to celebrate his contribution for many years, and Chile named a succession of capital ships for him. 
Cochrane was the most brilliant naval officer of the period that followed the death of Nelson in 1805, and he was the only one who achieved a world reputation. However, his true greatness has been much misunderstood. He never commanded a ship, let alone a squadron, against first-class opposition in good fighting order. (After 1805 such opportunities were rare.) His peculiar talents were honed in littoral warfare off the coasts of Spain and France, culminating in the assault on the Aix Roads, which, like much else that he did, relied on the enemy being already half beaten. In South America he deployed this system of warfare to the greatest effect, relying on his name, battle-hardened British and American sailors, and demoralized opponents to secure rapid and decisive results from apparently unpromising situations. To the end of his life his thoughts centred on the projection of maritime power ashore, not fleet-to-fleet encounters. As a result he was among the first to see the potential of steamships, at a time when they remained short-ranged, unreliable, and weakly armed. By contrast his political career lacked the tactical skill, insight, and cunning that made him so successful at sea; in this field his popularity was based on a straightforward, direct naval approach that was diametrically opposed to the usual conduct of business at Westminster. He made many enemies by incautious words, giving offence when he would have been better advised to be tactful; and by alienating St Vincent he missed the chance to co-operate with the other great naval reformer of the age. His disgrace in 1814 arose from a trusting nature and the obvious delight of those whom he had pilloried for so long to get their own back. That it kept him out of his uncle's major littoral warfare campaigns against the Americans helped his posthumous reputation more than it hindered the British war effort at the time. As a scientist and engineer he shared many of his father's eccentricities, but withal had a clear purpose and came close to success. 
The key to Cochrane's complex character -- the combination of ambition, genius, daring, and resource that made him great, the direct manner and rejection of authority where it did not meet his own high standards that set him apart, and the greed, pride, and vindictiveness that held him back -- can be traced to his relationship with his father and, in all probability, a sense of rejection following the death of his mother and his removal to military academy on his father's second marriage. In private he was charming and had an honest and open character; his violent politics reflected an obsessive hatred of corruption and an inability to suffer slights. His qualities of leadership were beyond compare, securing the undying love of junior officers, seamen, and the unruly constituents of Westminster. In old age he tended to dwell on the political and financial wrongs of his career, pursuing the various governments he had served for moneys left unpaid, and passing on his claims to his son. Yet, like Nelson, his greatness rose above petty human failings. With his long life, full range of adventures, and variety of careers Cochrane remains one of the great, if unfulfilled, biographical subjects. He was, and remains, the romantic naval hero. 


@@@@@


doc= 5758


Cochrane, Sir Thomas John (1789-1872), naval officer, eldest child of Admiral Sir Alexander Inglis Cochrane (1758-1832) and his wife, Maria (died 18 March 1856), daughter of David Shaw and widow of Captain Sir Jacob Wheate RN, fifth baronet, was born in Edinburgh on 5 February 1789. He was entered as a volunteer on board the 'Thetis', commanded by his father, in June 1796, and continued to serve under his father's pennant, or flag -- including on the expeditions to Quiberon, Belle Isle, Ferrol, and Egypt -- until June 1805, when he was made lieutenant into the frigate 'Jason' (32 guns). In September 1805 he was advanced to be commander of the sloop 'Nimrod' (18 guns), on 23 January 1806 to be acting captain of the 'Jason', and his rank was confirmed on 23 April 1806, when only two months over seventeen. This rapid promotion, by the commander-in-chief, of a foreign station for his son was gross jobbery. There were few instances so flagrant of a practice then not uncommon. Off the coast of Surinam on 27 January 1807 Cochrane captured the French warship 'La Favorite', and in December served at the capture of the Danish West Indian islands. He continued in the West Indies until 1809, and after two years on half pay commanded the frigate 'Surprise' (38 guns) on the coast of North America -- capturing on 16 January 1813 the American privateer 'Decatur', and serving in the operations against Washington and Baltimore and on the Georgia coast -- until the peace. From 1820 to 1824 he commanded the 'Forte' (44 guns) on the same station, from 1825 to 1834 he was governor of Newfoundland, and on 23 November 1841 he became rear-admiral. He was knighted (29 May 1812) as proxy for his father at his installation as KB. He was himself made CB on 18 April 1839, KCB on 2 November 1847, and GCB on 18 May 1860. He was Conservative MP for Ipswich in 1839-41, and unsuccessfully contested Greenock in July 1841. 
From 1842 to 1845 Cochrane was second in command in China, with his flag in the 'Agincourt', and he was commander-in-chief from 1844 to 1846. In August 1845 and July 1846 he punished Brunei pirates by destroying their forts and other buildings. He supported J. F. Davis's policy of conciliation at Canton (Guangzhou), with a minimal naval presence there so as not to inflame Chinese hostility. British merchants criticized him for ineffectiveness against Chinese pirates, but he was limited by government instructions. He was commander-in-chief at Portsmouth from December 1852 to January 1856. In due course of seniority he became vice-admiral on 14 January 1850, admiral on 31 January 1856, and admiral of the fleet on 12 September 1865. 
Cochrane married on 6 January 1812 Matilda, eldest daughter of Lieutenant-General Sir Charles Ross, seventh baronet, and they had two sons, including Alexander Cochrane-Wishart-Baillie, first Baron Lamington (1816-1890), and two daughters; she assumed the additional name of Wishart and died on 4 September 1819. He married on 8 January 1853 Rosetta (died 27 May 1901), daughter of Sir J. D. Wheeler-Cuffe, first baronet, and they had children. He died at his residence, Quarr Abbey House, Ryde, Isle of Wight, on 19 October 1872, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery, London, on 25 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 5759


Cochrane, William, first earl of Dundonald (1605-1685), army officer and politician, was the second son of Alexander Blair (died 1640/41) of Blair, Ayrshire, who assumed the name Cochrane on his marriage to Elizabeth, daughter of William Cochrane of Cochrane, Renfrewshire, and his wife, Elizabeth. He was educated first at Paisley grammar school, and then at Glasgow University, where he was laureated in 1626, and where he later founded the Dundonald bursaries. In 1632 he was appointed sheriff-depute of Renfrewshire. Some time before 1634 he married Euphame 
(Eupheme; died after 1685)
, daughter of Sir William Scott of Ardross and Elie, Fife, director of the court of chancery. Cochrane acquired a substantial landed estate in the shire, including the lands of Dundonald, obtained in 1638. His father had purchased the barony of Cowdown in 1623, but resigned it to William in 1634. In 1641 he was granted particular privileges in the management of his father's patrimonial barony of Blair. The same year he was appointed chamberlain to the duke of Lennox and was elected to represent Ayrshire at the Edinburgh parliament which assembled in 1641. At its meeting Cochrane was knighted by Charles I, but despite misgivings about several clauses in the covenant, commented on by Baillie in 1638, he remained opposed to the king's disastrous attempt to entrench the Scottish episcopacy. As premier landlord in the west of Scotland he could hardly do any other. 
During the civil war Cochrane was loyal to the committee of estates at Edinburgh, and assisted in the military campaigns against Montrose, bringing over 1400 men from the Scottish army in Ulster in 1645. He returned there again to fetch Major-General Robert Monro when the covenanters failed to crush the royalists in the highlands, but the victory at Philiphaugh rendered his orders obsolete. In the aftermath of war Cochrane was closest to the Hamiltonian faction among the covenanters, and was granted the title Lord Cochrane of Dundonald by patent dated at Carisbrooke Castle on 26 December 1647, the very day on which the king entered into his ill-fated Engagement with the duke of Hamilton and his supporters in Scotland. Lord Cochrane raised forces in his native Ayrshire, and once more in Ireland, for the much delayed invasion, which eventually got off the ground in July 1648. His association with this malignant venture, and its disastrous conclusion, resulted in his proscription under the 'Act of Classes' and his ostracism by the presbytery of Ayr in 1649. Like most fervent Scots loyalists he remained out in the cold until Charles II was installed on the throne at Scone in 1651. 
Unlike his elder brother, Sir John Cochrane, who undertook diplomatic duties in northern Germany, Lord Cochrane preferred to serve his royal master by remaining on his estate in Scotland. However, in the parliament which opened in 1651 he was once again to the fore, helping to organize the military venture on which the king pinned his hopes for the resumption of the English crown. Although he raised a regiment of horse of his own Cochrane was not optimistic about the king's chances in England -- his misgivings possibly arising when Charles saw fit to deny Cochrane's brothers the command of his lordship's horse regiment, giving it instead to a Dutchman, Vandrosk. When Cochrane's worst fears transpired on the field before Worcester, he retired to private life in Scotland. He acquired the lordship of Paisley from Archibald, earl of Angus, for $160,000 Scots in 1653, and it is said that he lived there in great opulence. After the Cromwellian conquest Cochrane was fined $5000 sterling by the 'Act of Pardon and Grace', although in the end the pressure on him was eased and the mulct was reduced by the council at Whitehall to the more manageable sum of $1666 13's'. 4died In a sign of further attempts at some sort of reconciliation, promoted especially hard during the governorship of Lord Broghill, Cochrane was named to the commission of the peace for Ayrshire in 1656. Later in the year he was elected to sit at Westminster as the member for Ayrshire and Renfrewshire in Oliver Cromwell's second protectorate parliament. 
It has been claimed that Cochrane supported General Monck financially to the tune of $20,000 in 1659, supposedly in order to promote the Stuart restoration, following which he was sworn of the privy council and appointed commissioner of the Treasury and excise in Scotland, which latter post he occupied from 1667 to 1682. He was created earl of Dundonald and Lord Cochrane of Paseley and Ochiltrie on 12 May 1669. He frequently acted on behalf of the duke of Monmouth, whose interests as duke of Buccleuch were not always well served by his absence at court. Later, the earl's second son, Sir John Cochrane would also earn the duke's gratitude, his action in the 1685 rebellion almost costing him his life. In 1684, although Dundonald was under threat of prosecution for harbouring covenanter fugitives on his own land, his granddaughter Jean married John Graham of Claverhouse, scourge of the western rebels. Dundonald's tremulous signature appears attached to the marriage contract. The same year it was also alleged that his eldest son, William, Lord Cochrane, who had died five years earlier, had kept a chaplain who had prayed for God's blessing on the 1679 uprising. The story of this Cochrane connection with the covenanters was revived and exploited as a way of discrediting the powerful and influential Claverhouse. He himself was at pains to clear the family of any distasteful imputation, insisting that there were far fewer rebels on the earl's estates than there were on many other local lairds', but could not deny the religious sentiments of his mother-in-law, Lady Katherine, 'nee' Kennedy. The earl was, however, somewhat delayed in taking the oath of loyalty prescribed under the 1681 'Test Act', although his procrastination was excused by his colleagues in the privy council by his age and infirmity. He died in November 1685, aged eighty, and was buried at Dundonald. Having been predeceased by his eldest son he was succeeded in the earldom by his grandson, John. His daughter, Grizel, married George, tenth Lord Ross. 


@@@@@


doc= 5760


Baillie, Alexander Dundas Ross Cochrane-Wishart-, first Baron Lamington (1816-1890), politician and author, was born on 24 November 1816, the younger of the two children of Admiral Sir Thomas John Cochrane GCB (1789-1872) and his first wife, Matilda, daughter of Lieutenant-General Sir Charles Lockhart-Ross, seventh baronet, of Balnagowan, and his first wife, Matilda Theresa, Countess Lockhart Wishart of the Holy Roman empire; his mother, who died in 1819, took the married name Cochrane Wishart. Until 1880 his formal name was Alexander Dundas Wishart Ross Baillie-Cochrane, but on his elevation to the barony of Lamington he changed his surname to Cochrane-Wishart-Baillie. He is commonly referred to by historians as Cochrane-Baillie, the form of name used by his son and his descendants. 
Cochrane (or Kok as he was nicknamed) was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge (BA 1837), where he was president of the union in his last year. By 1837 he had inherited the desolate estate of Lamington near Biggar in Lanarkshire, in direct descent through the female line. He greatly improved the estate and the welfare of its dependants, building sturdy, plain-Gothic cottages that outlived Lamington House itself. 
On 4 December 1844, Cochrane married Annabella Mary Elizabeth Drummond (1824-1917), daughter of Andrew Drummond, of Cadlands, Hampshire, and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Drummond, Lord John Manners's sister; they had three daughters, Constance Mary Elizabeth, Amy Augusta Frederica Annabella, and Violet Marie Louise, and a son, Charles Wallace Alexander Napier Ross Cochrane-Baillie, who succeeded his father as second baron. 
By early 1841 Cochrane was a leading member, with Lord John Manners and G. S. Smythe, of what Disraeli by then was calling 'Young England'; in late January (according to Manners's journal) he went with a boisterous group to Canterbury to support Smythe's electoral bid. An incident in a public house resulted in his appearance before a magistrate. In the general election that summer, he stood unsuccessfully at Bridport as a Conservative, but was elected in September as a Liberal-Conservative. He made his maiden speech on 20 September of that year, opposing an increase in the grant for Maynooth College in Ireland. According to a letter from Cochrane's son in 'The Times' of 25 February 1890, Peel offered him a post shortly after his election. Although Cochrane was less enthusiastic than the others about Disraeli, in October 1842 in Paris he and Smythe reached an informal agreement with him, and subsequently with Manners, that the Young England group would act together in parliament. Cochrane was not, however, a strong party man; he never wavered on matters such as Young England's opposition to the new poor law, but on other issues, especially protectionism, he vacillated. Having in November 1844 predicted that repeal of the corn laws would cause a revolution, on 9 February 1846 he declared himself in favour of repeal, and tried to appear consistent by arguing that he now favoured protection for all classes. In March 1846 he accepted the Chiltern Hundreds and stood for re-election at Bridport as a Peelite; he won by one vote, but on 27 April was unseated on petition. In the general election of 1847 he regained the seat, and held it until 1852. 
In the 1852 general election Cochrane was defeated at Southampton, and shortly thereafter approached Disraeli, now chancellor of the exchequer, for 'any appointment in or under the government', citing his qualities of 'Earnestness, Zeal & Love of Labour'. Disraeli responded with 'expressions of good will', but the government fell before anything came of it (Disraeli, 'Letters', vol. 6, letter 2350 n1). In January 1853 he was again defeated at Southampton. On 5 January 1857 he was returned unopposed at a by-election for Lanarkshire, only to be defeated on 7 April in the general election. On 29 April 1859 he was elected at Honiton, and represented it until 1868. From 1864 to 1868, he was joint editor and writer for 'The Owl', a popular satirical weekly. 
When the third Derby administration was formed in June 1866 Cochrane was again disappointed of place, although Disraeli told him he had given Derby a list with his name on it. In September 1867 Manners expressed concern to Disraeli that Cochrane was going to have his seat 'cut from under him by the 'Reform Bill''. Disraeli apparently offered him something, for in December Manners reported that Cochrane was grateful but reluctant to give up public life in England. A year later Disraeli offered him (possibly for the second time) the governorship of Cape Colony, but again the government fell before a decision was made. In the general election in November 1868 Cochrane was defeated in the Isle of Wight, but he was returned for that seat in 1870 and 1874. In September 1876 he was appointed a trustee of the National Portrait Gallery. He did not stand for re-election in 1880, and Disraeli (now Lord Beaconsfield), in his last days in office, recommended him for a peerage; on 3 May 1880 he was created Baron Lamington. 
Cochrane published widely. His early 'Poems' (privately printed 1838) were followed by 'The Morea' (1840). He wrote four novels, 'Ernest Vane' (1849), in which George Smythe figured as the character George Percy, 'Lucille Belmont' (1849), 'Florence the Beautiful' (1854), and, under the pseudonym of Leonard Holme, 'A Young Artist's Life' (1864); several pamphlets, including 'Exeter Hall' (1841), 'Young Italy' (1850), 'Who are the Liberals?' (1852), and 'Justice to Scotland' (1854); and several historical works -- 'Historic Pictures' (2 vols., 1865), 'Francis the First' (2 vols., 1870), 'Historic Chateaux' (1876), and 'The Theatre Francais in the Time of Louis XV' (1879). He contributed to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' between 1881 and 1890, the 'Nineteenth Century' in 1883, the 'National Review' in 1883 and 1884, and the 'Fortnightly Review' in 1884; the last piece was an anonymous article, 'Forty years of parliament', by 'A Young England peer', blaming the decline of parliament on the 1867 'Reform Act'. 
Lamington died on 15 February 1890, of influenza, at 26 Wilton Crescent, his London residence; on 20 February he was buried at Lamington in the episcopal chapel of the Holy Trinity which he himself had built. At the time, 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' was running his reminiscences, 'In the days of the dandies' (reprinted as a book later in 1890), concluding in March with 'The Young England party'. 
Cochrane is of importance primarily as a gifted member of Young England, the original of Buckhurst in Disraeli's 'Coningsby' (1844), where he is portrayed as a 'most energetic... fiery and generous... reckless genius'. He was the eldest, the richest, and most Byronic of the group, with an impetuous, generous, self-assured, open nature, and an elegant and sophisticated manner. According to Richard Faber, Cochrane's writings show him to have been also the most heterosexual of the group. Independent by nature, he did not see himself as a central figure in the party, though he shared the group's belief in the need to address the 'condition of England question' by what in 1884 he called 'progressive Conservatism'. He admired Peel, and his political heroes were Canning and Castlereagh, but in the group his favourite was the mercurial Smythe (who in 1844 reciprocated by dallying in Koblenz with a woman he calls merely 'Cochrane's Green Gage'). He was prominent both in parliament and in society, especially in literary circles; he was highly regarded as an expert on Greece and Italy (he was knight of the Order of St Saviour of Greece), and after his death was fondly remembered as a 'kindly, cultivated country gentleman' (in 1883 his estates totalled 12,708 acres, worth nearly $12,000 a year). Although his life was full and productive, his career left a sense of failure, given the high expectations his talents aroused. 


@@@@@


doc= 5761


Cock, George (bap. 1615, d. 1679), merchant and friend of Samuel Pepys, was baptized at All Saints, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 25 April 1615, the son of Garrett Cocke. His family were deeply involved in trade and after his apprenticeship in 1631 to a corn merchant he became an influential and active member of the Newcastle Merchants Company, negotiating for them in their dispute with the Merchant Adventurers of London. 
During the civil wars Cock was an early supporter of the king and was captured in 1643. He was released in exchange for a parliamentary prisoner but returned to Newcastle as a member of the marquess of Newcastle's army and was present at the siege when he was again captured, imprisoned, and eventually fined in 1646 as a delinquent. In one of several petitions after the Restoration he stated that he had been in exile for eleven years and was rewarded for his loyalty with the post of searcher in the port of Newcastle in 1660. 
While abroad Cock was employed as an agent of the Eastland Company in Danzig. Here he may have met his first wife, Anna Marie Solomons, after whose death he married again. According to Pepys, Cock's second wife was 'a Germane lady, but a very great beauty' (Pepys, 22 Nov 1661). On his return to England he had houses in Greenwich and London. As a navy contractor and the 'greatest epicure in the world' (Pepys, 21 Aug 1665) he appears often in Samuel Pepys's diaries, usually with the prefix Captain. On 21 July 1662 Pepys records that 'I did take boat and down to Greenwich to Captain Cockes, who hath a most pleasant seat and neat'. Cock was one of the few merchants wealthy and experienced enough to deal in Baltic and Scandinavian timber, owned a tannery in Limerick, and dealt extensively in hemp and tar. Though frequently enjoying his company and hospitality Pepys and others were wary of him. When asked by Lord Sandwich how far he could be trusted in the rather shady affair of the prize ships which they had all invested in, Pepys replied 'not too far' (Pepys, 23 Sept 1665). He was suspected by Pepys of anonymously offering hemp at high price when supplies were low during 1665-6 but the risks for the merchants were considerable, given the Navy Board's frequent lack of money. Cock seems to have talked too much, particularly when drunk, a quality that would naturally make Pepys uneasy, especially on occasions such as that on 5 November 1665, when Cock interrupted a meeting 'as drunk as a dog, but could stand and talk and laugh... But very troublesome he is with his noise and talk and laughing, though very pleasant'. However he generously bestowed gifts on Pepys and other associates, sending them wine, sturgeon, plate, and money. Cock was treasurer of the Commission for Sick and Wounded Seamen (1665-7). He successfully petitioned for funds towards this on several occasions but came under suspicion for irregular accounting in 1670. Cock was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 21 March 1666 (proposed by Viscount Brouncker). A merchant to the bone Cock wrote after the fire 'the city will be rebuilt by trade' ('CSP dom.', vol. 170, p. 105). His will, dated 19 February 1679 and proved on 3 April that year unravels many threads of his life while dealing with his considerable estate and includes $30 to repatriate a servant, 'Dutch Margaret'. His will also mentions four sons: John, George, Matthew, and William. He died in the parish of St Clement Danes, London, and, in accordance with his wishes, was buried at night near his first wife in the church of St Peter-le-Poer, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 5762


Cockayne, Thomas Oswald (bap. 1809, d. 1873), philologist and teacher, was baptized on 20 January 1809 in Keynsham, Somerset, the eldest of nine children born to John Cockin, curate of Keynsham parish, and his wife, Louise. He was admitted into St John's College, Cambridge, as a sizar in 1824. Following a distinguished undergraduate career, Cockayne was awarded his BA degree as thirtieth wrangler in 1828, and proceeded MA in 1835. On 7 April 1833 Cockayne was ordained a deacon, and was immediately appointed as curate of Keynsham parish. Ordination to the priesthood followed on 10 October the following year. Four days later he married Janetta Edwards (1809-1894), daughter of a Keynsham Baptist surgeon. In 1835 their first daughter, Florence Louisa, was born. 
By the time his other child, Alice Eden, was baptized on 25 March 1837, Cockayne had left his position as curate and schoolteacher, and had moved to London to take up the post of assistant master at King's College School. Among his future pupils were Walter Skeat (1835-1912) and Henry Sweet (1845-1912), leaders of the next generation of philologists. Cockayne and his wife supplemented the assistant master's modest salary by taking in as many as nine student boarders at their home at 17 Montague Street, Bloomsbury, and, later, at 13 Manor Park, Lee. He remained at this post until his abrupt dismissal, on 20 November 1869, amid charges of using unsuitable language in his classes and speaking on improper topics to his students. Cockayne vigorously denied the use of unsuitable language, but readily admitted to discussing matters usually avoided by the other masters when they appeared in Greek and Latin passages. Although the investigating committee acknowledged a complete absence of intent to corrupt the boys, it recommended the dismissal of Cockayne for acting 'in direct opposition to the feeling of the age... which will tolerate no such teaching in an English School' ('Report of a committee'). Cockayne promptly published a pamphlet in his own defence entitled 'Mr. Cockayne's Narrative'. 
It was during his long tenure at King's College School that Cockayne distinguished himself as one of the leading philologists of his day. He was an early and active member of the London Philological Society, where he presented several papers and served as a member of the society's council. During the course of his career he published more than twenty-five books and articles. While Cockayne's early philological works dealt primarily with Greek and Latin sources, he is principally noted for his work in Anglo-Saxon. Prominent among his contributions is a three-volume work published between 1864 and 1866, in English and Anglo-Saxon, entitled 'Leechdoms, Wortcunning, and Starcraft of Early England'. Cockayne also edited several books for the Early English Text Society, including 'Hali Meidenhad' (1866) and 'The Liflade of St. Juliana' (1872). He wrote an account of the Jews, histories of Ireland and of France, and a biography of Marshall Turenne. Between 1864 and 1870 Cockayne also published a wide-ranging series of critical and scholarly essays called 'The Shrine: a Collection of Occasional Papers on Dry Subjects' (nos. 1-13). A number of Cockayne's unpublished philological manuscripts survive in the Houghton Library at Harvard University. 
Although Cockayne was a gifted and productive philologist, his pugnacious personality and abrasive 'ad hominem' attacks on influential critics closed the doors to higher academic positions. He was a well-intentioned but impolitic man whose life was driven by a love of language but whose life was ultimately ruined by the unbridled use of language. 
In June 1873, at St Ives, Cornwall, Cockayne, unemployed and unemployable, and suffering increasingly from 'melancholia', died as the result of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head. He was buried in St Ives parish cemetery on 18 June 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 5763


Cockayne, William (1717-1798), Church of England clergyman, the son of the Revd George Cockayne (died 1746), vicar of Doveridge in Derbyshire, was born on 3 November 1717. After attending Merchant Taylors' School (1728-36), he went to St John's College, Oxford, and took degrees of BA, MA, and BD in 1740, 1744, and 1751 respectively. He was junior proctor of the university in 1750, and proceeded DD on 13 July 1754. When his uncle Francis Cockayne was elected lord mayor of London in 1750, he was appointed his chaplain, and preached before him the anniversary sermon of 5 November that year. In 1753 he was chaplain to the countess of Orkney and Inchiquin. From 1752 to 1795 he held the chair of astronomy in Gresham College, London, for which at that date no particular astronomical competence was required. On 20 September 1763 he was nominated rector of Kilkhampton in Cornwall, a post he occupied until his death in 1798. His only publications were religious in content. He left a widow, Mary, who died at Salisbury in 1807. 


@@@@@


doc= 5764


Cockburn, Adam, of Ormiston, Lord Ormiston (c.1656-1735), politician, was a younger son of John Cockburn of Ormiston (died 1657), and his wife, Janet Hepburn, daughter of Sir Adam Hepburn of Humbie. He succeeded his elder brother, John, in the lands and barony of Ormiston on 28 December 1671. By the late 1670s he had married Lady Susanna Hamilton, third daughter of John Hamilton, fourth earl of Haddington; they had six children -- John Cockburn (1679-1758), Charles, Patrick, Adam, Christian, and Anne. 
Ormiston first appears in the parliamentary record in June 1678, when he sat in the convention of estates as one of the two commissioners for Haddingtonshire. He was again elected in July 1681, his commission having been disputed but sustained. In May 1685 he was named as one of the commissioners of supply for the shire, a position he was to hold regularly prior to the union. However, Ormiston -- described by the Jacobite commentator Colin Lindsay, third earl of Balcarres, as one of the leaders of the presbyterian and discontented party -- had few opportunities in public life before the revolution of 1688, when he assumed a far more prominent role in national politics. 
On 11 March 1689 Ormiston was again returned a commissioner for Haddingtonshire, and he took his seat in the convention on the 14th of that month. He subscribed both the act declaring the convention a lawful meeting of the estates and the letter of congratulation addressed to the prince of Orange. In April he was one of those appointed to discuss the prospect of a union with England, and elected a member of the committee of estates -- a body charged with governing the country in the interval before the convention became a parliament on King William's instruction. The following month he was named a member of the privy council, an office he again occupied in 1696, 1698, and 1707. On 28 November 1692 he was appointed lord justice clerk in place of Sir George Campbell of Cessnock, consequently attending parliament in this capacity as one of the officers of state. In May 1695 Ormiston was part of the commission appointed to inquire into the massacre of Glencoe, the report of which was presented to parliament the following June. For his part in the commission and his conduct as lord justice clerk, Ormiston appears to have been subject to considerable criticism. One contemporary, Dr Houston, remarked: 'of all the party Lord Ormiston was the most busy, and very zealous in suppressing the rebellion and oppressing the rebels, so that he became universally hated in Scotland, and when ladies were at cards, playing the nine of diamonds, commonly called the curse of Scotland, they called it the Justice Clerk. (Brunton and Haig, 478-80)' Nevertheless, that month Ormiston was created a director of the ill-fated Company of Scotland trading to Africa and the Indies. Then on 6 February 1699 Ormiston was created lord treasurer-depute in place of the deceased Lord Raith. He took his new seat in parliament on 21 May 1700. At this point, consistent with his former conduct, he took the oath of allegiance, signed the same with the assurance and association, and took the oath of parliament. 
On the accession of Queen Anne, Ormiston was dismissed from office. However, his enforced retirement was not to last long. On 8 January 1705 he obtained a commission restoring him to the office of lord justice clerk and appointing him an ordinary lord of session, both in place of Sir William Hamilton of Whitelaw. He assumed his seat as justice clerk on 26 January, and as a lord of session on 31 January. Ormiston was superseded as justice clerk by James Erskine of Grange in 1710, but retained his place as a lord of session. Nevertheless, in 1714, on the accession of George I, Ormiston had the office of justice clerk conferred on him for a third time; he retained it for the remainder of his life. 
Ormiston was one of the first Scottish landowners who endeavoured to introduce long leases of farming land, and as early as 1698 he attempted to break through the old system of short leasing. Similarly it was on his own estate of Ormiston that the fields were enclosed for the first time in Scotland. He was evidently a capable man of considerable diversity, though his talents were matched by his 'hot, virulent, turbulent and domineering temper' (Young, 131). He was described by one contemporary as a gentleman who 'entered heartily into the measures of the Revolution, and was zealous all King William's reign, especially for Presbyterian church government'. He was also 'too great a bigot in his principles, but in other respects a very fine gentleman, both in person and manners, of strong good sense and great integrity' ('State Papers and Letters', 99). Following the death of his first wife Ormiston married Anne, daughter of Sir Patrick Houston of that ilk and widow successively of Sir James Inglis of Cramond and Sir William Hamilton, Lord Whitelaw; they had one daughter, Jean. Ormiston died at Edinburgh on 16 April 1735, aged about seventy-nine. 


@@@@@


doc= 5765


Cockburn, Sir Alexander James Edmund, twelfth baronet (1802-1880), judge, was born on 24 December 1802, the only son of Alexander Cockburn (1776-1852), later envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to Wurtemburg and then Colombia, and his wife, Yolande (died 1810), daughter of the vicomte de Vignier of St Domingo. Part of his early education took place on the continent, leaving him fluent in French, and with some knowledge of Spanish, German, and Italian. In September 1822 he was admitted to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he was a scholar and prizeman in 1823, and president of the Union Society in 1824. He achieved first class in civil law in 1824-5, and graduated LLB in 1829, and would remain a fellow of his college until 1850. In November 1825 Cockburn was admitted into the Middle Temple, and was called to the bar in February 1829. After his call Cockburn joined the western circuit. He acquired a large practice at the Devon sessions, but was so doubtful of success in London that he did not even keep his chambers open. He had an adventurous youth, observing in later years, 'Whatever happens, I have had my whack' ('A Generation of Judges by their Reporter', 10). On one occasion, he had to escape from bailiffs by climbing out the window of the robing rooms at Exeter Castle. Ever keen on the company of women, he fathered two illegitimate children, a girl and a boy, Alexander Dalton Cockburn, to whom he left the majority of his fortune. 
After the 'Reform Act' of 1832, Cockburn began to practise in election cases and published a set of election reports with William Rowe. He was retained as counsel by the MPs for Coventry, Henry Lytton Bulwer and Edward Ellice. It was thanks to the latter that he was appointed in 1834 to the municipal corporations commission, being assigned to the north midland circuit. Some of his reports, written jointly with his fellow commissioners Whitcombe and Rushton, were of high quality; but those he undertook alone were less ample in their detail, and appeared to have had less care bestowed on them. His election business introduced him to Joseph Parkes, the Liberal agent, and he would soon cultivate an interest in politics. 
Cockburn's election and parliamentary practice was lucrative; but he was also very ambitious. In 1838 he turned down an Indian puisne judgeship worth $2000 a year, saying 'I am going in for something better than that' (Manson, 158). He soon began to reduce his election and parliamentary practice, to concentrate on higher profile cases, and in 1838 became recorder of Southampton. In 1841, the year in which he took silk, he argued successfully for his uncle Sir William Cockburn (1773-1858), the dean of York, in a proceeding against the archbishop of York for illegally depriving the dean on a charge of simony, which had been brought before Dr Phillimore. Two years later, he attracted much wider notice by his successful defence of McNaughten, who was acquitted of the murder of Peel's secretary, Edward Drummond, on the grounds of insanity. In a long and much publicized speech, Cockburn persuaded the jury to accept the view of the experts that the defendant could not tell right from wrong. 
Cockburn's taste for high-profile cases continued. In 1844 he appeared for the owners in the celebrated case concerning the racehorse Running Rein. In 1852 he defended John Henry Newman in the libel action brought against him by Achilli, where his opponent was (as it would be in many cases at this time) Sir Frederick Thesiger. In the same year, he was engaged in the Hopwood will case, in which the court of chancery referred to a Liverpool jury the question whether an elderly testator, with a fortune of $7000 a year, had been of sound mind when disinheriting his eldest son just prior to his death. Cockburn persuaded the jury that he had not. In 1856 he prosecuted William Palmer, a medical man with high gambling debts, in a case where all hinged on circumstantial evidence. Cockburn prepared by studying the effects of poisons day and night, and his mastery of the detail was so thorough that Palmer, who became known as the Rugeley poisoner, attributed his conviction to Cockburn's skill with a racing metaphor: 'It's the riding that has done it' (Yates, 2.131). 
In 1847 Cockburn was elected Liberal member of parliament for Southampton. At first he spoke little, save on legal matters. However, in 1850 Palmerston required a cool, legalistic defence of his conduct of the Don Pacifico affair. After Crowder had turned down an invitation to supply this, Cockburn rose to the occasion, delivering the best speech of his life, and in effect saving the government from defeat. This performance secured for Cockburn the post of solicitor-general, which was accompanied in August 1850 by a knighthood. In March 1851 he was promoted to the attorney-generalship, which he retained until the fall of the government one year later. He was reappointed to the post at the beginning of 1853, and became recorder of Bristol in the following year. He was an active member of the government and not slow to assert himself politically: thus, in July 1855, he was one of the main leaders of the group of Liberal MPs who forced Russell to quit the government. However, he was cautious on law reform, as his opposition to J. G. Phillimore's bill in 1855 for a public prosecutor showed. 
With the death of the chief justice of the common pleas, Sir John Jervis, in 1856, Cockburn, as attorney-general, was the obvious successor. However, he hesitated before accepting the post, for it entailed giving up an income at the bar of some $15,000 a year for a salary of $6000, as well as giving up his parliamentary career. At the same time, he did not relish the civil cases which filled the common pleas, not least because he was not a particularly distinguished technical lawyer. Three years later, on Palmerston's return to office, he was made chief justice of the queen's bench. He had in fact hoped to become lord chancellor, but Campbell was preferred. It would not be the only occasion when he would be disappointed at being overlooked for the great seal. On his promotion to the queen's bench, Palmerston offered him a peerage, but Cockburn turned it down, not desiring to hold a peerage as chief justice. The prime minister then promised him that he could have the peerage whenever he wanted it. In 1864 Cockburn asked for the promise to be made good; but the royal household informed the government that 'this peerage has been more than once previously refused upon the ground of the notoriously bad moral character of the Chief Justice' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 1.257). Given the queen's sincere disapproval, Cockburn did not press the matter. He had succeeded to the baronetcy held by his uncle in April 1858. 
On the bench as at the bar Cockburn relished the limelight offered by controversial cases. In April 1867 he delivered a six-hour charge to a grand jury at the Old Bailey in the case of Colonel Nelson and Lieutenant Brand, who had been charged with the murder of George William Gordon, executed under the martial law declared in Jamaica by Governor Eyre. Eyre regarded Cockburn's charge as 'violent and partisan', and claimed that the chief justice 'would do all in his power and beyond it to further the ends of the Jamaica Committee' (Heuston, 17). In a carefully reasoned address, Cockburn told the grand jury that the common law knew of no such thing as martial law. Though life might be protected and crime prevented by the immediate application of such force as was necessary under the circumstances, the crown had no power to go further, as Eyre had done. He declared that the seizure of Gordon had been illegal, and that his trial had been marred by improper proceedings. It was indeed an invitation to the grand jury to find the indictment; but in the heated atmosphere of the time, they found no true bill. Cockburn's charge, while lauded in the press for its liberal principles, had potentially disturbing implications for a government facing increasing Fenian hostilities in Ireland; and his views were attacked both by Eyre's supporters in the Lords and by Thomas Carlyle. Moreover, when in June 1868 Eyre himself faced a grand jury, Justice Blackburn took an entirely different view of the law, directing the jury to throw the bill out. Blackburn's assertion that all the judges -- including the chief justice -- agreed with him earned him a sharp rebuke in court from Cockburn. 
Cockburn continued to choose to sit in controversial cases, for, as Bramwell put it, it was his great desire to have a page of 'The Times' devoted to him every day. He presided over the case of 'Saurin v. Starr' in 1869, when a sister of mercy expelled from her order sued for damages. Coleridge, who appeared in the case, commented that 'Cockburn enjoys the situation and goes on making things longer and longer' (Coleridge, 2.163). He also presided over the trial of the directors of the failed bank of Overend, Gurney & Co. The most controversial trial he handled, however, was the perjury case in 1874 of Arthur Orton, the Tichborne claimant, which followed the collapse of the civil suit where the claims were asserted. From the outset, the defence felt that the chief justice was biased against them -- he had, after all, during the civil case, congratulated Coleridge for turning the tide of opinion against the 'monster', by accusing him of being a perjurer and a slanderer. The criminal trial proved long drawn out and difficult, thanks to the confrontational attitude of Orton's lawyer, Dr Edward Vaughan Kenealy, who ferociously attacked the character of many of the witnesses, and even appeared to cast aspersions on the bench. Though he was godfather to one of Kenealy's children, Cockburn was provoked by the barrister into making 'utterances to which a colder and less generous disposition would not have been tempted' ('Solicitors' Journal', 18, 1874, 337). After many skirmishes during the trial, Cockburn exacted his revenge on Kenealy in his summing-up, which lasted 18 days, and filled 800 pages in 2 volumes. He began by accusing Kenealy of mis-stating evidence, perverting facts, and attempting to make foul imputations against innocent people, and of abusing the liberty of the bar. Cockburn was playing to the crowd, and his speech was met with suppressed applause. His summing-up ended with a declaration that the jury's verdict would be received as sincere by all, except 'fanatics and fools' -- a phrase seized on by the claimant's supporters in the popular press ('The Times', 2 March 1874, 8). 
Cockburn's handling of this case showed up some of his faults as a judge. It was generally agreed that his desire to play to the gallery had prolonged the case, and contributed to its highly charged atmosphere. Many in the profession regretted the overt antagonism shown towards the defence by the judge, and it was felt that too often he had over-ridden rather than over-ruled legal objections. It was not the only case in which it would be observed that Cockburn's 'cursed vanity led him into fireworks for ten minutes, which, to my thinking, spoiled the whole' (Coleridge, 2.167). Nevertheless, when Kenealy in 1874 sought a royal commission to look into the handling of this case, Cockburn's parliamentary friends rallied around him, Disraeli praising him as a 'man of transcendent abilities' ('Hansard 3', 223, 1874, 1598). 
In his later years, Cockburn never shied from entering into public controversies on legal matters. Although he professed to desire law reform, his attitude in practice was generally conservative and cautious. In 1870, for instance, he attacked the 'High Court of Justice Bill', which sought to effect a fusion of the courts of law and equity. While claiming to support the principle, he got the common-law judges to agree to a resolution that 'express provision shall be made as to what the law shall be in each particular instance' -- a requirement which would have made fusion impossible. Equally damaging was the opposition of the judges to the government's proposal that the rules of the new court should be left to a committee of unnamed members to work out. The opposition organized by Cockburn -- encapsulated in his letter to the Lord Chancellor Hatherley, entitled 'Our judicial system' -- effectively delayed the reforms for three years. Cockburn abhorred any idea that the style and title of chief justice might be compromised by the reforms, and remained in office to become the first man to hold the legally recognized title of Lord Chief Justice of England. 
In 1871 Cockburn clashed once more with Hatherley, over the appointment of Sir Robert Collier to the judicial committee of the privy council. To help reduce arrears in privy council cases, an act had been passed in 1871 to appoint four salaried members of the privy council, from men who had either been chief justices in India or superior court judges in England. However, since the salary was only $5000 a year, and since the judges would have to pay their own clerks, the government found great difficulty in filling the second common-law judgeship. After three had declined, and after Cockburn had let it be known that no judge would accept, Gladstone decided to offer it to the attorney-general. Collier was duly appointed to the common pleas for two weeks, in order to qualify under the statute for office on the judicial committee. Cockburn was furious, writing to Gladstone that such 'a colourable appointment to a judgeship for the purpose of evading the law appears to me most seriously to compromise the dignity of the judicial office'. The chief justice raised the stakes by publishing the letter in 'The Times' (5 Dec 1871). He was especially irritated by the fact that he had only received a curt reply from Gladstone and an uncivil one from Hatherley. In turn, the lord chancellor, a man with a keen sense of decorum, felt mortified by an imputation of corruption coming from a man with Cockburn's reputation, and thought it inappropriate for the chief justice to launch a public attack without first being in full possession of the facts. He was also determined not to be accountable on a political matter to the chief justice, and to wait until the meeting of parliament to explain his actions. When the Lords met in February 1872, Cockburn ensured that his friends would attack Hatherley. However, the government fought back and, incensed by the attack on his conduct by the eighth duke of Argyll, the chief justice threatened to break all links with the government if he did not receive an apology. 
In particular, Cockburn threatened to resign from his position as Britain's representative at the Geneva arbitration to settle the United States' claims arising from alleged breaches of neutrality during the American Civil War. The question of compensation had been referred to five arbitrators by the treaty of Washington of 1871, a treaty which Cockburn felt had been ineptly negotiated and badly drafted. He also formed a low opinion of the competence of the other arbitrators, and allowed his irritation to show through, even to the length of insulting them. His view was that they had determined to decide against Great Britain without first listening to the arguments, and without having a sufficiently detailed grasp of the principles of international law. In the end, $3.2 million damages was awarded against Great Britain, with Cockburn recording an elaborate dissent from the report in September 1872. While he admitted Britain's liability for the depredations of the ship the 'Alabama' he dissented on the other matters. A peerage was once again made available to Cockburn at this stage. However, he again refused it, in part from his growing dislike of Gladstone, and in part because he did not want to resign as chief justice, and did not want a peerage while he held that office. Instead, in February 1873, he was awarded the grand cross of the Bath. 
Cockburn's legal conservatism was seen again in 1874 and 1878 over proposals to codify criminal law. In 1874 he attacked a bill drawn by James Fitzjames Stephen to codify the law of homicide as partial and imperfect, with the result that the bill was withdrawn. Four years later, he sabotaged the codification bill of the criminal law commissioners by writing a letter to the attorney-general in protest. Cockburn took the view that codification was desirable, but that any partial measure which relied at all on common-law principles would merely create confusion. Stephen was furious, suspecting that Cockburn's hostility to the measure was connected to his resentment at having been omitted from the commission, and replied to his critic with an article in the 'Nineteenth Century'. 
In 1878 Cockburn issued another sharp letter to a judge, this time answering Lord Penzance's comments in 'Combe v. Edwards', which criticized Cockburn for issuing a writ of prohibition against his proceedings as an ecclesiastical judge in 'Martin v. Mackonochie'. Though in form a private letter, it was once more an attempt at a public vindication of his own conduct, and was described by 'The Times' as 'a singularly unedifying controversy' (22 Nov 1880). 
As a judge, Cockburn did not have the highest reputation. The quip in the legal profession was that he became a first-rate judge, but only by sitting alongside Justice Blackburn. For Selborne, he was 'splendid rather than learned or profound' (Palmer, 1.496), while Coleridge simply said 'I do 'not' feel oppressed at having to succeed 'him'' (2.300). He was not remembered as a deductive legal logician, but rather as a man of the world who knew how to master detail by hard work and present a rounded picture to the jury. 
Nevertheless, Cockburn made a number of important judgments, notably in aspects of public law. In 'R. v. Lords Commissioners of the Treasury' (1872), he ruled that the remedy of 'mandamus' did not lie against the crown to compel those who held money as agents for the crown to hand it over to those legally entitled to it; and in 'Rustomjee v. R.' (1876) he held that a petition of right could not be used to compel the crown to pay compensation acquired under a treaty to those who had suffered the damage to be compensated. In a leading case on the notion of fair comment in libel, 'Campbell v. Spottiswoode' (1863), he ruled that it was actionable to say that the editor of a religious magazine who advocated a scheme for missions to the heathen was an impostor, and that his aim was merely a pretext for puffing his magazine, even if the libeller thought it was true. For Cockburn, the law should not sanction attacks on people's honour and character made without any foundation. However, in 'Wason v. Walter' (1868), he ruled that fair reports of parliamentary proceedings should not be subjected to the law of libel, even if parts were defamatory. He was keen for the common law to continue to develop with society, and in cases like 'Goodwin v. Robarts' (1875) sought to ensure that commercial law kept pace with commercial practice. 
A short man, with a large head and an expansive brow, Cockburn had a warm charm, a distinguished air, and a melodious voice. He was highly courteous, witty and eloquent in company, and keen to share anecdotes with his friends, who included Charles Dickens. An enthusiastic follower of music, he generally entertained the prima donnas of the age, and hosted musical evenings for his friends, always retiring late, and rising only in time to rush to court. Cockburn was also a keen sailor, and enjoyed hunting, though more for the company than the shooting. He was the author of a pamphlet entitled 'Nationality, or, The Law Relating to Subjects and Aliens' (1869), which discussed the report of the Naturalization Commission of 1868. At the time of his death, he had prepared a work on the authorship of Junius, and was writing a series of articles entitled 'The history of the chase' in the 'Nineteenth Century'. An honorary fellow of his college, he was disappointed not to have been elected master of Trinity Hall in 1877, on the death of Dr Geldart. He was, however, chairman of the Cambridge University commission in 1877 and 1878. He continued to devote himself to his work, in spite of three heart attacks and repeated warnings from his doctors, and died suddenly at his home at 40 Hertford Street in Mayfair on 20 November 1880; he was buried six days later at Kensal Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 5766


Cockburn, Alison (1713-1794), writer and literary hostess, was born on 8 October 1713, the youngest of six children of Robert Rutherford of Fairnalee, Selkirkshire, and his wife, Alison, 'nee' Ker (died 1723/4); her birthplace was the family's mansion house at Fairnalee. On 12 March 1731, at Ormiston parish church, she married Patrick Cockburn (died 1753), the advocate son of Adam Cockburn of Ormiston, lord justice clerk; the couple had one son, Adam (1732-1780), who became a captain in the dragoons. The marriage to Cockburn formally ended a romantic attachment to John Aikman, son of the painter William Aikman and a friend of Allan Ramsay. Alison's relationship with Aikman may have been the primary inspiration for her most famous lyrical lament 'Flowers of the Forest', although Sir Walter Scott attributed the occasion of its writing to a series of bankruptcies that devastated several ancient Selkirkshire families. 
Although Alison Cockburn wrote poetry and songs throughout her life, only a few of her works were ever published. She seems to have regarded her poems as personal pieces or items to be shared with friends between dinner toasts. The enduring 'Flowers of the Forest', was only published in 1765 and initially not even under her name. When it first appeared many believed it to be an old ballad from the time of Flodden Field. Robert Burns, who recognized it as a more recent production, admired it nevertheless and imitated it in his own 'I dreamed I lay' in 1776. 
Like her husband, Alison Cockburn was a whig Presbyterian with no time for the Jacobite inclinations of some of her tory friends and relations. This was a potentially dangerous position at a time of Jacobite activity. Returning by coach from Ravelston, where she visited relations during the Jacobite siege of Edinburgh Castle in 1745, Alison was accosted by the 'grim officer on guard' who proposed a search for 'Whig letters'. In her pocket she carried a squib that she had composed on Bonnie Prince Charlie entitled 'Clout the Caldron'; she was, however, spared the indignity of a search by the Ravelston arms on the coach (Tytler and Watson, 2.79-81). For several years from 1750 the couple lived on the estate of James, sixth duke of Hamilton, the duke having asked Patrick Cockburn to supervise his affairs while he was overseas. 
Patrick Cockburn died on 29 April 1753 and was survived by his wife for another forty years. After her husband's death Alison transferred her residence to Edinburgh, where she helped to mould that city's dinner and drawing-room culture in the same way that a select set of French noblewomen ruled the salons of Paris. Her literary circle included David Hume, Henry Mackenzie, William Robertson, Lord Monboddo, David Dalrymple, John Home, and the young Walter Scott, her cousin on her mother's side. Cockburn lived long enough to act as 'a connecting-link between the Edinburgh of Allan Ramsay and Burns, and the Edinburgh of Scott -- her house was the rallying-ground, while she was herself a queen, of the literati of Edinburgh' (Tytler and Watson, 2.179-80). 
In the late twentieth century Alison Cockburn's reputation has owed much more to her effervescent correspondence, chronicling her role in the cultural and literary scenes of the day, than to her intermittent poems. Her correspondence is one of the finest sources of information on the changing social etiquette and Edinburgh season, visiting habits, balls and assemblies, and convivial dinners that characterized Edinburgh in the age of improvement and Enlightenment. This correspondence was only interrupted once, under the tragic circumstances of the death on 22 August 1780 of her son, Adam. Adam Cockburn had inherited the reserved character and fragile constitution of his father. His mother loved him deeply and one of the few times that her close friendship with David Hume was seriously tested was when her 'bon' 'David' failed to use an opportunity to promote her son's interest. Her 'Short account of a long life', which prefaces the 1900 edition of her correspondence, was dedicated to the Revd Robert Douglas of Galashiels. 
Alison Cockburn's relationship with Hume was one of intimate friendship. She constantly chided him for his atheism, encouraged him to make his famous visit to France, suggested that he bring her 'beloved' Jean-Jacques Rousseau to Scotland, and then took Hume's part against Rousseau when the latter proved a paranoid house guest. She even offered to find Hume a home and a wife when he settled down in Edinburgh. Their relationship was sufficiently close that she felt at ease to offer, whether in jest or in earnest, to 'play at quadrille and sleep with you. Will that do?' (Mossner, 533). Her connection with her cousin Walter Scott was more paternalistic. Their mutual admiration was firmly established when Walter was only six. While visiting Scott's father at his home in George Square, she pronounced the child prodigy 'the most extraordinary genius of a boy I ever saw'. Walter Scott returned the compliment by telling his aunt that Alison Cockburn was 'a 'virtuoso' like myself' (Lockhart, 1.119). 
As a young woman Alison Cockburn's beauty must have been remarkable. Dignified and charming, she had sufficient wit and vivaciousness to attract considerable attention and was ranked among Edinburgh's most beautiful women in a published piece by a visiting Frenchman. A portrait painted by Anne Forbes in Alison Cockburn's mature years depicts the woman that befriended David Hume -- an open but clearly well-bred character with just a hint of sauciness. She died in Edinburgh on 22 November 1794 and was buried in Buccleuch parish church beside her son. 


@@@@@


doc= 5767


Cockburn, Archibald (fl. 1722), Church of England clergyman and writer, is a figure about whom little is known. In his only published work he describes himself as being 'M.A., rector of the parishes of St Mary Cayon and Christ's Church, Nichola Town, in St. Christopher's' in the Caribbean. Cockburn recounts that at the request of the Hon. William Matthew, lieutenant-governor of the Leeward Islands, he wrote 'A Philosophical Essay Concerning the Intermediate State of Blessed Souls' (1722). In this curious work Cockburn discussed the souls of the dead, and especially those which made a physical appearance to the living. As a later commentator noted, the author was very metaphysical, 'and firmly believed in ghosts and apparitions' (Noble, 3.141). It is not known when he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 5768


Trotter, Catharine (1674?-1749), playwright and philosopher, was born in High Holborn, London, probably on 16 August 1674, the second of the two daughters of David Trotter (died 1684), naval captain, and his wife, Sarah Bellenden, who was related to Lord Bellenden and the earls of Perth and Lauderdale. Katherine Trotters, the daughter of David and Sarah Trotters, was baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 29 August 1674. This is five years earlier than the date of birth given by Thomas Birch in his life of Trotter, and that recorded on her gravestone, but is probably correct. Her parents were both Scottish. Captain Trotter served under Charles II, but died of the plague while on a voyage to Iskenderun, losing all his effects. His widow was granted a pension by Charles II, which ceased at that king's death, and was not renewed until the accession of Queen Anne in 1702. 
Catharine Trotter apparently learned to write and to speak French by her own efforts, but according to the biographical summary, 'The life of Mrs Cockburn', written by Thomas Birch, the editor of 'The Works of Mrs. Catharine Cockburn', she 'had some assistance in the study of the Latin grammar and Logic' (Birch, 1.v). It is not clear whence that assistance came. Her first published work was an epistolary novella, 'The Adventures of a Young Lady', her anonymous contribution to a collection published by Samuel Briscoe entitled 'Letters of Love and Gallantry and Several other Subjects, All Written by Ladies' (2 vols., 1693-4, vol. 1). Although anonymous in this edition, the novella, retitled 'Olinda's Adventures, or, The Amours of a Young Lady', was attributed to Mrs Trotter in a 1718 collection published by Briscoe: 'Familiar Letters of Love, Gallantry and Several Occasions'. Her novella is superior in construction and style to the general run of letter fiction in this period. 
Trotter wrote five plays, which were all performed on the London stage. About December 1695 her first play, 'Agnes de Castro', was performed at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, London. This was followed by 'Fatal Friendship', which was performed at Lincoln's Inn Fields in 1698. Among her contemporaries, the latter was the most acclaimed of her plays. Charles Gildon stated that 'it deserv'd the Applause it met with' (Gildon, 179). George Farquhar wrote to her 'my passions were wrought so high by the representation of 'Fatal Friendship', and since raised so by a sight of the beautiful author' (BL, Birch Add. MS 4264, fol. 102). Her only comedy, 'Love at a Loss', was performed in November 1700 at Drury Lane, and includes a generous dedication to her patron, the poet Sarah, Lady Piers. This play was later revised and retitled 'The Honourable Deceivers', but was unperformed and no manuscript copies have survived. Her next play, a tragedy, 'The Unhappy Penitent', was staged at Drury Lane in February 1701. After a five-year gap during which she had published her first philosophical work, her last play, also a tragedy, 'The Revolution of Sweden', was produced about February 1706, at the Queen's Theatre at the Haymarket. She had previously shown the manuscript of this play to William Congreve for his suggestions, most of which she did not incorporate in the final version. 
Trotter's dramatic work was in many ways in the vanguard of the movement to reform the stage, which gained momentum in the eighteenth century. In the dedication to 'Fatal Friendship' she stated that the intention of the play was to 'discourage vice, and recommend a firm unshaken virtue'. Contemporary comment often centred on her ability to entertain and instruct in her drama, as in this anonymous reference to 'Fatal Friendship': 'A celebrated Female in use, has lately convinc'd you, in her 'Fatal Friendship', that 'tis possible to entertain, with all the Judgment, Wit and Beauty of Poetry; without 'shocking our senses', with intollerable prophaness ['sic'] or obscenity' ('A Letter to Mr. Congreve on his Pretended Amendments etc. of Mr. Collier's Short View of the Immorality and Prophaneness of the English Stage', 1698, 36-7). Acclaim for her writing was often conflated with praise for her beauty. Birch described her as 'small of stature, but had a remarkable liveliness in her eye, and delicacy of complexion' (Birch, 1.xlvi). Gildon praised her for 'two things rarely found together, Wit and Beauty: and with these a Penetration very uncommon in the Sex' (Gildon, 179). Her drama is notable in this period for its unusually rational and politically aware female characters. Although Trotter denied alliance to any political group, she was closely involved with the very politically active Marlborough circle in the early eighteenth century (Kelley, 21), and a close associate of Bishop Burnet and his third wife, Elizabeth, a friend of Sarah Churchill. 
In 1702 Trotter published her first, and best-known, philosophical piece, the anonymous 'A Defence of the 'Essay of Human Understanding', Written by Mr. Lock', defending him from the charges of deism and Socinianism which had been levelled at him anonymously in 'Remarks' by Dr Thomas Burnet of the Charterhouse in 1697. Elizabeth Burnet, a friend of John Locke, revealed Trotter's authorship to the philosopher, encouraging him to demonstrate his appreciation by gifts of money and books. Subsequently, Trotter published 'A Discourse Concerning a Guide in Controversies' (1707), prefaced by remarks by Bishop Gilbert Burnet. This marked her return to the Anglican faith after several years as a practising Roman Catholic. 
In 1708 Trotter married the Revd Patrick Cockburn (1678-1749), eldest son of Dr John Cockburn. After her marriage she moved from London to Nayland, Suffolk, where her husband had a curacy. In February 1713 he became curate of St Dunstan-in-the-West, London, but lost his appointment as he refused to take the oath of abjuration on the accession of George I. In 1726 he was persuaded by his father and Lord Chancellor King to take the oath, and was granted the ministry of the episcopal congregation of St Paul's Chapel in Aberdeen. Subsequently, he was also granted the living of Long Horsley, near Morpeth in Northumberland, although he did not reside there until the bishop of Durham insisted in 1737. He was the incumbent of this parish until his death, on 4 January 1749. 
Trotter's later important publications were all concerned with philosophical issues, where she consistently opposed ethical schemes based on voluntarism or moral relativity, in favour of a theistic belief in intrinsic essential moral differences within the law of nature. Her consistent position was that moral principles are not innate, but discoverable by each individual through the use of the faculty of reason endowed by God. She was a lifelong adherent to John Locke's philosophical principles, in 1726 publishing 'A Letter to Dr. Holdsworth', defending Locke against Winch Holdsworth's allegations of heresy. A further vindication of Locke addressed to Holdsworth failed to find a publisher, but was included in her posthumous 'Works'. In 1743 her 'Remarks upon some writers in the controversy concerning the foundation of moral virtue and moral obligation' was printed, on the recommendation of the Revd Dr Thomas Sharp, archdeacon of Northumberland. 
In 1747, despite her age and many years of poor health, Trotter wrote 'Remarks upon the principles and reasonings of Dr. Rutherforth's Essay on the nature and obligations of virtue: in vindication of the contrary principles and reasonings, inforced in the writings of the late Dr. Samuel Clarke', in support of Clarke's ethical principles. This was published by Mr Warburton, prefaced by a very glowing tribute to her powers of reasoning. She has been accused by some critics of not realizing that Clarke's ethical theory is inconsistent with that of Locke, yet there is considerable congruity in their approaches, as she recognized. Both men were concerned with describing a scheme of rational Christian morality; moreover, Locke did not dispute the concept of a fixed law of nature. 
Catharine Cockburn died at Long Horsley shortly after her husband on 11 May 1749. Their graves are in the parish churchyard where she was buried on 13 May, together with their daughter Grissel, who had died on 1 November 1742. There were three surviving children, Sarah (Lady Keith), Catharine, and John. 
In 1749 Warburton, among others, initiated a project to publish her writings, edited by Thomas Birch. The two-volume 'Works' was eventually published by subscription in 1751. It includes all her important philosophical writing, with a few minor pieces, some poetry, many of her letters and one play, 'Fatal Friendship'. 
Interpretations of Trotter's work have been influenced by changes in the way women writers have been read over the last three hundred years. The early association with the stage quickly gave way to the image of a respectable learned lady, accelerated by the publication of her 'Works' in 1751. Nineteenth-century editors substantially reinforced this emphasis on intellect and irreproachable moral standards, and foregrounded her role as wife and mother. It is only in the late twentieth century that the significance of her dramatic and philosophical work has been recognized, and her feminocentric stance as a dramatist and philosopher has been appreciated. Her own life was an argument for female rationality and responsibility, a demonstration that a woman could exercise her intellect in the male-dominated public sphere of philosophical debate. 


@@@@@


doc= 5769


Cockburn, Sir George (1763-1847), army officer and writer, eldest son of George Cockburn, and his wife, the eldest daughter of Charles Caldwell and a sister of Admiral Sir Benjamin Caldwell GCB, was born in Dublin. He was commissioned ensign in the 1st, afterwards the Grenadier Guards, on 9 May 1781, and in 1782 went to Gibraltar, where he was aide-de-camp to General Eliott during the siege. For his services he was promoted captain-lieutenant in the 105th regiment in 1784, and transferred in 1785 to the 65th, then quartered in Dublin. His new colonel, the earl of Harrington, took a great fancy to the young man, and instead of letting him go to Canada with the rest of the regiment in June 1785, he kept him at home for recruiting duties, and sent him to study the Prussian autumn manoeuvres. In the following years he went to Austria, France, and in 1788 to Spain for the same reason, and in March 1790 was promoted captain in the 5th (Royal Irish) light dragoons. He married in 1790 his cousin Elizabeth Riall (1771-1851), the eldest daughter of Phineas Riall, of Heywood, co. Tipperary, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Caldwell, of Dublin. In the same year he was made major of the royal Irish independent invalids, and in November 1793 was transferred to the 92nd, of which he purchased the lieutenant-colonelcy in the following month, and soon after went on half pay. In 1797 he was promoted colonel, in 1803 major-general, and from 1806 to 1810 held a command in the northern district. 
In April 1810 Cockburn was appointed to the command of a division in the army of occupation in Sicily, and took charge of Messina, but his period of command was short, and in November, on his promotion to lieutenant-general, he had to resign. Previously, however, he had been present at the defeat of Cavaignac's division when it attempted to land in Sicily, but the chief credit for this action is due to the adjutant-general, James Campbell. Cockburn then travelled in Sicily, and on his return to England published two illustrated volumes called 'A voyage to Cadiz and Gibraltar, up the Mediterranean to Sicily and Malta in 1810 and 1811, including a description of Sicily and the Lipari Islands, and an excursion in Portugal'. 
On leaving Sicily, Cockburn settled down at Shanganah Castle, near Bray, co. Wicklow, which he had purchased, and began to devote himself to politics. He was initially a radical reformer and admirer of Cobbett, and erected a column in his grounds in memory of the 'Reform Bill', which he speedily demolished when the whigs ceased to please him. He became a supporter of Sir Robert Peel. In 1821 he was made a KCH by George IV, and in 1831 William IV made him a GCH, more for his activity as a magistrate than for his military services. In 1843 he published a pamphlet, praised at the time, 'A Dissertation on the State of the British Finances', in which he advocated banknotes be issued by government and not the Bank of England. In 1846 he issued another, in which he examined such historical puzzles as Hannibal's passage over the Alps, and the authorship of the 'Letters of Junius', which he ascribed, on the testimony of Dr Parr, to Charles Lloyd. In 1821 Cockburn was promoted general. When he died at Shanganah Castle, on 18 August 1847, he was fourth general in seniority in the British army. 


@@@@@


doc= 5770


Cockburn, Sir George, eighth baronet (1772-1853), naval officer, second son of Sir James Cockburn, sixth baronet (died 1804), and his second wife, Augusta Anne Ayscough, was born in Middlesex and brought up in a family of eight children and educated at schools in Marylebone and Margate. He also attended the Royal Navigational School in Old Burlington Street, London. At the age of nine he was entered as captain's servant on the books of the frigate 'Resource' and afterwards of the yacht 'William and Mary', but he only went to sea in 1786. After serving in the channel and East Indies, he was confirmed in the rank of lieutenant on 2 January 1793. In June he was appointed as one of the lieutenants of the 'Victory', Lord Hood's flagship off Toulon; in October he was promoted to the command of the sloop 'Speedy'; and on 20 February 1794 he was posted to the frigate 'Meleager', which served in relaying signals in Hotham's two actions off Toulon, on 14 March and 13 July 1795. For the following twelve months the 'Meleager' was employed in the Gulf of Genoa, under the orders of Captain Nelson, whose patronage Cockburn won by his 'zeal, ability and courage' (Nicolas, 2.176-7), for which in August 1796 he was moved into the 'Minerve', a large frigate lately captured from the French. That December, when Nelson was sent from Gibraltar to relieve the garrison of Elba, he hoisted his commodore's broad pennant in the 'Minerve', which, on 20 December, in company with the 'Blanche' off Cartagena, captured the Spanish frigate 'Sabina'. On her return, passing the straits of Gibraltar, the 'Minerve' ran through the Spanish fleet and joined the fleet under Sir John Jervis the day before the battle of Cape St Vincent, at which the 'Minerve' was present, though without any active participation. Cockburn remained in the Mediterranean until the peace, and the 'Minerve' captured, or assisted in capturing, several of the enemy's privateers and smaller ships of war, more especially the frigates 'Succes' and 'Bravoure', which were driven ashore on the coast of Italy on 2 September 1801. 
In July 1803 Cockburn was appointed to the 'Phaeton', which he commanded for the next two years in the East Indies. In July 1806 he was appointed to the 'Captain', and in March 1808 to the 'Pompee', in which in September he went out to the West Indies, where in the following February he assisted in the reduction of Martinique. In 1809 he commanded the flotilla of gunboats and bomb-vessels which co-operated with the army in the capture of Flushing, and which covered its retreat as it withdrew from the Scheldt. On his return he married his cousin Mary Cockburn on 28 November 1809; they had one surviving daughter, Augusta Harriot Mary. In February 1810 Cockburn was appointed to the 'Indefatigable' and ordered to Quiberon Bay, where on 7 March he landed two agents who had undertaken to effect the escape of the king of Spain, then imprisoned in the castle of Valencay. However, these men were speedily arrested. The 'Indefatigable' subsequently sailed for Cadiz, then besieged by the French, against whom in August 1812 Cockburn commanded the boats of the fleet in an amphibious attack on the town of Moguer. He was afterwards sent to Havana, Cuba, in charge of two Spanish three-deckers, and on his return was, in November 1811, appointed to act as a commissioner in the attempted mediation between Spain and its South American colonies. The attempt proved impracticable, and the commission was dissolved in August 1812. 
Advanced to the rank of rear-admiral, with his flag in the 'Marlborough', Cockburn was ordered first to command the squadron off Cadiz, then in November, with the outbreak of war with the United States, to Bermuda, where Sir J. B. Warren, the commander-in-chief, sent him with a small squadron to attack the enemy in the Chesapeake. Here the war took the form of attacks by landing parties on selected economic and military targets. The squadron forced its way to the head of the Chesapeake and was in regular conflict with the American militia, especially at Havre de Grace, Georgetown, and Frederickstown. 
In August 1814 Cockburn accompanied the joint naval and military force under Major-General Ross, which after the battle of Bladensburg seized the city of Washington for twenty-four hours. By then familiar with operations on shore, Cockburn provided support and guidance to the army throughout the campaign, for which, in reporting its success, Ross credited him with the idea of the attack on Washington. However, the idea had long been part of the strategy of Sir Alexander Cochrane, who succeeded Warren as commander-in-chief on the North American station early in 1814. Cockburn also accompanied Ross in the subsequent advance against Baltimore, and was with him in the skirmish on 12 September in which Ross was mortally wounded. Between January and March 1815, while Cochrane attempted to take New Orleans, Cockburn undertook diversionary attacks on the coast of Georgia from a base on Cumberland Island. 
Cockburn was recalled to England following the conclusion of peace, only to find, on anchoring at Spithead on 4 May, that war with France had again broken out. He was ordered to hoist his flag on board the 'Northumberland' and to convey Napoleon to St Helena, which he reached on 15 October. He remained there as governor of the island and commander-in-chief of the Cape of Good Hope station until the summer of 1816, when he was relieved by Sir Hudson Lowe and Sir Pulteney Malcolm. Having been nominated a KCB in January 1815, he was made GCB on 20 February 1818, became vice-admiral on 12 August 1819, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1820. He was a junior lord of the Admiralty between April 1818 and May 1827, a member of the council of the lord high admiral between May 1827 and September 1828, and then first naval lord until November 1830. In 1828 it was principally Cockburn, as the leading council member and a privy councillor, who brought about the resignation of the duke of Clarence as lord high admiral for exceeding the terms of his patent. 
Although a tory, Cockburn served under the whigs as commander-in-chief on the North America and West Indies station between March 1833 and May 1836. He became a full admiral on 10 January 1837, and, although aged sixty-nine, he returned to the Admiralty as first naval lord from September 1841 until July 1846. There, far from being the reactionary as which he was later depicted by Sir John Briggs, he ensured that the latest steam and screw technology adopted by the Royal Navy was appropriate to its requirements. He maintained the navy's traditional priority of professionalism over politics in appointments, and held as a prime criterion for professionalism the ability to manage seamen without the need to resort to physical punishment. He was, when there was no alternative, for long a champion of impressment, but he had, by the time of his retirement, contributed to the system of examining masters and mates of merchant ships for their competency, the registration of which later joined the register of seamen, transferred from the Admiralty to the Board of Trade, to permit the foundation of a naval reserve. 
Cockburn's views were fluently expressed in the House of Commons, in which he became tory MP for Portsmouth in 1818, for Weobley in 1820, for Plymouth in 1828, and for Ripon in 1841. He became admiral of the fleet on 1 July 1851. On 26 February 1852, by the death of his brother James without a son, he succeeded to the family baronetcy, a dignity he enjoyed until his death on 19 August 1853. Cockburn was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his brother William, dean of York. He was survived by his wife, Mary, who died in January 1859. His daughter, Augusta, married Commander J. C. Hoseason, his adviser on steam technology, in 1856. 


@@@@@


doc= 5771


Cockburn, Henry, Lord Cockburn (1779-1854), author and judge, was born in or near Edinburgh, on 26 October 1779, the son of Archibald Cockburn (died 1820), and his wife, Janet Rannie. His father was one of the learned lairds who made up the country's 'noblesse de robe', a sheriff of Edinburghshire and a baron of Scotland's court of exchequer, a queller of riots, and a tory: Archibald Cockburn was the cousin and brother-in-law of Henry Dundas -- minister of the younger Pitt and pro-consul of North Britain -- and his marriage was witnessed by Dundas and by the ferocious judge Lord Braxfield, later arraigned in the writings of his son. Cockburn's principal vein was narrative history, the annals of his time, with reminiscence giving way eventually to the journal record of 'occurrences as they have arisen'. But he was a man of many parts, and his first fame was achieved as an advocate and politician who became a judge and a minister of the crown and who was a participant witness of two profoundly interesting public contentions: the passing of the 'Reform Bill' in 1832 and the Disruption of 1843, when schism struck the Church of Scotland over the issue of patronage -- decried as the intrusive appointment by landlords of ministers of the kirk. 
Cockburn (nicknamed Cocky) attended Edinburgh high school and Edinburgh University, where he came under the influence of the moral philosopher Dugald Stewart, and shone as a debater in the university's Speculative and Academical societies. His experiences at what he remembered as a brutal, flogging school were to be reflected in the part he played in the foundation of an alternative institution, the Edinburgh Academy, in 1823 (he was also to serve as rector of Glasgow University and as a founder of the Commercial Bank, and was to have an Edinburgh street named after him). His education was summarized in one of his inspired exaggerations: he was 'kept about nine years at two dead languages which we did 'not' learn' ('Memorials', 19). 
In 1796 Cockburn's father approached Dundas with a request that the small sinecure of presentership of signatures be bestowed on his son, in order to assist his legal studies. 'Your namesake Henry,' wrote Archibald Cockburn, 'in spite of every remonstrance and some degree of severity on my part, persists in being a limb of the Law' (Miller, 56). The post was denied him, but Cockburn persevered, and he passed advocate in 1800. He began to practise at the time when the 'Edinburgh Review', edited by Francis Jeffrey, began to appear. Jeffrey and John Richardson, a solicitor poet, were his closest friends, and Jeffrey's virtues are sung in his correspondence and in his 'Life of Lord Jeffrey' (1852). 
Cockburn testified that the 1790s were a time when the life of his community was steeped in a single event -- the French Revolution. This event, and the sedition trials which were aimed at the punishment of Jacobin and reformist sympathies and which are discussed in a book of his published in 1888, helped to make a whig of him, to turn him, politically, against 'my kindred'. He shared Jeffrey's perception of a growing struggle between the aristocracy and democracy of Britain, and his wish for an accommodation, for the 'tranquillity' which the 'Reform Bill' was later designed to secure. A decade after the presentership affair, the Dundases offered Cockburn a post as one of the lord advocate's deputes, which he accepted on the understanding that party loyalty would not be expected of him. His political opinions were deemed 'a mere youthful fervour' by his kin; his fear that they might think so 'only made the fervour warmer'. In 1810 he was sacked for insubordination. The following year, Dundas wrote of Cockburn's whiggery: 'Nobody can give me a reason how it began or why it continues' (Fry, 305). 
Cockburn's main purposes as a reformer were to bring about a wider parliamentary franchise, more and fairer juries, and an elected clergy. Parliamentary reform meant the enfranchisement of 'wealth and sense'. It also meant the prevention of revolution, and indeed of democracy. In his fervour, Cockburn foresaw a Scottish millennium over which flew the whig flag of 'sense and justice'. And yet his adult years can be considered those of a divided man. He was in love with the old feudal Scotland he was determined to change. His reason was with 'the modern world'; his dreams were with 'the old one'. His love for the old one is affirmed in the 'Memorials', which he started to prepare shortly after his father's death in 1820, at the point when northern politics awoke from the spell of Dundas-ship and 'our Scotch progress' started to accelerate; and his darkening view of the aftermath of reform is projected in the 'Journal'. Cockburn's contradictions were an important aspect of his life. He was a patrician iconoclast, an Anglophile Scots patriot, and a classical romantic. He was both the enemy and the friend of Scotland's landlords. 
In March 1811 Cockburn married Elizabeth MacDowall and set up his rural household gods at Bonaly in the lee of the Pentland hills, to the south-west of Edinburgh. Five daughters and six sons were born. His house in Charlotte Square stood at the heart of Edinburgh's new town, then under construction, from which he would sometimes recoil, thinking it unromantically commercial and mathematical. 'Nature and romance' were pursued at Bonaly, Cockburn's more modest Abbotsford, a farmhouse augmented by a peel tower. Bonaly was a convivial place, with its 'bouzes' and 'bowlifications'. But it was also a place where this public man could shed what he saw as the needful 'pugnacity' of his political and professional involvements, and be by himself. As did his recourse to the past, the Pentlands belonged in some measure to the category of dreams. 
Cockburn's country pleasures are embodied in a series of youthful poems. These show none of that hostility to Romanticism for which the 'Edinburgh Review' has been blamed, and can be credited with a feeling for Wordsworth. Extracts from 'Tintern Abbey' are the opening items in a commonplace book, a huge cento of favourite passages of verse, copied out by Cockburn and a circle of Pentlands friends and friends of the Pentlands, of whigs and of whig romantics. 
Cockburn was an admired advocate, and was depicted as gaining the trust of juries by displays of homeliness, and by pleading in Scots and, at times, in tears. Two of his greatest occasions were his appearances for James Stuart of Dunearn, in 1822, and, seven years later, for Helen MacDougal, the companion of body-snatching Burke, the 'resurrectionist' serial killer. Stuart had shot dead Boswell's son Alexander in a party-political duel, and Cockburn's defence was reckoned a masterpiece of forensic praise and pathos; at the time of the Burke and Hare trial, Stuart, once 'thought so pure and firm', as Cockburn observed, was revealed as a speculator who had run off to America in debt. Cockburn also spoke for western weavers accused of sedition. One of their number, Alexander Richmond, supported by Cockburn and Jeffrey, would appear to have served as a government spy. 
With reference to Scotland's special backwardness in electoral matters, and to the crisis which overtook the 'Reform Bill' in 1832, Cockburn wrote: 'The feeling of Scotland, whose 'all', as to representation, was at stake, was deep, intense and grave... It was an old covenanting business with them; who the 'Reform Bill' brought literally out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. (Miller, 'Millennium', 36)' This business was soon to succeed, and thus abolish the supremacy evoked in the best-known passage of the 'Memorials': 'Within this Pandemonium sat the town-council, omnipotent, corrupt, impenetrable. Nothing was beyond its grasp; no variety of opinion disturbed its unanimity, for the pleasure of Dundas was the sole rule for every one of them' ('Memorials', 87-8). A Venetian cast is imparted here to Edinburgh's town council. In 1823, in the course of a continental tour, he had seen Venice for himself: by then, the 'impenetrable' mystery and secrecy which had enclosed the regime of the Doges, according to certain historians of the time, had been extinguished by Napoleon. 
As Scotland's solicitor-general and lord advocate respectively, in the Grey administration of 1830-34, Cockburn and Jeffrey were charged with drafting the 'Scottish Reform Bill'. For both men 'benchification' took place in 1834, and as lords of session they were caught up in a further momentous struggle. The evangelical (or 'wild') party had won an ascendancy in the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, and their opponents in the country, the moderates, were to challenge on civil grounds the Church legislation in favour of popular election in the kirks, which resulted from their ascendancy. This became a question of controverted parishes and disputed pastoral 'calls'. The battle of wills lasted until 1843, when the 'wild' (some 200 ministers and elders, almost half of the general assembly) broke away to form the Free Church. 
For Cockburn, kirk was country, and his 'Journal' accounts of the Disruption make this clear, as do the votes he cast in the course of the court's relevant adjudications. Patronage was the law of the land, and he could take the view that the court was asserting a rightful claim in respect of temporalities -- manses and livings. But he could also see it as overreaching itself. The anti-intrusionist cause was, like parliamentary reform, a modern example of the old covenanting business of the seventeenth century. His was a patriotic piety. He was an opponent of religious intolerance, and was displeased by 'covenanting sublimities' and by the bletheraciousness of the cloth; but he was moved by the courage and idealism of the departing ministers and their flocks. 
Among Cockburn's writings in the field of law reform is a discussion in the 'Edinburgh Review' (April 1830) of the state of the Scottish legal system. The introduction of juries in civil causes, as in English law, was one of his foremost concerns. A civil jury court was formed in 1815 and was later merged with the court of session. Cockburn argued against the judiciary's power to pack juries, and against the exercise of its 'native vigour' -- in effect, a law-making capacity, which had developed in reaction to a parliamentary neglect of Scotland. While harbouring mixed feelings on the subject, he welcomed the end of entails, seen as a constraint on capital investment. 
Cockburn took a by no means progressive interest in the poor laws of his time, and questioned (in vain) the assessment of landowners in order to relieve distress, believing that compulsory provision on a regular basis tends 'to increase the very evil which it is meant to cure' ('Edinburgh Review', October 1824). He was in sympathy with the position taken by one of his statesmanlike sages, the evangelical leader Thomas Chalmers, with regard to the virtues of self-help, as exemplified between 1819 and 1823 in the Glasgow parish of St John's. On the question of trade-union combination, he judicially upheld the innocence of strikes, while saying of one aspect of their coerciveness: 'It is 'impossible' to defend a combination which is kept up by concussing me to join it' (Miller, 42). 
The modern world, with the swiftness of its railroads and its mass migration to urban centres, reminded Cockburn of a well-known Scottish whirlpool: 'All things now are melted in one sea -- with a strong Corryvreckan in it, sweeping everything towards the metropolis' ('Journal', 2.91). There were improvements which he abhorred, such as 'furious communication', and he was an early environmentalist whose concern for his native city gave rise to the modest proposal set out in his 'Letter to the lord provost on the best ways of spoiling the beauty of Edinburgh' (1849). He was drawn to the new art of photography, and was portrayed not only in oils by Sir Henry Raeburn, in 1819, but in the calotypes of Octavius Hill and Robert Adamson. 
A pugnacious and triumphant reformer like Cockburn was bound to arouse an answering pugnacity; lawyers in particular have sometimes been keen to put him on trial. A certain impatience on the bench, and an inaptitude for the intricacies of feudal law and the practicalities of Scottish life, have been laid at his door. Errors committed in the huddled circumstances which vexed the drafting of the 'Scottish Reform Bill' have been thought to have subverted, and inverted, its designed effects. Among his critics was Patrick Fraser, who spoke of his indolence and love of enjoyment. The House of Lords, on appeal, sustained judgments of his which had been reversed by his colleagues at the court of session, and Fraser says of this: 'The utterly untechnical character of his mind made his judgements read in the eyes of a foreign lawyer with a force not due to their intrinsic merits' (Miller, 51, 248). But it was also said in mitigation that no one by 'fits and starts' could make greater efforts. His alleged indolence might seem to be corroborated by a story which supposes him to have told a Pentlands shepherd, 'If I were a sheep, I would lie on the sunny side of the hill', and to have received the reply: 'Ah, my Lord, but if ye was a sheep, ye would hae mair sense.' The same reply was said by John Buchan, in 1940, to have been directed by a border shepherd at Gladstone. 
Like other prominent Scotsmen of his generation, such as James Stuart and Walter Scott, Cockburn fell into debt, and late in life he was smitten with the need to retrench. A testament of 1847 states that 'there cannot be another shilling of debt', and that 'I can be plucked by sons no more'. The theme of an estranged kinship was one which stayed with him throughout his life. He died at Bonaly on 26 April 1854 and was buried in Dean cemetery. After his death, Bonaly and its contents were sold. Three years earlier Cockburn had written to a friend that he had had a very happy life. 
For reasons of discretion Cockburn burnt many of his papers, and a son destroyed the original manuscripts for the 'Memorials' and the 'Journal', derived from four 'red books' of his which have also gone. For similar reasons, the 'Memorials' was pruned of some of Cockburn's outspokenness by its sheriff editors, Archibald Davidson and Thomas Cleghorn. Nevertheless, specimens of his writing which contain expurgated material have survived, as has a body of unpublished letters to friends. His portrait of the judge Lord Eskgrove, magnificent in its abbreviated form, is even more so as originally intended. In the passage that follows, deleted expressions that might have come from Cockburn's great-great-grandson Evelyn Waugh are restored and shown in italics: 'His eyes were blue, and half cunning, half maudlin; the under lip enormous, and supported on a huge clumsy chin, which moved like the jaw of an exaggerated Dutch toy; his nose prodigious, 'and absolutely purple with lust and liquor'. He walked with a slow, stealthy, sinister step, 'as if conscious he was going to do what was wrong' -- something between a walk and a hirple, and helped himself on by short movements of his elbows, backwards and forwards, like fins (Bell, 176)' The power of Cockburn's calm and confident prose is evident here, together with its pungent idiosyncrasy, which is also evident in an epistolary passage on the removal of a public lavatory when his heavenly city of Edinburgh was undergoing its process of extension, a removal which coincided with the motion for reform in the Augean stables of the House of Commons: 'I must confess that walking out yesterday to the Foul Brig I saw the sun glittering three times on a large, distant, whitish object, which, being neared, turned out to be a bum.' This is the Cockburn who beheld George IV, at his Holyrood levee of 1822, 'in a 'kilt' !!!... Bare or trousered, the knees were undoubtedly philabegged' (Bell, 14, 177). 
Cockburn did something to bring about a more widely representative politics and a more responsible public life, and he took part in a struggle which embroiled the law of the land, the government of the day, and a national institution intent on its independence. He was a superb historian of these exemplary conflicts. No less valuable are his accounts of the manners of his day -- of the regional Scotland described in his 'Circuit Journeys' (1888), and of the seasonal Edinburgh life of his adult years. In summer, at Bonaly, 'we sauntered in the twilight of a mild, milky evening, amid a glorious profusion of breathing roses of every description' (Miller, 67). But winter had its glories too: 'Fall, thou snow -- blacken, thou surly dark-souled night! Is it not Saturday? Have we not coals and claret, talk and time?' (Bell, 21). 
Such raptures may occasionally be thought to smack of the 'withering self-sufficiency' ascribed by Sir Archibald Alison to these Scottish whigs. But Cockburn and Jeffrey were, as Scott in his toryism conceded, extraordinary men, and so were their friends, in whom, as in Cockburn and Jeffrey themselves, the likeness of a latter-day Scottish Enlightenment can be found. Cockburn was sombre and thoughtful, as well as happy, as well as supple and wiry and sparkling, and he was no crony. With new and enlarged editions of his annals, and with a collected edition of his letters, a wider recognition of his qualities might be hoped for. An attempt was made to contribute to this in publications of the mid-1970s, where he was praised as the Tacitus of Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 5772


Cockburn, Sir James, fifth baronet (1723-1809), army officer, was the second son of John Cockburn (1675-1758), a surgeon of Kilkenny, and his wife, Martha Rich (died 1756). In 1754 he married Laetitia Little (1732/3-1804), the daughter of Luke Little of co. Carlow. He entered the army about 1747, but, lacking funds, appears to have served as a volunteer before finally gaining an ensigncy in the 44th foot on 22 June 1755. The following year he transferred to a lieutenancy in the 35th foot and was appointed regimental adjutant; he subsequently saw action at Fort William Henry, was wounded at Louisbourg and Quebec, and in 1762 served at the capture of Martinique. With the onset of peace, Cockburn expressed resentment at the purchase of rank above him by richer but less well-qualified officers. Only on 13 April 1767 did he make captain, and only by exploiting in a presumptuous fashion the goodwill of his colonel, General Henry Fletcher, was he able, on 13 January 1776, to purchase his majority. The following October the lieutenant-colonel of the 35th was killed during the New York campaign at White Plains, and General Sir William Howe, in recognition of Cockburn's excellent conduct during the battle, promoted him to command the regiment. Cockburn, however, proved such a persecutor of his fellow officers that within a year three-quarters of them prepared a petition to General Howe complaining of their commanding officer's oppressive behaviour. Discord continued after the 35th moved to St Lucia and culminated in the court martial and cashiering of Major Edward Drewe, a rich dilettante whose rapid ascent to field rank particularly offended Cockburn. 
In December 1780 Cockburn was appointed quartermaster-general of the army in the West Indies. Two months later he accompanied the expedition to capture the valuable Dutch island of St Eustatius. As agent for the captors and later military governor of the island he was a willing accomplice in the wholesale (and illegal) confiscation of goods by Admiral George Rodney and General Sir John Vaughan. Indeed, the contemplation of riches so blunted Cockburn's efficiency that in November 1781 he allowed St Eustatius to fall to a surprise attack. By subsequently asserting that $13,000 of confiscated money was his, and because the indulgent French commander actually let him keep it, Cockburn added a charge of scandalous and infamous behaviour (although many suspected treachery) to one of culpable neglect when, in May 1783, he came to be court-martialled for the loss of St Eustatius. The outcome was his dismissal from the army. 
In January 1800 Cockburn inherited a baronetcy from his cousin. His wife, with whom he had four children, died in 1804 aged seventy-one. Cockburn, who was probably also the father of the traveller Claudius James Rich (1786/7-1821), died on 9 June 1809, and his son William Cockburn (1769-1835), also an army officer, succeeded to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 5773


Cockburn, James Pattison (1779-1847), army officer and watercolour painter, was born on 18 March 1779 in New York, the son of Colonel John Cockburn and his wife, Mary, daughter of Colonel Sir James Cockburn. He entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, as a cadet on 19 March 1793, and passed out, as a second lieutenant, Royal Artillery, on 2 March 1795; his promotions were: first lieutenant (1803), captain (1806), brevet major (1814), lieutenant-colonel (1825), brevet colonel (1837), and major-general (9 November 1846). He served at the capture of the Cape of Good Hope in 1795, in the expedition sent against Manila in 1798 but was recalled when on its passage owing to the threatening situation in the Carnatic, and also at the siege and capture of Copenhagen in 1807. In 1800 he married, at Cape Colony, Elizabeth Johanna Vansittart; they had five sons and two daughters. From November 1822 to June 1823 he visited Lower Canada. On 5 April 1826 he was given command of the Royal Artillery in the Canadas, to which he returned in August 1826; he left in August 1832. He was director of the Royal Laboratory, Woolwich, from 10 October 1838 to 15 November 1846, when he retired with the rank of major-general. 
As a cadet Cockburn had been a pupil of Paul Sandby, Royal Academician (who was for many years professor of landscape drawing at the Royal Military Academy), and became an accomplished and prolific artist, whose work was exhibited and engraved. During leave from Malta and Woolwich, where he was stationed after 1815, he made many drawings of continental scenery, which were engraved and published as 'Swiss Scenery' (1820) with sixty-two plates; 'Views of the Valley of Aosta' (1822) with twenty-nine plates; 'Views to Illustrate the Simplon Route' (1822) with fifty plates; and 'Views to Illustrate the Mont Cenis Route' (1822). These drawings supplied the continental 'scenes' for illustrated editions, annuals, and similar works long afterwards. He also executed the landscapes in Professor T. L. Donaldson's 'Pompeii Illustrated' (1829). He painted Canadian scenes (collections of his work are in Canadian galleries and museums), and in 1831 published anonymously a small 'picturesque guide' (with seven plates) to the town of Quebec and its environs. According to Ludwig Spohr, who met Cockburn when travelling, he 'made use of a machine, which transmitted the landscape on a reduced scale to the paper' ('N&Q', 309) -- presumably a camera lucida. 
Cockburn, who had long been in feeble health, died at his residence, at Woolwich Common, Kent, on 18 March 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 5774


Cockburn, John (1652-1729), Church of Scotland minister and Church of England clergyman, was born on 20 April 1652, the son of John Cockburn ('c'.1620-1658), a tailor in the Canongate, Edinburgh, and his wife, Sarah Inglis (died 1688). In 1666 he entered Edinburgh University, but in November 1668 was transferred to King's College, Aberdeen, by his uncle, Patrick Scougal of Saltoun, bishop of Aberdeen, who oversaw his studies. After graduating MA on 20 June 1670 Cockburn probably continued to study under Scougal, until in 1673 he became tutor to Lord Keith, son of George, ninth Earl Marischal. He left his post in 1675 and was ordained by his uncle, who presented him to the parish of Udny, Aberdeenshire, on 14 February 1676. A public disturbance occurred at his institution in May, owing to the laird of Udny's claim to the patronal rights. In August Cockburn declined a presentation to the parish of Langton, Berwickshire, offered by his cousin, Cockburn of Langton. On 15 November 1677 he married Anna Garden (died 1695), daughter of Alexander Garden, minister of Forgue, with whom he had at least four children, including Patrick Cockburn (1678-1749). 
Between 10 August and 7 September 1681 Cockburn was translated from Udny to Old Deer, Aberdeenshire, thanks to the patronage of the Earl Marischal. Baulking at the test oath, which from 31 August 1681 bound all civil and ecclesiastical office holders to adhere to the whole confession of faith of 1560 and to support the established government in church and state, Cockburn joined the strong opposition shown by Bishop Scougal and his clergy. However, in February 1682 he and eight 'loyall and learned' churchmen ('Reg. PCS', '1681-2', 343), overcame their scruples concerning the confession and the royal supremacy, complied, and were allowed by the privy council of Scotland to return to their parishes. On 13 June 1683 he was translated to the parish of Ormiston, Haddingtonshire, in the gift of Sir Archibald Cockburn, filling a vacancy caused by John Sinclair's deprivation for refusing the test. Consequently Cockburn's assiduous ministry was fraught with difficulty, especially in persuading parishioners to act as elders in the kirk session, but it is unclear if he followed the common practice, alleged by Wodrow, of deliberately nominating presbyterians so they could be prosecuted for their refusal to serve. 
Cockburn undertook the innovative publication of a monthly periodical in January 1688. The 'Bibliotheca Universalis', which was perhaps modelled on Pierre Bayle's 'Nouvelles de la republique des lettres', contained translations of recent reviews of theological and other works from French periodicals. The duke of Perth construed some passages as anti-Catholic and the privy council quickly stopped further publication. That year Cockburn was made a doctor of divinity at Aberdeen. Following the revolution, like many other episcopal clergy, he was cited before the council for not reading the proclamation of 13 April 1689 which declared William and Mary as sovereigns, and instead of praying for them, praying for King James and confusion on his enemies. After one month in prison, until 7 August, he was deprived of his parish on 29 August. The privy council again gaoled him on 5 September 1690 for a period. 
A sharp polemic against the presbyterian church settlement, 'Historical Relation of the Pretended General Assembly', and a second part (1691), are attributed to Cockburn during a stay in London, when he befriended the nonjuror Dr Thomas Smith. After returning to Edinburgh in December 1691, he occasionally preached in 1692-3. The council arrested and examined him in March 1693 on suspicion of practices against the government committed by nonjuring clergy. Although his papers contained nothing damning, he admitted managing charitable donations for the episcopal clergy. On 27 June 1693 he refused to take the oaths of allegiance and assurance, and was ordered to leave their majesties' dominions by August. His pass to travel to the Netherlands from England was dated 18 September 1693. 
Next Cockburn lived at the court of the exiled James VII at St Germain, where he hoped to find sanctuary, if not reward. After a period he was represented as a dangerous man by priests who had failed to convert him to Rome and, like his cousin Cockburn of Langton the younger who also became 'persona non grata' at St Germain, he was forced to quit France by the authorities. Cockburn returned to England about 1696, when he published 'An Enquiry into the Nature, Necessity, and Evidence of Christian Faith'. In 1697 a second part appeared, followed by 'Fifteen Sermons'. In early 1698, shortly after publishing his first narrative of 'Bourignianism Detected', against the Catholic mystic and prophet Antoinette Bourignon, his prolific output was interrupted briefly by his hurried departure from England following the act against corresponding with King James. An interim 'Letter' on Bourignon was dated at Rotterdam on 11/21 April 1698, and his second narrative followed that year. He sought to demonstrate that she was a false prophet and saint, but his bitter denigration of her mystical piety reflected his own renunciation of the quietist spirituality which he had imbibed from his uncle and from his cousin, Henry Scougal. As his brother-in-law George Garden pointed out, Cockburn had once venerated Thomas a Kempis's 'Imitation of Christ'. In 1708 Cockburn felt it necessary to clear himself of the imputation of unorthodoxy and Bourignonism in 'Right Notions of God and Religion'. 
At Rotterdam Cockburn lodged with the scholar Pierre Bayle, another enemy to Bourignonism, and forged a friendship with the bookseller Leers, who introduced him to the leading men of the place. He endeavoured to set up as chaplain to resident Anglicans, but his nonjuring principles and reluctance to pray for King William alienated the majority of the English merchants, as well as alarmed the English authorities, so he departed during 1699, leaving it to his successor to establish an official ministry. His first wife had died in July 1695. He married again apparently some two years later, while abroad; his new wife was Elizabeth Littlepage, daughter of Sir Joseph Littlepage of Buckinghamshire, with whom he had at least seven children. Settling next in Amsterdam, Cockburn began to hold prayer-book services in a private chapel on the first Sunday in January 1700. His persistent efforts were crowned with the success of a lasting congregation, and he enjoyed cordial relations with the burgomasters, who granted the Anglicans the right to worship. His political principles were perhaps not tested by the imposition of oaths applicable in England, but it was later claimed he prayed for King William and Queen Anne. Henry Compton, bishop of London, and John Sharp, archbishop of York, supported his ministry. 
In March 1703, after returning from a brief visit to England in order to secure a royal grant of $60 for the chaplaincy, Cockburn began sending reports on public affairs to the earl of Nottingham, hoping for the gift of an English living to which he could retire. In January 1704, as financial hardship caused him to dispose of most of his library, he complained that Bishop Burnet's false allegations of his clashes with other clergy and the authorities had caused the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel to stop its grant. However, he persisted with his ministry, occasionally publishing sermons. In 1708 his crown grant was raised to $100. 
That year Cockburn was granted the rectory of Beercrocombe, Somerset, where he hoped to employ his son Patrick as curate. He had left Amsterdam by 27 May 1709, when he was honoured with a doctorate in divinity by Oxford University in recognition of his successful chaplaincy. On 9 June he was instituted to the rectory of Curry Malet, Somerset, in the queen's gift, but resided in London. Taking the requisite oaths was an abandonment of his nonjurancy and an avowal of orthodox Anglican churchmanship. It was later claimed that Cockburn was so well thought of that, had the project for bishops for the American colonies been realized, the queen intended his appointment as one of them. It was at her instance that in 1714, as he was about to take up residence in one of his charges, he was somewhat reluctantly presented by John Robinson, bishop of London, to the vicarage of Northolt or Northall, Middlesex, one of the wealthiest in his diocese. Resigning his rectories, he devoted himself to his parochial duties at Northolt, and provided during his life for the education of ten boys and six girls of the parish. He wrote an account of Northolt's history and present state. 
Cockburn continued to pen earnest works of a practical, moral cast, including 'A Discourse of Self-Murder' (1716) and 'The History and Examination of Duels', written about 1717 and published in 1720 in support of the outlawing of duels. In 1717-18 he again displayed his conservative and orthodox credentials with two defences of the rights and authority of the church against the views of Benjamin Hoadly, bishop of Bangor. After the publication of Gilbert Burnet's 'History of his Own Times', about 1724 he was encouraged to write a pamphlet correcting, among other matters, Burnet's account of his Scottish career, in which he accused him of historical bias, indiscretion, and intemperate behaviour. However, he admitted having to rely on his memory of many papers, including some of Bishop Scougal's, which he had lost. In addition to about twenty-three published works, latterly Cockburn completed a history of the Scottish church from the Restoration to the revolution, which was probably one of several manuscripts left unpublished at his death aged seventy-seven, on 20 November 1729. He was described as 'true and sincere in his private friendships, kind and benevolent to all mankind' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. J.40.2). On 26 November he was buried in Northolt parish church; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 5775


Cockburn, Patrick (1678-1749), Scottish Episcopal clergyman, was the eldest son of John Cockburn (1652-1729), Church of Scotland minister, and his wife Anna (died 1695), daughter of Alexander Garden, a leading cleric of the diocese of Aberdeen. Patrick was born at Udny, Aberdeenshire, during his father's incumbency of the parish. After the revolution in 1689 his father went abroad, though not apparently as a nonjuror as he prayed for King William and Queen Anne during his time as chaplain to the British congregations at Rotterdam and Amsterdam. It is not known whether Patrick accompanied his father, or where he was educated, but he was in Holland in 1705, for on 17 August of that year he received an MA from Edinburgh University and was described as being currently 'in Batavia agens'. Early in 1708 he married the dramatist and philosopher Catharine Trotter (1674?-1749), daughter of David Trotter and Sarah Ballenden. He is said to have shortly afterwards obtained the perpetual curacy of Nayland, Suffolk, but he was probably only a temporary curate-in-charge from June 1708. The sole reference to him in the Nayland registers is the entry of the baptism on 13 April 1712 of 'Mary, daughter of Patrick Cockburn, curate, and Catharine his wife'. 
From Nayland Cockburn moved to London, where he was curate at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street. Soon afterwards he had to give up his appointment owing to his refusal to take the oath of abjuration of the former Stuart royal line in 1714. For a time he made a scanty living by teaching Latin at a school in Chancery Lane, London. However, by 29 November 1726 he had reversed his former nonjuring position and, having taken the oath, was appointed at that date as the qualified, or Hanoverian, minister of St Paul's Episcopal Chapel, Aberdeen, which was built in 1722. Soon afterwards he was preferred to the parish of Long Horsley, Northumberland, but did not live there until 1737. 
While in Aberdeen Cockburn published a number of apologetic works upholding the legitimacy of the Hanoverian regime, including a sermon, 'On the Duty and Benefit of Praying for our Governors' (1728), and a pamphlet, 'The Lawfulness and Duty of Praying for our Present King and Governor' (1735). These were probably engendered by a controversy with the predominantly nonjuring Scottish Episcopalians. Cockburn had a family connection to the eighteenth-century Scottish Episcopalian mystical tradition, which was influenced by French quietism through the works of Henry Scougall and George Garden. Garden was Cockburn's uncle, and Scougall his father's first cousin. Probably as a result of this connection he produced his edition of Scougall's 'Life of God in the Soul of Man' (1726). The addition of Scougall's 'Nine Discourses' and Garden's funeral sermon for Scougall made this work an important contribution to Scougall's biography. Compelled to move to Long Horsley in 1737, Cockburn resigned his Aberdeen incumbency on 1 June 1739. He died on 4 January 1749 and was buried three days later at Long Horsley parish church cemetery. He was survived by his wife who, shocked by his death, died on 11 May of the same year. 


@@@@@


doc= 5776


Cockburn, William, of Henderland (d. 1530), criminal, enjoyed a laird's status in the Scottish borders, holding the twenty-pound land of Henderland and Sunderland in Peeblesshire and Selkirkshire, with tower and chapel. He preferred, however, to make his living from theft, blackmail, and collusion with Englishmen during the minority of James V. During 1518 and 1519 he was warded, and released only when information that his tenants were being attacked reached the government. He was to re-enter at three days' notice, with Malcolm, Lord Fleming, standing cautioner. Cockburn none the less continued his notorious thieving and evaded capture until his arrest in March 1530. On 16 May that year a convention of the nobility took place in Edinburgh. On the same day James V put many border surname chiefs into ward and ordered Cockburn, already imprisoned, to be executed by beheading. The king clearly wanted to make an example of border thieves as he executed the so-called 'king of thieves', Adam Scott of Tushielaw, on 18 May and also executed many Armstrongs in the following July. 
A tombstone at Henderland commemorating Piers Cockburn and his wife, Marjory, has been associated with William Cockburn, but there is no evidence to suggest that he was brought back from Edinburgh for burial 'sans tete'. On these and other grounds William Cockburn's link with the ballad 'The Lament of the Border Widow' remains highly questionable. One of the most eloquent of the border ballads, 'The Lament' depicts a widow's anguish at a king who 'brake my bower, and slew my knight'. The family's disgrace leaves her without servants, so she is forced to bury him alone. '
I digg'd a grave, and laid him in, 

And happ'd him with the sod sae green. 
(Scott)' This widow perhaps symbolizes the reality of life for well-born women in the Anglo-Scottish borders when their husbands fell foul of the law, but she cannot have been Mrs Cockburn. In 1532 James V granted Cockburn's estate to James Fleming, brother of the aforesaid Lord Fleming -- a move that undoubtedly left Cockburn's family destitute. 


@@@@@


doc= 5777


Cockburn, William (1669-1739), physician, about whose early life nothing is known, proceeded MA at Edinburgh on 9 July 1688. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' erroneously described him as a son of Sir William Cockburn of Ryslaw. His name occurs in the register of the University of Leiden as a student of medicine on 29 May 1691, he being then in his twenty-third year. While at Leiden he attended the lectures of his fellow Scot Archibald Pitcairne, and was strongly influenced by Pitcairne's combination of iatromechanism and Newtonian matter theory. Cockburn did not take a degree at Leiden, and returned to Britain about 1693. In that year he published his translation of Walter Harris's 'De morbis acutis infantum' (1689), describing himself as 'W.C. M.S.', and in the preface praised the medicine of Thomas Sydenham. He dedicated the book to the countess of Roxburghe, alluding to his own 'particular ties' to her. The nature of these ties remains unknown, but Cockburn appears to have had a powerful patron, possibly Lady Roxburghe's father, the marquess of Tweeddale. On 2 April 1694 Cockburn became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in London (he never got promotion in the college hierarchy), and about the same time he was appointed by the Admiralty board as physician to the Blue squadron. This was a sought-after position highly dependent upon patronage. His first book, 'Oeconomia corporis animalis', was published a year later, dedicated to Admiral Sir William Bridgeman. It was a sort of scheme of general pathology, or first principles of physic. Pitcairne's influence is evident in its mechanistic explanations, although his name is not mentioned. 
In 1696 Cockburn brought out a small work entitled 'An account of the nature, causes, symptoms and cure of the distempers that are incident to seafaring people'. This was a record of his two years' experience as ship's doctor on the home station. Among other things it points out that chills are due to the suppression of the perspiration, and it contains remarks on the cause of scurvy: the 'boatswain's favourites', he pointed out, suffered much more from scurvy than the men set to do the hard work, a diet of salt beef and pork requiring active exercise to carry it off. He had no notion, however, of the importance of citrus and other foods rich in vitamin C. Scurvy was not effectually banished from the fleet until Gilbert Blane's rules of victualling in 1795, and Cockburn was inclined to despise the ignorance of those who, 'at the name of scurvy, fly to scurvy-grass, water-cresses, and horse-radishes, but to what advantage may be easily understood by our foregoing theory'. He was sensible enough to see that land scurvy, which the dogmatists of the 'scorbutic constitution' discovered under many guises, 'is not so very frequent as it is commonly imagined, and that so-called cases of it are something else'. 
Through his connection with the fleet Cockburn was able to introduce his secret remedy for dysentery, which made his fortune. The account given (pamphlet on a 'Medicine Against Looseness', by La Touche, 1757) is that in July 1696 he was dining on board one of the ships in the company of the Admiral Lord Berkeley of Stratton, and captains Meese and Beaumont when, after some compliments to him, it was remarked that 'there was nothing farther wanting but a better method of curing fluxes'. Cockburn replied that he thought he could be of use. The trial was made next day upon about a hundred patients on board Captain Meese's ship, the 'Sandwich', and proved brilliantly successful. The result was reported to the Admiralty board by Sir Cloudesley Shovell, who was directed to purchase a quantity of the electuary for the use of the Mediterranean squadron. Cockburn supplied the fleet with it for forty years, and it was probably in use also in the army on foreign service. William III conveyed his thanks to the inventor for a benefit of national importance, and Louis XIV tried to buy the secret for the French fleet through his ambassador in London, but war broke out in 1702 and put an end to the negotiations. Its fame brought Cockburn crowds of private patients suffering with fluxes of various kinds. During the spring of 1700 the admiral asked the Royal College of Physicians to comment on Cockburn's suggestion that all naval surgeons should record on a chart the exact symptoms of the dangerous fevers in the West Indies, and the effects of the remedies he proposed. After investigating, the eminent Walter Charleton reported that 'the Experientes and observations brought by the Dr. as the sole Ground, upon which he builds his new Method of treating the sick, seems to us neither authentick enough to engage our Belief, nor Consistent with those made by other physicians in the same countries. (Cook, 24)' The college suggested that the Admiralty should find other cures. 
Cockburn also sought fame as a natural philosopher. In 1699 he published an article in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' which attempted to explain, in mechanical terms, the action of a blister in curing a fever. He had been elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1696. On 26 March 1697 he was granted the degree of MD by King's College, Aberdeen. By about 1700 he had settled in London and begun building a successful career as a physician. He lived for many years on St James's Street, near Piccadilly. Cockburn seems to have kept his connection with the navy for many years, and in 1731 he became physician to Greenwich Hospital. When Swift went to London in September 1710 on the three years' visit chronicled in the 'Journal to Stella', the first of his many recorded dinners was with Cockburn. The latter is often mentioned in the 'Journal', once as 'honest Dr. Cockburn', and another time as having 'generally such a parcel of Scots with him'. Although Swift was more in the company of Drs Freind, Arbuthnot, and Garth, it was Cockburn whom he chose as his medical adviser. Cockburn possessed a large practice, some of it brought to him by his secret remedy for fluxes, and some of it doubtless by his other writings (in which the treatment was also vaguely given at first), on the 'Virulente gonorrhoeae' (1717) and on the 'Symptoms, Nature, and Cure of a Gonorrhoea' (2nd edn 1715). The latter was well thought of, went through four editions, and was translated abroad. In the same class of writings was his 'Account of the Nature and Cure of Looseness' (2nd edn 1710). His other writings were pamphlets connected more or less directly with his secret remedy. One of these, 'The Present Uncertainty in the Knowledge of Medicines' (1703), was a letter to the physicians in the commission for sick and wounded seamen, in which he remonstrates with them for their dogmatic narrowness of view. Another, 'The Danger of Improving Physick' (1730), is a well-written rejoinder to the cabal of academical physicians who opposed him on account of his secret remedy, and particularly to John Freind, who turned against him in his 'History of Physick' (1725) after being on good terms with him for twenty years. 'The most learned physicians', Cockburn says, 'are always most subject to obloquy, on account of their superior knowledge and discoveries'. 
Cockburn's first wife, whom he married in 1698, was Mary de Baudisson (1663/4-1728), a widow, who died on 5 July 1728, aged sixty-four. On 5 April 1729 he married Lady Mary Fielding, eldest daughter of Basil, fourth earl of Denbigh. According to the contemporary gossip he found the latter, who was his patient, in tears at the prospect of having to leave London owing to her reduced circumstances, whereupon the doctor said, 'Madam, if fifty thousand pounds and the heart of an old man will console you, they are at your service'. Cockburn is described as 'an old, very rich quack', and the lady as 'very ugly'. He died in November 1739, aged seventy, and was buried on 24 November in the middle aisle of Westminster Abbey. His will was written on 4 December 1738, probably after the death of his second wife, since she is not mentioned. It was proved on 12 December 1739. The executors were Richard Shelley and James Cockburn, secretary to the duke of Argyll. Cockburn left several small bequests to various relatives, revealing his role as a family benefactor: to his cousin Helen Cockburn, Lady Allenbank, he left 100 guineas and his wives' diamonds, and he left $200 to another cousin, Ann Cant, and her niece Amelia White. He forgave the debts of two other cousins. He left the bulk of his estate to Alexander Cockburn of Langtoun, whose relationship to the doctor was not specified. This included an estate at Stockton in co. Durham, which was leased for three lifetimes from the bishop of Durham. Cockburn died a wealthy man, although the exact extent of his wealth is not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 5778


Cockburn, Sir William, of that ilk, sixth baronet (1769-1835), army officer, was the only son of Colonel James Cockburn, afterwards fifth baronet (1723-1809), and his wife, Laetitia Little (1732/3-1804), daughter of Luke Little of co. Carlow and heir of the Rossiter family in Ireland. According to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', Cockburn was born 'in a camp'. He became an ensign in the 37th regiment in 1778. He was promoted lieutenant in 1779, and after serving through the latter part of the American War of Independence became captain in the 92nd on 27 April 1783. His regiment was disbanded at the end of the war, and he went on half pay until 1790, when he received a company in the 73rd regiment, then in India. On 1 January 1791, in Madras, he married, as her third husband, Eliza Anne Davis ('nee' Creutzer; first married name Clifton) (died 1829) and they had a son and a daughter. He served through the last campaigns of the First Anglo-Mysore War in the western army, under Sir Robert Abercromby, and when the two armies met before Seringapatam he was appointed acting engineer, and made a valuable survey which was afterwards published. 
Cockburn was promoted major in 1794 and lieutenant-colonel on 1 January 1798, and in 1802 he returned to Britain, and exchanged to the lieutenant-colonelcy of the 4th regiment. In 1804 he was appointed inspecting field officer of volunteers in Ireland, and was promoted colonel on 25 April 1808, and major-general on 4 June 1811. On his father's death in 1809 he succeeded as sixth baronet, but seems to have been confused as to which branch of the Cockburn family he was heir to, and often called himself 'of Ryslaw' as well as or instead of 'of Cockburn'. In 1813 he was appointed inspecting general officer for the Severn district, and on 19 July 1821 he was promoted lieutenant-general. His first wife died in 1829, and in July 1834 he married Martha Honora Georgina, 'nee' Jervis, widow of Osborne Markham and great-niece of John Jervis, earl of St Vincent. In his later years he was a prominent supporter of the local charities of Bath, and was particularly active in the Society for the Relief of Occasional Distress, founded by Lady Elizabeth King. Cockburn died on 19 March 1835 at his house in Lansdowne Crescent, Bath. He was survived by his second wife, who died in 1865, and by his children, Sir William Sarsfield Rossiter Cockburn of that ilk, seventh baronet (1796-1858), and Katherine, wife of Edward Cludde, of Orleton, Shropshire. 


