@@@@@


doc= 39226


Ealhswith (d. 902), consort of Alfred, king of the West Saxons from 871 and of the Anglo-Saxons from 886, was the daughter of AEthelred Mucel, ealdorman of the 'Gaini' (presumably an old tribal group of the Mercians), and his wife, Eadburh, who, according to Alfred's biographer Asser, was a member of the Mercian royal family. She had a brother, an ealdorman named AEthelwulf, whose appearance in a charter of 897 confirms the siblings' Mercian royal pedigree ('AS chart.', S 1442). In 868 she married Alfred (848/9-899), at that time apparently regarded as 'heir-apparent' to his brother AEthelred, king of the West Saxons ('r'. 865-71). The Mucel who appears in two charters of that year in company with West Saxon dignitaries was probably her father ('AS chart.', S 340 and 1201). 
In marked and curious contrast to her husband, the best-attested of all the Anglo-Saxon kings, Ealhswith is very obscure in the sources. Asser never names her explicitly, and, in accordance with what he says was the West Saxon custom of the time, she was apparently never called 'queen'; nor does she appear as a witness to any of Alfred's extant charters. The couple had three daughters and two sons who survived into adulthood. Their first-born child, AEthelflaed (d. 918), married AEthelred (d. 911), ealdorman and ruler of the Mercians from at least 883. Another daughter, AEthelgifu, was made abbess of his own foundation of Shaftesbury by her father. AElfthryth married Baudouin (II), count of Flanders, at some time after 893. Of the two sons, Edward (the Elder) (d. 924) succeeded his father as king of the Anglo-Saxons. The youngest child, AEthelweard, was well educated at the royal court, received generous provision in his father's will, attested several of his brother's charters, and died on 16 October, probably in 920. 
It was probably on her own initiative, and perhaps after Alfred's death in 899, that Ealhswith founded the convent of St Mary at Winchester, usually called Nunnaminster. The bounds of her land in Winchester, which survive in a tenth-century addition to an earlier prayer book which came into Nunnaminster's possession, probably describe the site of the foundation, to the east of Edward's New Minster, founded in 901. The New Minster's 'Liber vitae', compiled 'c'.1030, describes her as Nunnaminster's builder. Construction was probably not completed until 'c'.908, if the tower which (according to the chronicler AEthelweard) Archbishop Plegmund then dedicated belonged to Nunnaminster. 
In his will ('AS chart.', S 1507), Alfred left to his wife the highly symbolic bequest of three key estates: Edington (Wiltshire), the site of one great victory over the vikings; Lambourn (Berkshire), at or near the site of another -- Ashdown; and Wantage (Berkshire), his birthplace. These were all part of Alfred's 'bookland', which, in order to ensure that they remained in the king's family, could be purchased by any of his male kin during Ealhswith's lifetime, and would pass to his direct male descendants on her death: all three were still royal estates in the tenth century. Ealhswith died on 5 December 902, and was buried, with Alfred, by their son Edward, in the newly consecrated New Minster, Winchester. She is commemorated in two manuscripts of an early tenth-century metrical calendar as 'the true and dear lady of the English' (McGurk, 110), finally but posthumously sharing the honour so recently won by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 39230


Ecgwine (d. 717?), bishop of Worcester, is a figure of whom almost nothing is known. He is not mentioned by Bede or in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'. The early twelfth-century historian John of Worcester recorded that Ecgwine succeeded Oftfor as the third bishop of Worcester in 692; that a few years later he began to construct the monastery known as Evesham; and that he died on 30 December 717. The sources of John's information are unknown, and even the bare facts which he records are not beyond suspicion (it is uncertain, for example, that Oftfor died in 692; he may have died some years later, perhaps between 693 and 699). Ecgwine's name is recorded in the witness lists of seven charters issued between 692 and 717 (but not outside these dates), and he is named as beneficiary, on Evesham's behalf, of three others. Although none of these charters is authentic in its present form (and several are manifest forgeries), some seem to have an authentic basis, and may be considered broadly trustworthy. Depending on how much reliance one wishes to place on these various charters (and omitting the manifestly spurious ones), they reveal Ecgwine as an active promoter of Evesham's interests, building up a substantial endowment from royal and lay patronage, including estates at Ombersley, Stratford upon Avon, Abbots Morton, Oldberrow, and Droitwich. Ecgwine's last datable act as bishop was his appearance at the council of 'Clofesho' in July 716. 
It was approximately three centuries later that the first life of Ecgwine was composed ('c'.1016) by Byrhtferth, a monk of Ramsey who may at the time have been resident at Evesham. By the early eleventh century all memory of Ecgwine had passed away, and there was very little documentary record of his bishopric. In order to compose his 'Vita sancti Ecgwini' Byrhtferth was obliged to resort to hagiographical fiction. The life is set out in four parts, corresponding to the four ages of man, and Ecgwine is described proceeding through the seven ecclesiastical grades and then being appointed bishop of Worcester in the days of King AEthelred of the Mercians (675-704). As a result of his stern preaching to the people of his diocese (Byrhtferth puts the text of Bede's 'De die judicii' into Ecgwine's mouth), Ecgwine was forced by the people to leave his see and go to Rome. Before setting off, he shackled himself and threw the key to his shackles into the River Avon; when he reached Rome, one of his companions caught a fish in the Tiber which miraculously was found to contain the key to the shackles (Byrhtferth has here adapted an international folk-tale widely attested in western literature from Herodotus onwards). When he returned home, Ecgwine founded the monastery of Evesham on a site revealed to him in a vision; he subsequently went to Rome with kings Offa of the East Saxons and Coenred of the Mercians (whose trip is described by Bede, though Ecgwine is nowhere mentioned) in order to secure a papal privilege for his foundation. On his return, the privilege was endorsed at a synod (otherwise unrecorded) at Alcester under the presidency of Archbishop Berhtwald (died 731). Byrhtferth takes the opportunity here to list some of the estates in Evesham's endowment, including Stratford and Twyford; his source for this information was apparently charters preserved at Evesham, spurious or otherwise. The life closes with various miracles which took place at tenth-century Evesham through the divine agency of St Ecgwine. 
Byrhtferth's account of Ecgwine's life is largely fiction, but it served as the basis for all subsequent hagiography, including a life by Dominic of Evesham written 'c'.1100, an anonymous recension of Dominic's life compiled in the early twelfth century and known as the Digby-Gotha recension, and a further recension of Dominic's text by Thomas of Marlborough (died 1236) in the early thirteenth century. A Middle English verse life of St Ecgwine is included in the popular south English legendary, produced at Worcester between 1270 and 1285. These various works supply no further information about the historical Ecgwine, but give some indication of the extent to which his cult had grown, particularly at Evesham and in its environs. From the eleventh century onwards, St Ecgwine's deposition is recorded in liturgical calendars (particularly from Evesham and Worcester) against 30 December, and his name is frequently invoked in litanies of the saints. 


@@@@@


doc= 39234


Erik of Hlathir, earl of Northumbria (fl. 995-1023), magnate, was the son of Hakon Sigurdson, earl ('jarl') of Hlathir, or Lade (now part of Trondheim), in Norway. He married Gytha, daughter of Swein Forkbeard, king of the Danes, and was thus a brother-in-law of King Cnut. 
After the death of Harald Grafeld 
(Harald Greycloak; 'c'.970)
the earls of Hlathir were the most powerful chieftains in Norway. Their court was a centre for the production of skaldic verse; Erik, poorly documented in England, was a famed warrior in northern Europe. In the Scandinavian power struggles of the late tenth century Hakon and his sons, Erik and Swein, often allied with the Danes. By the 990s these struggles involved the prestige and profit of raids on England. In 995 the successful adventurer, Olaf Tryggvason, backed by the English king, AEthelred, returned from England to take the Norwegian throne. Hakon was killed and Erik and his brother went into exile, Erik taking refuge with Swein of Denmark. Now if not before he raided widely around the Baltic, until in 999 he joined the Swedish-Danish alliance that defeated and removed Olaf at the battle of Svold. He and his brother then ruled western Norway, acknowledging some Danish lordship. This military and political background made him an obvious companion to his brother-in-law Cnut in the conquest of England in 1015-16. English and Scandinavian sources agree on his significance in the important siege and fighting around London in these years. His involvement in the famous battle at Ringmere in 1010 is found in Scandinavian sources alone and is debatable. 
Erik was one of Cnut's most important followers in England after 1016. After the murder of Uhtred of Bamburgh, earl of Northumbria, he was made earl 'as Uhtred was' according to the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', although Durham sources record Eadulf's succeeding his brother Uhtred. Northumbria was often divided along the Tees in the later tenth century, though Erik may have had overall lordship with Eadulf holding of him. Erik was frequently at court from 1018 to 1023, and is alleged to have been instrumental in the death of Eadric Streona, ealdorman of Mercia, in 1017. He may have been Cnut's trusted companion, but he did not become the most important earl until Thorkell's outlawry in 1021. Erik had lost power in Norway to Olaf Haraldsson during the English campaign, whereas Thorkell remained an independent force. Raids on England had meshed with and been driven by Scandinavian politics. The sparse sources contain no hint of the likely cross-currents and tensions among men like Erik, Thorkell, and Cnut in these years. Erik disappeared in 1023, by which date he must have been forty, if not considerably older. William of Malmesbury has him driven back to Scandinavia into exile. Cnut's subsequent favour to his son Hakon argues against his father's disgrace; Hakon was an earl in the west midlands and Cnut's regent in Norway between 1028 and 1030, and may have been married to Cnut's niece. But the king's favour could equally have been an attempt to limit the repercussions of Erik's fall. Scandinavian sources contain no hint of Erik's exile; they place his death in England, due to loss of blood after an operation. 


@@@@@


doc= 39235


Elfoddw (d. 809), archbishop of Gwynedd, is known for three things. First, in 768, he is said by the 'Annales Cambriae' to have brought about the adherence of the Britons to the Roman method of calculating Easter. He is there described as 'a man of God' which implies that the annalist perceived him as saintly, and perhaps also, though less certainly, that his reputation for holiness played some part in persuading the Britons to abandon their traditional paschal cycle. This is the last known change from the customs adopted by the Britons, probably in the fifth century, which they had spread to the Irish, and which were then handed on by the Irish to the Picts and the Northumbrians. It is not known, however, when the Bretons and Cornishmen adopted the Roman Easter. The change brought about by Elfoddw was not the first among his people. Bede says that some of the Britons conformed to the Roman Easter having been persuaded by Adomnan about 690. These were presumably the Britons of Strathclyde, with whom Iona had good relations, as shown by Adomnan's life of Columba. Bede's information also indicates that the churches of Strathclyde were not directly subject to Iona, since those that were subject apparently did not change at that date. 
The second notable thing about Elfoddw is the description of him in his obit as 'archbishop of Gwynedd' ('Annales Cambriae', s.a. 809). He is not claimed to be 'archbishop of Britannia' -- that is, of Wales -- as one might have expected, given some of the models for such a claim: both Kildare and Armagh had, in the seventh century, claimed to be the sees of archbishops of all Ireland. Their claims were probably modelled on the position given to Theodore of Tarsus (died 690), namely archbishop of the island of Britain. As Theodore was archbishop of one island, so might Kildare, or Armagh, provide an archbishop of the other island. A British response to such claims might have taken the form of an archbishopric of Britannia (meaning Wales), yet Elfoddw was only said to be archbishop of Gwynedd. This makes it more likely that the model was the English situation after 735, when there was one archbishopric for the northern English at York and another for the southern English at Canterbury. Elfoddw's archbishopric of Gwynedd may have been the northern archbishopric of Britannia. Asser (died 909) avers without any apparent sense of stating something remarkable that his kinsman Nobis of St David's was archbishop. There may thus have been a southern archbishopric of Dyfed alongside a northern archbishopric of Gwynedd. 
It is usually said that these claims must have been remote from reality because no Welsh bishop could have received a pallium from Rome or had his title of archbishop conferred by the pope. This argument rests on anachronistic assumptions. Theodore's archbishopric represented an extension to the west of a position previously set out, without any reference to the papacy, by the emperor Justinian ('r'. 527-65): the archbishop or patriarch was to be the ecclesiastical head of an imperial diocese, such as Egypt or Britain, while the metropolitan bishop corresponded to an imperial province and the bishop to a city and its territory. A different, probably consciously anti-imperial, scheme is set out by Isidore of Seville (570-636) in his 'Etymologiae': patriarchs were only for apostolic sees, such as Alexandria or Rome (he carefully does not include Constantinople), while below the patriarch come archbishops, metropolitan bishops, and the ordinary bishops of cities. Neither Isidore's patriarchs nor his archbishops are said to have required papal pallia: as the register of Gregory the Great shows, pallia were given on occasion to ordinary bishops; they were not given to those metropolitan bishops in Illyricum who were traditionally known as archbishops. The link between the English metropolitan bishoprics and the papal pallium was created by the special papal sponsorship of the English mission; its link with an English archbishopric was created by the particular office conferred upon Theodore and his immediate successors. The elevation of York to an archbishopric was in substance a reversion to the earlier Gregorian scheme for Britain of two metropolitan bishoprics, but with the addition of the title of archbishop. There was no reason why an archbishop of Gwynedd should have been required to obtain a papal pallium, apart from the fact that, in the Gregorian scheme, all Britain was to be subject to his two metropolitan bishops. No doubt the claim would have been rejected at Canterbury and at Rome, but just the same problems were caused by the political impossibility of subjecting the Picts to an archbishop based at York. 
The third guise in which Elfoddw appears is in the 'Nennian preface' added in the tenth century to the 'Nennian' or Cambridge recension of the 'Historia Brittonum', itself composed in 829-30. This claims that Nennius was a disciple of Elfoddw. While chronologically not impossible, this claim cannot be corroborated by evidence of ninth-century date. 


@@@@@


doc= 39239


Eorcenberht (d. 664), king of Kent, was the son of his predecessor Eadbald (d. 640) and Ymmae, or Emma (died 642), who may have been the daughter of a powerful Frankish aristocrat named Erchinoald. The first element of Eorcenberht's name is Frankish (it is identical to that of Erchinoald), and he gave Frankish names to his second son Hlothhere, and to his daughters, Eormenhild and Eorcengota (he sent the latter across the channel to be a nun in the monastery of Faremoutiers, near Meaux). Eorcenberht succeeded his father in 640 and was the first English king to order the destruction of pagan idols in his kingdom; he also used his royal authority to enforce the keeping of the Lenten fast in Kent. Little is known of the secular events of the reign, apart from a series of marriage alliances with other royal families. Eorcenberht himself married Seaxburh (d. c.700), the eldest daughter of King Anna of the East Angles, and their daughter Eormenhild became the wife of King Wulfhere of Mercia. In addition, the powerful King Oswiu of Northumbria married Eorcenberht's first cousin, Eanflaed, who had been brought up in Kent and with whom he was on good terms. This network of alliances may have afforded Kent some protection against aggressors. Eorcenberht died on 14 July 664, the same day as Deusdedit, archbishop of Canterbury; it is possible that both were victims of the great plague which swept Britain and Ireland in that year. Eorcenberht was probably buried alongside his father in St Mary's Church in the monastery of St Peter's and St Paul's (later St Augustine's), Canterbury. His widow, Seaxburh, eventually became abbess of the monastery at Ely, founded by her sister AEthelthryth; Kentish tradition also connects her with the foundation of Minster in Sheppey. 
Eorcenberht's successor was his son 


@@@@@


doc= 39240


Sherborn, Charles Davies (1861-1942), geologist and scientific bibliographer, was born on 30 June 1861 at 5 Gunter Grove, Chelsea, London, the eldest child of Charles William Sherborn (1831-1912), a metal-engraver and etcher, and his wife, Hannah Simpson Wait 
('nee' Davies; died 1922)
. He was educated at local schools from the age of three, but left St Mark's College School, Chelsea, at fourteen in order to work in a fashionable stationers. (Sherborn always maintained that this experience of the book trade was invaluable for his later bibliographical work.) During 1884-5, when on the continent, he availed himself of the opportunity to attend lectures and meet distinguished zoologists and geologists. Over the next decade, employed in various clerical positions throughout London, he pursued his interests in books, antiquities, and natural history. Access to the exhibits and libraries of London's museums enabled Sherborn to further his knowledge of many subjects. 
As a young man, Sherborn accompanied many distinguished geologists on their excursions. In the 1880s he was engaged by T. Rupert Jones to assist in the preparation of material for monographs on Tertiary Entomostraca (1889) and Crag Foraminifera (1895-7). This grounding in scientific methods, together with his interest in natural history, persuaded Sherborn to seek a career in science. His association with Rupert Jones had other benefits apart from their joint publications of 1887, 1888, and 1889; it resulted in further introductions to many geologists. He assisted William Topley in editing the 'Geological Record' for 1884-5 and then became editor himself for the 1885-8 volume. In June 1888 Sherborn began his long association with the British Museum (Natural History) when Dr Henry Woodward engaged him to mount and prepare fossils in the collections of Sloane, Konig, Sowerby, and Phillips. Between 1892 and 1899 he served on the editorial committee of the critical monthly journal 'Natural Science'. 
With limited resources for fieldwork, Sherborn devoted his spare time to producing indexes and reference works. 'A Bibliography of the Foraminifera' (1888) was followed by 'An Index to the Genera and Species of Foraminifera' (1890), both published in America. He then collaborated with Arthur Smith Woodward in compiling 'A Catalogue of British Fossil Vertebrata' (1890), and he was asked to catalogue the collections and library of the Geological Society of London. He then became involved in sorting the papers of Sir Richard Owen for the eventual biography by Revd R. Owen (1894). Between 1894 and 1908 he undertook a survey of the zones of the White Chalk of the English coast with Arthur Walton Rowe and was largely responsible for their publication. Inspired by the 'Index Kewensis' Sherborn undertook to provide a complete list of all generic and trivial names given to recent and fossil animals from the time of Linnaeus, together with references to the date and place of their publication. 'The Index animalium, 1758-1850' became the basis for zoological nomenclature and was compiled single-handed over forty-three years. The first volume (1758-1800) was published in 1902 and the ten volumes 1800-1850, published under the auspices of the British Museum (Natural History), were completed in 1933. During its preparation, Sherborn published numerous bibliographic papers that verified the dates and history of many works and periodicals. This information was incorporated by B. B. Woodward into his 'Catalogue of Books... in B. M. (N. H.)' (1903-15). 
Sherborn joined the Geologists' Association in 1883, and became a fellow of the Geological Society (1887) and the Zoological Society (1890), and an associate of the Linnean Society (1912). He was made a life member of both the Zoological Society (1907) and the Geologists' Association (1924) for his services. In 1890 he was awarded the Geological Society's Lyell fund for his bibliographical work and received the Foulerton award from the Geologists' Association in 1922. In 1931 he received an honorary DSc from Oxford University. After helping to found the Society for the Bibliography of Natural History in 1936, he became its first president. Sherborn particularly enjoyed his membership of several select dining clubs of these professional societies for the regular opportunity they gave for scientific discussions. 
By living a relatively spartan life, Sherborn was able to collect books, Byzantine bronze coins, and antiquities of all kinds. His deep concern that these objects should rest with 'those who could best appreciate them' (Norman, 'Nature', 150, 1942, 146) led to numerous donations to institutions. He also ensured that the library of the British Museum (Natural History) acquired many of the works it lacked. His encyclopaedic knowledge, wit, and generosity were widely acknowledged. Like his alleged antipathy to women (especially their attendance at society meetings), his later gruff and brusque manner was essentially a cloak that could be shed when its protection was unnecessary. 
After his health declined in 1938, Sherborn's attendance at the British Museum (Natural History) lessened, but even in the 1940s he maintained a weekly visit. He collapsed in his bath following a heart attack on the morning of 22 June 1942 and died that afternoon at his home, 49 Peterborough Road, Fulham, London. His remains were cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 26 June. He was unmarried and was survived by two brothers. 


@@@@@


doc= 39241


Alexander, William (1826-1894), novelist and journalist, was born on 12 June 1826 at the farm of Westerhouses, Rescivet, in the parish of Chapel of Garioch, Aberdeenshire. He was the eldest son of the ten children of James Alexander (1789-1856), blacksmith and tenant farmer, and his wife, Anne Wilson of Old Rayne (1802-1889). He received the normal course of instruction for a country boy at the parish school of Daviot, but the real education of this deeply cerebral man began within the pioneering educational self-help movement then spreading throughout the north-east of Scotland. 
Alexander's enthusiastic beginnings in the family farming tradition ended abruptly when, at about the age of twenty, he lost a leg in an accident. During the long recuperation period he taught himself shorthand and became active in the Aberdeenshire and Banffshire Mutual Instruction Union. This won him the friendship and support of William McCombie of Cairnballoch, political economist and moral philosopher, and one of the most impressive autodidacts in Scotland in a generation which included Robert Chambers and Hugh Miller. McCombie gave Alexander a thorough grounding in 'the leading philosophical tendencies of the age' and a job on his newspaper, a struggling radical weekly called the 'Aberdeen Free Press'. Alexander was the main support of his late father's young family, and he was forty-one when he married Anne Allan, a schoolteacher, at Oldmachar, Aberdeen, on 22 May 1867. They had no children. 
McCombie was largely an absentee editor, so that Alexander effectively ran the 'Free Press' for many years before he officially succeeded to the editorial chair in 1870. He was one of the pioneering generation of professional journalists that created the Scottish popular press after the repeal of the 'Stamp Act' in 1855. A lifetime of reporting politics at city and parliamentary level nourished his fascination with power. He was effective in gaining access for the press to the centres of decision making, and was intimately familiar with every aspect of newspaper work, from agriculture -- in which he was an authority in his own right -- to fine art. His shorthand was renowned, and he was famous for his ability to reproduce people vividly and economically on the page. His professional achievements were recognized when he was made vice-president of the Institute of Journalists. Alexander was active in liberal politics in the north-east of Scotland and also in the civic life of the city of Aberdeen. He was a council member of the New Spalding Club and the Aberdeen Philosophical Society, and was active in many projects for the benefit of the city. In 1887 he was awarded an honorary LLD by the University of Aberdeen. 
As a writer, Alexander's most famous work is the novel 'Johnny Gibb of Gushetneuk', begun as a serial in the 'Free Press' on 28 September 1869. It was published in book form in 1871 and went through more than twenty editions thereafter, seldom being out of print. The novel long enjoyed a merely regional reputation because of the radical demotic Scots in which it is written, as, for example, in the famous opening apostrophe: 'Heely, heely, Tam, ye glaiket stirk -- ye hinna on the hin shelvin o' the cairt. Fat hae ye been haiverin at min? That cauff saick'll be tint owre the back door afore we win a mile fae hame. See't yer belly ban' be ticht aneuch noo. Woo, lassie! Man, ye been makin' a hantle mair adee aboot blaikin that graith o' yours, an' kaimin the mear's tail, nor balancin' yer cairt, an' gettin' the things packit in till't. (W. Alexander, 'Johnny Gibb', 1871, 1)' It later came to be regarded as a classic of nineteenth-century Scottish fiction. A masterly study of power and its ramifications at every social level, the work deals with the struggle to control the land and the impact of the great disruption of 1843, the most dramatic event of nineteenth-century Scottish history. It centres on the eponymous hero, Johnny Gibb, tenant farmer of Gushetneuk in Aberdeenshire, a man conceived in epic Courbet-like proportions, who leads the successful revolt of the small farmers against established authority in politics and religion. The novel takes a revolutionary view of the centrality and significance of the common man, and offers a radical solution to the crisis in land ownership, being influenced by John Stuart Mill as well as by contemporary French socialist thinking. 
It was not Alexander's intention that 'Johnny Gibb' should appear in book form at all; it was deliberately addressed to a plebeian audience, the high-quality Scottish common readers among whom he himself had grown up, and it was only at the insistence of friends that it was launched into the heavily Anglicized middle-class book market. Because the market for books within the United Kingdom was at that time dominated by England, Scottish novelists, from Scott to Barrie and beyond, had to accommodate themselves to this fact, and present a view of Scotland and Scottish life that fitted English prejudices and expectations. Some of Alexander's other writings were also published in book form -- his short-story collection 'Life amongst my Ain Folk' (1875) and the brilliant social history 'Notes and Sketches Illustrative of Northern Rural Life' (1877). 
Most of Alexander's work, including a further five novels, remained until the mid-1980s in the obscurity of the newspaper columns in which it had originally been published, so that his full range and power only then began to be appreciated. The 'lost' novels (two of which, 'The Laird of Drammochdyle' and 'My Uncle the Baillie', were published in book form in 1986 and 1995 respectively) deal powerfully with city as well as country life, with the plight of the urban poor as well as with farmers and cotters; they draw upon a complex of advanced social, economic, and scientific theory, and taken together form an ambitious imaginative sequence covering more than a century of social and economic change. 
Alexander's work demonstrates the presence of a sophisticated literary realism in a tradition previously dismissed as having dwindled into kailyard sentimentality. It was central to the re-evaluation of nineteenth-century Scottish literature that took place in the last decades of the twentieth century. Alexander died of pneumonia at his home, 3 Belvidere Street, Aberdeen, on 19 February 1894 and was buried on 24 February in the city's Nellfield cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 39242


Ali, (Chaudhri) Muhammad (1905-1980), prime minister of Pakistan, 1955-6, was born on 15 July 1905 in Nangalambia village, Jullundur district, Punjab province, India. His father was Chaudhri Khairuddin, a farmer and member of the Arain community, his mother, Ayesha Khairdin; he was the third of five children, with two elder sisters and two younger brothers. Muhammad Ali was educated at Nangalambia high school and at the University of the Punjab, Lahore, where he gained an MSc. He had the reputation of being an outstanding student and for the year after he graduated taught chemistry at Islamia College, Lahore. 
In 1928 Muhammad Ali entered the Indian audit and accounts service. In 1932 he was seconded as accountant-general to Bahawalpur state, where he set the finances on a sound footing and planned the repayment of the state's debts to the government of India. In 1936 he joined the finance department of the government of India, rising to become deputy financial adviser on military finance in 1939, joint financial adviser on military finance and additional financial adviser, department of war and supply, in 1943, and financial adviser, department of war and supply, in 1945. He was only the second Indian to hold this last post. In 1942 he toured the war fronts in the Middle East, visiting El Alamein, Tobruk, and Iran. In 1945 he was a member of the Hydari commission to negotiate an agreement over items in short supply in the United Kingdom; in 1946 he was a member of the Indian lend-lease mission to the United States; and from June 1947 he was the member representing Pakistan, alongside H. M. Patel representing India, of the two-man steering committee which worked out the details of the division of the assets of British India. In this capacity he also worked with Patel as secretary to the partition committee, which presided over the whole process. 
From 1947 to 1956 Muhammad Ali was a major figure in the establishment of the Pakistani state. From August 1947 to October 1951 he was secretary-general of the civil service. Acutely aware of the enormous problems which confronted the government of the new state, he set out to establish a greater degree of administrative centralization than had existed in British India. His post was to be the key link between the cabinet and the bureaucracy; he appointed officials not just at the central but also at the provincial levels and was the decision maker in all matters to do with the administration. During these years he acquired considerable influence over the affairs of Pakistan. The prime minister, Liaquat Ali Khan, 'was very much under the influence of Chaudhri Mohammad Ali' (Khan, 40), noted the future martial law ruler Ayub Khan. Muhammad Ali left his own record of the difficulties of these founding years in his book 'The Emergence of Pakistan' (1967). 
After the assassination of Liaquat Ali Khan in October 1951 Muhammad Ali joined the cabinet as minister of finance and economic affairs. During the years 1952-4 he led Pakistan's delegation to the Commonwealth Finance Ministers' Conference and the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Over the same period he laid the foundations of Pakistan's planning commission. On 7 August 1954 he was elected leader of the Muslim League party in the constituent assembly. On 11 August 1955 he became prime minister, leading a coalition between the Muslim League and the United Front of East Pakistan. 
The crowning achievement of Muhammad Ali's premiership was to bring to an end the nine-year period of constitution making with the promulgation on 23 March 1956 of the first constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. He had been closely involved in the negotiations leading up to this moment. The key issue in this process was how to create a constitution in which the Bengalis, who formed the majority of the country's population, would not dominate the state at the centre. Under the so-called Muhammad Ali formula the five provinces of the west wing of Pakistan would agree to form one unit while the Bengali east wing would agree to a status of parity with the west. The first stage of the process was achieved with the passage of the 'One Unit Bill' on 14 October 1955, and the second with the adoption of a federal and parliamentary constitution for the country in March 1956. Unfortunately, Muhammad Ali was keener to make a constitution than to make one which would work. His constitution weighted power too much in favour of the president and exacerbated relations between centre and province, and province and province. On 8 September 1956, despairing of being able to govern, he resigned. No elections were held under the constitution. Politics became increasingly chaotic until, in October 1958, Ayub Khan declared martial law. 
Muhammad Ali was a dedicated constitutionalist and devoted himself to opposing the martial law regime. In 1958 he founded the Tahrik-I-Istehkam-I-Pakistan Party for the consolidation of Pakistan, the protection of the constitution, separate elections for non-Muslims, and the establishment of a welfare state. In 1959 he merged his party with the Nizam-i-Islam Party. In 1960 he stirred up much controversy through his widely publicized reply to Ayub Khan's constitutional commission, in which he urged the restoration of parliamentary democracy and expressed his fears that the presidential system would lead to dictatorship. In 1964 he played the leading part, along with Khwaja Nazimuddin, in bringing together utterly dissimilar parties in the Combined Opposition Party, which sought to restore parliamentary democracy and to remove within ten years the economic disparity between East and West Pakistan. The party's candidate for the presidency was Fatima Jinnah, the sister of the founder of Pakistan; despite having the full weight of the government machine ranged against her, she gave Ayub Khan a good fight in the elections of January 1965. 
In October 1969, six months after the fall of Ayub Khan, Muhammad Ali retired from politics. He became a deeply religious man, devoting much of his time to reciting the 'Koran' and reading Islamic literature. His wife, who survived him, was Razia Sultana, daughter of Dr Muhammad Jan of Amritsar. They had four sons and one daughter. He died at his home in Karachi from heart failure on 1 December 1980. 
Muhammad Ali was primarily an administrator. As a politician he had no following and did not seek one. He was of equable temperament and adopted a rational and pragmatic approach to issues. If his contemporaries assessed him as a major contributor to the consolidation of the Pakistani state, subsequent comment has tended to focus on his contributions, through both his successes and his failures, towards establishing the dominance of a military-bureaucratic elite in the governance of that state. 


@@@@@


doc= 39245


Virgno (d. 623) was the first abbot with the time to emerge out of Columba's shadow. He was also the first not to be of Cenel Conaill. To judge by what Irish law had to say at a later date about churches controlled by the kin of the 'patronus' (often, but not always, the founder), Virgno should have been a man of considerable ability. That he was very probably a Briton, presumably from what is now southern Scotland, makes his succession all the more remarkable. Iona later had an English bishop, Coeddi (died 712), but Virgno was the only non-Irish abbot. This is also what Iona remembered: he is described by Adomnan (writing of Columba's lifetime) as 'a young man of good ability, who later, by divine authority, was in charge of this church' (Adomnan, 3.19). Adomnan's story told of Virgno praying during the night and so becoming by accident the witness of a visitation of heavenly light upon Columba. Virgno is said to have told this story to his sister's son, a priest called Comman, after Columba's death, and Comman told it to Adomnan. Virgno's death was commemorated on 2 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 39253


Altounyan, Roger Edward Collingwood (1922-1987), physician, was born on 24 October 1922 at Aleppo, Syria, the only son and fourth of the five children of Ernest Haig Riddell Altounyan (1889-1962), surgeon, and his wife, Dora Susie (1886-1964), artist and daughter of William Gershom Collingwood (1854-1932), poet and secretary of John Ruskin, of Lanehead, Coniston. Ernest Altounyan had been educated at Rugby School, Cambridge University, and the Middlesex Hospital, London. Having qualified in 1915, he married and then served with the Royal Army Medical Corps in France, where he was severely wounded and won the Military Cross. After the war he and his wife went to the Altounyan Hospital, Aleppo, which had been founded by his Armenian father, Assadour Aram Altounyan. About 1955 Ernest Altounyan's fortunes changed; the hospital and his other property were confiscated and he was turned out of Syria. The family returned to Britain and subsisted on a small property in the Lake District inherited through Dora's family. 
Roger Altounyan's childhood was spent at Aleppo and at Lanehead, where Arthur Ransome, a family friend and neighbour, taught the children to sail their dinghy 'Swallow' on Lake Coniston. When Ransome later wrote his book 'Swallows and Amazons', Roger and his sisters were the originals for the characters of the Walker family. Ransome dedicated the first edition to them, though he later disclaimed the connection. 
Altounyan was educated at Abbotsholme School, Derbyshire, where his severe eczema made his life difficult and often unhappy. In 1941 he joined the RAF, where his ability as an instructor of bomber pilots was exceptional. He was appointed to the staff of a flying instructors' school in 1943 and was awarded the Air Force Cross for the dangerous work of developing low-level night-flying techniques. 
After the war Altounyan read medicine at Cambridge and the Middlesex Hospital, where he first developed the asthma which was to trouble him for the rest of his life. On 8 September 1951 he married Hella-Christel Schumacher ('b'. 1925); they had five children. Altounyan qualified in August 1952 and went to Aleppo to help his father, but in 1955 the political situation created increasing difficulties and he returned to the UK. In 1956 he obtained a post with Bengers, a small pharmaceutical company, at Holmes Chapel, Cheshire, which was developing compounds to relax bronchial smooth muscle and help asthmatic subjects. New compounds were being tested in sensitized guinea pigs for their ability to relax contracted smooth muscle induced by allergic reactions. Altounyan noted that one otherwise inactive compound significantly diminished this allergic reaction, and saw its potential for the treatment of human asthma. 
Because reactions in guinea pigs are clearly different from those in humans, studies on human asthma were essential. Altounyan therefore began careful studies on himself to see whether prior inhalation of the experimental compounds would prevent the development of attacks of asthma that he could induce by inhaling extracts of guinea-pig hair. Over the next seven years he gave himself more than 600 attacks, each lasting between two and three hours. The studies were done at Monsall Hospital, Manchester, where he also saw patients in his thrice-weekly outpatient clinics. 
Although Altounyan eventually obtained encouraging results, these were only in himself, not in the guinea pigs. An independent expert's opinion did not support him, and the project was closed down in 1961. But Altounyan persuaded his colleagues to continue, initially in secret until, in January 1965, they synthesized the highly active disodium cromoglycate with the required properties. A small clinical trial in severe asthmatics using an ingenious inhalation device invented by Altounyan gave such encouraging results that a pilot production plant was commissioned. But three further trials by acknowledged asthma experts were not supportive and it was feared that Altounyan had produced a monumental commercial failure. Fortunately, senior management saw for themselves the undoubted benefit in a group of patients and had no further doubts. The drug was eventually marketed worldwide as Intal -- interferes with allergy -- a major new treatment for asthma. Over the next twenty years, ignoring advice, Altounyan continued testing further new drugs on himself even though he was increasingly disabled with breathlessness, and eventually required continuous oxygen therapy. 
Altounyan lectured widely on asthma, with clarity and wit, and was admired and respected by colleagues throughout the world. His original and meticulous investigation of patients, which ahead of prevailing practice included provocation tests for bronchial hyper-reactivity, gave him an unsurpassed understanding of the nature and treatment of airways disease, as set out in his publication in 'Thorax' in 1964. For his outstanding work Altounyan was elected FRCP in 1982, and he received an honorary doctorate of Southampton University. His major contributions to medicine, benefiting countless asthmatics, were made at great personal cost, and many felt that he did not receive adequate recognition. 
Although blessed with an exceptionally clear and original mind, and possessing the leadership qualities so necessary for success, Altounyan had no personal ambition. His intellectual honesty was absolute so that at times he could be embarrassingly frank. He loved entertaining with Middle Eastern cuisine and copious amounts of home-made wine. He was an enthusiast who enjoyed life, but never more than when sailing 'Amazon' on his beloved Lake Coniston. He died at his home, 2 Stanneylands Road, Wilmslow, Cheshire, on 10 December 1987, and was buried at Wilmslow parish church four days later. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 39256


Hadrian (630x37-709), abbot of St Peter's and St Paul's, Canterbury, was a native of north Africa. The broad outlines of his career are known from Bede's 'Historia ecclesiastica' and may be supplemented by incidental references in the corpus of biblical commentaries and glosses which derive from the teaching of Hadrian (and his colleague Archbishop Theodore) at Canterbury. 
The exact date of Hadrian's birth is unknown, but apparently fell during the years 630 to 637 (he cannot in any case have been born later than 637, since he must have been at least thirty years old when he was offered the archbishopric of Canterbury by Pope Vitalian in 667). Bede describes Hadrian as an African by birth ('vir natione Afir') who was equally skilled in Greek and Latin. In combination these remarks imply that Hadrian originated in one of the eastern (Greek-speaking) provinces of Africa; and an observation preserved in the Canterbury biblical commentaries concerning the furnishings of houses in Libya further suggests that Hadrian originated in Libya Cyrenaica, perhaps in one of the cities of the Pentapolis. Hadrian is next recorded (by Bede) as the abbot of a 'monasterium Ni[s]idanum' in Campania near Naples. The identity of this monastery has caused difficulty (not least because manuscripts of Bede's 'Historia ecclesiastica' give the adjective in the form 'Hiridanum'; but the orthographical confusion is easily explained by letter forms of the presumed cursive half-uncial script of the document from which Bede derived his notice), but most scholars now agree that the monastery in question was located on the islet of Nisida in the Bay of Naples, now in the suburbs of Naples and joined to the mainland by a causeway. No trace of the monastery remains; but there is sound evidence that there were numerous other monasteries in the vicinity of Naples, and that, in the sixth century, particularly through the activities of Eugippius and his followers, there was a strong tradition of biblical scholarship. It may be assumed that the young Hadrian arrived in the bilingual community of Naples as a (Greek-speaking) refugee from the Arab invasions of Cyrenaica (which took place in 644-5), devoted himself there to biblical studies, and in due course became abbot of a small monastery on Nisida. 
In the mid-seventh century much of southern Italy was under the control of Lombard rulers, with the centre of their dukedom at Benevento; Naples and its environs, however, because they could be defended from the sea by the Byzantine fleet, were independent of Lombard dominion. It was in the attempt to recover the Lombard lands that the Byzantine emperor Constans II (641-68) invaded southern Italy in 662. Although the expedition was largely unsuccessful, Constans II made his base at Naples, where he spent most of 663 and from where he travelled to Rome to meet Pope Vitalian. Perhaps because Greek was his native language, Hadrian may have served as an interpreter for the emperor, and may have accompanied him on his journey to meet the pope; in any case, it is known from Bede that Hadrian was subsequently entrusted with two imperial embassies to Francia, perhaps for the purpose of raising Frankish support for the emperor's struggle against the Lombards. A few years later, in 667, the archbishop-elect of Canterbury (one Wigheard) died in Rome, and Pope Vitalian offered the archbishopric to Hadrian. Hadrian declined the offer, and suggested instead the name of one Andrew (then chaplain of a nunnery in the Naples area), who was deemed too ill to accept. On Hadrian's advice the post was subsequently offered to Theodore, then a monk in Rome, who accepted the appointment, with far-reaching consequences for the English church. The story (as related by Bede) shows that Hadrian was the trusted counsellor of the pope and the Byzantine emperor, then the two most powerful authorities in Christendom. 
One condition of the election of Theodore was that Hadrian should accompany the new archbishop to England. Hadrian and Theodore set off from Rome together on 27 May 668; but when they were passing through Francia, Hadrian was detained by the mayor of the palace, Ebroin, on the suspicion that he was carrying some embassy from the Byzantine emperor to the kings of Britain. Only when the suspicions were proved groundless was Hadrian allowed to pass. He arrived in England in 670, a year later than Theodore. On his arrival he was given the monastery of St Peter and St Paul at Canterbury (it had been a papal condition that Hadrian and his followers be suitably housed in England). Little is known of Hadrian's administrative activity as abbot; but it is noteworthy that he obtained from Pope Agatho ('r'. 678-81) a papal privilege for his monastery, and in other ways assisted Theodore in his administrative duties (soon after their arrival, for example, they visited every part of the archdiocese) and in giving instruction at their school in Canterbury to which, in Bede's words, they 'attracted a crowd of students into whose minds they daily poured the streams of wholesome learning' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 4.2), giving instruction in scripture as well as in metre, astronomy, and computus. A surviving letter from Aldhelm to Hadrian, preserved fragmentarily by William of Malmesbury, shows that Aldhelm was one of these Canterbury students. 
It is unfortunate that no writings have been preserved in Hadrian's name. He is frequently cited by name in the corpus of biblical commentaries and glosses which were based on his (and Theodore's) teaching at their Canterbury school, and these citations indicate that Hadrian, like Theodore, was concerned with literal (Antiochene) exposition of the biblical text. Various surviving pre-conquest manuscripts provide evidence of liturgical books brought to England by Hadrian. Pericope lists preserved in various Northumbrian manuscripts (including the Lindisfarne gospels) pertain to feasts and saints of Naples, and were presumably derived from a (now lost) gospel book of Neapolitan liturgical use brought from Naples by Hadrian; and the feasts of many Campanian saints commemorated in the Old English martyrology and in the calendar of St Willibrord apparently derive from a Campanian sacramentary brought by Hadrian. Hadrian's influence on early Anglo-Saxon liturgy, through the medium of these two lost books, was very considerable. 
According to Bede, Hadrian died in the forty-first year after he was sent to England by Pope Vitalian, hence in 709; he would have been between seventy-five and eighty years old at the time. He was buried in his own monastery, where his remains were translated and rehoused in the new buildings there in 1091. Later Anglo-Saxon liturgical calendars record his deposition on 9 January. An unprinted life of Hadrian, probably by the late eleventh-century hagiographer Goscelin, is preserved in two contemporary manuscripts; but the historical information contained in this life is derived wholly from Bede. 


@@@@@


doc= 39258


Amanullah Khan (1892-1960), amir of Afghanistan, was born on 2 June 1892 at Paghman, Kabul. He was the third son of Amir (King) Habibullah (died 1919), but his mother, Ulya Hazrat, was the 'first queen'. She used her considerable skill and intelligence to prepare him for the throne. However, Amanullah contracted two unhappy arranged marriages -- with Peri Gul in 1908 and Shahzada Khanum (died 1911) in 1910 -- while in his teens, at his mother's instigation. He also imbibed her Anglophobia. This was reinforced by the father of his third, and lifelong, wife, the talented Soraya Tarzi, whom he married in 1913. Mahmud Beg Tarzi, his father-in-law, had spent many years in exile and had been greatly influenced by the liberalism and anti-colonialism of the Young Turk movement. Tarzi encouraged Amanullah to support the so-called War Party of the Young Afghans during the First World War. The latter espoused pan-Islamic anti-British sentiments and were committed to modernizing Afghanistan. 
Amir Habibullah was more pro-British, although Afghanistan remained neutral during the war. Amanullah and Mahmud Beg Tarzi fell into disfavour because of their pro-Turkish sentiments, as did many of the Young Afghans, who were gaoled. These circumstances aroused suspicion following Habibullah's mysterious murder on 19 February 1919 during a hunting expedition from his winter court at Jalalabad. Amanullah, who had remained in Kabul, seized the throne from his uncle Nasrullah. He was backed by the army, the Young Afghans, and the powerful figures of Tarzi and Ulya Hazrat. 
Amanullah's position was strengthened by his assuming the mantle of Afghan nationalism in the Third Anglo-Afghan War, which he launched in May 1919. The peace treaty which followed the month-long conflict was a personal triumph: it guaranteed Afghanistan the right to control its own foreign affairs, something the British had denied to earlier amirs, who, in Lord Lytton's colourful phrase of 1877, were 'earthen pipkins' between the two iron pots of Britain and Russia. Amanullah was brought back to earth the following year by the disastrous hijrat episode. Indian Muslims began a religiously ordained flight to Afghanistan in response to British treatment of the defeated ruler of Turkey. By August 1920 about 50,000 'muhajirin' (refugees) had flocked to Afghanistan. The impoverished country could not absorb such an influx and had to expel the refugees. 
In 1919 Amanullah embarked on a number of reforms, which included the abolition of forced labour, the granting to women of freedom of choice in marriage, and anti-corruption and anti-smuggling measures, and culminated in the promulgation of Afghanistan's first constitution in 1923. These reforms alienated his country's traditional tribal and religious leaders. The Mangal tribes, led by the Lame Mullah, responded by rising in revolt in Khost in 1923-4. Amanullah made some concessions to religious pressure in its aftermath. However, following his return from a successful European visit with Queen Soraya in July 1928, he embarked on further ambitious reforms. These included such controversial measures as the requirement of Western dress at court functions, the discouragement of purdah, the changing of the day of rest from Friday to Thursday, and the reduction of allowances and subsidies for mullahs (clerics). Such reforms were just part of a vast programme which would have revolutionized Afghan society. Before many could be implemented Amanullah faced another serious tribal revolt in November 1928, led by the Shinwaris. Many mullahs supported it, including the influential hazrat of Shor Bazaar, one of the most important commercial centres of Kabul. The hazrat's Mojadidi family claimed the hereditary right to crown Afghan kings at their coronation. Opposition also emerged in the north from the Tajik leader Bach-i-Saqao, who briefly supplanted Amanullah and reigned as King Habibullah. 
Amanullah fled from Kabul on 14 January 1929 and abdicated in favour of his older half-brother Inayatullah. At Kandahar, Amanullah tried to rally Pashtun support against the Tajik ruler in Kabul, but his attempts were unavailing and he had to slip across the border to India. On 22 June 1929 he and most of his family sailed from Bombay to Europe. Exile in genteel poverty in Italy awaited him. Amanullah Khan never returned to Afghanistan before his death in Switzerland on 26 April 1960; he was buried in Jalalabad. 
Amanullah was a sincere individual given to emotion. Despite the claims of his critics, he was a pious Muslim who placed importance on the substance, rather than the outward trappings, of religion. The overthrow of the modernizing shah of Iran, Reza Shah Pehlavi, in 1979 questions a too easy assumption that Amanullah was a man before his time. His judgement, however, that without a centralizing and modernizing ideology Afghanistan would break up into its constituent tribal elements appears prescient in the light of late twentieth-century developments. 


@@@@@


doc= 39261


Hygbald (d. 802/3), bishop of Lindisfarne, took over the duties of the aged Cynewulf, his predecessor as bishop of Lindisfarne, at Cynewulf's retirement in 780. He was consecrated later (in 780 or 781), after Cynewulf's death. Nothing is known of Hygbald's background, but it may be assumed from his name that he was English. It is possible that he had been educated in the religious community at Lindisfarne; certainly he was known to its members, since he was chosen by unanimous consent. No writings by him survive. Lindisfarne had long been regarded as one of the holiest sites in Britain, but the constitution of the community of which Hygbald took charge is unclear. From Alcuin's letters it seems that Bishop Hygbald was the head of a single monastic 'familia', and no other abbot or prior is attested during his term of office. 
In the 780s Hygbald was present at at least one Northumbrian episcopal consecration and at the Legatine Council of 786, the acts of which he subscribed. In the 790s he continued to attend episcopal consecrations. Meanwhile, the serious disturbances in Northumbria of those years affected Hygbald directly. Lindisfarne was sacked by the vikings in 793. Although no demonstrably contemporary account gives precise information about the extent of the material damage, Alcuin's writings occasioned by the event show that it was intellectually and spiritually devastating, comparable in some respects to the sack of Rome. Yet Alcuin did assume that the community's regular life could continue (and indeed it was not until the following century that the monks had to leave their exposed location). As a result of the attack, Hygbald may have been burdened with the worry that the sinfulness of the community had occasioned divine vengeance. Alcuin consoled him with letters and his third-longest poem, but also admonished and exhorted him and the community to a better life. 
The final decade of the eighth century was a time of violent contests for the Northumbrian throne, two of which impinged on Hygbald. In 796, after a reign of twenty-seven days, one former king, Osbald, took refuge on Lindisfarne and then fled from there by boat. Hygbald's possible role in that episode is unknown, but not long afterwards he attended the consecration and enthronement of Osbald's successor, King Eardwulf, in York Minster. Hygbald died on either 25 May 802 or 24 June 803. 
Almost nothing is known of the condition of learning or monastic discipline on Lindisfarne in Hygbald's time; a century earlier, its scriptorium had been notable. Alcuin's letters to the community indicate that standards were at least adequate and that its reputation as a holy place was outstanding. The Carolingian scholar Candidus, known for his contributions to logic and speculative thought, began his education with Hygbald at Lindisfarne. Hygbald subsequently dispatched Candidus to the continent for further instruction from Alcuin. 
It has been conjectured that Hygbald is identifiable with the Wigbald who was the chief scribe of the Barberini gospels (Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, MS Barb. lat. 570) and whose signature may be seen on folio 153 of that manuscript. The suggestion must be rejected because the scribal signature there reads 'Uuigbald', an entirely different and not uncommon name, frequently recorded (with the spelling Uigbald) in the Durham 'Liber vitae'. The ninth-century portion of that work includes the name Hygbald, but the absence of the bishop-section in the manuscript makes it impossible to determine which of the attestations might refer to the bishop of Lindisfarne. From the nineteenth century Hygbald was equated with Alcuin's correspondent Speratus, but that identification has now been disproven. 


@@@@@


doc= 39262


Hlothhere (d. 685), king of Kent, was the son of Eorcenberht (d. 664), king of Kent, and Seaxburh (d. c.700), daughter of Anna, king of the East Angles, and later abbess of Ely. He succeeded to the kingship after the death of his brother Ecgberht I ['see under 'Eorcenberht] in July 673. It has been argued that there was an interregnum of several months before Hlothhere managed to establish himself as king; but this hypothesis is based on the testimony of an unreliable charter ('AS chart.', S 7), and it seems best to follow Bede, who dates the period of Hlothhere's rule from July 673 to February 685. Hlothhere does, however, appear to have experienced difficulties at the beginning of his reign. His brother Ecgberht had had some degree of control in Surrey ('AS chart.', S 1165), but overlordship of that area had passed to Wulfhere, king of the Mercians, at some point before 674; even more indicative of a new Kentish weakness was the devastating invasion of the kingdom in 676 by Wulfhere's successor, AEthelred, during which the city of Rochester was sacked and destroyed. It is possible that the instability of the kingdom in this period was the result of dynastic conflict. King Ecgberht's two sons, Eadric ['see below'] and Wihtred, had been passed over on his death. Eventually Eadric enlisted the help of the South Saxons to oust his uncle from the kingship; Hlothhere was fatally wounded in the ensuing battle and died on 6 February 685. He was buried in the monastery of St Peter and St Paul (later St Augustine's Abbey) in Canterbury. 
Before this encounter Eadric may at some stage have ruled jointly with his uncle: his consent is referred to in the record of a land grant which Hlothhere made in 679 ('AS chart.', S 8), and a law-code has survived which is said to represent 'the decrees which Hlothhere and Eadric, kings of Kent, established' ('English Historical Documents', 1.360). The lawgivers declare explicitly that their new laws are additional to the existing law of the Kentish people (which may be a reference to the law-code of AEthelberht I), and for the most part the decrees simply give supplementary detail about the fines for criminal activity and about legal procedure. However, some extra interest attaches to a series of provisions regarding the purchase of land in London by a Kentishman, which seem to indicate that the Kentish kings maintained a hall and a reeve in that city; it is not clear whether this means that Hlothhere and Eadric enjoyed some degree of political control over London, or whether these arrangements were simply a reflection of the city's importance as a trading centre, an 'emporium of many peoples' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 2.3). 


The next 'usurper' was Swaefheard, who came to power in Kent at some point in the year before 29 February 688. He was the son of Saebbi, king of the East Saxons, and his success in Kent was probably due at least initially to an invasion by an East Saxon army; at some stage he also came to rely on Mercian support, acknowledging the overlordship of AEthelred, king of the Mercians. Another Mercian candidate, a certain Oswine, also emerged as king in Kent in the course of 688, or perhaps in very early 689; about 690 he was reigning jointly with Swaefheard, but he quickly disappears from the record. One very difficult charter in the archive of Minster in Thanet ('AS chart.', S 11) suggests that there may have been a King Swaefberht in Kent at this time, also ruling jointly with Oswine (although there is a good chance that the name in the charter is a corruption of Swaefheard's). 
In the early 690s Eadric's brother Wihtred was able to gather enough support to make a bid for the kingdom. In July 692 he was ruling jointly with Swaefheard in Kent; by 694 Swaefheard had disappeared and Wihtred was the sole ruler of the kingdom. 


@@@@@


doc= 39264


Judith (b. after 843, d. c.870); on 1 October the marriage was solemnized and Judith was consecrated in an elaborate ceremony, while her husband 'conferred on her the title of queen: something not customary before then to him or his people' ('Annals of St Bertin', s.a. 856). Charles, constructing a network of quasi-imperial alliances, and perhaps anxious to concert operations against the vikings, evidently thought AEthelwulf a useful son-in-law. AEthelwulf wanted a share of Carolingian charisma, emphasizing his own status through Judith's. His Frankish connection, insistently recalled by the compilers of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' in the early 890s, continued Ecgberht's, and was as politically significant. Already, in the 840s, a Frank named Felix 'was responsible for AEthelwulf's letters': Lupus, who thought Felix wielded much influence over the king, referred in similar wording to Felix's job and to that of Charles's arch-chancellor. The influence of Carolingian diplomacy is undetectable in the texts of AEthelwulf's charters, yet AEthelwulf may have had a little chancery and Felix may have headed it. In Wessex, as in Francia, the drafting of charters was the work of notaries (such as, in AEthelwulf's entourage, the deacon Eadberht), but a Carolingian's arch-chancellor might oversee added enactment clauses: perhaps Felix was behind Carolingian-style references in 'decimation' charters of 854 to their production 'in palatio nostro'. Felix's appointment indicates substantial similarities of form and substance, as well as high-level contacts, between West Saxon and Frankish regimes. 


@@@@@


doc= 39265


Kentigerna (d. 734), anchorite, was an Irish noblewoman who ended her days as an anchorite on a Scottish island. She owes her fame to her reputation for holiness and to the holiness and status of her male kin: she was the daughter of Cellach Cualann, king of the Ui Mail of Leinster (d. 715), probably with his fourth wife, Caintigern, and her death merited an entry in the contemporary annals of Ulster. Two of Kentigerna's sisters, according to genealogies based on the annals of the four masters, were wives of Ui Neill kings while a third married a king of the Ui Dunlainge. 
For Kentigerna's own life there are only late traditions, found in the ninth-century 'Book of Deer' and the early sixteenth-century Aberdeen breviary. According to these, Kentigerna, herself the wife of an Irish king, Feriacus of Monchestree, left Ireland on his death in the company of her brother, Coemgen and her son, Faelan of Cluain Moescna ['see under 'Faelan Amlabar]. With them she went first to Strathfillan, later moving to the island of Inchcailloch in Loch Lomond to adopt the solitary life. Whatever the historicity of these accounts, those elaborations which credit Kentigerna with St Fursa and St Ultan as further sons should be dismissed as apocryphal. 
Kentigerna's travels underline the vitality of the links in the eighth century between south-west Scotland and the Irish coasts of Wicklow and Wexford, links forged both by intermarriages between the aristocracies of these regions as well as by the wanderings of their saints. 


@@@@@


doc= 39266


Laisren mac Feradaig (d. 605) was also abbot for a fairly short period. Adomnan's life places him at a greater distance from Columba than was Baithene. The only story involving Laisren in a role of any consequence concerned the latter's period as superior of the community at Durrow. He is said by Adomnan to have overworked the monks when they were erecting a large building. Columba, seeing this in a vision, was greatly distressed until Laisren ordered the monks to stop, have a meal, and rest while the bad weather lasted. Columba ceased to weep and in his joy blessed Laisren as 'the consoler of the monks' (Adomnan, 1.29). Since Columba's blessings were usually modelled by Adomnan on 'Old Testament' benedictions, the story is likely to have been intended to imply that Laisren was destined by Columba to succeed him in the future; it presumably also implied that he was remembered on Iona as a kindly abbot. He is said to have died on 16 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 39268


Leoba (d. 782), abbess of Tauberbischofsheim, was the leading female contributor to her kinsman Boniface's mission to pagan Germany. Her full name was Leofgyth. Leoba was the only child of elderly parents, Dynne and AEbbe, and entered the monastery of Wimborne as an oblate in the time of Abbess Tetta. She was educated there by Eadburh ('fl'. 716-746), who knew Boniface and was in correspondence with him. Four lines of verse composed by Leoba in the style of Aldhelm have been preserved in a letter she sent to Boniface in the period after 732 when Boniface began attracting religious from England to work with him. Leoba reminds him of his kinship with her mother and friendship with her father. Subsequently Boniface invited her to join him in Germany, but her move there cannot be dated securely. A passage in her life by Rudolf of Fulda has been interpreted as linking her arrival to the time of the dispatch of Boniface's follower Sturm to Rome in 748, but it is not certain that Rudolf intended such chronological precision, and a letter from Boniface to Leoba and other Anglo-Saxon women known to have worked in Germany provides some support for the idea that she had settled in Germany before 748. Boniface founded a nunnery at Tauberbischofsheim, near Wurzburg, for Leoba, but according to Rudolf she had a wider authority over all the nuns working with Boniface, comparable to that which Sturm exercised over the monks. Before his departure to Saxony and martyrdom in 754, Boniface reinforced Leoba's position, symbolized by his gift to her of his cowl, and instructed her to continue the work she had begun under his direction. 
Leoba's kinship with Boniface must have been of key importance for the authority she continued to enjoy after 754, but that should not detract from her own innate abilities as a spiritual leader. Tauberbischofsheim became a major training centre for Anglo-Saxon religious women working in Germany and several of Leoba's nuns became abbesses themselves, including Thecla, a kinswoman, who became abbess of Kitzingen and of Ochsenfurt, and another West Saxon, Walburg, who succeeded her brother Winnebald as head of the monastery of Heidenheim. According to her biographer, Leoba was an inspirational monastic leader and renowned for her learning in the scriptures, the fathers, and ecclesiastical law. Tauberbischofsheim also had an important role to play in the evangelization of its locality and as abbess Leoba had a difficult and sometimes dangerous position; her hagiography is notable for miraculous events which show her in an active role. One incident reported by Rudolf concerns a false accusation that one of the nuns was the mother of a dead baby found in a millpond, which caused considerable ill feeling against the nunnery. Leoba organized an impressive round of church services and processions and caused the real culprit to confess. On another occasion local panic about a severe storm obliged Leoba to validate the power of God by confronting the storm directly. 
Leoba's influence went beyond her immediate locality and the work of the men and women she trained. She was also influential at the courts of Pippin III and his son Charlemagne, and was particularly close to Charlemagne's wife, Hildegard, though, according to Rudolf, Leoba 'detested the life at court like poison' (Rudolf of Fulda, 'Vita Leobae', 129). She was also apparently consulted by bishops on spiritual matters and on ecclesiastical discipline. After Boniface's death Leoba visited Fulda regularly to pray at his tomb and to speak with the monks; as Rudolf stresses, she was an exception to the rules which otherwise prevented women from entering the male preserve. In her old age, having been abbess for twenty-eight years, Leoba gave up her abbacy and retired with a few nuns to Schornsheim, near Mainz, a royal estate which, according to a surviving charter, was made available to her by the gift of Charlemagne. 
Leoba died at Schornsheim on 28 September 782 attended by her Anglo-Saxon chaplain Torhthat, who seems to have been a member of the community at Tauberbischofsheim for many years. Her death is recorded in the necrology of Fulda. Boniface had requested that she be buried in his own tomb, but although she was buried at Fulda it was not considered appropriate to reopen Boniface's grave and she was at first buried near him in the crypt of the main church. Abbot Eigil subsequently translated her remains to the west porch and a number of miracles are reported at her tomb from this time, including the healing of a Spaniard who came to Fulda after a fruitless tour of the shrines of Italy and France and was cured through the joint intervention of Boniface and Leoba. Following an extensive programme of rebuilding at Fulda during the abbacy of Hrabanus Maurus (822 to 841 or 842), Leoba's remains were translated again in 836 or 838 and placed in a reliquary behind an altar, dedicated to Mary and the female virgins of Christ, in the crypt of a new church on the nearby hill of Petersburg, where her remains can still be visited. It may have been in preparation for this translation that Hrabanus commissioned Rudolf, a monk of Fulda, to compose his life of St Leoba, which was completed before the body was transferred. The work is dedicated to a nun called Hadamout and drew upon the recorded remembrances of female disciples of Leoba, including her kinswoman Thecla, who may also have been formerly a nun at Wimborne; they evidently recalled her with affection and respect. 


@@@@@


doc= 39269


Lul (c.710-786), archbishop of Mainz, was born in Wessex, probably about 710, and entered the abbey of Malmesbury, apparently at a young age. In 738, while in Rome on a pilgrimage, Lul encountered his fellow countryman Boniface, who was then, on his third visit to the city, appointed papal legate in Germany. Lul was one of those whom Boniface persuaded to accompany him back to his mission field east of the Rhine. The prominence which he quickly achieved in the mission, and his closeness to Boniface, are evident from his correspondence, some of which survives among that of his master in three ninth-century, and a number of later medieval, copies. These letters show Lul near the centre of a network of English clerics that covered both those who accompanied Boniface on his continental mission, including Burchard, later bishop of Wurzburg, and their acquaintances and supporters in England. Prominent among the latter, at least during the earlier part of Lul's career, were a number of abbesses: Lul asked that they support him through their prayers. This notion of confraternity through prayer was one of the English mission's significant contributions to continental religious life. The surviving correspondence reveals that Lul had become a deacon by 745-6, an archdeacon by 746-7, and was employed by Boniface to take letters to Rome. In 752 Boniface made Lul one of two 'chorepiscopi' (assistant bishops) to help him in his efforts to mould a diocesan organization in Germany. Shortly afterwards he wrote to Fulrad, the abbot of St Denis and one of the most influential figures at the court of the new Frankish king, Pippin III, asking that Lul be his successor. 
On Boniface's death in 754, Lul duly succeeded to the bishopric of Mainz. He did not, however, also acquire the metropolitan status that Pope Gregory III ('r'. 731-41) had granted to Boniface. Nevertheless, there are signs that Lul was considered pre-eminent among the bishops of the Anglo-Saxon mission. From the time of his accession onwards, he was in correspondence with the leading members of the English church, including two archbishops of Canterbury and one of York, in a network of mutual support animated by prayer and the exchange of gifts. Furthermore, it was to Lul that King Alchred of Northumbria wrote in 773, asking that he lend his aid to the legates that the king had sent to Charlemagne and confirming his spiritual confraternity with Lul. Other English correspondents of Lul included King Eardwulf of Kent and King Cynewulf of Wessex; the extent of his influence in his native land is also amply demonstrated by his excommunication of the English abbess Switha. On the continent, Lul's advice on the administration of family monasteries and on questions of marriage law was sought by the Frankish bishop Megingoz, who had succeeded Burchard at Wurzburg. The limit to Lul's episcopal power is evident from his failure to end the privilege of direct jurisdiction from Rome that Boniface's foundation of Fulda had enjoyed since 751. Between 769 and 775, however, Lul established his own foundations at Hersfeld in Hesse and Bleidenstadt in Nassau. He was also able to incorporate into his diocese the short-lived missionary bishoprics of Buraburg and Erfurt. 
His correspondence reveals Lul as a pivotal figure in the dissemination of Anglo-Saxon learning on the continent. He wrote requesting the works of Aldhelm, and sent presents to the tomb of Bede at Jarrow, in return for which Abbot Cuthbert dispatched copies of Bede's prose and verse lives of St Cuthbert: he would, he said, have provided more had not the cold of winter hampered the hand of the scribe. Lul had, in any case, also acquired a copy of Bede's 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum'. The list of that author's other works which it contains prompted Lul to send further requests to Abbot Cuthbert and to Archbishop AElberht of York: a copy of Bede's 'De templo', at least, was forthcoming. Lul had himself been taught metrics by Boniface in Rome and before he became bishop he sent a specimen of his efforts to an abbess and a nun in England. Later he wrote to Milred, bishop of Worcester, asking for a book of the egregiously florid picture poems of Optatianus Porfyrius ('fl'. 325-333), which, however, Milred could not send, because it had not been returned by Cuthbert, archbishop of Canterbury. 
Apart from his letters, with their included snatches of poetry, the only other work of Lul to survive is his profession of faith. This he made 'c'.780, when Pope Hadrian I ('r'. 772-95), prompted by Charlemagne's desire to complete Boniface's work of diocesan organization, ordered an examination by the bishops of Rheims, Trier, and (perhaps) Tarentaise of Lul's consecration. On the basis of the resulting profession, Hadrian granted Lul the pallium, indicating metropolitan status, probably in the following year. 
Lul died on 16 October 786 and was buried at Hersfeld. His epitaph survives in the same manuscript as his profession of faith. Lampert of Hersfeld wrote a life of Lul 'c'.1070 which adds nothing to historical knowledge of him. His cult never took hold in his native England, but there are many dedications to him in Germany. 


@@@@@


doc= 39272


Odhran (supp. d. c.563), holy man and self-sacrifice, lends his name (Oran and Odran are alternative Gaelic forms) to a chapel and a graveyard on the island of Iona. The oldest extant version of his story, which resembles one told of St Finnbarr in the thirteenth-century revision of the Latin life of that saint, appears in a Middle Irish homily of the mid-twelfth century. According to this source, Odhran was one of the original companions of Columba. On their arrival on Iona from Ireland 'c'.563, Columba said to his company: 'Someone among you should go down into the soil of the island to consecrate it.' Odhran readily volunteered and Columba told him: 'No one will be granted his request at my own grave, unless he first seek it of you' (Herbert, 261). At this, Odhran promptly died. The graveyard on Iona, still called Reilig Odrain ('the grave of Odhran') in modern times, is likely, therefore, to have been so called already in the mid-twelfth century. The cult of Odhran, which the homily places on a par with that of Columba in terms of its attractiveness to pilgrims, can be traced back much further. In his life of Columba (completed 'c'.697), Adomnan relates the story of Baetan, a contemporary of Columba, which he says was told to him by the monk Mael Odrain, whose name means 'devotee of Odhran'. Since, according to his own report, Mael Odrain was alive and adult very shortly after Baetan's death, his name indicates that Odhran was commemorated in the circle of Iona within a generation of the date of his death given in the twelfth-century story. 
The tale of Odhran's death had survived with few changes when Manus O'Donnell assembled his early Modern Irish life of Columba ('Betha Coluim Cille') in 1532. By 1698, however, oral tradition, as recorded by William Sacheverell, told the story in order to explain the name of St Oran's Chapel, a twelfth-century structure which still stands some 100 yards south-west of the present abbey on Iona. Moreover, it was then said that Columba had dreamed that a famine could be ended only if a man were buried alive; that Odhran was so buried, upright, with the promise that his grave would be opened again after twenty-four hours; and that, when he was dug up, the still-living Odhran described the other world with such precision that Columba could trust him no longer in the land of the living and ordered him to be buried again. Eighteenth- and nineteenth-century writers give lines in Gaelic, clearly derived from oral tradition, said to report Odhran's blasphemous utterances on his emergence from his tomb: 'There is no wonder in death, and hell is not as it is reported'; and the response of the shocked Columba: 'Dust, dust over Odhran's eye, that he may speak no more' (Adomnan, 362). 


@@@@@


doc= 39277


Segene mac Fiachna (d. 652), a kinsman of Columba. He appears to have taken a direct interest in the Northumbrian mission. A story told by Adomnan reveals Columba's support for Oswald's victory over Cadwallon. It was said to have been told by Oswald to Segene in the presence of Failbe, Adomnan's predecessor as abbot and his informant. This meeting between abbot and king very probably took place in Northumbria rather than in Dal Riata, since the annals show that abbots of Iona not infrequently visited churches subject to their authority. Segene was also responsible for sending Finan to Northumbria after Aedan's death in 651, the year before his own death. Earlier, in 635, he had founded a monastery called 'Rechru', probably Lambay Island, but possibly Rathlin Island. By the time of his death on 12 August 652, however, political conditions in the midlands of Ireland were becoming less favourable to Iona. After the death of Domnall mac Aeda, Cenel Conaill king of Tara, in 642, supreme power among the Ui Neill was divided between Cenel Conaill and the rulers of Brega (roughly modern co. Meath and north co. Dublin). The latter were forming close ties with Armagh, probably as a counterweight to the alliance between Iona and Cenel Conaill. It may be for this reason that Durrow is not once mentioned by the annals in the seventh century. 


@@@@@


doc= 39280


Sigfrid (fl. mid-10th-early 11th cent.), missionary bishop, eludes biography. No record of his activities survives before the late twelfth century, after which Icelandic saga literature and Swedish hagiography combined to produce conflicting accounts of his career. His place of origin in England is nowhere reliably identified in those sources. 'Sigefridus', a bishop, is remembered in an obit list in a thirteenth-century custumary from Glastonbury Abbey (BL, Add. MS 17450, fol. 5'v'; under 5 April); in William of Malmesbury's 'De antiquitate Glastonie ecclesie' ('c'.1130) 'Sigefridus' is identified as 'episcopus Norwegensis' and a monk of Glastonbury, possibly during the time of King Edgar ('r'. 957-75). Some have seen this bishop as the (unnamed) churchman who accompanied King Hakon Adalsteinsfostri (Hakon Athelstan's Foster-Son) from England to Norway in the mid-tenth century. Others have associated him with the bishop named in the thirteenth-century sagas of Olaf Tryggvason as the English companion of that Christianizing king ('r'. 995-999/1000). A Bishop Siward, who returned to Ramsey Abbey from a period as a missionary in Scandinavia some time after 993 and before 1009, may have been the same man, although the name (probably originally Sigeweard) may invalidate the identification. Olaf Tryggvason's bishop, known in Norwegian and Icelandic saga sources as Jon-Sigurd, is said to have turned his attention to Sweden after the death of his Norwegian patron, and to have converted and baptized King Olof Skotkonung ('r'. 995-1022) and many Swedish heathens. He reputedly returned to Norway to assist King Olaf Haraldsson ('r'. 1014-30) to further the conversion there, after which he resumed his Swedish mission. His place of burial is claimed to be the cathedral of Vaxjo, in southern Sweden, of which see (along with Skara, in Vastergotland) he was purportedly the founder. 
No authority is known for the statement of the seventeenth-century Swedish Catholic writer Vastovius ('Vitis aquilonia', 32) that Sigfrid was canonized by the English pope Adrian IV in 1158, but in the thirteenth century his cult blossomed in Sweden and he was revered as the nation's apostle. Swedish hagiography identified him as an archbishop of York whom the English king, Milred, had sent to King Olof. If there was originally any basis of fact in the Swedish lives, it had clearly been lost or confused before this thirteenth-century flowering, as no contemporary Archbishop Sigfrid or King Milred is known (although a Sigeferth was bishop of Lindsey from 'c'.996 to 'c'.1004. The conversion histories fostered by the different Swedish dioceses sought not so much to preserve a historical account of Sigfrid's life and work as to claim for their churches Sweden's 'first' saint and missionary, thereby establishing their primacy. His name stood for missionary endeavour 'par excellence', so much so that the credentials of contemporary churchmen came to be established by relationship with him: he is credited with a suspicious number of nephews. The date of his death is unknown, but he is commemorated on 15 February in medieval Scandinavian calendars. His apparent longevity and ubiquitousness (and, potentially, two obit dates), suggest that several Sigfrids were at work in the Scandinavian mission field, but the evidence does not allow separate identities and achievements to be distinguished. 


@@@@@


doc= 39281


Sleibine mac Congaile (d. 767). Cillene seems to have resigned the abbacy before his death on 3 July 752, since his obit gives him the title 'anchorite of Iona' ('Ann. Ulster', s.a. 752). Resignation followed by a period as anchorite was a well-attested practice, found, for example, in the case of Aed, bishop of Sleaty in Carlow, who died as an anchorite in 700. Sleibine also seems to have resigned before his death, which occurred perhaps on 2 March, since his successor, 


@@@@@


doc= 39282


Suibne moccu Urthri (d. 657), was the second abbot of Iona not to be a kinsman of the founder. His name shows that he came of a minor group, Corcu Urthri (Corco Fhirthri), attested in connection with the people known as the Luigni, both in northern Connacht and in Meath. It may have been felt to be wise not to bind Iona too closely to Cenel Conaill, whose power, after the deaths of Cellach Coel (654) and Cellach mac Maele Coba (658), continued to decline from the peak it had reached 'c'.640. During Suibne's time, Finan, bishop of the Northumbrians, sent missionaries to the Middle Angles and then Mercia, and also to Essex. When Suibne died (probably on 11 January), therefore, the authority of Iona, direct and indirect, stretched in a great arc from Durrow in the very centre of Ireland, through northern Ireland, Scotland, Northumbria, Mercia, and as far as the Thames. If Suibne's successor (and brother of Segene, Suibne's predecessor) 


@@@@@


doc= 39283


Suibne (d. 772), was abbot by 766. 


@@@@@


doc= 39290


Vorteporius (fl. c.540), king of the Demetae, whom Gildas in his 'De excidio Britanniae' calls 'tyrant of the Demetae' (Gildas, cap. 31), is probably the Voteporix commemorated in a bilingual (Latin and Irish) inscription formerly at Castelldwyran in the west of Carmarthenshire in the heartland of early medieval Dyfed. The form of the name in the Irish inscription would fit a sixth-century date, while the traditional date of 'c'.540 for Gildas's 'De excidio Britanniae' is unlikely to be far out. The Latin, in square capitals, runs as follows: '
MEMORIA 

VOTEPORIGIS 

PROTICTORIS 
(Nash-Williams, no. 138)' This is usually translated 'The memorial of Voteporix 'protector''. The Irish inscription on the same stone contains only the name and is in the ogham alphabet: Votecorigas. The person commemorated was, therefore, known both by a British name and by its Irish cognate. The Irish version of the name suggests that he belonged to the Irish settlers in Dyfed; this is corroborated by the appearance of forms of the name Vorteporix in, first, an Old Irish text about the migration of the Dessi (the people whose name is preserved in the baronies of Decies in Waterford) and, second, in Old Welsh genealogies of the mid-tenth century. Both the Irish and the Welsh versions of the pedigree of the kings of Dyfed agree with Gildas, however, in inserting an 'r' into the name (Gildas has the name in the vocative, Vortipori -- 'O Vortiporius'). Gildas's tyrant was, according to him, the wicked son of a good father, namely, if the pedigree is reliable, Aircol (Agricola). The father is described as king; here, then, as elsewhere, Gildas was using 'tyrant' of a king of evil conduct rather than of a ruler who took power by a coup. As with his other wicked tyrants, Vortiporius had distinguished himself by vicious conduct both domestic and familial: killing male kinsmen and having sexual intercourse with his own daughter. 
Solutions of the problem posed by different forms of the name start from the title used in the inscription, 'protector'. In the later Roman empire the term 'protector' was used for one of the two corps of elite bodyguard troops ('domestici' and 'protectores'). Typically the 'protectores' served as staff officers and were likely to receive high military office as the next step in their careers. The term remained in use in the successor states, as in a Burgundian inscription: 'HARIULFUS PROTECTOR DOMESITICUS EILIUS [filius] HANHAUALDI REGALIS GENTIS BURGUNDIONUM (Le Blant, 'Nouveau recueil des Inscriptions de la Gaule', no. 38)' Here both titles, 'protector' and 'domesticus', are used, making it doubly clear that the reference is to the Roman institution. On the other hand, the name Voteporix has the literal meaning 'Refuge-King', and this has led Celticists to wonder whether the Latin title might not be a gloss on the name, or, on the other hand, whether the name might not, in origin, have been a title corresponding to the Latin 'protector'. Some knowledge of the title 'protector' seems to have come down to the tenth-century compiler of the Harleian genealogies: he inserts the title some generations above his Guortepir in the pedigree of the Dyfed kings. 
The two most likely solutions to this entangled problem begin, in the first case, from the suggestion that the form with 'r' is a deformation of the form without 'r' -- Vortipori of Votepori -- and, in the second case, from the proposal that the two names stood for different but related men, both belonging to the royal kindred of the Demetae (compare Hariulf, a member of the Burgundian Gibichung dynasty). The first explanation has to face the difficulty that a supposedly deformed version of the name was the one recorded in the genealogies; the second has to meet the objection that the Old Welsh genealogy suggests that its Guortepir (with an 'r') was connected with the title 'protector' (as in the inscription, which does not have 'r'). The first explanation sees the two names as standing for the one person; according to it, the person commemorated in the inscription was indeed Gildas's Vortiporius. For the second they were not the same person, but rather kinsmen. 


@@@@@


doc= 39291


Wigstan (d. 849), martyr, is most reliably documented in what is probably the ninth-century section of an early eleventh-century list of saints' resting places, 'Secgan be pam godes sanctum pe on Engla lande oerost reston', which has an entry 'Then St Wigstan rests at the monastery of Repton near the River Trent' (Liebermann, 11). This record may be corroborated by architectural study at St Wystan's Church, Repton, which shows that during the Anglo-Saxon period two corridors were pierced to give access to the crypt, possibly to allow access to a saint's shrine, presumably Wigstan's. Archaeological excavation has shown a cluster of richly fitted graves around the east end of the church, possibly representing persons wishing to be buried close to the saint. According to Thomas of Marlborough (died 1236), prior of Evesham and author of the abbey's chronicle, King Cnut translated Wigstan's remains to Evesham, although a portion was later returned to the newly founded canons of Repton. The same writer asserts that Wigstan was the son of Wigmund, king of Mercia in the early ninth century, and his queen, AElfflaed. On Wigmund's death, Wigstan refused to become king, preferring a life of religion. When his relative Beorhtfrith asked permission to marry the widowed queen, however, Wigstan refused and Beorhtfrith accordingly had him murdered. John of Worcester, writing in the early twelfth century, gives a brief mention of Wigstan's parentage, death, and burial (at Repton), and gives the date of his death as 1 June 849. Finally, a slightly different version of Wigstan's life and death is preserved in two fourteenth-century manuscripts, Gotha, Forschungsbibliothek, MS I. 81, and London, British Library, Harley MS 2253, which came originally from Herefordshire. Because this version does not refer to the translation of Wigstan's relics to Evesham in the time of Cnut it is possible, but by no means certain, that they derive from an early 'passio', possibly of ninth-century date. 
If the information contained in these texts is reliable, it appears that Wigstan was a victim of dynastic conflict in early ninth-century Mercia, specifically between the family of King Wiglaf, whose son Wigmund was, and the family of King Beorhtwulf, father of Wigstan's killer Beorhtfrith. Wigstan's subsequent veneration as a saint is part of a wider pattern of the veneration of kings and princes killed for what appear to have been political motives. That veneration may have been prompted by the church at large as a means of drawing attention to the crimes of the murderers; or it may have emanated from the desire of the victims' families to perpetuate their memory and the iniquity of their enemies. Repton seems to have been the centre of a royal estate, for in later centuries it had a large parish with dependent chapelries; and Wigstan's cult seems also to have been fostered on the neighbouring royal estate of Glen, where churches at Wigston and Wistow, Leicestershire, were dedicated to the saint. In the later middle ages, Wistow was supposed to have been the site of Wigstan's murder. The cult appears never to have been widely diffused, and its relationship with these royal estates suggests that it was sponsored from within the Mercian royal family. 


@@@@@


doc= 39297


Cunedda (supp. fl. late 4th-mid-5th cent.), ruler in north Wales, is said to have led the migration of a section of his north British people from Manau in Gododdin, the area around the headwaters of the Forth still commemorated in Clackmannan, to north Wales, where he expelled the Irish settlers and founded the dynasty that ruled Gwynedd until the early ninth century. The purported date of these events was either the end of the fourth century or the middle of the fifth. Such is the story told by the 'Historia Brittonum' (sometimes ascribed to Nennius), which was written, probably in north Wales, in 829 or 830. The corpus of British genealogies (the Harleian) assembled in the mid-tenth century, makes Cunedda son of OEtern (possibly Eternus), grandson of Padarn Pesrut (Peternus of the Red Cloak), and great-grandson of Tegid (Tacitus). He is himself father of eight (or nine) sons, each the eponym of a subdivision of the early medieval kingdom of Gwynedd (for example, Meirion for Meirionydd, Rhufon for Rhufoniog, and so on), and is therefore progenitor not only of the main dynasty of Gwynedd, but also of the lines of sub-kings ruling its constituent elements. 
This sparse information is almost certainly an aetiological myth, which had three principal functions. First, it provided a model for the intervention of a new and alien dynasty at a time when the house of Cunedda had made way for that of Merfyn. It also linked Gwynedd with the north British area where a 'heroic age' had played itself out in the sixth century, to the accompaniment of formative poetry ascribed to the bards Aneirin and Taliesin: their renown is recorded in the immediately preceding sentence of the 'Historia Brittonum'. 
Finally, it firmly cemented into the history of the main kingdom those parts which might otherwise have been aspiring to separate destinies. Thus it can be suggested that Ceredig became Cunedda's ninth 'son' when Ceredigion was incorporated into Gwynedd in 872. Cunedda's Roman-sounding ancestors are of the type often used to lend grandeur to the remoter reaches of Welsh genealogies: the most popular choices are Constantine himself and Magnus Maximus, both of whom began their bids for power at the head of the army in Britain. The dating of Cunedda's life given by the 'Historia' or implied by the genealogies is correspondingly artificial. The 'Historia's' '146 years before Maelgwn, 'magnus rex apud Brittones'' ('great king of the Britons') (534?-547?) means 388, in other words the death of Magnus Maximus, one of early medieval British tradition's few 'historical horizons'; adjustment in the genealogies to make Cunedda not Maelgwn's 'atavus' (great-great-great-grandfather), as in the 'Historia', but merely 'proavus' (great-grandfather) serves to transfer his activity to the period when, on the evidence of Gildas and Bede, the Britons' struggle with the 'Picts and Scots' was at its height. 
These observations show that Cunedda is essentially a figure of the ninth and tenth centuries. His historical role was to legitimize a particular perception of the past and present in the Gwynedd of that period. Whether he had a historical existence in his own right is impossible to say, but is perhaps rather more likely than not. If so, he should surely be envisaged as the leader of a warband from the very fringes of the British world, who contrived to make an effective intervention far from his home base, in much the same way as warriors from Gwynedd are celebrated by Aneirin among the participants in the battle fought by the Gododdin themselves against the Northumbrians at Catterick. That his presence in Gwynedd was part of a master-plan by the authorities in sub-Roman Britain to regain control of the situation is no more (or less) than agreeable fantasy. 


@@@@@


doc= 39298


Ralli, Pantia Stephen (1793-1865), merchant, was born on the Turkish island of Chios, the third son of Stephen Ralli (1755-1827), a wealthy merchant of Chios, and his wife, Loula, daughter of Avgoustis and Virginia Sechiari. Pantia's eldest brother, Zannis (1785-1859), opened a branch house in London, trading as Ralli and Petrochino, and the second brother, Avgoustis (1792-1878), and Pantia followed soon after, to form Ralli Brothers. The firm was not the first Greek merchant house to trade in London, but it soon became the most successful. 
Ralli Brothers' business records were destroyed during the Second World War, so details of their trade are scarce. It appears that their earliest trade was in silk, which no doubt included exports of raw silk from Asia Minor to England. The brothers then took an early lead in the export of Russian grain from the Black Sea ports to England. Here their success was due to the development of a system known as the cargo trade in which the merchant responsible for loading the grain in the Black Sea port dispatched the bill of lading and sample to his partner in London or Liverpool who sold the shipment in advance of its arrival. When the ship reached the first British port (Falmouth or Cork) the captain was informed where he was to discharge the cargo. Return cargoes to the Black Sea and the Middle East were increasingly British cottons, and to facilitate this trade the youngest of the five sons eventually in the firm, Eustratios (1800-1884), opened a branch in Manchester in 1827. Pantia married, on 25 September 1831 in London, Marietta (1810-1860), daughter of Petros Scaramanga, a Chian merchant, and his wife, Nina. Marietta had moved to London to live with her elder brothers and this connection cemented the Ralli and Scaramanga partnerships in Russia. They had two sons (one dying in infancy) and a daughter. 
As Ralli Brothers' trade grew the firm spawned new partnerships and trading bases round the Mediterranean, Russia, and the Middle East, notably in Marseilles, Odessa, Constantinople, St Petersburg, Taganrog, and Tabriz (Persia). From these bases the firm's agents reached far into the interior, even as far as Turkestan, conducting a cash and barter trade, typically exchanging grain, wool, or raw silk for Manchester cottons. In 1851 Pantia Ralli attained his ultimate ambition as a merchant by opening a branch house in Calcutta, from which, as in Russia, his company reached out into the vast undeveloped interior of India. In the 1850s Ralli Brothers was employing some 4000 clerks and 15,000 workers for transporting and warehousing stock in their network of branches. 
Pantia Ralli established an autocratic control and discipline which enabled Ralli Brothers to stamp its authority on the Levant trade and the Greek trading community. The system that he established included the rule that no partner or employee was allowed to 'lead a life unduly luxurious or extravagant' or to take part 'in any other combination or enterprise whatsoever' except Ralli Brothers. A second rule was established in 'the iron discipline which regulates the relations of superiors and inferiors, and which, indeed, pervades the entire organisation'. These rules, together with 'absolute probity in all transactions', were 'religiously maintained irrefragable for close upon an entire century', a Greek hagiographer wrote in 1902 (Gennadius). The London families from Chios, who constituted a large trading group in Victorian Britain, nicknamed Pantia Ralli 'Zeus', admitting the moral influence he exercised over them. 
So anxious was Pantia to safeguard the reputation and credit of his firm that it never issued 'paper' (bills of exchange) but conducted a cash business to the extent of its available means. The system was reported to Baring Brothers in 1863: 'When they [Ralli Brothers] buy goods in New York and New Orleans, they pay cash and draw against them [Barings] on London; when they sell goods in America (this being an important branch of their business) they remit the net proceeds to the London firm. (Baring Bros. MSS HC16.193)' This conservative policy protected the firm from the vulnerability of so many small trading houses in the recurrent trade crises. A partnership capital of $130,000 in 1827 had climbed to $500,000 in 1846, which meant that Ralli Brothers commanded more resources than any other merchant house in London at the period, so far as the record goes. 
In 1835 Pantia Ralli was appointed Greek consul, which confirmed him as the leading Greek merchant in London. He proposed the building of a Greek church in London in 1843 when the Finsbury Square house used for worship became too small. Thirty Greek trading families that had settled in London subscribed $10,000 for an imposing Byzantine edifice, which was opened at the end of 1849. Ralli's leadership of the Greek trading community never restrained him from moving freely in English society; his surviving son was sent to Eton and his daughter married the son of the bishop of Gloucester, Charles Monk MP, another Etonian. He became friendly with W. E. Gladstone. In 1851 Ralli left the Finsbury Square Greek quarter for a mansion overlooking Marble Arch. 
When Ralli died at his home, 5 Connaught Place West, London, on 9 July 1865 the Ralli partnerships were formally dissolved. However Stephen AugustusRalli (1829-1902), a nephew who had been trained in the London house (both of Pantia's sons having died in early life), constituted a new Ralli Brothers, based on India and the Anglo-American trade, leaving the Russian business to the Scaramangas. Stephen Ralli maintained Pantia Ralli's authority in the firm and leadership of the Greek community until the end of the century. 


@@@@@


doc= 39302


Willyams, Sarah Brydges (d. 1863), heiress and benefactor of Benjamin Disraeli, was the younger daughter of Abraham Mendez da Costa (died 1782), of Bath, and his wife, Elizabeth Leigh, whom he married in 1775. Sarah was descended from a line of Peninsular-English Jews via Jamaica, where her grandfather Daniel Mendez da Costa settled and made a fortune. She was also heir of her father's only brother, Isaac (died 1766). Her father was estranged from his relatives because of his marriage; after his death her mother married in 1789 John Ford. In 1794 Sarah married James Brydges Willyams (1771/2-1820), a poet and illustrator, and lieutenant-colonel of the Cornwall militia, eldest son of James Willyams of Carnanton, Cornwall; they had no children. 
Mrs Brydges Willyams's interest in Disraeli arose because, like herself, he was a Christian of Jewish parentage. She wrote to him about his books and speeches and in 1851 asked him to be an executor of her will in return for a substantial consideration in it. The voluminous extant correspondence with Disraeli (and with Mrs Disraeli) begins shortly thereafter, in August 1851. In the summer of 1853 the Disraelis paid her the first of ten annual visits at Mount Braddon, her house at Tormoham, Torquay, the Disraelis always staying at a hotel. Thus began the extraordinary friendship between a reclusive elderly provincial gentlewoman and one of the leading politicians of the day; it was marked by generosity and affection on both sides, with a constant exchange of gifts (game, fish, books, newspapers, flowers, pictures, even trees). For Disraeli, the correspondence partially replaced that which he had once had with his sister, and he wrote to Mrs Brydges Willyams at length on affairs both public and domestic. He gave much personal attention to her wishes, most notably in the period 1859-62 with respect to her coat of arms. She responded with grateful and adoring incredulity at his interest in her. 
Madame Lionel de Rothschild in December 1862 described 'the female Croesus, who is likely, or unlikely to leave her wealth to Dizzy. She has piercing black eyes, wears a jet black wig, with an enormous top knot, no crinoline, is quite a miser, starves herself into a skeleton, except when her adored Disraeli is here, is ninety-seven ['sic'] years of age, keeps neither horses, nor carriages, nor men servants -- only an enormous watchdog to protect her and her gold. (Rothschild Archives, RFam C/21)' Mrs Brydges Willyams' will (1857) acknowledged Disraeli's 'efforts to vindicate the race of Israel', and requested him to assume additionally the names of Lara and Mendez da Costa, both she and Disraeli (mistakenly) believing themselves to be of similar aristocratic descent. Disraeli did not assume the names, but granted her wish to be buried at Hughenden, Buckinghamshire; when she died, rather suddenly, on 11 November 1863 at Mount Braddon, aged (according to Disraeli) ninety-four years, she was interred in the Disraeli vault. She left an estate sworn at under $40,000, of which Disraeli received over $30,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 39303


Pierrepont, Charles, first Earl Manvers (1737-1816), landowner and politician, was born on 14 November 1737, the second son of Philip Medows (1708-1781), deputy ranger of Richmond Park, and Frances Pierrepont ('c'.1711-1794), sister of Evelyn, second duke of Kingston upon Hull. He entered the navy, becoming lieutenant in 1755 and post captain in 1757, and in 1762 was in command of the 'Isis'. He resigned his commission in 1763. 
On the death of his uncle the duke of Kingston in 1773 Charles Medows became heir presumptive to the vast Pierrepont estates which went to the duke's widow for her lifetime. On 14 March 1774 he married Anne Orton Mills (1756-1832), youngest daughter and coheir of William Mills of Petersham, Surrey; they had four sons and a daughter. Despite challenges from his elder brother, Evelyn, leading to the widowed duchess being declared bigamous in 1776, the will was not overturned, and after her death in 1788 Medows held lands in Nottinghamshire (including Thoresby Hall and Holme Pierrepont Hall), Yorkshire, Derbyshire, Lincolnshire, Somerset, Devon, and Wiltshire. He also had London property. 
By royal licence Charles Medows now changed his name to Pierrepont. Sponsored by the duke of Newcastle, he was elected to parliament for Nottinghamshire in 1778, promising to do his utmost for poor manufacturers in a time of framework knitters' disputes. No speech of his in the Commons is known, but he is known to have opposed William Pitt in 1784 and 1791 and was listed as a whig supporter of the duke of Portland in 1792. From about 1781 to 1792 he was a protonotary in the Palace Court, Westminster, and was made a DCL at Oxford University in 1793. He retained his seat in the Commons until 1796, when he was created Viscount Newark through Portland's influence. In 1806 he obtained the title of Earl Manvers from the Grenville ministry. In the Lords he voted against Catholic emancipation. 
Through his position in parliament Pierrepont was able to promote the enclosure movement, then reaching its height, throughout his constituency. Between 1779 and 1796 he was associated with the passing of twenty-six Nottinghamshire enclosure bills and six that were initially withdrawn. (After his viscountcy he can be linked to over thirty more between 1797 and 1815 through his sons who also sat as MPs.) His interest in agricultural change is confirmed by his appointment as vice-president of the board of agriculture in 1803. 
Between 1788 and 1803 Pierrepont was involved with a large-scale landscaping scheme at Thoresby Hall which cost over $22,500. This was devised by Humphry Repton of Romford, and included the planting of oaks which met with the approval of the Society for the Advancement of Arts. He employed William Wilkins (later architect of the National Gallery) as designer of estate houses for his tenants and to survey his Bath property. Lord Manvers died at his London house in Portman Square on 17 June 1816 and was buried on 28 June at Holme Pierrepont. He was succeeded by Charles Herbert, second Earl Manvers, his second but eldest surviving son. 


@@@@@


doc= 39306


Cullen, John (c.1838-1914), Church of England clergyman and poet, born at Newport, co. Tipperary, Ireland, was the son of a farmer from Newport. Possibly educated privately and at St Aiden's, he briefly entered Trinity College, Dublin, in July 1867 but did not proceed to a degree. By this time he was already working within the Church of England, holding curacies, possibly at St George's, Wigan, Lancashire (1865-7), and definitely at Knipton (1867-9) and Bottesford (1869-74), both in Leicestershire. While at Knipton he married, on 3 May 1869, German-born Leontine Eugenie Dorndinger 
(or Derndinger; 'c'.1841-1906)
, with whom he had three children. In February 1874 he became vicar of Radcliffe-on-Trent in Nottinghamshire, a position he held until his death. 
Cullen was to have a considerable impact on his new parish. Between 1875 and 1907 he organized some nine religious missions to stimulate belief and increase church attendance. He masterminded the extension of the church, St Mary's, believing it necessary because of a rapid increase in population in the parish. The medieval nave and tower were replaced and the Victorian chancel modified between 1878 and 1883 to the design of Goddard and Paget of Leicester. The tower's unusual saddleback roof was said to be the idea of Cullen's German wife as a reminder of her homeland. In his general parish work he kept careful records, relaid the churchyard, encouraged Sunday-school teaching, and supervised the work of the local day school. In 1882 he unwittingly put Radcliffe-on-Trent at the centre of a public health inquiry. Distressed by presiding over the frequent burials of children during a scarlet fever epidemic, he wrote to the Local Government Board in London requesting action. The subsequent investigation came to the notice of the 'Nottingham Journal' which waged a long-running campaign against the village, making it notorious during the summer of 1882. 
Throughout his life Cullen wrote and translated poetry, mainly from the German. 'Horae poeticae', a collection of poems written in his youth, was published in 1869, followed by various poems and idylls from 1882 onwards. In 1886 he received the thanks of Queen Victoria for his work 'Queens Regnant'. Originally written for recitation at Baltimore Female College in the United States, it was dedicated 'To all good women in every land', was well received by American reviewers, and allegedly earned him the reputation of being a supporter of women's suffrage. 'Songs of Consolation' appeared in 1893, including a poem dedicated to his brother who had died in 1849. 'The River Trent: an Idyll' was published in 1899, its eleven poems described in 1941 as 'a curious blend of Gray's 'Elegy', Tennyson's 'In Memoriam' and Victorian vicar'. His own 'In Memoriam' was dedicated to his wife, who died in 1906. Much of his work, including 'Ian and Edric', a theological discussion in blank verse, was collected into a 359-page volume, 'Poems and Idylls', in 1913. 
In 1893 Cullen was awarded an honorary doctorate of divinity by Illinois Wesleyan University. Of 'very strong and pronounced views', he was long remembered as a benevolent, white-bearded figure in a clerical hat, travelling in a wicker-sided trap. He died at the vicarage, Radcliffe-on-Trent, of apoplexy on 6 May 1914 and was buried two days later at Bottesford where he had been curate forty years before. 


@@@@@


doc= 39307


Davenport, William (bap. 1584, d. 1655), landowner and diarist, was baptized in Stockport, Cheshire, on 25 March 1584, the son and heir of Sir William Davenport (1563-1627) of Bramhall and Dorothy Warren ('fl'. 1566?-1615), the daughter of a neighbouring gentleman. William Davenport is an especially well-documented example of someone who refused to take sides in the English civil war and who suffered for it. He was the head of a cadet line of a cadet branch of a Domesday family, a one-manor gentry family with an income of perhaps $400 p.a. in the 1630s, in the top fifty but not the top thirty families in Cheshire. His ancestors in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries had been chief foresters of the royal forest of Macclesfield, and his family served continuously from the first Cheshire commission of the peace in 1543 to the death of his father in 1627. Sir William had rebuilt the family home -- Bramall Hall -- at the turn of the sixteenth century as a magnificent timber-framed mansion -- a 'fair house and a park and all things fit for a worshipful seat' (W. Webb, 'Perambulation', 1656, 70). The marriage of his daughters to mere merchants suggests that Sir William may have overextended himself in this rebuilding. 
Davenport himself married twice into families higher in the Cheshire rank order of wealth and status than himself; first, in 1599, he married Frances (died 1620), daughter of Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey, and second, in 1637, he married Margaret (died 1653), daughter of Thomas Legh of Adlington. His father's brother Humphrey was -- as chief baron of the court of exchequer -- at the centre of legal controversy in the 1630s; his mother's brother was a Jesuit but his own religion seems to have been staunchly conformist Anglican. His younger brother Humphrey was killed in the duke of Buckingham's failed Ile de Re expedition in counter-productive support of the French Huguenots in 1627; he was a country squire with intriguing connections. 
Between 1613 and 1650 Davenport kept one of the most interesting of all gentry commonplace books. The first half covers events at court, at Whitehall, and at Westminster, and contains accounts of the failure of English arms abroad down to 1641. It then becomes a chronicle of Davenport's experiences during the lead up to, and through, the civil wars. The first half demonstrates just how much information about matters of public concernment was circulated in manuscript by the 1610s and 1620s; it ranges from scabrous accounts of the divorce of the earl and countess of Essex and the ensuing Overbury scandal (1612-15), and of the earl of Castlehaven's trial for sodomy (1631), to copies of the speeches of all eight managers in the impeachment of the duke of Buckingham (1626), a speech allegedly made by Archbishop Abbott in council against a greater tolerance of Catholic practice (1623), and details of the marriage negotiations (1622-3) between the then Prince Charles and the Spanish court for the hand of the Spanish infanta. Disapproval of royal fiscal policy, of a bungled royal foreign policy, and of corruption at court did not make this unpuritan man a parliamentarian in the civil war. But conventional Anglican piety and a distaste for local sectarian activity did not make him a royalist either. 
After 1640 Davenport's book changes and becomes an account of his own experiences. It records the petition -- humble in tone, determined in purpose -- presented to him by a group of his tenants on 17 September 1642. It explains why, despite his own misgivings, they felt bound in conscience to enlist as soldiers in a parliamentarian regiment being raised by a neighbouring gentleman. It records his decision to remain neutral and to obey all lawful commands (which he took to mean warrants in due form from both sides) and it lays out the various contributions that he made to royalist and parliamentarian commanders. It also records various raids and the pillaging of his house by both sides, and his formal protests (for instance, when he was forced by a file of parliamentarian soldiers to dismount, hand over his horse, and walk home; a subsequent strong protest to their gentleman-captain brought an apology and the return of the horse). His even-handedness did not prevent a local committee from confiscating his estate on account of the assistance he had given to the royalists, and he then fell foul of an internal feud within the parliamentarian bureaucracy; he had to pay fines totalling $995 to two different bodies (the local sequestration committee and the committee for compounding with delinquents in London). Davenport demonstrates that an unwillingness to take sides in the civil war and a willingness to obey whoever was in power in his area was no guarantee of a quiet life. He was buried at the parish church, Stockport, on 24 May 1655. 


@@@@@


doc= 39315


Brookshaw, George (bap. 1751, d. 1823), cabinet-maker and decorative painter, was baptized at St Philip's Church, Birmingham, on 10 July 1751, one of three children of George Brookshaw ('b'. 'c'.1722) and his wife, Mary Hawkes ('b'. 'c'.1723); his elder brother, the engraver Richard Brookshaw, was baptized in the same church on 1 January 1749. Nothing is known of his father's occupation or of his own education or training. However, Brookshaw's Birmingham origins and his chosen career suggest a possible early association with the manufacturer Matthew Boulton (1728-1809) and his 'mechanical painting' venture. 
By 1777 Brookshaw was living in London, where he set up business as a maker of (almost exclusively) painted furniture -- at first in Curzon Street, and from 1782 or 1783 to 'c'.1794 at 48 Great Marlborough Street. He adopted a successful decorative formula of painted figurative medallions derived from engravings, largely after Angelica Kauffman, combined with panels of closely observed garden flowers and borders of delicate stylized ornament. This formula was applied not only to movable furniture but also to chimney-pieces in either wood or marble; sometimes the ornament was painted partly on copper panels, mounted on or within the wooden frame. Although lacking strong architectural qualities, Brookshaw's output accorded with a rather feminine expression of neo-classical taste. For a short period in the early 1780s his idiom was favoured by adherents of the refined Anglo-French style promoted by Henry Holland, including William Cavendish, fifth duke of Devonshire, and the prince of Wales -- earning him the appellation 'Peintre Ebeniste par Extraordinaire' (inscribed on his bill for a commode supplied to the prince of Wales at Carlton House in 1783). Among his other patrons were Lord Delaval (1781-3), Henry Somerset, fifth duke of Beaufort (1787), William Blathwayt of Dyrham (1791), and Sir Mark Wood of Piercefield Park, Monmouthshire ('c'.1794). 
This highly specialized business may have been sustained by capital provided by Brookshaw's wife, Sobieski ('bap'. 1749, died 1811), the daughter of a Birmingham gun maker, William Grice, whom he married on 20 January 1778. At some point they parted company, perhaps in the mid-1790s when he abruptly abandoned his cabinet-making practice, having probably been forced into bankruptcy; at his death in 1823 he lived with one Elizabeth Stanton, 'who has passed for my wife' (will). For up to a decade ('c'.1794-1804) he lived under an assumed name, G. Brown, earning a living as a teacher of flower-painting and on the proceeds of his first painting manual, 'A New Treatise of Flower Painting', published anonymously in 1797. A 'third' edition by 'G. Brown' was issued in 1799, and the book was eventually reissued under his real name in 1816, followed by various supplementary volumes (on flowers, fruits, and birds) between 1817 and 1819. However, Brookshaw's most important published work, which indeed is of some botanical significance, was his finely illustrated treatise on fruit growing, the 'Pomona Britannica', issued in parts from 1804 -- when he first resumed his own name -- and as a single folio volume in 1812. It was dedicated to his most illustrious former patron, the prince of Wales. But Brookshaw's renown in the botanical world never matched that of his cabinet-making career, and he failed to gain recognition by Sir Joseph Banks, Sir J. E. Smith, and other luminaries of the recently founded Horticultural Society -- perhaps in part because of the mystery surrounding his past, which he undoubtedly suppressed deliberately. His last years (1819-23) were spent in obscurity in Twickenham and he died at Greenwich in January or February 1823. He was buried at St Mary's Church, Twickenham, on 6 February 1823 and left the bulk of his small estate (under $450) to his only child, Caroline (by his wife, Sobieski), who died unmarried in 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 39316


Cobb, John (c.1715-1778), cabinet-maker and upholsterer, is presumably the person of that name put as apprentice in 1729 to Tim Money, a Norwich upholsterer (Boyd MSS). The Norfolk connection is feasible on account of Cobb's bequeathing in 1778 the interest realized on $20,000 (after his second wife's lifetime receiving of the same) to William Cobb, the grandson of William Cobb at Wallingford in Norfolk (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1044, fols. 257'r'-258'r'). As apprentices were normally put to a trade at the age of fourteen, 'c'.1715 seems a likely year for his birth, although nothing precise is known of his parentage or birth. Having come out of his apprenticeship about 1736 he may have continued to work for his master as a journeyman (that is, one who works in a business he does not own). Some chance then brought him in contact with William Vile (1714/15-1767), his partner for the next fourteen years, until Vile's retirement in 1764. 
The partnership between Cobb and Vile was set up in London in 1751, in the New Street ward of St Martin-in-the-Fields, and was, seemingly, capitalized by the successful cabinet-maker William Hallett (1707-1781). The rate books for 1751 show 'William Vile & Co.' with their patron, William Hallett, occupying the next-door premises (Westminster city archives, MS, fol. 527). By 1755 Hallett's name has been excised in favour of John Cobb. The bank accounts of Vile and Cobb show monthly payments to Hallett (who used the same bank), particularly in the years 1758-63 (Royal Bank of Scotland, Drummonds branch, London). On 31 March 1755 Cobb consolidated his position (although affection probably played a part) by marrying Sukey, daughter of Giles Grendey (1693-1780), a successful London furniture maker with an extensive export business. The newspaper account of the marriage described Cobb as 'an eminent Timber Merchant' ('General Evening Post'). Cobb, as his will makes clear, married twice; his second wife was called Mary. The date of Sukey's death, and the date of the second marriage, are unknown. There seems little reason for Cobb's adoption of a singularly haughty character, other than the fact that with his partner he had been a cabinet-maker to the crown since 1761 (TNA: PRO, LC 5/57). J. T. Smith records how, presumably in the 1760s, Cobb in full dress 'of the most superb and costly kind strutted through his workshops giving orders to his men' (Smith, 2.243). Smith also relates how George III placed Cobb's name second to that of Vile through annoyance at his pomposity and imperious delegation of duties to his foreman, John Jenkins. Cobb was in royal service from 1761 to 1764, and after the retirement of his partner turned to the provision of superb marquetry furniture in the neo-classical style. 
After Vile's retirement Cobb continued in business for a further fourteen years: the full range of his commissions was listed by G. Beard and C. Gilbert in their 'Dictionary of English Furniture Makers' (1986). Mindful of the upsurge of styling in the neo-classical taste, introduced from Italy, and particularly by the architect Robert Adam (1728-1792), Cobb worked in woods other than mahogany. In particular he used exotic veneers and floral marquetry. There was probably an urgent need to do so to counteract competition from other successful cabinet-makers working in this 'new' mode, such as Mayhew and Ince (active from 1758 to the end of the century), and by the insistence of patrons wanting such pieces. An early example of this styling came in 1765 when Cobb supplied Robert Adam and his patron, George William, sixth earl of Coventry, with furniture including '8 Mahogony Armd Chairs' at a cost of $30. They are after a drawing by Adam (Sir John Soane's Museum, London), and are thus an early essay in the revived 'antique' taste. The chairs are still in the possession of the estate trustees. Cobb continued to provide a wide range of furniture although he made no provisions for funerals -- for many cabinet-makers undertaking was a profitable side-line. Seminal to the late work, however, is a series of commodes of superb quality which incorporate the elaborate veneering of curved surfaces and floral marquetry. A documented example is the inlaid commode and two satinwood vase stands supplied in 1772-4 to Paul Methuen (priv. coll.). The commode was charged in 1772 at $63 5's'. 3died; the vase stands were supplied two years later at an unknown cost (Methuen archive, MS 1742, 8112, Wilts. & Swindon HC). The side panels incorporate Methuen's arms with those of his wife, Catherine Cobb (seemingly no relative to the maker), and the sinuous ormolu corner mounts enhance the form. They are among Cobb's finest achievements. 
Cobb's work after Vile's retirement gave him an increasing fortune. At his death in London, which occurred between 26 and 31 August 1778, he had a dwelling house in St Martin's Lane, a house at Highgate, a chariot, horses, and the sum of $20,000 to 'support the name of Cobb' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1044, fols. 257'r'-258'r'). A notice in 1783 recorded that he was 'formerly partner with the late Mr Hallett of Cannons', a fact well attested by the earlier financial arrangement ('GM'). With his partner, William Vile, John Cobb was one of the most accomplished furniture makers active in the third quarter of the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 39323


Frances Eliza Macdonald (1873-1921), artist, was born on 24 August 1873 in Ravenscliff Road, Kidsgrove, Stafford. Margaret was educated at Orme Girls' School in north Staffordshire until she was sixteen and attended an art school in Germany in her late teens or early twenties. In 1890 after her father's retirement and subsequent move to 9 Windsor Terrace, Glasgow, Margaret and her sister Frances immediately began attending classes at the Glasgow School of Art. Four years after her father's death in 1895, Margaret moved with her mother to live with her brother Charles at Dunglass Castle, Bowling, near Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 39328


Marot, Daniel (1661-1752), architect, designer, and engraver, was born in Paris in 1661, the son of the protestant Jean Marot (1619-1679), engraver and architect, and his wife, Charlotte, daughter of the Dutch cabinet-maker Abraham Garbrand. Daniel assisted his father on his engravings of contemporary French architecture, published in 1670 as 'L'architecture francoise', known as the 'Grand Marot'. From 1677 Daniel worked independently as an engraver for the designers Jean Le Pautre (1618-1682) and Jean Berain (1637-1711), then 'dessinateur du cabinet et de la chambre' to Louis XIV. Marot's prints after Berain included the designs for Lully's opera 'Le triomphe de l'amour' (1681) and for the funeral in 1683 of Queen Marie Therese, wife of Louis XIV. Marot's reputation was enhanced by the engraving of the celebrations marking the birth of the dauphin, 25 August 1682: 'Faite par un jeune homme qui egale deja les plus habile graveurs, et qui se sera autant connaitres par luy-mesme, qu'il est connu a Paris par le nom de feu son pere. Il est fils du Sr Marot, architecte et graveur, qui a laisse beaucoup ouvrages au Public. ('Mercure de France', Sept 1682)' Daniel Marot left France as a consequence of the persecution of protestants that led to the revocation of the edict of Nantes in October 1685. He went to Holland to join his mother's relatives. There, Jacob Gole, Marot's future brother-in-law, engraved 'c'.1700 Marot's portrait by James Parmentier. 
The earliest recorded print by Marot in Holland commemorates the ball held in December 1686 at the huis ten Bosch, near The Hague, given by Mary, princess of Orange, to celebrate her husband's birthday. The festive scene, set in the famous Oranjezaal, is framed with allegorical figures and an ornamental cartouche. This etching is signed by Marot as both draughtsman and printmaker and was sold from his house in The Hague and by Jacob Gole in Amsterdam. It carries an effusive dedication to the princess demonstrating that Marot was anxious to attract her patronage. 
Two years later Marot engraved 'The order of the fleet of his serene highness the lord prince of Orange coming to the help of the English protestants on 11 November 1688', an impression of which is in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. The forty-nine warships are depicted diagrammatically so that individual vessels can be identified. The coat of arms indicates that the print was published after William and Mary had been crowned joint English monarchs in April 1689. 
Marot's role as a visual propagandist for William and Mary was not limited to the production of prints of royal or political events. He became active as a designer encouraging a taste for unified interiors and gardens for royal palaces and for the stately homes of courtiers, in Holland and in England. A wide range of furnishings and decorative paintings were executed to Marot's designs by teams of artists and craftsmen. His first such commission in 1686 was for the staircase, Willemszaal, and marble room at Slot Zeist, near Utrecht, built to the designs of Jacob Roman (the town architect of Leiden) for Willem Adriaan, count of Nassau-Odijk (1632-1705), ambassador to France and a cousin of William of Orange. At Zeist, Marot was also responsible for the layout of the gardens. In the same year, Mary of Orange had laid the foundation stone for the hunting lodge at Het Loo near Apeldoorn. Also built to the designs of Jacob Roman, after 1689 it was extended as a royal palace. In 1692 Daniel Marot designed the illusionistic painting for the staircase inspired by the escalier des ambassadeurs at Versailles. This was painted by a team of decorative artists including the French protestant refugees Pierre Berchet and James Parmentier, both of whom had previously worked in England and were to return there. 
At Het Loo, Daniel Marot was responsible for most of the interior decoration. The original painted decoration in the audience room has survived intact, with landscapes painted by Glauber and figures by Gerard de Lairesse. Further evidence for Marot's role is provided by the printed versions of these designs which appeared in The Hague in 1703. They include the new dining-room and the king's library -- which was originally intended as a porcelain cabinet for Queen Mary, with a mirrored ceiling -- it was only adapted for the king after Mary's early death in 1694. These prints were published in Holland by Marot after William III's death in an endeavour to compensate for the loss of royal patronage and to encourage new commissions. A later print of a state bedchamber which appeared in the 'Second livre d'appartements' in 1712 may have been based on the original design for the king's bedchamber at Het Loo. It shows the extent to which such a room depended on upholstery for its effect. The walls are draped in fabric which echoes that on the state bed. The set of upholstered chairs is, like the wall hangings, enriched with applique motifs. 
In England as in Holland, courtiers were swift to realize Marot's potential and supported his role as a designer of interior furnishings. A rare design drawing signed and dated 1700 by Marot for a mirror, table, and candlestand for William III at Het Loo is endorsed on the back 'table at miroir dore pour Loo 17 Sept 1701' (Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam). Similar mirrors with applied carving at the corners and middles were supplied for English patrons. Examples were made for Thomas Coningsby's seat at Hampton Court, Herefordshire. 
There is no distinction in quality between the furnishings made to Marot's designs for the monarch and those for leading courtiers. A set of upholstered chairs, dating from the 1690s, with a daybed and paned hangings 'en suite', survive at Penshurst, Kent. They may have come from one of the English royal palaces, for they belonged to Henry Sidney, first earl of Romney, who was William III's groom of the stole. Or they may have been commissioned for Leicester House, London, refurbished for Lord Romney's elder brother. A daybed and sofa (Temple Newsam, Leeds) made for Thomas Osborne, first duke of Leeds, after 1694 by Philip Guibert may have been designed by Marot; the same maker produced very similar pieces for William III in 1697. 
As at Zeist, Marot was responsible for designing the garden layout at Het Loo under the supervision of Hans Willem Bentinck, first earl of Portland. The grotto in the corner of the queen's garden consisted of three rooms. The first room was lined with shells and paved with black and white marble; the second room contained a couch or daybed for repose; the third was decorated with porcelain. The king's garden was dominated by a bowling green and the fountain in the centre of the upper garden rose to a height of 45 feet, with thirty-two jets around it. 
It was Marot's skill as a garden designer which led to his first documented English commission, the design for the parterre at Hampton Court Palace, dated August 1689. The design was apparently sent by Marot from Holland and was not executed until 1698. Marot's presence in England is not documented until 1694, although a payment to 'Mr. Maro' in September 1693 (Petworth) may indicate that he was already in England. He was not paid for work on the Hampton Court parterre until after he had returned to Holland. In March 1698 Caspar Frederick Henning (paymaster of the money for the use and service of his majesty's gardens at Hampton Court and Newmarket) wrote to the council of Nassau demesne suggesting that Mr Marot should be paid $236 11's'. 11died sterling. In London, Marot was employed by the francophile Ralph, first earl of Montagu, at Montagu House, Bloomsbury, rebuilt after a fire in 1686. Marot also worked for Montagu's son-in-law, Charles Seymour, sixth duke of Somerset (1662-1748), at Petworth, Sussex. As master of the king's wardrobe from 1689, Montagu was aware of Marot's work as an interior designer in both the Dutch and English royal palaces. William III's visit to Montagu's London house in May 1689 stimulated the wish to emulate that unity of interior decoration in his own royal palaces. 
A set of record drawings of decorative panels at Montagu House, Bloomsbury, is annotated in Marot's hand (V&A). They relate to five painted panels at Boughton, Northamptonshire, that originally lined a closet in the London house. These drawings were not subsequently published by Marot. One is inscribed 'la hauteur de la tapisserie de monsieur Loire est de 7 pied 6 pouce' indicating that the panels were probably based on designs by Alexis Loir (1640-1713), Parisian engraver and goldsmith. Similar drawings in the National Museum, Stockholm, correspond to Loir's 'Nouveau desseins d'ornemens de paneaux, lambris, carosse etc'. As Loir is not recorded in England, Montagu may have imported the panels from France. Marot's contribution to the interior decoration at Montagu House was as co-ordinator of design although he may have directed operations from Holland. Decorative painting was bordered by architectural woodwork and matching picture frames. Although the house was demolished in the 1840s, surviving picture frames demonstrate that their design answers to Marot's later published designs for frames. The Montagu House frames may have been made from original drawings by Marot. 
As at Montagu House, London, Daniel Marot's work at Petworth for the duke of Somerset is largely undocumented. Similar to the second Montagu House, Bloomsbury, said by Colen Campbell to be the work of 'Pouget', the exterior originally had a pronounced central squared dome (destroyed by fire in 1714). The interior -- in particular the marble hall realized during 1692, with its giant doorcases, huge bracketed frieze, and overmantels crowned by segmental pediments -- is similar to Daniel Marot's Treveszaal in the Binnenhof at The Hague, completed in 1698. The west front is similar to Marot's De Voorst, designed from 1697 for William III's favourite Arnold Joost van Keppel, first earl of Albemarle; the busts on fluted tapering plinths over the ground-floor windows of the pavilions are reminiscent of an overmantel there. The central section of the frieze is close to one of Marot's prints in his series 'Trois diferentes corniches'. Marot's influence is present in the military trophies on the gates to the forecourt, a form of trophy which reappears in his published designs for triumphal arches. 
On 30 September 1693 John Bowen the agent 'received of my Lord Duke twenty Pounds which was paid to Mr. Maro' (sixth duke of Somerset's personal receipt book, W. Sussex RO). Marot is also recorded as borrowing a book from the duke's library. 
Probably inspired by the interior of Montagu House, William III entrusted the earl of Montagu with the supervision of his palace interiors. At some time in the early 1690s Daniel Marot became involved, indeed Marot later referred to himself as 'Architecte des appartments de sa Majeste Britanique'. Correspondence from Constantijn Huygens dated April 1694 records that Marot had been sent for from Holland by Queen Mary. In October he was back in Amsterdam where he married Catherine Mary, daughter of Adrian Gole, but the registers note that Daniel was resident in London. His brother Isaac witnessed the marriage. Daniel, Catherine, and Isaac returned to London. The records of Queen Mary's privy purse document annual fees paid to Daniel Marot and specific payments to Daniel's younger brother, Isaac, in 1694 for 'designing and drawing 3 large pieces of silk during 3 weeks at 5s a day. For designing during 6 days some ornaments for a bed and cushions' (BL, Add. MS 5751). Thus the series of eight embroidered panels in Queen Mary's closet, Hampton Court Palace, traditionally believed to have been designed by Daniel Marot for the queen, may have been the work of Isaac Marot -- they were probably not completed and therefore not hung until after Mary's death. It was Daniel who probably took overall responsibility for the decoration of Queen Mary's water gallery at Hampton Court, a suite of private apartments on two floors overlooking the River Thames, adjoining the privy garden. The 'piano nobile' had a gallery and a great room with four closets at the corners; the lower floor housed a dairy and a bathing room. Celia Fiennes described the closets opening off the great room as 'panelled all with Jappan, another with Looking Glass and two with work under panells of glass' (C. Morris, ed., 'The Travels of Celia Fiennes', 1947, 59-60). Could this 'work under glass' be the hangings embroidered to Marot's designs which have now returned to Hampton Court? The upper floor was decorated in blue, white, and gold; the gallery furnished with four couches upholstered in sky-coloured satin, twenty-five cane chairs, and twelve round stools japanned blue and white. In addition two sets of tables, mirrors, and stands, decorated 'en suite', were supplied for the piers. One of these tables has been identified and carries the inscription 'La Galerie Thames' on the underside of the stretcher (priv. coll.). The dairy was furnished with tiles (examples in the Rijksmuseum, and in the V&A) and Delft milk pans (V&A; Hampton Court Palace) made in Delft to Daniel Marot's designs. There were also urns, vases, and tall pyramids, made up of tiers of box-like units, each with a number of protruding nozzles. Usually referred to as tulip vases, they were probably used to grow hyacinths (see A. Pavord, 'The Tulip', 1999, 182). The delftware bears the 'AK' monogram of Adrianszoon Koex (who ran the Greek A factory at Delft from 1687 to 1701) and the 'PAK' monogram of his son Pieter Adrianszoon who ran the factory until his death in 1703, when it was managed by his widow until 1722. Marot also designed some features of the interiors for William III at Hampton Court -- a ceiling design in the collection of the Royal Institute of British Architects incorporating a royal crown is thought to be part of this commission -- but in the main palace Marot worked under the supervision of William Talman (1650-1719). 
Marot almost certainly designed interiors for Queen Mary at Kensington Palace. There the queen's bed was of seven-colour velvet, lined with gold satin and adorned with green and silver 'passementerie', with an embroidered gold satin counterpane. Her closet was hung with Indian damask and furnished with a blue and gold embroidered couch, with a tented canopy of gold and gauze curtains. These could be raised up and down with pulleys round a framework. The design of the latter may have been inspired by Turkish practice. Recent research has indicated that Daniel Marot was also responsible for the layout of the twelve-acre slope garden to the south of Kensington Palace from 1689 to 1690. A broad gravel walk centred on the south front of the palace was flanked by arrangements of grass and gravel forming 'parterres a l'Angloise' with 'plates bandes' and topiary. This formal garden was cleared in 1727. 
Daniel Marot was based in London for at least two more years. In June 1695 his eldest son, Daniel, was baptized at the Huguenot church of Leicester Fields and his daughter Marianne was baptized there in June 1696. The family were still in London in December 1696 when Daniel's wife (then named as Catherina Maria van Goolen) witnessed the baptism of Abraham, son of her cousin the cabinet-maker Cornelius Gole, at the same church. By the autumn of the following year, Daniel, Catherine, and their two young children had returned to Holland; their second son was baptized in Amsterdam on 1 September 1697. How was Marot's time in England occupied for the two years that he is definitely recorded in England and in particular from January 1695, after the death of Queen Mary? 
Leading courtiers created in their own country palaces suites of apartments worthy of their monarch. They commissioned grand beds in imitation of those made for the royal palaces. Other furnishings also imitated royal decoration. Delftware believed to have been made to Daniel Marot's designs survives at Boughton and Drayton in Northamptonshire, Castle Howard, Yorkshire, Dyrham, Gloucestershire, and Petworth and Uppark in Sussex. One courtier, Thomas Coningsby (1656-1729), appears to have commissioned the king's own designer to achieve the necessary effect. At Hampton Court, Herefordshire, the king's state bedroom was hung with the same crimson damask that was used to upholster the state bed and the accompanying set of seat furniture. The damask was identical to that used in William III's presence chamber at Hampton Court Palace. Woven in Genoa, it was provided by the London-based Huguenot merchant William Portal. The state bed (Het Loo Palace, Apeldoorn, Netherlands) with its flying tester has little cantoon wings at the end corners, a feature also found on the great crimson velvet bed from Melville House, Fife (V&A), made for William III's former secretary of state for Scotland, George, earl of Melville. Melville House was designed from 1697 by the Scottish architect James Smith. Not satisfied with creating a bed for the king's use, Coningsby ordered for himself a four-poster bed upholstered in blue silk damask (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York). 
Both the Melville state bed and those from Hampton Court, Herefordshire, are attributed to the London-based Francis Lapiere, the leading French emigre upholsterer of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth century, although no bills have survived to prove this. The attribution is based on a comparison with the remaining canopy, headboard, and cloth of a crimson damask state bed embellished with silver braid (Hardwick Hall, Derbyshire) originally made for William Cavendish, first duke of Devonshire's seat at Chatsworth, Derbyshire, for which Lapiere charged $497 in 1697. Another state bed, created about 1704, two years after William III's death, can be seen at Dyrham Park, Gloucestershire, the seat of William Blaythwayt, former secretary of war to that king. Upholstered in crimson and yellow velvet, and lined with a sprigged satin, it was created for the 'Best Bed Chamber above Stairs' where the walls were lined with tapestry and the windows had matching yellow damask silk curtains and red and white striped case curtains. Even the doors had similar curtains and valances. The names Lapiere and Marot are directly associated with the provision of upholstered furnishings for Montagu House, London, and Boughton House, Northamptonshire. In 1705 Lapiere was paid $6 0's'. 0died for 'taking a crimson & gold damask bed all to pieces & new making it up again to go to Boughton' (MS, Boughton House), a reference to the Boughton state bed (V&A). Lapiere also made new beds for Montagu and in 1706 supplied a bed of striped tapestry needlework and charged for 'Mr. Marrot' for 'drawing the Cornishes and for drawing the Cupps' (MS, Boughton House). This rare reference to the designer is unexpected, as by 1697 Daniel Marot had returned to Holland. The most likely explanation is that this refers to Daniel's younger brother, Isaac, the 'dessinateur' whose son Charles was baptized at the Huguenot chapel at the Savoy in September 1707. 
In England, it was Daniel Marot's skill as a designer which resulted in a unified approach to interior decoration. This was realized under his supervision through a team of other designers, artists, and craftsmen. The importance of Daniel Marot's younger brother, Isaac, as a designer has only recently emerged and as yet no drawings have been firmly attributed to him. But there were other designers working in a similar style. Mr Boujet signed drawings for the overmantel at Dunham Massey, Cheshire (drawings collection, RIBA), and a sculptured relief for a pediment (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York). A series of elaborately carved walnut hall benches at Dunham Massey are Dutch in inspiration and, if not imported from Holland, may well have been designed by Marot, or another member of his circle. Many of those who worked with Marot in England were foreigners; some were Huguenot refugees from France, others came to England via Holland. Apart from the upholsterer Lapiere, they included the cabinet-makers Gerrit Jensen and Cornelius Gole, the carvers and gilders Jean, Thomas, and Rene Pelletier, and the goldsmith Peter Archambo. Through his published designs, Daniel Marot's influence in England was long-lived, and inspired the work of later designers including the architect William Kent. Marot's published designs were reissued in 1892, and the resulting resurgence of interest produced a spate of articles and Marot revival interiors, of which the blue drawing-room at Stansted, Sussex, designed by Goodhart Rendel in 1926, is most remarkable in its close adherence to Marot's printed designs. 
On his return to Holland, Daniel Marot worked for Arnold Joost van Keppel, first earl of Albemarle (1669-1718), at De Voorst (destr.) near Zutphen. Here Marot supervised the interiors of a building designed by Jacob Roman and designed the garden layout. The drawing for the 'trompe-l'oeil' staircase decoration (Cooper Hewitt Museum, New York) is signed by the decorative artist Isaac de Moucheron. This demonstrates how closely Daniel Marot worked with his team of artists and craftsmen. 
Although Marot continued to receive annual payments from William III until 1701 (TNA: PRO t38/193, fol. 98), the king's death in 1702 led Marot to seek patronage from citizens of The Hague and Amsterdam. He lived in The Hague until 1704, then moved to Amsterdam and developed his career as an architect. There his clients included the stadholder of Friesland, John William Friso, for whom he created new state apartments and a staircase at Oranienstein Castle between 1707 and 1709. 
From 1687 Marot issued series of printed designs in suites of about six sheets. The first collected edition consisting of 108 plates appeared in 1703; many of the prints proclaim Marot's former appointment as 'architecte de Guillaume III, Roy de Grande Bretagne'. The second edition of 1712 consisted of 126 plates and was published in The Hague as 'OEuvres de Sieur D. Marot'. His sets of designs included 'Nouveaux livre da partements' (first published in The Hague in 1700-01); 'Second livre dappartements' (1702); 'Nouveaux livres d'ornements' (before March 1702); 'Second livre d'ornaments' (1702-3); 'Nouveaux livres de pintures de salles et d'escaliers'; 'Nouveaux livre de tableaux de portes, et cheminee utiles aux peintres enfleurs'; 'Nouveaux livres de placfond'; 'Nouvelles chiminee de la Hollande' (before March 1702); 'Nouveaux livre de boites de pendulles de coqs et estuys de montres et autres necessaire au orlogeurs' (1706); and 'Nouveaux livre d'orfevrerie' (before March 1702). The latter included designs for silver tables. Some of Marot's printed designs from the library of Ralph, first duke of Montagu (priv. coll.), bear contemporary annotations. They include his 'Livres de statues propres a tailliere en marbre' and 'Vases de la maison royalle de Loo' -- some are similar to a set of four lead vases with relief decoration which survive at Boughton which were probably supplied by Thomas Pelletier in 1705. There are designs for gardens, coaches, embroidery, stage sets, and funerary monuments. 
With the help of Isaac Marot and the Huguenot booksellers David and Pierre Mortier who maintained shops in both Amsterdam and London, Daniel Marot's designs were successfully marketed in Britain as well as in Denmark, Sweden, Germany, and Austria. In England they were used by artists and craftsmen who had already worked to his drawings. They continued to inspire -- a set of seventeen painted panels incorporating the Montagu arms and garter star and ribbon (priv. coll.), which were painted for the second duke of Montagu after 1718, bear witness to their influence fifteen years after they were first published. 
In Holland, Marot developed a second career as an architect. At The Hague, his patrons were government officials and members of the cultivated upper class. For Francois Fagel (1659-1746), secretary of the states general, he rebuilt a house at Noordeinde in 1707. In 1715 for Cornelis van Schuylenburch (1683-1763) Marot converted two town houses into one mansion -- here he applied typical Louis XIV interior ornament to exterior architecture. About 1717 Johan Hendrik van Wassenaer-Obdam (died 1745), a member of the council of state, commissioned a house on the Kneuterdijk. In 1734-6 Marot designed the interiors of a palatial residence for Adriana Margareta Huguetan (died 1752) on the Lange Voorhout; the facade was the work of Jan Pieter van Baurscheit. One of his last important commissions was to extend the huis ten Bosch for William Charles Henry Friso of Orange Nassau (later Stadholder William IV). He added two wings and a new entrance hall in 1745-7. 
Throughout his life Marot continued to draw on late seventeenth-century French design for inspiration and it is surprising how little his style changed and developed. This must reflect conservative taste in Holland and the extended dominance of the Louis XIV style. Daniel Marot's eldest son, also Daniel (1695-1769), assisted his father. His earliest drawing dates from 1716. He continued to paint decorations for garden pavilions after his father's death on 4 June 1752. 


@@@@@


doc= 39337


Delaval, John Hussey, Baron Delaval (1728-1808), industrialist and politician, was born on 17 March 1728, the second of twelve children of Captain Francis Blake Delaval RN (bap. 1692, d. 1752) ['see under 'Delaval family] and his wife, Rhoda Apreece (died 1759), heiress, of Doddington, Lincolnshire ['see 'Delaval family (per. c.1520-1752)]. His father, born Francis Delaval, changed his name to Francis Blake on inheriting the Ford estate in north Northumberland in 1718, and then to Francis Blake Delaval in 1729, on inheriting the coal-rich coastal estates at Seaton Delaval and at Hartley in south-east Northumberland. His younger brother was Edward Hussey Delaval. John Delaval was educated at Westminster School and Eton College. He went to Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1746, but his academic career was curtailed when the 'Captain Hargreaves' living with him proved to be female. He married Susanna Potter, 'nee' Robinson (died 1783), widow of John Potter, on 2 April 1750, thereby acquiring property in Soho and Mayfair, Westminster. By 1756 he had effectively superseded his hedonistic and profligate elder brother Francis as head of the family, and the fortunes of the estates, then carrying debts of $45,000, thereafter depended upon him. 
Ford, a rural and largely barren estate of about 7000 acres, was enclosed and divided by Delaval. By 1794 plantations had been established, and farmsteads extended or rebuilt, at a cost of $9000; another $10,500 was devoted to remodelling the castle. Delaval favoured improving farm leases and having 'practical' farmers as tenants -- having a known dislike of gentlemen farmers -- and was able to increase the estate rental from about $1000 to nearly $5000 by 1794. Existing collieries and limeworks were extended, and a brick and tile works and an iron forge were established. As an industrial centre Hartley was always more significant than Ford. Because of its natural harbour, there had been fishing, coalmining, and salt making since the thirteenth century, but Delaval added considerably to these activities. Under skilled agents, pumping engines and wagon-ways were introduced at the pits. The increased coal outputs, together with the establishment of a glass-bottle works in 1762, then required an improved harbour, and this was achieved in 1764 at a reputed cost of $10,000. 
The improved harbour at Seaton Sluice allowed faster turnaround times for the collier brigs, thereby increasing the vend and market price of Hartley coals. It also facilitated the import of raw materials for the glassworks, and the export of its products. By 1788, Delaval's Royal Northumberland Bottle Works had become the largest such enterprise in the country, a position it held until the 1800s, its output having reached 200,000 dozen bottles per year. Copperas production was also begun, using iron pyrites found in some coals, to provide a colouring agent for the glassworks, and also for export. The glass and copperas works, like the salt works before them, utilized the almost unsaleable small coals from the Hartley pits. 
Delaval encouraged his agents to be innovative in these developments, but he maintained close overall control, except for a period after 1764 when family disagreements saw his younger brother Thomas assume responsibility for the Hartley enterprises. Thomas was no businessman, however, and his financial difficulties enabled John to resume control in 1771. This was a prelude to further family upsets. John had succeeded to the Doddington estate in 1759 (adding Hussey to his name), only to lose it to his brother Edward in 1774. Having spent $17,000 on improvements there, John sought revenge by ordering every tree on the estate to be felled. He was created a baronet on 1 July 1761. 
By 1770 the Hartley pits alone employed 300 hands, and in 1777 some 48,000 tons of coal were shipped coastwise, about 180 ships cleared the harbour, and around $24,000 was paid in port revenues. Such success did not enamour Delaval to the Tyneside coal traders, especially when he refused to be bound by their cartel arrangements. Another development was the industrial village alongside the harbour. By 1790 Seaton Sluice, with forty-three cottage houses in the predictably named John, Hussey, and Delaval streets, also had a market square, a school, a brewery, and public houses, so that 'no man should have an opportunity of gaining money here, and spending it elsewhere' (Askham, 128). 
As a politician Delaval defeated the young John Wilkes at Berwick in the general election of 1754, and when Wilkes subsequently disputed the result, Delaval made a flippant speech 'full of wit, humour, and buffoonery, which kept the House in a roar' (HoP, 'Commons'), but which brought harsh words from William Pitt (1759-1806). Delaval lost the seat in 1761, regained it at a by-election in 1765, and held it in 1768. Failing to win the Berwick freemen's support for Wilkes's plans for electoral reform, Delaval lost a county seat in the election of 1774 but was returned for Berwick as a whig in 1780. Initially he supported Charles James Fox's plan to regulate the East India Company; but he later changed his party. On 24 May 1784 Delaval: 'astonished a great many by a very warm, explicit declaration that he had, in the last Parliament, opposed Mr Pitt as a supposed minister of secret influence, but having now heard so unequivocally from the people themselves that he was 'their' minister, he should most heartily obey their voice, and give him all the support he deserved. (HoP, 'Commons')' Delaval had received an Irish peerage in 1783, and Pitt rewarded him with an English peerage in 1786 to strengthen tory support in the Lords. Delaval's elevation led to his being mentioned in 'The Rolliad', and he was the butt of an opposition satire, 'The Delavaliad'. 
Susanna died in 1783, and Delaval took the sixteen-year-old Elizabeth Hicks as his mistress in 1786, spending lavishly on her. Miss Hicks died in 1796, having from 1795 shared Delaval's affections with Susanna Elizabeth Knight ('c'.1762-1822), whom he finally married on 5 January 1803. 
Delaval banked with Surtees and Burdon in Newcastle, but also with Hoares & Co. in London, and when the former crashed in 1803 he faced a degree of financial embarrassment. His losses are uncertain, but he asked Newcastle tradesmen to accept payment in coal rather than money, and sold the contents of his wine cellar. However, presumably cushioned by his deposits with Hoares & Co., he was able to maintain a family even keel, the housekeeping expenses at Seaton Delaval for 1807 amounting to $2,390. 
Delaval died without a male heir on 17 May 1808 at Seaton Delaval Hall and was buried in June 1808 in St Paul's Chapel at Westminster Abbey. The Ford estate, the Hartley glassworks, and his personal possessions passed to his widow for life. His entailed estates at Seaton Delaval and Hartley devolved upon his brother Edward Hussey Delaval, on whose death in 1814 the Delaval family became extinct in the male line. 


@@@@@


doc= 39338


Donaldson, Sir George Hunter (1845-1925), art collector and dealer, was born in Edinburgh on 25 May 1845, the youngest child of Charles Alexander Donaldson ('c'.1800-1868), importer and exporter of furniture, and his wife, Mathilda Hunter. Although little is known about his early life and education, it is clear that Donaldson travelled extensively in Europe, settling in Paris in the late 1860s. He developed there what became a lifelong interest in historic furniture. After moving to London about 1871, he set up in business as a dealer in works of art in New Bond Street, where his shop remained until his retirement in the 1890s. In 1872 he married Alice Jessie Stronach (1851-1907), with whom he had seven children. 
Perhaps in recognition of his knowledge and contacts, Donaldson was made a juror in the furniture section of the Universal Exhibition in Paris in 1867. His professional and private interests were principally in English and European furniture of the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries and early musical instruments. He built up outstanding personal collections of both and could list among his clients the collectors George Salting and John Jones, and the South Kensington (later the Victoria and Albert) Museum. The latter made its first purchase from him in 1885 and continued to receive furniture, carpets, and ceramics from him, as purchases or gifts, until his death. The Royal College of Music was the recipient of his unparalleled collection of historic musical instruments in 1894. Timed to coincide with the opening of the new college building in Prince Consort Road, Donaldson was given free rein to decorate the room of his choice in an appropriate style, which included a coffered ceiling and a Sienese minstrels' gallery. The Donaldson Room, as it became known, is now used as a library. 
Donaldson's interest in international exhibitions continued with his creation of the historic music rooms for the Inventions Exhibition in London in 1885. He was a juror again at the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1889 and was made vice-president of the jury in Paris in 1900. Recognizing the 'superior ingenuity and taste' shown by the European 'new art' exhibits, he spent $500 granted by the Board of Education and several thousand pounds of his own on a collection of furniture and ceramics that he presented to the Victoria and Albert Museum for circulation among the government schools of design (new art furniture nominal file, V&A). The collection included two cabinets by Louis Majorelle, a table by Emile Galle, and part of a music room by Charles Spindler (all V&A). It was, and remains, one of the finest collections of art nouveau -- acquired contemporaneously -- outside France and Belgium. However, its initial reception in England was decidedly mixed, eliciting letters of complaint to 'The Times' and the 'Architectural Review'. 
The success of Donaldson's business can be measured by the string of homes he bought or rented in Britain and Europe from the mid-1880s. He eventually settled at 1 Grand Avenue, Hove, Sussex, where he opened his own museum. He was made a knight, first class, by the grand duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha in 1885, and a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur 'for artistic services to France' in 1892 (Mott, 85). In 1904 he received a knighthood. Having suffered from bronchial conditions all his life, he died at home in Hove on 19 March 1925 after a long illness and was buried on 23 March in Brighton. 


@@@@@


doc= 39340


Howell, Charles Augustus (1840?-1890), artists' agent and rogue, was born on 10 March, probably in 1840, in Porto, Portugal, the youngest of the six children of Alfred William Howell, an English drawing master and wine merchant, and Dona Enriqueta Amelia de Souza De Rosa Coehlo. Through his mother's distinguished Portuguese family Howell claimed to have inherited the red ribbon of the order of Christ. Renowned during his lifetime principally as a prodigious liar and gifted raconteur, Howell's historical importance lies in his varied dealings with members of the Victorian art world, notably John Ruskin, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Charles Algernon Swinburne, and James McNeill Whistler. 'He had the gift of intimacy,' Whistler said, observing that 'it was easier to get involved with Howell than to get rid of him' (Pennell and Pennell, 'Whistler Journal', 59). 
Little is known about Howell's early years, though he seems to have assisted his father in the wine trade until, at the age of sixteen, he went to England to live with his uncle, who was vicar of Darlington. There he gained employment with the Stockton and Darlington Railway and made the acquaintance of the Italian revolutionary Felice Orsini (1819-1858); because of some involvement -- probably innocent -- with the Orsini conspiracy, Howell was compelled to leave the country in 1858, returning only in 1865. The intervening years he spent, according to various reports, diving for treasure off the coast of Portugal, becoming a sheikh of an Arab tribe in Morocco, and serving as an attache to the Portuguese embassy in Rome. Upon returning to England, Howell lived at 3 York Villas in Brixton with his aunt and his cousin Frances Kate (Kitty) Howell (died 1888), whom he married on 21 August 1867; their daughter, Rosalind Blanche Catherine, was born on 20 March 1877. 
By the end of 1865 Howell had become Ruskin's secretary, almoner, and confidant, producing skilful facsimiles of works of art, serving as intermediary in Ruskin's ill-fated liaison with Rose La Touche, and settling in Fulham to keep up the spirits of Edward Burne-Jones, Ruskin's protege. Howell's association with Ruskin ended in 1870, for reasons that remain obscure. Howell and Ruskin had met through Dante Gabriel Rossetti, who was for a time Howell's intimate friend. It was Howell who, in 1869, managed the exhumation of Rossetti's poems from the grave of his wife, Elizabeth Siddal: no one else, Rossetti said, 'could well have been entrusted with such a trying task' (Angeli, 139-40). Also through Rossetti, Howell met Swinburne, who unwisely employed him to negotiate with his publisher John Camden Hotten, and met Whistler, who relied on him through a period of financial crisis to take on debts, manage his affairs, and help prepare his lawsuit against Ruskin, which went to court in 1878. 
At Chaldon House, his exquisitely furnished residence at North End Road, Fulham, Howell established himself as an art expert and interior decorator. One of his clients, George Howard, later ninth earl of Carlisle, commended his 'wonderful skill in the discovery of pretty things' (Cline, 7). He also possessed keen business instincts, and as a dealer in fine arts helped foster the Victorian taste for Chinese porcelain and Japanese prints and elevated the value of contemporary art, especially works by Rossetti, Burne-Jones, Ford Madox Brown, Frederick Sandys, and G. F. Watts. According to William Michael Rossetti, Howell was 'rich in versatile resource and in attractive personal qualities' (Rossetti, 81). He appears in Theodore Watts-Dunton's 'Aylwin' (1898) as De Castro, 'a professional anecdote-monger of extraordinary brilliancy, a raconteur of the very first order', with the bearing of a gentleman and a face revealing 'power and intelligence'. Endowed with tremendous personal charm, Howell founded his dealings with artists in friendships that inevitably foundered through evidence of his dishonesty and double-dealing. Rossetti characterized him in a limerick as '
A Portuguese person called Howell, 

Who lays on his lies with a trowel, 

' and Graham Robertson observed that he attracted 'portable property' -- pictures, furnishings, bric-a-brac -- as a magnet attracts steel (Robertson, 187). Skilled in winning confidence and notoriously unprincipled, Howell is also suspected of having engaged in (or at least contemplated) blackmail, which may account for Georgiana Burne-Jones's chilling dismissal of her husband's former intimate as 'a stranger to all that our life meant' (Burne-Jones, 1.294). 
In 1878 Howell was forced by the extension of the railway lines to leave Chaldon House and persuaded a court to award him substantial compensatory damages. He lived the rest of his life at 91 Southampton Row and at Old Danner, a house by the sea at Selsey Bill, Sussex, where he is said to have entertained the local children with stories and games and played the part of a distinguished personage. He had become involved in 1873 with the artist Rosa Corder (1853-1893), with whom he is alleged to have supplied spurious Rossettis and other forgeries for the art market; their daughter, Beatrice Ellen Howell (whom Howell referred to in his will as his niece), was born about 1883. Howell's death was reported more than once -- 'It is believed by his own agency', according to G. C. Williamson, 'in order that he might hear what was to be said' (Williamson, 150), and also to afford an occasion for a sale, to which his former acquaintances flocked in fruitless hope of recovering their long-lost possessions. His actual demise was consequently met with disbelief: it took place on 24 April 1890, at Home Hospital, 16 Fitzroy Square, after a long illness, probably tuberculosis. A lurid story arose -- apparently without foundation, but befitting Howell's predilection for mendacity -- that he was discovered in a gutter outside a Chelsea pub with his throat cut and a ten-shilling piece clenched between his teeth. He was buried in the Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 39341


Leyland, Frederick Richards (1831-1892), shipowner and art patron, was born on 30 September 1831 in Liverpool, the first of the three sons of John Leyland, a bookkeeper, and his wife, Ann Jane Leyland (died 1877), both of Liverpool. Although Ann Leyland is reputed to have sold pies in the city streets after her husband died or deserted the family in the late 1830s, a contemporary records that she worked in a respectable eating-house near the offices of John Bibby & Sons, Liverpool's oldest independent shipping line. In 1844 she persuaded Bibby to apprentice her eldest son, educated at the mechanics' institute. Frederick Leyland's intellectual gifts and managerial talent quickly became apparent, and he is said to have been instrumental in Bibby's introduction of steamships into the Mediterranean trade in 1850. As the Bibby Line prospered, Leyland rose through the ranks from bookkeeper to clerk to merchant by 1859, and in 1861 he settled a dispute between Bibby and the Birkenhead corporation with such success that he was made a partner in the firm. When at the end of 1872 the partnership dissolved, he bought out his employers and changed the company name to his own. Under his direction the Leyland Line expanded into transatlantic trade and by 1882 comprised some twenty-five steamships. He retired from active business in 1888, leaving his son Frederick Dawson Leyland in charge of the shipping line. 
On 23 March 1855 Leyland had married Frances, 'nee' Dawson (1836-1910), daughter of a master mariner, and by 1861 the Leylands were living with their four children in Falkner Square in Liverpool. His wealth and position were then on the rise, and in 1867 he leased a historic, half-timbered Tudor house, Speke Hall, 7 miles outside the city, where the family resided until 1877, when they moved to another mansion in the vicinity, Woolton Hall. With the advice of his closest friend, the artist Dante Gabriel Rossetti, whom he met through the Liverpool collector John Miller in 1866, Leyland restored much of Speke Hall and embellished it with the art which he had begun acquiring in the early 1860s. More of the paintings were installed at 23 Queen's Gate, Leyland's London home during his most active period of art collecting -- from 1868 to 1875 -- and then, from 1876 until his death, at 49 Prince's Gate, a house remodelled to realize Leyland's 'dream of living the life of an old Venetian merchant in modern London' (Child, 82). 
As a modern-day Medici, Leyland purchased Italian Renaissance paintings, including a Botticelli series illustrating Boccaccio's tale of Nastagio degli Onesti and mentioned in Vasari (now in the Cambo collection, Barcelona, and an Italian priv. coll.). He also became the leading patron of several living artists, primarily Rossetti, Edward Burne-Jones, and James McNeill Whistler. Whistler was commissioned to decorate the entrance hall at Prince's Gate, which featured a famous balustrade salvaged from Northumberland House. That project led to his redecoration of the adjacent dining room, which he gradually transformed into 'The Peacock Room', formally 'Harmony in Blue and Gold' (1876-7, now in the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, DC). The artist and his patron quarrelled over the price of the project, and Whistler immortalized the altercation in a mural of two peacocks poised for battle. He subsequently declared that Leyland would be remembered only as the owner of the work whose price he had refused to pay, and outside the annals of British shipping the prophecy mostly held true. Recent scholarship, however, has recognized Leyland's importance as a patron and supporter of the Victorian avant-garde. 
In portraits by Whistler (Freer Gallery of Art) and Rossetti (Delaware Art Museum), Leyland appears aristocratic in demeanour and dressed like a dandy in ruffled shirts, which gradually became his attribute; he figures in Theodore Watts-Dunton's 1898 novel 'Aylwin' as Symonds, 'an elegant-looking man in a peculiar kind of evening dress' (p. 230). Brooding and aloof, Leyland took solace in music, faithfully practising on his piano but never mastering the instrument to his satisfaction. According to contemporaries he was 'hated thoroughly by a very large circle of acquaintance' (White, 152), and his 'immorality and doings with women' are said to have been widely acknowledged (Stripe, 82). He and his wife officially separated in 1879, possibly because of Leyland's liaison with Rosa Laura Caldecott, 'nee' Gately (died 1890), whom he had established in 1875 at Denham Lodge, Hammersmith, and who bore a son named Frederick Richards Leyland Caldecott in 1883. At about that time Leyland acquired Villette, near Broadstairs, Kent, a house he shared with Annie Ellen Wooster and her children, Fred Richards and Francis George Leyland Wooster, born in 1884 and 1890; they are noted in Leyland's will as his 'reputed sons'. 
In his retirement Leyland was named president of the National Telephone Company (1889) and became deputy chairman of Edison & Sons United Electric Light Company. He died suddenly, from a heart attack, on 4 January 1892, while on a London underground train between Mansion House and Blackfriars stations. Leyland's estate was assessed at $732,770, from which his legitimate children each received substantial legacies. His will also made ample provision for Miss Wooster and her two children; to raise capital for these bequests, the art and furnishings of Prince's Gate were auctioned at Christie, Manson, and Woods on 26-27 May 1892, realizing $36,257; the house itself was sold in 1894. Leyland was buried on 8 January 1892 in Brompton cemetery, where his grave is marked by an impressive bronze monument designed by Edward Burne-Jones. 


@@@@@


doc= 39343


Phillips, Sir Lionel, first baronet (1855-1936), mining financier, was born on 24 August 1855, at 36 Finsbury Circus, London, one of three sons of Jewish parents, Philip Saunders Phillips, sponge dealer, and his wife, Jane Lazarus. He had little formal education but, by means of private study, became a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. He worked as his father's bookkeeper and as a sorting clerk with a London diamond merchant, before settling in Kimberley in South Africa in 1875. Employed initially by J. B. Robinson successively as a diamond sorter, bookkeeper, publisher of his newspaper 'The Independent', and mine manager, Phillips became a haulage contractor after being ruined financially in the diamond-market crash of 1884. A second financial set-back forced him to accept the position of manager of the French and d'Esterre Company, which was absorbed in the formation of De Beers Consolidated Mines. 
In recognition of his integrity, ability, and mining experience, Julius Wernher and Alfred Beit appointed Phillips in 1889 as technical adviser to H. Eckstein & Co. (The Corner House), their gold-mining business on the Witwatersrand. Phillips arrived in Johannesburg in September 1889 with his two small sons and his wife, Dorothea Sarah Florence Alexandra (Florrie) Ortlepp (1863-1940), a South African Christian, whom he had married on 22 August 1885. The couple later also had a daughter. 
For Phillips the years 1890-95 were among the most challenging and rewarding of his career. His recognition of the importance of deep-level claims and his astute business sense in acquiring them for his firm culminated in the successful proving of deep-level mining with the formation of Rand Mines Ltd in February 1893; he thus secured a dominant position for The Corner House and revolutionized the industry ['see 'Randlords]. He became the first chairman of Rand Mines, and after the sudden death of Hermann Eckstein on 16 January 1893 succeeded him as head of the most powerful mining house on the Rand and as president of the chamber of mines, which office he held from 1893 to 1896, and from 1908 to 1909. 
Having become a very wealthy and prominent man of the Rand with a socially ambitious wife, Phillips, with his family, moved in 1894 to Hohenheim ('house on high'), Parktown; this was the first of their grand homes, and they lavished on it vast amounts of money. However, their sumptuous lifestyle and their position as uncrowned 'king and queen of Johannesburg' came to an abrupt end with the fiasco of the Jameson raid in December 1895. For his part in the conspiracy to overthrow the Kruger government, Phillips received the death sentence -- later commuted to a $25,000 fine and banishment from the Transvaal in 1897. 
Back in England, Phillips slipped comfortably into the roles of partner in Wernher, Beit & Co. and country squire on his large Hampshire estate, Tylney Hall. He became lieutenant, justice of the peace, and high sheriff. In 1905 he was selected as the Conservative candidate for North Paddington, but he was forced to stand down before the election, owing to other commitments. In 1906 he returned to South Africa, at the request of Julius Wernher. He re-established himself as head of The Corner House and was again the undisputed leader of and spokesman for the mining industry. Since mid-1911 he had also been the vice-chairman of the Central Mining and Investment Corporation Ltd, successor to H. Eckstein & Co., Johannesburg, and Wernher, Beit & Co., London. 
During their second sojourn in Johannesburg (1906-14) the Phillipses resumed their former lifestyle, but this time at Villa Arcadia, situated just below Hohenheim. Having revived the Witwatersrand Agricultural Society, Phillips served as president from 1906 to 1924 and was awarded life presidency and honorary membership in 1935. In 1907 he was made honorary colonel of the Witwatersrand Rifles, a regiment originally recruited from the mines. Elected to the Union house of assembly from 1910 to 1915 as the Unionist Party representative for Yeoville, Phillips became the 'watchdog' of the mining industry and piloted through parliament the legislation establishing the National Botanical Gardens at Kirstenbosch. 
Phillips was awarded a baronetcy on 10 February 1912 for his public work. He played a prominent role in establishing the University of Cape Town and was a founder trustee of the Johannesburg Art Gallery. A contemporary described him as 'a shrewd and capable businessman whose chief interests, apart from business, lay in the direction of music and art' (Bell, 'Bygone Days'). He was an accomplished musician who generously contributed time and money to many cultural, scientific and technical, and sporting bodies. A dark-haired, dapper man, immaculately groomed and with a twinkle in his eye, Sir Lionel Phillips was a keen sportsman, motorist, and traveller. He was described in 1910 as 'An able speaker, and a brilliant leader among the Rand Magnates' (Weinthal). 
In December 1913 Sir Lionel was shot at several times and nearly killed outside the Rand Club by J. L. Misnun, a former hawker at one of the mines. Still weak from this ordeal he returned to London in 1914 to become chairman of the influential Central Mining and Investment Corporation. During the First World War a wing of Tylney Hall was converted into a hospital for officers and Sir Lionel was appointed a member of the Imperial Munitions Committee, which was concerned with the development of Britain's mineral resources. He resigned from Central Mining in 1924 and retired to the historic Cape farm, Vergelegen, which he had purchased for his wife Florrie on 31 March 1917. His autobiography, 'Some Reminiscences', was published in 1924, and 'Transvaal Problems: some Notes on Current Politics' came out in 1905. His younger son Francis (Frank) was a businessman and the chairman of Central Mining from 1934 to 1942, when he suddenly died. The elder son, Harold Lionel Phillips, a farmer, had died in 1926. The youngest child was Edith Minnie (Edie) Phillips. 
Li Phi, as Phillips was known, had lost an eye in a shooting accident, and his 'indigestion' was finally diagnosed as stomach cancer. He died in the Cape Province at Vergelegen, Somerset West, on 2 July 1936 from cancer, and his ashes were interred next to the burial place of his son Harold, at Brixton cemetery, Johannesburg, in January 1938. General Smuts paid him the following tribute: 'In a very true sense, the Rand can be said to be, in part at least, a monument to his genius and efforts' (Smuts, 15). 


@@@@@


doc= 39344


Orrock, James (1829-1913), painter and art collector, was born in Edinburgh, the elder son of the four children of James Orrock, a successful chemist and surgeon-dentist, and his first wife. His mother encouraged his lifelong passion for music and painting; as a boy he collected prints and drawings and his portfolio became his most cherished toy. At the age of eight he went as a boarder to the Revd George Corson's Irvine Academy in Ayrshire. There he received his first formal lessons in art from Mr White, an old-fashioned drawing-master who taught him to copy engravings by Landseer and Lawrence; so he developed the accurate if imitative skills which were to distinguish his future output as an artist. He went to Edinburgh to study medicine and decided on a course of surgeon-dentistry while taking tuition in oil painting from James Ferguson. In order to perfect the mechanical branch of dentistry Orrock moved to Leicester as a pupil assistant to Mr Williamson, dividing his time between private practice and the Leicester dispensary. In all available free time he travelled about the midlands filling sketchbooks, and he sent drawings to various exhibitions to supplement his income. During this time he became a pupil of John Burgess of Leamington, a respected watercolour painter (a member of of the Royal Watercolour Society) and art collector who did much to improve his watercolour technique and wider appreciation of art. After returning to Edinburgh to finish his medical studies he won the senior gold medal in anatomy. He also resumed lessons with Ferguson and produced his first pictures for exhibition at the Royal Scottish Academy. In 1853 he married Susan (died 1911), the daughter of Charles Gould of Leicester, and established himself in dental practice in Nottingham, where he entered the school of design run by the Fussell brothers and took instruction from Stewart Smith. This period in Nottingham gave him enough time to exploit a sound but unspectacular talent for painting and sufficient increase in wealth to build a significant collection of English pictures, blue and white porcelain, and fine Chippendale and Adam furniture. 
In 1866 Orrock gave up dentistry to become a professional painter and moved to London to Bedford Square, where he shared studio space, and then to 43 Bloomsbury Square. In 1870 he took lessons from William Leighton Leitch, and in the following year he was elected to the New Watercolour Society (later the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours), proposed by Leitch and supported by the president, Louis Haag. Thereafter he was influential and active in affairs of the society, and he was mainly responsible for building their fine new gallery in Piccadilly, reconstituting the institute, and gaining the royal charter. He was both skilled and prolific in producing mainly watercolours in an early nineteenth-century style and possessed a confident gift for self-promotion. With his powerful proselytizing personality he took up a public stance for the English watercolour tradition exemplified by J. M. W. Turner, David Cox, Peter DeWint, and William Henry Hunt. The essential collector's instinct enabled him to fill his beautiful Adam house at 48 Bedford Square with the best of these and other great artists from which his own 'oeuvre' derived. Their merits and, as Orrock perceived it, their lack of recognition by the museum world were argued in an outpouring of pamphlets and impassioned articles in the fashionable and influential magazines of the day; most famous was a lecture to the Society of Arts on 11 March 1890, 'On the claims of the British school of painting to a thorough representation in the National Gallery'. 
Orrock's persuasive zeal in turn brought him recognition of his own work and acquisitions, and in his fine domestic setting evolved his lucrative secondary career as an art dealer. This high-profile connoisseurship inevitably gave him acceptance within a wealthy Victorian society and access to rich friends and clients. Lord Leverhulme, the industrial soap tycoon and serial collector, was one notable disciple in taste, and between 1904 and 1912 he bought almost all of Orrock's art collection, as well as sixty oils and more than 1000 watercolours by the artist himself. Most of the last decade of Orrock's life was spent as an invalid at Shepperton-on-Thames, Middlesex, where he died at The Chestnuts on 10 May 1913. He was buried at Watford cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 39347


Goodison, Benjamin (c.1700-1767), cabinet-maker and undertaker, is of unknown parentage, although the surname is common in south Yorkshire. His occupation is first recorded in September 1719 when he signed for $500 from Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, for his master the London cabinet-maker James Moore the elder. Goodison was probably apprenticed to Moore about 1716. Some of the giltwood furniture previously attributed to Moore made at this time may be by Goodison working under Moore's supervision. The Bateman chest (V&A) made to commemorate the marriage of William Bateman and Lady Anne Spencer (a granddaughter of the duchess of Marlborough) in 1720 is more boldly sculptural in design than James Moore's documented work and characteristic in style of later documented work by Goodison. In 1720 Goodison signed a further receipt for work done for 'My Master James Moore' for Richard Boyle, third earl of Burlington. 
By 1725 Goodison was sufficiently experienced to set up on his own and took on an apprentice in January that year. He married Sarah Cooper at St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, on 13 August 1723, but their son, also called Benjamin, was not baptized until 23 February 1735 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. Goodison worked at the sign of the Golden Spread Eagle in Long Acre and in August 1727 a newspaper announced the theft from his premises of 'a large old fashioned Glass Sconce, in a Glass Frame, with Gold Flowers painted on the Glass Frame, and a Green Ground' ('Daily Courant', 22, 23 and 24 Aug 1727), demonstrating that he also dealt in secondhand furniture. 
By then Goodison had succeeded his master James Moore (who died in 1726) in royal service. In 1729 Goodison supplied a brass lantern for the queen's staircase at Hampton Court Palace for $138 (still 'in situ'). During the 1730s royal demands for furniture were supervised by the master of the great wardrobe, Sir Thomas Robinson. Goodison regularly supplied mahogany, walnut, and giltwood furniture for royal use in palaces and yachts. Some of the giltwood furniture previously attributed to Goodison in the Royal Collection has now been reattributed to the Pelletier workshop, and redated to the early 1700s. No mahogany or walnut furniture by Goodison in the Royal Collection has been identified although detailed descriptions survive in the bills. For instance, in 1741 Goodison was paid $16 10's'. by the lord chamberlain for a 'Mahogany Library Table with Drawers on one side and Cupboards on the other... top covered with black leather & Castors to ye Bottom' (Beard and Gilbert, 352). 
Many of Goodison's early customers were related to Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, a client whom Goodison inherited from his master. (Goodison was still supplying her with looking-glasses for Blenheim Palace in the 1730s.) Goodison also worked for her son-in-law, John, second duke of Montagu, supplying furniture for Montagu House, Whitehall, to the designs of the architect Henry Flitcroft. These include a mahogany library table with lion masks and a set of stepped mahogany bookcases with elaborate carved foliage. With their sober use of richly coloured hardwood, they formed an appropriate complement to the Palladian interiors (Boughton House, Northamptonshire). Goodison also worked with Flitcroft at the Dover Street, London, house which Goodison purchased in 1740 as agent for Sarah, duchess of Marlborough. The house was intended for her recently widowed granddaughter Isabella, duchess of Manchester -- the elder daughter of the second duke of Montagu. Here Goodison provided chimney-pieces to Flitcroft's designs as well as walnut tables and chairs. For the duchess of Marlborough's other daughter, Lady Sunderland, Goodison provided furniture for Althorp, Northamptonshire, including a pair of white-painted supports for marble tables in the entrance hall and a pedestal for the terracotta bust of Van Dyck by J. M. Rysbrack. Goodison provided an inventory of the contents of Althorp in 1746. 
The accounts of John, second duke of Montagu, demonstrate that in addition to supplying new furniture Goodison took charge of old furniture from the duke's former London home Montagu House, Bloomsbury, and restored and reframed pictures and looking-glasses where necessary. A pair of overdoor paintings by Jean-Baptiste Monnoyer (priv. coll.), formerly in Marot-style frames by the Pelletier workshop, were reframed by Goodison for Montagu House, Whitehall. Goodison also worked for Montagu's son-in-law, George Brudenell, fourth earl of Cardigan, furnishing his house in Dover Street, London. 
Goodison worked for the first and second viscounts Folkestone supplying furniture for Longford Castle, Wiltshire, considered in 1754 to be 'one of the best furnished houses in England' (J. J. Cartwright, ed., 'The Travels through England of Dr Pococke', 1888-9). It is probable that on this occasion Goodison designed the furniture himself. The mahogany and gilt seating in the gallery, for which Goodison received $400 in 1740, consists of two mahogany daybeds, and two large and eight smaller stools. The fine carving of lions' paw feet and superimposed shells on the legs of the stools and daybeds is lightened by the Greek key pattern which serves as a frieze along the seat rails and is highlighted with gilding. A similar set of seating furniture at Woburn Abbey is attributed to Goodison by comparison with the Longford suite. A pair of pedestals incorporating heads of Hercules retain their original eighteenth-century oak-grained painted and gilded surfaces and are also attributed to Goodison. Two substantial marble tables supported on carved wooden plinths incorporating twin figures of foxes are also thought to be the work of Goodison (priv. coll. and V&A). One was originally intended for the two-storey Palladian hall at Longford (dem. in the nineteenth century) and was painted white to imitate statuary marble in order to complement the busts in niches around the hall. The other, curved in form, and originally painted green and gilded, was intended for the circular green drawing room with its carved giltwood decoration supplied in 1747 by Goodison's assistant Edward Griffiths. 
Goodison is also associated with the architect William Kent and certainly made furniture to Kent's designs for Sir Thomas Coke, later earl of Leicester, at Holkham, Norfolk. His early commissions included mahogany stools for a temple in the grounds supplied in 1739. Goodison was again employed at Holkham after Kent's death, when the work was probably supervised by the architect Matthew Brettingham. In 1757 Goodison supplied a carved and gilt mahogany table press with wire doors for the gallery. He later made an elaborate carved and gilt frame for the painting of Coriolanus by Pietro da Cortona, for which he charged $74. 
Goodison also supplied furniture to Frederick, prince of Wales, and served as his undertaker in 1751, supplying eighty black sconces for the funeral in the Henry VII chapel, Westminster Abbey. Fifteen years later his will mentions that he had not been paid for some of the work done for the prince. When Goodison died in London in 1767, the business was carried on by his nephew, Benjamin Parran, whom he had taken on as an apprentice in 1741. In 1769 Parran formed a partnership with Goodison's son Benjamin, who had qualified as a lawyer by 1764. They continued business as undertakers and serviced the funeral of the duke of Newcastle in 1768. One of Goodison's daughters, Sarah, married the carver and sculptor William Hinchliff, who with Benjamin Goodison the younger acted as executor to his father-in-law. 
Benjamin Goodison was a pious man with literary tastes. He enjoyed poetry, and in 1736 subscribed to Stephen Duck's 'Poems on Several Occasions' and in 1748 to a similar volume of poems by Thomas Warton. On his death Goodison left an estate of approximately $16,000. This included a substantial house in Mitcham, Surrey, as well as his London property in Long Acre, Covent Garden. 


@@@@@


doc= 39348


Vile, William (1714/15-1767), furniture maker, was probably born in Somerset, where the name is common. Support for a west-country origin is provided by Vile's will, in which he left money to his Humphrey cousins at South Petherton and Middle Lambrook. (Vile's father's will may have been among the twenty-four Vile wills proved in the Taunton archdeaconry, but all of them were destroyed in Second World War air raids on Exeter.) Vile's tombstone inscription in the Wandsworth Huguenot cemetery states that he died in 1767 aged fifty-two years and from this record his birth date has been calculated. In the late 1730s he married Sarah ('b'. 1709/10); her surname may have been Strickland, as there are bequests to several Strickland nephews and nieces in Vile's will. His wife's Christian name was recorded when their son, William Waldron Vile, was baptized at St Paul's Church, Covent Garden, on 2 June 1740; she died in 1782 and was buried alongside her husband. 
Apprentices were normally put to learn a trade at the age of fourteen years, but the first notice of Vile's affiliation to furniture making was in 1749: on 10 August he wrote on behalf of 'My Master', the maker William Hallett senior (1707-1781), to George Selwyn. The letter suggests that, in view of Vile's marriage, and the birth of his son in 1740, and his needing a job, he probably continued to serve Hallett as a journeyman. By 1749 he was in any case well trained and no longer an apprentice. Soon afterwards he seemed to be hankering after setting up his own furniture making firm. 
To set up in business required money and there is evidence to suggest that Vile and his new partner, John Cobb (c.1715-1778), turned to Hallett for this. First, the rate books show them establishing premises in London in 1751 in the New Street ward of St Martin-in-the-Fields. By 1752 they were paying rent on four premises -- they were next door to Hallett's own premises -- but by 1755 the latter's property was taken over by Cobb. Hallett married successfully in 1756 and, significantly, from this year his bank account at the Royal Bank of Scotland, Drummond's branch, London, shows cash paid in from Vile and Cobb, almost monthly, in amounts of $150 to $300. A receipt of 1758 shows various payments from the partners (whose own accounts were at the same bank) totalling $3219; in 1761 there were four further substantial payments, adding up to $2350. It was this intermeshed practical form of financial backing which allowed the partnership to flourish, although there is no reason to think that Cobb, from his training as an upholsterer, looked solely after this side of the business. Either partner received payment, and applied it to their common good. 
The furniture that Vile made in partnership with Cobb was done between about 1751 and 1764. In these busy years the two partners took on as apprentices Thomas Plaistowe on 23 December 1752 and John Daniel on 27 February 1753. Their parents were charged the high premiums of $60 and $63 respectively. 
The first commission to which Vile's name has been attached was work in 1752-3 for Anthony Chute at The Vyne, Hampshire. The bills, for some $222, cover the whole range of furnishing provision: carpeting, festoon curtains, beds, bedding, neat mahogany chairs stuffed under linen covers, even a stand for Chute's hardstone cabinet, corner and other tables, a walnut bureau, and other minor items such as bellows and hearth brushes. The accepted role for furniture makers then included inventory listing, and sometimes the conduct of funerals. The making of coffins, and their equipping, was a morbid duty of furniture makers to families who had used their service in other ways. When Anthony Chute died in 1754, Vile at least took an inventory of effects, assisted by the London auctioneer John Prestage. 
Commissions in the early 1750s were plentiful. Making most of their furniture of mahogany, and assisted now by Samuel Reynolds, who in 1753 had transferred his services from William Hallett senior to Vile and Cobb, the partners worked for the fourth duke of Beaufort providing furniture for Badminton House, Gloucestershire; the second duke of Cleveland of 19 St James's Square, London; Sir William Proctor in Bruton Street, London; and Caroline, Lady Bridges. The reference in the Bridges bill to a mahogany dressing table with cutwork sides is of interest in view of Vile's later use of this style in the early 1760s. It resembled a complex array of thin horizontal and vertical timbers in precise geometrical formation, investing the sides and back of the object with a filigree quality almost unknown before. The firm's fire insurance valuation was first recorded in 1752 (Sun register 95, no. 129677, Guildhall Library, London), for three houses, warehouses, and workshops, but with a valuable stock of timber and mirror glass this was increased by 1755 to $6000. 
In an advertisement in the 'Public Advertiser' (20 May 1754) Vile and Cobb had announced themselves as 'Messrs Vile & Cobb's Cabinet and Upholstery Warehouse, the corner of St. Martin's Lane, Long Acre'. Neither partner is known to have issued published designs, although they probably made some use of those issued by their contemporary and near neighbour Thomas Chippendale senior (1718-1779) who had issued the first edition of his 'The Gentleman and Cabinet-Maker's Director' in 1754. One of the most important eighteenth-century country houses, Holkham Hall, Norfolk, was ready for furnishing in the 1750s. Its owner, Thomas Coke, earl of Leicester, built the Palladian-style house from 1734, and the work was continued after his death in 1759 by his widow. The earl paid $8 to Vile on 3 May 1755 for a 'Pattern Chair like the Duke of Devonshire's'. This was a recognized activity -- to make furniture, or indeed parts of buildings, after a pattern seen elsewhere. Vile, as an accomplished craftsman, was also able to provide the earl with a domed bed and all its accoutrements, fabric, fringes, and mattresses, the latter at an extra cost of $4 15's'. 
There were at least eleven other known commissions in hand in the high years of the firm's activity prior to 1760. These were all for private owners, and none was more supportive than George William, sixth earl of Coventry (1722-1809). The earl patronized several leading furniture makers during his fifty or so years of buying. He had to furnish both a Worcestershire house, Croome Court, and a London house at 29 Piccadilly. Inheriting his title in 1751, he set about rebuilding the Jacobean Croome Court and furnishing it from 1757 onwards. He left the main task of its interior design from about 1760 to the architect Robert Adam (1728-1792), and to Adam's group of reliable craftsmen, including Vile and Cobb. They were, however, involved from a few years earlier, in 1757, and Vile worked on until his retirement in 1764, with his partner continuing to work for the earl until 1773. Their various bills in the Croome estate office have been listed and some of the furniture itself, together with that of other makers, is still in the possession of family descendants. Much has since moved to other locations -- for example, a pair of looking-glasses and pier-tables, supplied by Vile and Cobb in 1760 for $173 and $33 12's'. respectively, is now at Temple Newsam House, Leeds. In June 1763 the library at Croome Court was embellished with two pedimented breakfront bookcases, made to correspond with the Ionic frame of the room's Venetian window. Adam supplied the detailed drawings for Vile and Cobb to work to, and they charged $260 for their work which included two men working for 226 days at the house taking down old bookcases and putting up the new ones. The applied carving in the bookcase pilasters was entrusted to the carver Sefferin Alken ('fl'. 1744-1783), who was also employed again on carving a clothes press. This last was supplied by Vile and Cobb in 1764, but after Vile's retirement Cobb charged a further $129 on 26 February 1766 for changing the press into a pair of cabinets. These bookcases and cabinets are now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. From the late 1750s the firm, with plenty of work, had been employing the furniture makers William France senior ('c'.1734-1773) and John Bradburne ('fl'. 1750-1781), and they were presumably responsible for much of the finer carved work on some of the pieces made in these years. 
After receiving the royal warrant on 5 January 1761 which confirmed Vile and his partner as 'Joint Upholsterers in Ordinary to His Majesty's Great Wardrobe' (TNA: PRO, LC 5/57) their names started to appear regularly in accounts, firstly for the quarter ending Lady day (25 March) 1761. All their relevant bills are in the bill books of the great wardrobe (TNA: PRO, LC 9/306-10), the organization responsible for the embellishment of royal palaces. They made much of their new position, soon providing George III and his wife, Queen Charlotte, with several pieces of furniture. An important medal cabinet, started in 1760 for the king, now only survives in the form of its two end-cabinets. The central part connecting the ends probably consisted of drawers and folio shelves. Vile charged in 1761 for '3 Difft pieces of work fited in Bet. the Legs of His Majesty's Grand Medal Case with Carved Doors & Ends and a New Sub plinth to Do on a Frame, $80' (TNA: PRO, LC 9/306). The two end-cabinets have been described in detail (Shrub), and are in the collections, respectively, of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York. Despite being but part of the whole they are very impressive in appearance. 
In 1761 Vile also made a superb mahogany bureau-cabinet for Queen Charlotte's apartments. It was invoiced at $71 in March 1762, and included similar cutwork sides to the dressing table provided to Lady Bridges in 1753. The cutwork is a feature of at least three other secretaire cabinets. Two of these were made for Robert D'Arcy, fourth earl of Holdernesse, secretary of state from 1751 to 1761. It is a form that has gone through the salerooms frequently, but a good example of 'handsome cuttwork', as it appears in accounts, may be found on the secretaire acquired by Noel Terry in 1964, and now part of the collection he bequeathed to Fairfax House, Castlegate, York, where it is on permanent display. 
Perhaps the two finest items made by Vile for Queen Charlotte (and still in the Royal Collection) are her jewel cabinet and a fine bookcase, both dated to 1761. The first has a mahogany frame with its front ends and top inlaid with ivory, and is further embellished with veneers of several exotic woods -- olive, padouk, amboyna, tulip, and rosewood. The hinged top is inlaid with the royal arms, and a concealed catch secures this. It can only be opened when the doors are also open. Therein is a nest of eight drawers and a further drawer, secured by a lock. It cost $138 10's'. in 1762 and has often been illustrated. Queen Charlotte's jewels were celebrated and were purchased by George III from his uncle. The bookcase, always credited to Vile, has been similarly illustrated, but the bill for it needs explanation. The bookcase, as at present, does not have one of the distinctive features described in the bill: 'one side of this is all in one Door that opens from Top to bottom and serves for the Door that goes into the Water Closet within the Bed Chamber' (TNA: PRO, LC 9/308). The entry implies that the bookcase was made for the queen's bedroom on the north-west corner of Buckingham House. A closet was in the north-east corner of the room, to the left of the queen's bed, and it could be expected that the bookcase showed some evidence of this opening. None has been found. When the bookcase was exhibited in an exhibition held at the queen's gallery, Buckingham Palace, in 1990 ('A royal miscellany', no. 2), it was noted that a possible explanation might lie in a subsequent payment of $31 in 1767, to John Bradburne. With his partner, William France senior, Bradburne had succeeded Vile and Cobb in royal service and remedial tasks lay therefore with them. With the payment there is an entry which reads, 'A New Mahogany Book Press made out of the Water Closet which was one Part a Book Press, the other part a Passage Door, but now the Whole Front is made into one Press' (TNA: PRO, LC 9/314). It was, if this explanation is correct, a careful transformation of Vile's work. 
One of the most unusual tasks Vile was entrusted with in 1763 by his royal patrons was to amend a mahogany organ case which had been made about 1735, probably by Benjamin Goodison. He was to refashion it to form a cabinet and did this at a charge of $57. This involved putting the whole on a mahogany plinth and ornamenting it with 'Ovals of Laurels and other Carved Ornaments & Carved Mouldings' (TNA: PRO, LC 9/308, 310). The ovals had appeared on pieces made in the Hallett shop. Vile, from his years there, carried forward the idea and their presence is usually some indication of his involvement, given a correct date and, hopefully, some documentation. The resulting piece in the Royal Collection has been illustrated both in its early and later states. Finally, among much else, a small item for which $5 5's'. was charged in 1764 (TNA: PRO, LC 9/293) was the carcass of a large shaped toilet-table, made from mahogany. The serpentine shape of this can be discerned beneath the fabric 'toylette' in the painting by Johan Zoffany, 'Queen Charlotte with her Two Eldest Sons' (1764; Royal Collection). 
On 31 May 1763 the master of the great wardrobe, Francis, Baron le Despencer, had nominated William France senior to succeed Vile and Cobb in royal service, and in the following June a similar concession was granted to France's partner, John Bradburne (TNA: PRO, LC 5/57). No reason was given for Vile's discharge, but it is known that he 'retired' at the age of forty-nine years, made his will, and was dead three years later. So he was probably unfit for health reasons to carry on his trade, and there seems no reason to attribute his discharge from service to overcharging. Some overcharging by his firm had occurred -- in the first quarter of 1763 there was a deduction of $75 for work in the 'New Japan Room' of the queen's house, the total being reduced from $858 18's'. to $783 18's'. (TNA: PRO, LC 9/308). Vile had also been guilty of overcharging Lord Folkestone in 1760 (Coleridge, 'Chippendale'), but this was a common trait among craftsmen, and was usually due more to faulty calculation than to dishonesty. There is no doubt that Vile and his partner were competent at what they had done over some fourteen years, and Cobb's success in trade in later years presages what the two of them might have accomplished had Vile not been sickly in health, forcing his early retirement. 
With ever-present thoughts of his mortality thrust upon him, Vile compiled his will in August 1763. He bequeathed to his wife, Sarah, two houses then in his own possession at Battersea Hill, his household furniture, and a sum of $300. There were bequests to his nephews John and William Strickland, and $20 each to his workmen Samuel Reynolds, John Bradburne, and William Eversley. He owned that he had not made any calculations in respect of his partnership with John Cobb, and left the settlement of this to his two executors, William Hallett senior and the London upholsterer and cabinet maker Charles Smith ('fl'. 1763-1767). They were to make such allowances to Cobb as they thought proper, and to invest the remainder of the estate so that his wife could receive $25 a year in her lifetime, and at her death this was to pass to a named list of nieces and nephews. Wills often have later codicils added, and Vile's was no exception. On 9 November 1764 the $20 he had left to his three workmen was only to be paid them if they were still in Vile's employment at his death. This excluded Bradburne, who had taken up royal service at Vile's discharge, and the $20 went instead to Mrs Vile. Reynolds continued with Vile and Cobb, not only appearing as a friend to testify to his knowledge of Vile when the will was proved on 23 September 1767, but also serving John Cobb in later years. Of Eversley nothing further is known. The cause of Vile's death on 21 August 1767 in Battersea is likewise unknown. 
It was established by Tessa Murdoch that Vile was buried in the Huguenot cemetery at Wandsworth, although neither he nor his wife is known to have any Huguenot connection. The inscription on his chest tomb is now almost illegible, but was, fortunately, transcribed in 1885. It reads: 'In memory of William Vile, Gent., of St. John's Place Battersea who died August 21st, 1767 Aged 52 years. Also the body of Mrs Sarah Vile, his Wife, who died June the 17th, 1782, Aged 72 years'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39354


George [i] Seddon (c.1727-1801) is thought to have gone to London about 1750. On his arrival there he established a cabinet-making firm that was to become the largest in the metropolis during the last quarter of the eighteenth century. George [i] Seddon has been identified as the cabinet-maker who, in 1754, purchased his freedom of the London Joiners' Company. 
By 1753, when he took on his first apprentice, George [i] Seddon had acquired a 2 acre site in Aldersgate Street including London House (the former residence of the bishop of London), which remained the location of the firm's workshops until 1850. With his wife, Lydia, 'nee' Oldham (died 1788), whom he had married by licence (she being over twenty-one) on 14 June 1759 at Holy Sepulchre without Newgate, George [i] Seddon had at least ten children who were baptized in the church of St Botolph, Aldersgate: John ('bap'. 26 Sept 1760); Thomas [i] ['see below']; Robert ('bap'. 26 Sept 1762); George [ii] ['see below']; Mary ('bap'. 4 Oct 1764, died 1 Dec 1818); Catherine ('bap'. 12 March 1766); Elizabeth ('bap'. 26 April 1767); Lydia ('bap'. 5 June 1768, died 13 July 1833); Esther ('bap'. 22 Dec 1771); and Dorothy ('bap'. 17 April 1774, died 1799). The firm expanded quite quickly during the 1760s; by 1768 100 journeymen were employed and in a fire that year 'upwards of eighty chests of tools were destroyed' (Beard and Gilbert, 793). When in 1783 there was a further fire, the firm enjoyed the services of nearly 300 'of the most capital hands' in London (ibid., 794). The value of stock and household goods insured increased from $3300 in 1768 to $13,000 in 1787, for the business alone. 
A remarkable contemporary description of George [i] Seddon's workshop by Sophie von La Roche provides a vivid picture of his business. In 1786, during her journey through England and Holland, she visited: 'Mr Seddon's, a cabinet-maker... who employs four hundred journeymen in all sorts of tasks, which are necessary for the proper furnishing of any house: cabinet-makers, wood-carvers, gilders, mirror-workers, upholsterers, brass-founders -- who make the fine bronze into ornaments -- and locksmiths. All this is carried out in a building with six wings. In the basement mirrors are cast and polished. In one of the other departments nothing is produced but chairs, sofas and stools of all kinds... One large room is absolutely full up with finished articles in this line, while more rooms are occupied by writing-tables, cupboards, chests-of-drawers. (Gilbert and Wood, 30-34)' The visitor also admired 'A thousand articles of straw-coloured satinwood, charming and quite perfectly made... Chinz, silk and wool fabrics for curtains and bed hangings' (ibid.). 
Of the proprietor, Sophie von La Roche wrote: 'Seddon seemed to me a respectable man, as foster-father to four hundred employees, and a man of genius, who understands the requirements both of the needy and the affluent, and who knows how to please them with the products of nature and of other manufactories' artistry; who has made himself master of the qualities of wood from all parts of the world, and has the chemical knowledge how to colour them... and who has both the managerial ability to appraise the time and trouble spent by all his employees, and the creative talent to keep on devising new forms. (ibid.)' A portrait of George [i] Seddon (V&A), painted towards the end of his life, shows a kindly and respectable-looking man, intelligent and unostentatious in manner. This suggests that Sophie von La Roche observed him accurately during her London visit. In his entrepreneurial skills, George [i] Seddon had something in common with the Birmingham manufacturer Matthew Boulton, with whom he had dealings and corresponded. Seddon was also connected to the enterprising Josiah Wedgwood, from whom he purchased medallions which were inserted into his furniture; Wedgwood was also one of his customers. 
For a firm of its size, it is perhaps surprising that little surviving eighteenth-century furniture has been identified. There is, however, archival evidence for some major commissions and important patrons: these include Charles Townley for Towneley Hall, Lancashire; Catherine the Great, empress of Russia; Sir Thomas Egerton for Heaton Hall, Yorkshire; the fifth duke of Beaufort for Badminton House, Gloucestershire; the fifth duke of Bedford for Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire; and the second Lord Mansfield for Kenwood House, Middlesex. Perhaps the most extraordinary creation of the firm was the painted and carved satinwood cabinet fitted as a writing and dressing table, dated 1793, ordered for Charles V of Spain, but not delivered; this piece survived until about 1910, when it was broken up. 



@@@@@


doc= 39355


Thomas [ii] Seddon (bap. 1793, d. 1864), who was baptized on 8 January 1793 and apprenticed to his uncle George [ii] Seddon from 1806 to 1813. In 1815 Thomas [ii] Seddon took over the firm and was joined two years later by his brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 39356


George [iii] Seddon (bap. 1797, d. 1857), who was baptized on 5 February 1797. By the time of his death, aged fifty-two, in September 1815, George [ii] Seddon had married, but had no children. He was buried on 20 September 1815 at St Botolph, Aldersgate. On 18 August 1820 Thomas [ii] Seddon married at St Martin Orgar with St Clement, Eastcheap, London, Frances Nelson, 'nee' Thomas, with whom he had at least eleven children. 
Not much is known of the firm from 1815 until 1827 when George [iii] Seddon entered a partnership with Nicholas Morel to supply furniture for George IV at Windsor Castle. The partnership of Morel and Seddon gave its address as 13 Great Marlborough Street, but the manufactory remained in Aldersgate Street. At this date, for the first time, the firm became associated with the manufacture of furniture by named designers. They employed P. Bogaerts, J.-J. Boileau, F.-H.-G. Jacob-Desmalter (in the neo-classical style), and A. W. N. Pugin (in the Gothic style). About 1830 the same partnership supplied furniture to the marquess of Stafford for Stafford House. Much work from these two commissions survives, or can be identified in late nineteenth-century photographs. 
The Morel and Seddon partnership appears to have ended by 1831, but Thomas [ii] Seddon and George [iii] Seddon, who received a royal warrant in 1832, continued into the 1850s. After a fire in 1830, when 100 tool chests were destroyed, the firm moved to new premises designed by J. B. Papworth in Gray's Inn Road. Regency-style furniture made during the second quarter of the nineteenth century can sometimes be identified by the firm's paper label attached to the undersides, for example, of tables and cabinets. The artistic and technical quality of surviving furniture by the Seddon family, together with knowledge of the size of their workshops, have ensured that their firms enjoy a high reputation in the history of English furniture making. George [iii] Seddon died, apparently unmarried, at Boulogne, France, on 3 August 1857, and Thomas [ii] Seddon died at his home, 27 Grove Terrace, Kentish Town, London, on 13 September 1864. In the later nineteenth century the family's reputation was enhanced by two of Thomas [ii] Seddon's sons, the Gothic revival architect John Pollard Seddon (1827-1906), and the landscape painter and furniture designer Thomas Seddon (1821-1856). 


@@@@@


doc= 39357


Seddon, John Pollard (1827-1906), architect, was born on 19 September 1827 at London House, 150 Aldersgate Street, London, the third child of Thomas Seddon (bap. 1793, d. 1864) ['see under 'Seddon family] and Frances Nelson, 'nee' Thomas (1800-1880) and great-grandson of George Seddon (c.1727-1801), furniture maker ['see under 'Seddon family]. His elder brother was the landscape painter Thomas Seddon (1821-1856), whose friendships with W. H. Hunt and F. M. Brown prompted Seddon's collaboration with Pre-Raphaelites on a variety of works in the 1850s and 1860s, for example Rossetti's reredos for Llandaff Cathedral. After attending Bedford grammar school Seddon was articled in 1847 to T. L. Donaldson, and in the same year joined the Architectural Association as a founder member; he served as honorary secretary in 1850-51. Despite Donaldson's neo-classicism Seddon was seduced in 1849 by Ruskin's 'Seven Lamps of Architecture', and was quickly converted to the philosophy of the Gothic revival, staunchly maintaining throughout his long career that Gothic was the only true Christian art, 'most scientific and beautiful, and most in accordance with common sense' ('Ancient and modern ornament contrasted', 'Building News', 29 Jan 1858, 109-12). In 1852, while building a small hotel in Southerndown, Glamorgan, he met John Prichard, diocesan architect of Llandaff, who offered him a partnership in 1853. The arrangement lasted until 1863, with Seddon largely responsible for the Monmouthshire jobs. Following an acclaimed competitive entry for the War and Foreign offices, Seddon established in 1858 the partnership's Whitehall office, through which he gained greater individual exposure. He was elected fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) on 5 March 1860, and repeatedly elected honorary secretary between 1862 and 1871. On 12 May 1864 he married Margaret Barber (1836-1910) of Brighouse, Yorkshire, with whom he had three children, Maud, Hugh, and Katherine. 
Seddon's architectural practice flourished in the 1860s and early 1870s. Significant secular designs included University College, Aberystwyth (1864-86), an entry in a law courts competition (1866), and the speculative bungalow development of Birchington-on-Sea, Kent (1880-82). But Seddon was essentially an ecclesiastical architect, and he built churches at Chigwell Row, Essex (1865-7), Great Yarmouth (St James's, 1869-78), Ullenhall, Warwickshire, and Ayot St Peter, Hertfordshire (1874-5), and Hoarwithy, Herefordshire ('c'.1872-85). He restored many medieval churches, notably St Nicholas's, Great Yarmouth (1863-77), Llanbadarn Fawr, Cardiganshire (1867-80), and Grosmont, Monmouthshire (1869-75), but disdained the sentimentality of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings. In 1884 he took John Coates Carter into partnership, and continued to work in his later years, primarily on ecclesiastical commissions, and greatly assisted by Carter; the Stroud School of Art and Sciences (1890-99), with W. M. C. Fisher, was an important exception. Seddon designed numerous church fittings, including some for Llandaff, and several splendid pieces were made by the family firm for the 1862 International Exhibition. He was also a prolific designer of stained glass and mosaic, the east window of Sunningwell church, Berkshire (1877), and the pulpit at Betchworth, Surrey (1885), being notable examples. Seddon wrote numerous articles and gave frequent lectures. His incisive wit was notorious: he once publicly ridiculed some of his contemporaries as creators of the 'hair-stand-on-end-style' ('Sundry notes upon some miscellaneous subjects', 'RIBA Transactions', 1863-4, xxiii). He published several books, including 'Progress in Art and Architecture with Precedents for Ornament' (1852), 'Memoir and Letters of the Late Thomas Seddon, Artist' (1858), and 'Rambles in the Rhine Provinces' (1867). Seddon died in St Thomas's Nursing Home, London, on 1 February 1906 and was buried four days later in Fulham cemetery. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 39358


Erasmus, Desiderius (c.1467-1536), humanist scholar and reformer, was born in Rotterdam during the night of 27-28 October in the late 1460s -- a year about 1467 seems plausible. He was illegitimate, a circumstance that doubtless contributed to the uncertainty attending all record of his origins, family name, and early life. The source of much information is the 'Compendium vitae', ostensibly written by Erasmus and clearly tendentious, and in any case known only from the seventeenth century. Earlier accounts, likewise tendentious in stressing both his youth and reluctance to enter a religious order, include the versions he wrote to popes Julius II and Leo X to gain the dispensations he needed to earn his own living while still in religious vows. With the assistance of his correspondence and other contemporary evidence, one may aim at reasonable conjecture. His father, who came from near Gouda, was Gerard Helye; his mother was one Margareta, possibly the daughter of a physician of Zevenbergen near Breda. In the address of a papal brief he is called Erasmus Rogerii, suggesting either that his father's full name was Roger Gerard Helye, or that his mother's surname was Roger. He had a brother, Pieter, older by three years, and possibly a half-brother from his mother's earlier marriage; Erasmus was in touch with Pieter until the latter's death in 1527. Their father, who had earned his living in Italy as a scribe, was lettered in classical Latin and Greek, the aspiration of all those -- later known as 'humanists' -- who sought in the civic life of antiquity the models for a revitalized political and religious culture in their own day. At some point he became a priest. Erasmus owned books from his library, and Greek manuscripts copied by him in Italy. 
The boys were provided with a good education. The young Erasmus was sent to the school of Pieter Winckel attached to the church of St John at Gouda and later, about 1475, to the school of the chapter of St Lebuin in Deventer, which rose to great prominence under its headmaster Alexander Hegius. Seemingly, his mother accompanied him to Deventer and fell a victim of the plague in 1483; his father died shortly afterwards. The two boys were then placed under the protection of three guardians, one of whom was Pieter Winckel. In 1484 they were sent to the school at 's-Hertogenbosch where they stayed at a hostel run by the Brethren of the Common Life. According to Erasmus, Winckel and the guardians pressed both boys to enter the religious life, although Erasmus longed to attend university. His account of the brethren is bitter and resentful, insisting that their main aim was to serve as recruiting sergeants for religious orders. At any rate, Pieter had already joined the canons regular of St Augustine at Sion near Delft when Erasmus joined the same congregation at Steyn, near Gouda, in 1487. He was by then about twenty years old, not sixteen as he later claimed. His earliest letters reveal that his life there was by no means unhappy, and that the Augustinian cloister was not at all inhospitable to humanistic studies. They also reveal his considerable mastery of the style and conventions of classical rhetoric, and his prominence within a literary circle of young Augustinians devoted to the cultivation of good letters. 
Erasmus was ordained priest on 25 April 1492 by the bishop of Utrecht, and shortly afterwards, with the permission of his superiors, entered the service of the bishop of Cambrai, Hendrick van Bergen, as his secretary. While so employed he revised his first important work, 'Antibarbari', composed during his monastic years but unpublished until 1518. It is a manifesto defending classical learning as an indispensable adjunct to Christian revelation, and testifies strikingly to its author's literary gifts and already remarkable erudition. By September 1495 Hendrick had released Erasmus to take up theological studies at Paris, with some promise of continuing financial support. Their relationship continued until 1501 after which the bishop's subsidy -- never found sufficient -- was withdrawn. While studying at Paris (initially residing at the College de Montaigu) he took pupils to supplement his income, among them the young William Blount, fourth Lord Mountjoy. In the summer of 1499 he accompanied Mountjoy to England. This was his debut in a courtly and scholarly world which would be of lasting importance to him, a world as well on which he would leave a lasting mark. 
In the course of this first, brief visit Mountjoy's connections enabled Erasmus to befriend people who would later provide powerful support and congenial society, prominent among them Thomas More, who introduced him to the eight-year-old Prince Henry. Until January 1500 he stayed in Oxford at St Mary's College, the house of the Augustinian canons, where the prior, Richard Charnock, was a kindred spirit. In the company of such others as John Colet, William Grocyn, William Latimer, and Thomas Linacre, his resolve to devote himself to sacred studies was confirmed. Erasmus, whose literary reputation evidently had preceded him, had been recommended to Colet by Richard Charnock as a truly virtuous man. The two were near in age, and they formed a relationship which was close and enduring. Colet's lectures on the epistles of St Paul impressed Erasmus deeply. Since Erasmus was already convinced that theology should concern itself with conversion of life and the fostering of individual devotion through the study of the scriptures, rather than with the speculative sciences dear to the scholastics, their influence may well have been less decisive than was once claimed; it was probably Colet's non-scholastic approach to scripture that chiefly attracted the Dutch humanist. Certainly, Erasmus's confidence in the providential role of pagan wisdom and the importance of understanding classical antiquity to repristinate Christian evangelism -- convictions asserted in his as yet unpublished 'Antibarbari' -- far exceeded that of Colet. 
A second English friend of great importance, close also to Colet, was Thomas More. With Mountjoy, More and Colet were doubtless responsible for introducing Erasmus to his wide circle of influential friends and followers in Oxford, London, and Cambridge. In addition to those already mentioned, Cuthbert Tunstall, John Fisher, William Warham, Richard Fox, Christopher Urswick, Richard Pace, and John Clerk are notable. Erasmus's closer involvement with these would await his return. He left England for Paris in January 1500, deeply impressed with what he had found and praising his English associates to his friends. His overriding aim now was to acquire Greek before venturing further into sacred studies. 
Subsequently Colet probably helped to finance Erasmus's return to England in 1505-6, and the transcriptions of Erasmus's translation of the epistles and gospels made by Pieter Meghen (BL, Royal MS 1 E.v, 2 vols., and CUL, MS Dd 7. 3) are associated with Colet, whose pupil Thomas Lupset helped Erasmus to collate the 'New Testament'. Colet's support continued through the years, but the most striking evidence of their friendship was Erasmus's involvement in St Paul's School, founded by Colet with his own patrimony: revision of William Lily's advanced Latin syntax, the 'De octo orationis partium constructione libellus', first published anonymously in 1513; various Latin poems; the 'Concio de puero Jesu'; and his treatise on rhetorical variation 'De copia' (see below). Erasmus's 'De ratione studii' was also written for St Paul's School. His admiration for Colet was evinced repeatedly throughout his lifetime, and he left an indelible portrait of him in a memorial letter written to Justus Jonas in June 1521. 
A stepping-stone towards the mastery of Greek was Erasmus's first published book, the 'Adagiorum collectanea', printed in Paris in the summer of 1500 and dedicated to Mountjoy. It was a small quarto of 818 adages culled from Greek sources and printed in humanistic format, a new presence in the Paris book trade. It was also the harbinger of one of Erasmus's greatest achievements, the 'Adagiorum chiliades' ('ordered in thousands'). In successive editions it grew, along with Erasmus's command of Greek authors, to become an invaluable quarry for the revived classical culture of Europe: in the 'Chiliades' of 1508 the number of adages rose from 818 to 3260. This edition also revealed the potential of classical proverbs to serve as pegs on which to display curious byways of erudition or inspire reflections on the issues of the day. In successive editions the enrichment continued, providing 4151 adages in that of 1536, the year of his death. 
In his Greek studies Erasmus turned further to editing the works of Jerome, a pathway also to his ultimate goal, revision of the 'Vulgate' text of the 'New Testament', and he resumed his study of pagan Greek authors: Euripides, Lucian, Plutarch, and Libanius, along with the popular grammar of Theodore of Gaza. In the spring of 1501, driven by plague first from Paris, then from Orleans, he settled in Flanders where he met the Observant Franciscan reformer Jean Vitrier, who encouraged his study of St Paul and fostered his appreciation of Origen. In this atmosphere, while preparing to write his own commentary on the epistle to the 'Romans', he composed the 'Enchiridion militis Christiani' ('Handbook of the Christian knight'), his first great pastoral essay, infused with citations from Origen's 'Homilies'. It appeared in a collection of 'Lucubratiunculae' from Antwerp in February 1503. This first edition attracted little attention, but in 1515 it was printed independently for the first time, and underwent seven more printings before that of 1518 by Froben, after which it swept Europe, so that by the end of the century there were seventy editions of the Latin text, and innumerable vernacular translations. The remarkable impact of this brief treatise, not obvious today, derived from its endorsement, with a strong Pauline emphasis, of the lay vocation to holiness in the Christian life as lived in the world. Erasmus's advocacy of life well led in the community -- 'the city as a monastery' -- directed the faithful towards the renewal of the entire Christian polity rather than more monastic ideals. Additionally, with its broad undercurrent of mystical theology, it served as a spur to the contemplative revival in sixteenth-century Spain. A key addition to the 1518 version was the introductory letter to a reforming Benedictine abbot, Paul Volz, which was effectively an epitome of Erasmus's doctrine of personal piety and the Christian mission. 
In Flanders, Erasmus continued his studies on the epistle to the 'Romans', made a brief attempt at Hebrew, and in 1504 discovered a manuscript of Lorenzo Valla's notes on the text of the 'Vulgate' 'New Testament' in the Premonstratensian abbey of Parc near Louvain. In 1505 he returned to England as the guest of Thomas More at Bucklersbury, where together they translated dialogues of Lucian, and Erasmus made a translation of Euripides' 'Iphigeneia in Aulis' and 'Hecuba' (dedicated to Archbishop Warham). That April, Josse Bade in Paris published Erasmus's edition of Valla's notes. Although his own approach would be more complex, Valla's was a further incentive to Erasmus in his driving ambition to revise the legacy of St Jerome in the Latin 'Vulgate'. In April 1506 he apparently visited Cambridge during a royal progress to Walsingham, staying at Queens' College, of which John Fisher was president. Acquainted with Fisher through mutual friends, Erasmus was nominated for the degree of DTh, which however he did not take. 
In May 1506 Erasmus left for Italy, professedly further to improve his knowledge of Greek, but this is the most obscure period of his adult life since no letters survive from his pen between December 1508 and April 1511. He took a doctorate in theology from the University of Turin by oral examination, witnessed the entry of the victorious Julius II into Bologna, and stayed with Aldus in Venice to prepare editions of Plautus, Seneca, and Terence's tragedies, and to complete the greatly enlarged 'Adagiorum chiliades' of 1508. From Venice he travelled to Padua, Siena, and Rome, and visited the cave of the Sibyl at Cumae accompanied by his pupil Alexander Stewart, the illegitimate son of James IV of Scotland; in Naples, Alexander presented his tutor with a gem supposedly bearing the image of the boundary god Terminus, which Erasmus subsequently adopted as his personal symbol with the motto 'Cedo nulli' ('I yield to no one'). 
On the accession of Henry VIII to the English throne in April 1509, and at the urging of Mountjoy and Warham, Erasmus returned to England for the longest and most productive of his visits. He arrived in August that year at the home of Thomas More, where he completed his most famous literary work, the 'Moriae encomium' ('Praise of folly'). This complex satire, a distillation of his critique of contemporary Christendom, did not appear until 1511, but by Erasmus's death in 1536 there were thirty-six Latin editions, with translations into Czech, French, and German. An Italian version followed in 1539, and Thomas Chaloner's English version in 1549. It was famous -- and notorious -- in his lifetime, and is the only product of his pen to survive intact into the modern era. 
Like many other of Erasmus's works the 'Folly' derived from classical antecedents: it is a mock encomium, a praise of folly by Folly herself with a punning allusion in the title to the author's English friend. It grew in time to be the centrepiece of Erasmus's tireless, satirical moralizing about the world as he found it and the professed ideals of those responsible for it. He himself insisted that it be understood as an essay in evangelical humanism, one entirely consistent with the purpose of the 'Enchiridion'. Bantering and playful in tone for the most part, it is suffused with ambiguity and paradox to capture the interest of those who might otherwise have shunned the radicalism of its impudent assault on the established order of the day, assailing everything from the uncritical acceptance of conventional pieties to real abuses of power and responsibility. None was spared, from princes to schoolmasters, from lawyers to monks, from philosophers and theologians to poets and grammarians like Erasmus himself. While the mask of Folly is always in place, the deeper purpose of the piece emerges with increasing clarity in the later pages: to contrast the Christendom of his own day with the ideals of the 'New Testament', especially as they were voiced by St Paul. 
The years immediately following Erasmus's return to England are again obscure, but in 1511 he went to Paris to supervise the printing of the 'Moriae encomium', and on his return repaired to Cambridge at the invitation of John Fisher, now chancellor, where he stayed until 1514. He lectured in theology (on St Jerome) and on Greek -- the first person known to have done so at either university -- from the grammars of Manuel Chrysoloras and Theodore of Gaza. He edited the letters of St Jerome, completed his Latin translation of the epistles and gospels, the 'Novum instrumentum', and, among other like tasks, translated St Basil's commentary on 'Isaiah' for presentation to Fisher. In early 1512 he finished his 'De copia verborum ac rerum' ('Foundations of the abundant style'), his letters suggesting that he was by now quite at home in England. 'De copia' was dedicated to Colet, and a revised and amplified edition of his Lucian translations was dedicated to Archbishop Warham, who in March appointed him rector of Aldington in Kent. The income from Aldington he commuted to a pension worth some $20 a year, an amount matched by Mountjoy. For a time it appeared that he would accompany John Fisher to the Fifth Lateran Council as his theologian, but Fisher reconsidered, and in the end England was represented only by Silvestro Gigli, bishop of Worcester. In the summer of 1512 Erasmus joined the Cambridge scholar Robert Aldridge on a pilgrimage to the shrine of Our Lady of Walsingham, commemorated in his colloquy 'Peregrinatio religionis ergo' (1526), and also went on a pilgrimage to Canterbury with John Colet. In July there was published in Paris the first authorized edition of the 'De ratione studii', the foundation of the curriculum at St Paul's School and, along with 'De copia', a widely influential treatise on the foundations of learning. At some point he also composed the epitaph on the tomb of Lady Margaret Beaufort in Henry VII's chapel in Westminster Abbey, for which he was paid $20 in December. 
During the following year, 1513, Erasmus continued his various undertakings, most notably further revision of the 'Adagia', along with a by-product of that revision, a compilation of aphorisms called the 'Parabolae' ('Parallels'), the collation of the 'New Testament', and his edition of Jerome. In the latter tasks he enjoyed the assistance of Colet's protege, Thomas Lupset, whom he praised in the same letter of 11 July 1513 in which he reminded Colet of a promise to provide the sum of 15 angels in return for dedicating the 'De copia' to St Paul's School rather than to Prince Henry. 
In January 1514, writing from Cambridge, Erasmus inscribed his translation of Plutarch's 'De utilitate capienda ex inimicis' ('On profiting from one's enemies') as a new year's gift to Thomas Wolsey. At the same time the worsening relations between England and France disturbed him. He wrote to Warham of an acute attack of the stone, which he attributed to the Cambridge beer and scarcity of French wine owing to the prospect of war, and in March told Antoon van Bergen of rising prices, the threat to his income, the scarcity of French wine, and England's growing isolation from the continent. Accordingly, he looked to the Netherlands -- to Prince Charles and the emperor Maximilian -- for new support. The argument of this important letter was the basis of his adage 'Dulce bellum inexpertis' ('War is sweet to those who know it not'), one of those published in the Froben edition of 1515 and destined to have an independent life, with fifteen separate printings before 1540. By early June he was staying in London at the house of Andrea Ammonio, and after making his farewells to the king, to Wolsey, Warham, Ruthall, and Fisher, he crossed the channel in early July, arriving at the castle of Hammes near Calais on the 8th, to stay with his patron Mountjoy. Here he composed a letter for Servatius Roger, prior of Steyn, excusing himself for his failure to return to his home monastery, one of a series of such 'apologiae' from which the variable details of his early life must be construed. 
By July 1514 Erasmus was undoubtedly ready to make for the Froben press with the fruits of his studies in the previous decade. These included a greatly revised and expanded version of the 'Adagia', his revision of the letters of Jerome, his revised text of Seneca, a number of translations from Plutarch, the 'Parabolae', and his accumulated work on the 'New Testament', a substantial part of which had been done in England. From this last grew Froben's historic undertaking: the printing of the Greek text of the 'New Testament' with Erasmus's new Latin translation and annotations. He proceeded up the Rhine to Basel, a journey that took him to Mainz and Strasbourg especially; there he was feted by societies of German humanists, among whom he met Ulrich von Hutten, Jakob Wimpheling, Sebastian Brant, and the educator Jakob Sturm. His reception in Basel by Johannes Froben, Beatus Rhenanus, and many others was no less warm. 
In September 1514 Erasmus for the first time stated that what was to be published of the 'New Testament' was his Latin translation 'with the Greek facing' and his notes ('Opus epistolarum', ep. 305). In the first edition ('Novum instrumentum', 1516) the Greek was printed with Erasmus's Latin rendering in parallel, while his annotations, keyed to the established 'Vulgate' and unprecedented in their scope and references to Greek texts, were printed separately. Erasmus's constant purpose was to provide a reasoned revision of the 'Vulgate' in his annotations. But it was the Greek text -- a late addition possibly suggested to Froben by the annotations themselves -- combined with his Latin translation that made the widest and most enduring impression. The work was reprinted 229 times in the course of the sixteenth century, and fostered allied treatises. These included the 'Paraclesis' ('Exhortation'), an impassioned plea for a life informed by the word incarnate which introduced the 'Novum instrumentum' and acquired independent celebrity, and Erasmus's 'Paraphrases' on the books of the 'New Testament', intended to make the text accessible to the lay reader. 
The year 1516 also saw the appearance of Froben's great edition of the works of Jerome in nine volumes, for the first four of which -- containing chiefly the letters and dedicated to Archbishop Warham -- Erasmus had special responsibility. And finally, Thomas More's 'Utopia', whose publication More had entrusted to Erasmus, appeared that December at Louvain. From this time Erasmus was increasingly taken up with activities on the continent, but contacts with his English friends continued for many years, and it will be expedient to deal briefly with the rest of his career before returning to the more complex question of his influence in England. 
Except for trips to Froben in Basel and occasional visits to England, Erasmus spent the years from 1514 to 1521 chiefly in Brabant, moving about between Louvain, Bruges, and Antwerp. He was closely involved in the project for a trilingual college at Louvain, initiated in 1517, and his appointment as an imperial councillor early in 1516 kept him close to Brussels. His 'Institutio principis Christiani' ('Education of a Christian prince'), published in 1516, had been completed in recognition of this appointment, and in October 1520 he attended the coronation of Charles V as king of the Romans at Aachen. There were occasional forays to England, chiefly on business concerning his pension, and the obtaining of a papal dispensation from Leo X which would allow him to earn his own living while still retaining his religious vows. The growing tumult around Luther worried him lest he be indirectly discredited by it, and he employed every rhetorical means at his disposal to distance his own proposals from Luther's, while urging that Luther himself 'be put right rather than put down'. In November 1521 Erasmus left Brabant for good, and returned to Basel. 
From this point onwards controversy was a constant preoccupation for Erasmus. It had begun already in 1517 with conservative critics of his great editorial projects, the Jerome edition and 'New Testament'. Among the first of these was the English Franciscan Henry Standish, an Oxford theologian and provincial of his order. Another vexed issue was Erasmus's ardent advocacy of 'trilingualism', a doctrine shared within the humanist circle that mastery of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew was essential for the renewal of learning, more especially of theology. It was one of the reasons why Erasmus's scholarly base in those years was Louvain, where the project for a trilingual college was finally realized within the university in 1520. Yet one of his chief opponents on this issue also resided at Louvain, Jacobus Latomus (Jacques Masson). The 'Novum instrumentum' in turn brought a new wave of critics, first among them another Englishman, Edward Lee, a Cambridge divine and prebendary of Lincoln. Lee was soon joined by several friars, among them the Carmelite prior at Louvain, Nicolaus Baechem, and several Louvain Dominicans. In the same years Erasmus collaborated with Johannes Faber, prior of the Dominican house, in a project for mediation in the dispute with Luther. This was the 'Consilium cuiusdam', published in Cologne in 1521, a companion piece to the eirenic 'Axiomata Erasmi pro causa Lutheri' written at the request of the elector of Saxony, which contained twenty-two short axioms on which to base a settlement of the whole affair. 
Luther's manifest intransigence and the propagation of his own 'Colloquia' were the dominant preoccupation of Erasmus's years in Basel, although he continued tirelessly to publish: successive revisions of the 'Adagia', paraphrases on the 'New Testament' ('Hebrews', 'Matthew', 'Luke', 'John', 'Mark', 'Acts'), editions of such fathers as Arnobius, Hilary, Irenaeus, and Augustine, classical texts (Cicero, Pliny, Seneca), and other humanistic and pedagogical works in abundance ('De conscribendis epistolis', 'Lingua', 'De civilitate morum puerilium', 'Christiani matrimonii institutio', 'Ciceronianus', 'De recta Latini Graecique sermonis pronuntiatione dialogus', 'De pueris instituendis'). 
If the 'Adagia' and the 'New Testament' represent the scholarly cornerstones of Erasmus's literary and theological enterprises, then the 'Colloquia' were the summation of his satirical campaign against the follies of the day and misuse of power, ecclesiastical and secular. Derived from his own teaching experience and rooted in the rhetorical handbooks of the later middle ages, the 'Colloquia' were first adumbrated in the unauthorized 'Familiarium colloquiorum formulae' from the Froben press in Basel in November 1518, apparently printed from a text belonging to a friend of Erasmus's Paris years, Augustinus Vincentius Caminadus, a fellow tutor and sometime room-mate. Erasmus made corrections in the Froben edition of 1519, and the book was reprinted at least thirty times before March 1522. In 1522 Froben published a much enhanced version, after which the work appeared at regular intervals, new colloquies being added sporadically, until the final edition of Erasmus's lifetime in 1533. In successive revisions the constantly amplified 'Colloquia' became a running, often trenchant, commentary on the affairs of the day. As the fully developed dialogues they now were, they experienced countless reprintings throughout Europe, both authorized and pirated, virtually initiating a new literary genre. They also reflect frequently their author's experience of England, dealing with such subject matter as St Paul's School, Thomas More, John Colet, and pilgrimages to Walsingham and to Canterbury. 
Erasmus's collision with Martin Luther marked a divergence within the community of reformers that was of lasting import. Luther was one of those in the generation after Erasmus who could not but be a pupil of the pre-eminent northern humanist's achievement as a pioneering editor of the fathers and of the 'New Testament', as well as an educational propagandist and master of satire: the 'Adagia', the 'Enchiridion', and the 'Moria' were all a part of Luther's formation, but important above all was Erasmus's Greek 'New Testament'. Luther's earlier training was scholastic, not humanistic, and his attitude to Erasmus was from the first ambivalent. After Luther's open break with Rome in his publications of 1520 Erasmus was seen by him increasingly as, at best, a half-hearted ally, if not indeed an obstacle to the kind of revolution Luther thought essential, while Erasmus was more and more concerned by Luther's apparent indifference to the unity of the church. Under pressure from Rome, from Duke Georg of Saxony, and from many other quarters including the English court, Erasmus finally took up his pen in public opposition to Luther on an issue that was central not only to the latter's doctrine, but to the humanist's reform programme: the issue of the freedom of the will. 
The 'De libero arbitrio diatribe' (literally, a 'discussion' of free will), issued by Froben in September 1524 (an advance copy had been sent to Henry VIII in March) was a measured response to Luther's 'Assertio omnium articulorum per bullam Leonis X'. In the 'Assertio' Luther had replied, article by article, to the bull of Leo X condemning his views, 'Exsurge domine' (15 June 1520). Article 36 of 'Exsurge domine' proclaimed free will, and in his reply Luther repudiated the orthodox Catholic teaching that by their own freely willed good deeds, performed in a proper relationship to divine grace, human beings might contribute to their own salvation. This was Erasmus's chosen ground of debate. He upheld the traditional view, drawing heavily upon scripture, on the fathers, and on the consensus of belief throughout earlier centuries. Luther's reply 'De servo arbitrio' ('On the enslaved will'), which appeared in December 1525, was an aggressive rebuttal, section by section, point by point, to 'De libero arbitrio'. Stung by his tone and belligerence Erasmus, convinced now that Luther was resolved to disrupt Christendom, denounced his reckless arrogance and insolence, and turned to a lengthy response. This was 'Hyperaspistes diatribae adversus servum arbitrium Martini Lutheri' ('A warrior shielding a discussion of free will against the enslaved will of Martin Luther'), the first part of which appeared in March 1526. The second, three times as long as the first, appeared in September of the following year. 
The exchange between the two men, arguing over the same scriptural texts, reflected their contrasting intellectual formations. Where Erasmus's approach was inductive and consensual, Luther's was deductive and systematic, from the outset placing the biblical texts in a doctrinal framework. Where Erasmus accepted diversity in the understanding of the 'Bible', appealing to the larger context of Christian practice and tradition, Luther's hermeneutic was impelled by his central conviction that human collaboration could contribute nothing to salvation, which proceeds from God's grace alone. Behind these differences lay contrasting anthropologies. Luther saw man as determined by his being wholly a sinner; Erasmus emphasized his vocation as a 'new creation' capable of serving God. At base, Erasmus thought that within the unfathomable mystery posed by God's omnipotence over against the fate of individuals, the human experience of freedom could not be dismissed, that Luther's doctrine of human unfreedom could not be proved in scripture, and that in any case to proclaim it publicly could have only disastrous consequences for the mass of believers already lethargic about their Christian calling. His concern was, as usual, more pastoral than doctrinal, so that what was all-important to Luther was of secondary interest only to Erasmus. 
The argument with Luther was not Erasmus's only concern, however, and his involvement with neighbouring reformers -- Huldrych Zwingli in Zurich, Johannes Oecolampadius in Basel, and Martin Bucer in Strasbourg -- impinged more directly on his personal fortunes. These were men who found Erasmus's humanist approaches much more congenial than did Luther, and who could appeal to the Dutch reformer's utterances in support of their own more radical opinions. Within a few months of his arrival in Basel, Erasmus intervened with eirenic intentions in a local row over compulsory fasting with a treatise 'De esu carnium' ('On the eating of meat'), which questioned the entire status of man-made ecclesiastical laws (including celibacy). His many earlier attacks on such rules as a 'legalism' opposed to 'evangelical freedom' were now hostages to fate, since reformers like Zwingli were prepared to cite him in support of their views, and to demand the entire abolition of such practices in the name of the gospel. Erasmus disagreed, seeing in such demands only a new legalism. 'De esu carnium' appealed to the bishops, on the one hand, to show pastoral prudence and openness, and to the reformers to act with moderation within the established church. His stand pleased neither side. His personal view of the church as an evolving community of faith under the perpetual tuition of the Holy Spirit put preservation of its unity and spiritual harmony above all other imperatives, but for those of a more doctrinaire turn of mind this was incomprehensible. Protestant and Catholic critics alike rejected or simply failed to comprehend his pneumatic ecclesiology and hermeneutic theology. The former envisaged the church almost entirely under the aspect of the Holy Spirit through the ages, while the latter shunned scholastic definitions of doctrine in favour of a core of belief drawn simply from the 'New Testament' and the teachings of the early fathers. A subsequent row over the eucharist, provoked by Oecolampadius, exposed Erasmus's profound sympathy with a view that was not in accord with the 'consensus ecclesiae', to which nevertheless Erasmus loyally adhered. The theologians of Louvain and Paris took up the cry, and in 1526 the 'Colloquia' were condemned, the first censures to be passed against his writings. As Catholic critics from Spain as well as France took up their pens, his 'Apologia adversus monachos quosdam Hispanos' (1528) addressed their dangerous accusation that he questioned the very doctrine of the Trinity. His vulnerability to the scrutiny of systematic theologians was again demonstrated, as it had been with Luther. 
In April 1529, driven from Basel by the radical party's successful campaign of iconoclasm and the replacement of the mass by compulsory celebration of communion in the protestant rite, Erasmus saw his independence imperilled and removed his household to Freiburg im Breisgau, a Catholic city within the territories of the Archduke Ferdinand. His 'Epistola in pseudevangelicos' later that year stated his position, without withdrawing his familiar objections to the church of the day. Although editions and revisions continued to pour from his study, his most substantial new achievement in the last years was the final version of 'Ecclesiastes' (1535), an extensive treatise on preaching which is also rich in theological reflection. His 'De sarcienda ecclesiae concordia' of 1533 ('On repairing the unity of the church'), a long reflection on 'Psalm 83 (84)', was an eirenic resume of his position on the need both for appropriate reforms and for diversity of observance within a unified church. It gave satisfaction neither in Rome nor in Wittenberg and, like other of Erasmus's late works, reflected both a less sanguine view of the prospects for reform through education and a more cautious attitude to what mere human powers could achieve. 
Debilitated by failing health, in 1534 Erasmus returned to Basel where a more accommodating religious policy now prevailed, and where he was sought by his old friend and influential associate, Bonifacius Amerbach, who became his heir and executor. He died at Zum Luft, Basel, the house of Hieronymus Froben, son of the printer Johann, of dysentery during the night of 11 July 1536 and was buried on the 18th in the cathedral. The most important component of his estate was the so-called 'Legatum Erasmianum', a sum of 5000 florins invested at 5 per cent with the duke of Wurttemburg and the city of Geneva to provide support for students and the poor. 
Erasmus's influence on the generation that came of age under Henry VIII was immense, especially in education. Episcopal and aristocratic patrons of his project included Richard Fox of Winchester, John Fisher of Rochester, and Lady Margaret Beaufort, all connected to Erasmus and key figures in the establishment of humanism in the universities. The names of Roger Ascham, Sir John Cheke, Leonard Cox, Richard Croke, Sir Thomas Elyot, Thomas Lupset, Thomas Paynell, Thomas Ruthall, Cuthbert Tunstall, Nicholas Udall, and Christopher Urswick must be added to those just mentioned as instrumental in the promotion of the Erasmian agenda directly or indirectly. There was also a notable translation industry involving predictably the 'Paraclesis' (1529), 'Enchiridion' (1533), and 'Praise of Folly' (1549), but including works of devotion and, most prominently, the 'Paraphrases' on the 'New Testament' on the initiative of Queen Katherine Parr. By royal injunction of 1547 the latter were to be made accessible in every parish in the realm along with the 'Great Bible'. 
To the list of adherents the name of Thomas Cranmer should be added, but direct citations of Erasmus in Cranmer's reforms of the liturgy are conspicuously absent. While it is tempting to think that the patristic orientation and ecclesiologically conservative character of the later Anglican settlement reflected the views of Erasmus, it is impossible to document such a continuing influence. Nevertheless in England he was generally regarded as an honorary protestant. Bishop Edward Stillingfleet (1635-1699) saw him as the father of Anglican moderation, while Alexander Pope, who had been brought up a Catholic, hailed Erasmus as 'that great, injur'd name', and praised him as the man who revived the study of letters after they had been corrupted by superstitious monks, 'those holy Vandals' ('Essay on Criticism', ll. 693-6). The first English biographer of Erasmus, Samuel Knight (1677/8-1746), saw him chiefly as a scholar and writer. John Jortin (1698-1770), whose two-volume study was more influential, acknowledged Erasmus's sincere adherence to the Roman church despite his criticisms, and provided a sympathetic estimate of his religion with influential extracts from Erasmus's works. His reputation as an eirenicist and advocate of peace was already clear, as it would be on the continent. 
The first English Catholic to compose a biography was Charles Butler (1750-1832), of old recusant stock, who was also a student of Grotius. Relying heavily on the earlier biographies, Butler admired Erasmus for his contributions to learning, sacred and profane, and criticized him chiefly for presenting abuses in the church as universal when they were not. Arthur Lionel Smith (1850-1924), a liberal protestant admirer, saw Erasmus as the most representative proponent of the Renaissance, anti-ecclesiastical and anti-dogmatic. In his admiration of Erasmus's moderation and partiality to gradual reform as opposed to Luther's violence, he fairly sums up the congenial attitude of most English authors to the Dutch reformer. It should be added, however, that it was Charles Reade's 'The Cloister and the Hearth' (1861), a romantic reconstruction of Erasmus's origins, based largely on the 'Compendium vitae', that fixed Erasmus's story in the minds of most readers in later generations. 
The modern critical study began with the monumental life's work of Percy Stafford Allen (1869-1933), the assembly and ordering of Erasmus's vast correspondence. This established for the first time a reliable framework within which the works could be located, and the development of Erasmus's thought explored. Its consummation is the new critical edition from Amsterdam along with the wealth of scholarship developed in the wake of the Second World War and the Second Vatican Council, after which Erasmus's eirenicism, advocacy of a European polity, and insistence that Christians agree to concentrate on the essentials of the gospel message acquired new relevance and urgency. He remains one of the architects of modern scholarship as a paradigm of critical intelligence and unflagging industry, and as an admired advocate of international peace and concord. 


@@@@@


doc= 39359


McLeod, Herbert (1841-1923), chemist and bibliographer, was born on 19 February 1841 in Stamford Hill, north London, the eldest child of Bentley McLeod (1808-1870), brewer, and Louisa Jane, 'nee' Cristall (1811-1901). McLeod received his initial education at Stockwell grammar school and at a private school in Deal, to where the family had moved in 1853. In 1855 he went to the (short-lived) Panopticon in Leicester Square, London, where he studied chemistry under George Frederick Ansell. The following year he entered the Royal College of Chemistry, London, to study under August Hofmann. In 1858 he became a junior assistant in the college, and in 1860 assistant chemist. In 1865 Hofmann was appointed professor of chemistry at Berlin. McLeod served as his assistant there during his first semester before returning to the Royal College of Chemistry as assistant to Hofmann's replacement, Edward Frankland. In 1871 McLeod was appointed professor of experimental science at the Royal Indian Engineering College at Coopers Hill, a post which he held (later as professor of chemistry) until his retirement in 1901. In 1888 he married Amelia Sarah (Minnie) Woodley (1862-1945); they had three sons and two daughters. 
McLeod was elected a fellow of the Chemical Society in 1868, served on its council from 1871 to 1874 and again from 1880 to 1884, and was vice-president from 1887 to 1890 and from 1901 to 1904. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1881 and was on the council from 1887 to 1889. He was president of the chemistry section of the British Association in 1892. He received an honorary degree of LLD from St Andrews University in 1907. 
As a chemist, McLeod's chief contribution was the invention in 1874 of an instrument for measuring very low pressures on an absolute scale; the 'McLeod gauge' is still a standard part of the equipment in chemistry and physics laboratories. In 1878, with George Sydenham Clarke, he devised an instrument for determining the speed of machines. In 1880 he showed that ozone was formed in the slow oxidation of phosphorus in air, and in 1884 he invented a sunshine recorder using ferrocyanide paper. From 1888 McLeod read the proofs of the Royal Society's 'Catalogue of Scientific Papers', published in the nineteenth century, and from 1902 to 1915 he undertook the direction of this catalogue, giving the later volumes an accuracy not achieved earlier. 
McLeod was devoutly religious throughout his life, belonging to the Anglo-Catholic wing of the Church of England. As Alexander Taylor, his chief at Coopers Hill, expressed it, McLeod was 'A High Churchman and a Tory, and, in all paths of life, a follower of the most orthodox of the strictest sects of orthodoxy' (A. C. Taylor, 'General Sir Alex Taylor', 1913, 2.257). He was thus deeply disturbed at the way in which science (which was, after all, his profession) and religion were beginning to be placed by some in opposition to each other. Especially problematic in the mid-1860s was the outcome of the trials of some of the contributors to 'Essays and Reviews' (1860) and of Bishop Colenso, which demonstrated that the Anglican church had very little power over what its members believed. The writings both of the essayists and of Colenso did contain some arguments drawn from modern science, the existence of which prompted McLeod and a few others at the Royal College of Chemistry in 1864 to write and promulgate 'The Declaration of Students of the Natural and Physical Sciences'. This asserted 'that it is impossible for the Word of God, as written in the book of nature, and God's Word written in 'Holy Scripture', to contradict one another, however much they may appear to differ'. The 'Declaration' was circulated throughout the British scientific community and when it was published in May 1865 it had been signed by 717 individuals or about 15 per cent of the community, including sixty-six fellows of the Royal Society (11.1 per cent of the fellowship). The 'Declaration' attracted strong criticism from some leaders of the scientific community, including Charles Daubeny, John Herschel, William Rowan Hamilton, and Augustus De Morgan. Although the 'Declaration' has ever since been used as evidence that science and religion are not necessarily in conflict, McLeod, disliking controversy entirely, played down his role in its creation, and indeed none of his obituary notices refers to it. 
McLeod died of cerebral thrombosis, at his home, 109 Church Road, Richmond, Surrey, on 1 October 1923. The most meticulous of men, as his chemical and bibliographical work illustrate, he kept a daily diary from the first day of 1860 until he went into a coma three days before his death; it ran to 174 volumes. All commentators agree that he was a clear lecturer who spent much effort in devising lecture demonstrations. Although not a great chemist in the way that Thomas Graham or William Crookes were, nevertheless McLeod's career is representative of the emergence of the chemical profession in the second half of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 39361


Cooper, John Thomas (1790-1854), chemist, was born on 29 June 1790 in Greenwich. He studied medicine and for a short while was a general practitioner, but, unable to cope with the anxiety and fatigue involved, turned to chemistry. He was married to Elizabeth ('fl'. 1785-1840) though further details are unknown; their second son, the naturalist Daniel Cooper, predeceased his father. Until 1842 he made his living from lecturing as well as from selling chemicals, acting as a consultant analytical chemist, and devising or improving scientific instruments. 
As early as 1810 he delivered popular lectures on chemistry in Mount Street, Lambeth. He later lectured on chemistry at the Russell Institution, at the Aldersgate school of medicine, and at the school of medicine in Webb Street, Southwark (founded by Edward Grainger), a position he occupied until 1842 when the school closed. Following this he devoted himself solely to the other aspects of professional chemistry. 
In his business of selling chemicals Cooper was at one time the sole supplier of iodine in Britain and a successful preparer of potassium and sodium when the price of these elements was 10 and 12 guineas per ounce. In 1825 he used matches with heads made of sulphur and phosphorous. 
In the course of his career Cooper invented several scientific instruments and made improvements to many more. In 1823 he published details of an improved apparatus for analysing organic bodies and also an account of a new hydrometer. For these two inventions he was respectively awarded, in 1823, the large silver medal and the gold Vulcan medal of the Society of Arts, of which he was a member between 1815 and 1829. With the optical instrument making company founded by William Cary he invented the oxy-hydrogen microscope, which he had perfected by 1835 and which was manufactured and retailed by Edward Montague Clarke. In 1839 he invented a baroscope which formed the subject of his only paper in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' and the topic of his first Friday evening discourse at the Royal Institution. His only other Royal Institution discourse, in 1841, was on electroplating. In 1840 he published a paper recommending the use of copper instead of platinum in the electric cell recently invented by William Robert Grove; this suggestion led Robert Wilhelm Bunsen to invent his own cell. In 1843 he published improvements to William Hyde Wollaston's refractometer. He was also the first to employ Canada balsam for mounting microscopic objects, an invention of important practical use. 
As a consultant analytical chemist Cooper appeared in trials (including the Severn and King insurance case in 1820) to give expert testimony. In 1827 he carried out some chemical experiments for the subcommittee of the joint Royal Society and board of longitude committee to improve optical glass. This subcommittee (which comprised John Frederick William Herschel, George Dollond, and Michael Faraday) was responsible for making optical glass and determining its properties. In the late 1840s and early 1850s Cooper's analytical services were retained by various London water companies in their fight with Edwin Chadwick. He published some of the analyses that he performed, such as of calculi (1816), zinc ores (1820), and ancient ruby (1824). One of the results of these kinds of activities was that he made several chemical discoveries. For instance, in 1817 he described some new compounds of platinum and two years later a method to separate lime and magnesia. He independently discovered iodoform (though it was originally thought of as the sesqui-iodide of carbon) about 1823, but because Cooper failed to publish it the credit went to Georges-Simon Serullas. One interest that he had which seems not to have stemmed from his analytical work was in the Fraunhofer lines of the solar spectrum. In 1831 he published a method of observing them and in 1839 announced, in a note published in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society', that the infra-red spectrum also contained Fraunhofer lines. 
Cooper was described in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' as having an unostentatious character, which doubtless accounts for the paucity of information about him, but he was, nevertheless, well-known in London's scientific community; he was one of the founders of the Chemical Society in 1841, and is said also to have had a connection with the Spitalfields Mathematical Society. He died after a long and painful illness on 24 September 1854 at his home, 82 Blackfriars Road, London, and was buried in Norwood cemetery. He was survived by a son and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 39362


Thomas Newborn Robert Morson (1800-1874), pharmaceutical manufacturer, born in Stratford-le-Bow, London, who served his apprenticeship with an apothecary in the Fleet Market before studying alkaloid chemistry in Paris. When the elder Morson returned to London in 1821 he established himself as a retail pharmacist in Southampton Row, Bloomsbury, and soon acquired a leading position in the import and supply of quinine and morphia. By 1837 demand for his range of products -- which included perfumes and dyes as well as pharmaceuticals and their ingredients -- was growing, and, like other pharmacists, he found that the back of the shop was inadequate for manufacturing; he set up a separate factory in Hornsey Road. In 1869 the factory was moved further out of London, to the Summerfields works, Ponder's End, in Middlesex. The elder Morson was a founder member of the Chemical and Pharmaceutical societies; he was a member of the Pharmaceutical Society's council, serving as vice-president and president. He died at his house, 38 Queen Square, Bloomsbury, on 3 March 1874. 


@@@@@


doc= 39364


Fuller, John (1757-1834), politician and eccentric, was born on 20 February 1757 at North Stoneham, Southampton, Hampshire, the only son of Revd Henry Fuller (1713-1761), rector of North Stoneham, and his wife, Frances (1725/6-1778), his cousin, and daughter of Thomas Fuller of Catsfield, Sussex. The Fuller family, originally cloth merchants in London, were Sussex landowners, ironmasters, and gun-founders, with sugar plantations in the West Indies. Their sources of wealth were reflected in the family motto 'carbone et forcipibus' ('By charcoal and tongs'). John, who had lacked a steadying influence following the death of his father when he was still a young boy, was educated at Eton College (1767-74). On reaching adulthood he inherited a vast fortune when, on the death of his uncle, Rose Fuller ['see under 'Fuller family], in 1777, the family estate at Rose Hill, Brightling, near Burwash, Sussex, together with the property in Jamaica came into his possession. From this date he established himself as the local squire determined to make a name in the eyes of posterity. 
Through family influence Fuller obtained the parliamentary seat of Southampton, which he held from 1780 to 1784 as a supporter of Lord North's administration. Mrs Thrale observed his rough and boisterous manner, though he rarely spoke in debates. From 1778 he was a captain in the Sussex militia, his chief interest, and he later led a troop of the Sussex yeomanry cavalry at the crucial period of the French invasion threat during the Napoleonic war. He was high sheriff of Sussex in 1796-7. After a lapse of seventeen years he was returned to parliament in July 1801 as a county member for Sussex. By then Fuller's extravagant behaviour and blunt outspokenness had become pronounced, his wild, intemperate, and frequently absurd interventions in debates making him an object of mirth. A vocal representative of the sugar planters, he declared in reply to William Wilberforce in a debate on the slave trade (30 May 1804) that the living conditions of West Indian slaves were 'equal, nay, superior to the condition of the labouring poor of this country' ('Hansard 1', 2, 1804, 459). He defended the duke of York in 1809 and attacked sinecures, proclaiming his own independence; legend had it that he declined an offer of a peerage from Pitt as a threat to his integrity, asserting 'I was born Jack Fuller, and Jack Fuller I will die!' ('GM', 106). 
On 27 February 1810 Fuller achieved notoriety when, drunkenly entering the Commons while the inquiry into the Walcheren expedition was in progress, he interjected various absurd questions to the earl of Chatham. On being ignored he exclaimed, 'God d -- n me Sir, I have as much right to be heard as any man who is paid for filling the place he holds'. It took the serjeant-at-arms and four messengers to overpower him and remove him from the chamber, on the orders of the speaker, whom he had addressed as 'the insignificant little fellow in the wig' (HoP, 'Commons, 1790-1820', 4.848). After spending two days in custody he apologized to the house, and was reprimanded, an outcome regarded by some as excessively lenient. 
Fuller retired from parliament at the dissolution in 1812 and settled on his Sussex estate. There he made the contributions to the age of folly building, then already on the wane, for which he is remembered. His first such effort, a Coadestone summer house with a 'Tudor' archway, was built in 1803 (restored 1992). Seven years later, and in the churchyard at Brightling so that it was visible from his windows, he commissioned his own mausoleum, a 25 foot high pyramid with a wall tablet inside bearing Thomas Gray's lines, 'The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power'. At the same time rose the rotunda garden temple which, together with its Doric columns and dome, now forms a backdrop to the matches played by the Brightling Park cricket club. A mystery surrounds the obelisk standing 646 feet above sea level at the north-west of Brightling Park, for which no record exists except that 'Mad Jack' (as he came to be known) built it. The observatory, designed by Sir Robert Smirke, was built between 1810 and 1818 simply because the squire of Brightling was a keen amateur astronomer who previously had no adequate means for studying the heavens. About 1828 he built a tower at Brightling as an observation point from which to view the repairs to Bodiam Castle, 6 miles away, which he purchased in that year and saved from ruin. Finally he erected the Sugar Loaf, the epitome of folly building, which stands 35 feet high in a field on the Battle-Heathfield road. Fashioned in the shape of a cone (the contemporary way of retailing sugar, linked with his Jamaican interests), it was said to have been built as a result of a wager. 
Anything but mad, and only mildly eccentric, Fuller had a purpose in most of his follies, not least to provide local employment, the reason for the 4 miles of stone wall he had erected around Rose Hill. He also commissioned the building of the predecessor to the Beachy Head lighthouse and donated a lifeboat to the inhabitants of Eastbourne. His patronage of the arts included several commissions to J. M. W. Turner. He was a generous benefactor of the sciences, endowing before his death two professorships, in anatomy and physiology, and chemistry, at the Royal Institution (known as the Fullerian chairs). He never married, having been rejected at the age of thirty-three by Susanna Thrale, a daughter of Henry and Hester Thrale. Fuller died at his London residence, 36 Devonshire Place, on 11 April 1834. Twenty-four private carriages attended the funeral cortege from London to his burial in the pyramid tomb in Brightling churchyard on 18 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 39365


Newman, John (bap. 1783, d. 1860), maker of scientific instruments, was baptized at St Giles, Camberwell, on 27 June 1783, one of two sons and two daughters -- Mary ('bap'. 1779) and Jane ('bap'. 1781) -- of Robert and Mary Newman of Windmill Row, Camberwell. He and his brother, George ('bap'. 1785), were together apprenticed on 1 October 1799 to Philip Brock, a lesser-known mathematical instrument maker of Fetter Lane, in the City of London. In 1807 John took his freedom in his master's livery, the Company of Makers of Playing Cards. From this time he traded independently, initially from 11 Windmill Row, Camberwell, on the southern margins of London. By 1809 he had moved to Lisle Street, off Leicester Square, Westminster, where he remained until 1827, trading as a chemical and philosophical instrument maker. 
Newman's lifelong association with the Royal Institution, based in Albemarle Street, on the north side of Piccadilly, began about 1809. Accounts show that he not only supplied standard laboratory apparatus and chemicals, but also acted as laboratory assistant, cleaning and repairing the instruments. He helped to prepare the theatre for the demonstrations of Humphry Davy, William Thomas Brande, and other lecturers, and it was in connection with one such lecture that an incident of some significance occurred. On 22 February 1813, as the 'Royal Institution Managers' Minutes' (5.353) recorded: 'Mr Harris the superintendent of the House reported that on Friday evening last, hearing a great noise in the lecture room, he went to see the cause of it. When he found Mr Payne and Mr Newman at high words and Newman complained of having been struck by Payne for representing to him his neglect of duty in being absent when he should have attended on Mr Brande.' Payne was promptly dismissed. A week later, the minutes recorded (5.355): 'Sir Humphry Davy has the honour to inform the Managers that he has found a person who is desirous to occupy the situation in the Institution lately filled by Mr Payne. His name is Michael Faraday. He is a youth of 22 years of age and as far as Sir Humphry Davy has been able to observe or ascertain, he appears well fitted for the situation.' Faraday was duly engaged. 
There is no evidence that Newman had applied to fill the vacancy. Clearly he had already developed a clientele that numbered some of the leading scientists of his day, as well as supplying the trade. In 1818 he made a copper water-bottle to Davy's designs for John Ross's polar expedition; it was a failure, though a sturdy iron sampler which he constructed for the chemist Alexander Marcet was sent on Edward Parry's first Arctic expedition of 1819 and appeared to function effectively down to 300 fathoms. Newman was also employed by the Revd Edward Daniel Clarke, professor of mineralogy at Cambridge, to make an oxy-hydrogen blowpipe, which was described in Clarke's 'The Gas Blow-Pipe' (1819). In 1822 he made a standard barometer for the Royal Society, and later supplied similar standards to several major observatories. 
In April 1828 the Royal Institution awarded the Fuller silver medal to Newman and allowed him to style himself 'philosophical instrument maker to the Royal Institution'. Newman promptly moved into more prestigious premises at 122 Regent Street. At about this time he married Elizabeth, who came from Southwark. They set up house at 82 Albany Street, Camden Town, and raised two sons and two daughters. 
Robert Hare, writing to the American scientist Joseph Henry in 1837, stated: 'In London you will find a great number of shops in which philosophical instruments are sold. The persons so engaged are generally scientific men... I do not like Newman, 122 Regent Street... he is however much employed' ('Papers of Joseph Henry', 3.151). In April 1837 Henry bought a number of instruments from Newman, and described him as 'a... much older man than I imagined' ('Papers of Joseph Henry', 3.237). 
Many scientists and explorers commissioned special apparatus from Newman; Sir Charles Wheatstone and Isambard Kingdom Brunel were among his customers, as were the major colleges and institutions. From the large number of surviving instruments, many of ingenious and imaginative design, and of first-rate quality, his high reputation was certainly justified. The citation for his award of the council medal at the Great Exhibition of 1851 praises for its originality, excellence, and perfection, his air-pump, the best in the exhibition. 
Newman's son John Frederick joined him in business until December 1859 when their partnership was dissolved by mutual consent and Newman retired from business. A Richard Newman who signed a shop receipt in 1839 may have been his other son, but his role in the firm is unknown. Newman died at his home, 26 High Street, Camden Town, on 5 July 1860. His son's business did not last long and the premises were almost immediately taken over by the rival firm of Negretti and Zambra, about whose barometers Newman had made some disparaging remarks in earlier years. Newman's will showed that he owned or leased much property in Camden Town, Woolwich, and Camberwell, in addition to the lease of 122 Regent Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 39367


Rowbotham, Thomas Charles Leeson (1823-1875), watercolour painter, son of Thomas Leeson Scrase Rowbotham (1782-1853), professor of drawing at the Royal Naval School, New Cross, London, was born in Dublin on 21 May 1823. He was instructed in art by his father, a master of perspective, whose skill in painting landscapes and marine subjects in both oil and watercolour proved an inspiration to his son. Rowbotham's grandfather, also called Thomas, had owned the Theatre Royal in Bath and Rowbotham's father was brought up in that city before moving to Dublin about 1812. During his time there he exhibited many works, and received a premium of $17 from the Royal Irish Institution in 1816. Keen for his son to become a professional artist, he gave him every encouragement. However, the younger Thomas developed a deep love for music and for some time thought of becoming a musician. Although accomplished in this vocation, in his early twenties he chose to concentrate on his artistic career. 
Thomas Rowbotham's first serious work was done in 1844 on a sketching tour to Wales, which was followed in succeeding years by visits to Scotland, Kent, Ireland, Germany, and Normandy. Although he exhibited three 'drawings in wax, without oil or watercolour' at the Royal Academy in 1840, it was at the New Society (later the Royal Institute) of Painters in Water Colours in Pall Mall, London, that he usually exhibited. Elected an associate in 1848 and a full member in 1851, he contributed no fewer than 464 watercolours to its exhibitions. He last exhibited there in the year of his death, showing sixteen works, of which the most important was 'Ruin Near Cape Miseno, Bay of Naples', priced at 120 guineas. On the retirement of his father, Rowbotham succeeded to the post of professor of drawing at the Royal Naval School, New Cross, an institution established for the sons of impecunious naval officers. He had had a productive relationship with his father, collaborating with him in writing 'The Art of Landscape Painting in Watercolours', published in 1850 by Winsor and Newton, and providing twenty-six detailed illustrations for his father's 'The Art of Sketching from Nature', engraved on wood by Edward Dalziel. 
T. L. Rowbotham junior, as he was known, was a skilful artist, apt at catching the salient beauties of picturesque or Romantic scenery. John Ruskin praised his work and, although anxious lest 'artificialness' spoil his compositions, noted that 'This artist does at heart care chiefly for the misty mountains and the deep lake; and is trying to make us care for them too' (Ruskin, 'Notes', 1858, 48). In his early days, judging by a watercolour of 1848, 'Rouen, from St. Catherine's Hill' (Victoria and Albert Museum, London), he fell under the influence of Turner. Rowbotham was not afraid to experiment to achieve the effects he wished, and he would sometimes work with water in which a small piece of loaf sugar had been dissolved, to create highlights in richly coloured foregrounds. He developed a fascination for light and found the scenery of Mediterranean lands well suited to his palette. In later years he followed the Miles Richardsons in manner, gaining impact by a particularly free use of body colour. His love of sunny effects led him to restrict himself to Italian subjects, especially those of sea or lake, even though there is no evidence that he ever visited Italy. 
Rowbotham illustrated a number of books, of which four, 'English Lake Scenery' (1875), 'Picturesque Scottish Scenery' (1875), 'Views in North Wales' (1875), and 'Views of Wicklow and Killarney' (1876), published by Marcus Ward & Co., contained many of his chromolithographs. He also contributed to Cassell's 'Picturesque Europe' series and to one of Vere Foster's drawing-books, 'Sketches in Water Colours by Various Artists' (1886), published in London by Blackie & Son. After his death other chromolithographs were published in a series entitled 'T. L. Rowbotham's Sketchbook' (1876). On 7 October 1852 he married Ellen Amelia Jameson ('b'. 1823), daughter of Hugh Jameson. Always a man of delicate health, he died at his home, Percy Lodge, Campden Hill, Kensington, London, on 30 June 1875 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery in London. His wife and eight children survived him. His obituary in the 'Art Journal' referred to his 'pleasing and popular' landscapes (p. 280), but Rowbotham died penniless and his family were destitute. With help from fellow artists, including gifts of pictures, his widow sold off his remaining works at Christies on 21 April 1876 to raise funds. The Victoria and Albert Museum, London, has some of his works in its collection. Two of his sons, Charles Edmund Rowbotham ['see below'] and Claude Hamilton Rowbotham (1864-1949), became professional artists. 

Charles Edmund Rowbotham (1856-1921), watercolour painter, was born in St Pancras, London, on 14 February 1856. His artistic talent developed early, and his father, a limited draughtsman of the human form, engaged him in his teens to paint in the figures in his landscapes. After his watercolour 'Near Bramber, Sussex' was shown at the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists in 1877, he undertook a number of sketching tours around the country. On 5 April 1884 he married Rachel Maria, daughter of James Cotton; with his wife he toured Switzerland, Italy, and the French riviera. It was during this period that he produced his best work, which is characterized by the compositional sureness of his father and a fondness for deep distinctive blues. His works are represented in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the National Gallery of Wales, Cardiff. Charles Rowbotham died in Croydon Hospital on 14 January 1921, having suffered a heart attack on the way to his club. His son, Leopold Charles Leeson Rowbotham (1899-1977), was a talented amateur artist. 


@@@@@


doc= 39374


Smith, Edward Tyrrel (1804-1877), impresario and showman, was born on 26 August 1804, the son of Admiral Edward Tyrrel Smith (died 1824). Intended to follow his father's profession, he was appointed a midshipman in Lord Cochrane's ship, but at the last minute was fetched back from Chatham at his mother's insistence. He then joined the Metropolitan Police, as a red-waistcoated Bow Street runner, but subsequently became an auctioneer, restaurateur, licensed victualler, music-hall and theatre manager, land agent, picture dealer, bill discounter, and newspaper proprietor. It was rightly said of him that he was everything by turns, but nothing for long. 
As a speculator, Smith turned Crockford's gaming house in St James's Street into a first-class restaurant which he called the Wellington. This venture fell through, however, and eventually it became the Devonshire Club. Smith then acquired an interest in Vauxhall Gardens, during their notorious days of decline. In 1849 he became the proprietor of several taverns, including the Coal Hole, in the Strand, where the tragedian Edmund Kean formed his Wolf Club. When the American Mrs Amelia Bloomer gave the world a new garment, he made the barmaids of his tavern wear it. 
Smith's connection with theatres began in 1850, when he took the Marylebone, in Edgware Road, which he held for two years. At the end of 1852 he became lessee of Drury Lane, at a rental of $3500. This theatre was in poor condition and had been on the market for some time, with the ground lessee even having considered demolishing it, but Smith kept it going for a full decade. He opened with 'Uncle Tom's Cabin', based on Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel, and the pantomime 'Harlequin Hudibras', later mixing opera with Shakespeare, variety, and circus entertainment. Smith introduced morning performances there, and claimed thus to have invented the matinee. In 1855 he became the proprietor of Hernandez and Stone's circus, and E. T. Smith's Leviathan Company, as it was known, toured the provinces, with Eaton Stone as manager. 
In 1858 Smith acquired the Royal Panopticon in Leicester Square, which he reopened on 7 February as the Alhambra, with the 'Cirque imperial', starring one of the Berri brothers and James Leach, rivals of Jules Leotard on the trapeze. The company was then sent tenting on a provincial tour. Smith next took over Her Majesty's Theatre in the Haymarket, opening in 1860 with Sims Reave in opera and that Christmas producing 'Tom Thumb', the first pantomime to be staged there. It is said that he lost $21,000 in the first year. Nevertheless, Smith was able to lease Cremorne Gardens from 1861 to 1869, meanwhile becoming lessee of Astley's Theatre (1863-4) and of the Royal Lyceum (1867-9). He introduced the sensational Adah Isaacs Menken at Astley's as Mazeppa on 3 October 1864, for a season of ten weeks. Smith worked her engagement for all it was worth, at one point advertising her as 'the saucy wench in tights' (W. Mankonitz, 'Mazeppa', 1982, 142). 
Smith ran the Surrey Theatre for a short season from October 1870, Highbury Barn Gardens, with the associated Alexandra Theatre, from 1871, and not long afterwards the Regent Music-Hall, Westminster. At the sale of any place of entertainment Smith would make the highest bid, flourish a $1000 note to demonstrate his means, and trust to luck to raise the funds afterwards. It was said he hired his $1000 note from a moneylender, for $1 per day. His friends believed that it was spurious. One of them, at a luncheon, produced a genuine $1000 note. Smith took it, rolled it into a ball, dropped it into his soup, and swallowed it. 
Smith then turned his attention again to restaurant catering and opened the Cremorne Supper Rooms in Leicester Square, and the Radnor on the corner of Chancery Lane, as well as a dining hall under the vaults of the Royal Exchange which was a conspicuous failure. He owned the 'Sunday Times' from 1856 to 1858, and he also started another newspaper, the 'Bedfordshire Independent', but he soon gave up both of these business ventures. He stood for parliament in Bedford in March 1857 but was soundly beaten by a brewer. 
Smith was a most wonderful and indefatigable impresario, a kind of English Barnum. He certainly made many friends, who seemed always ready to assist him in his various speculations. Although these were not always successful, his friendships were lasting and his faith and honesty were never doubted. He was a noted character in his day, who liked to see his name in print, and a generous supporter of charities; a great many of his acts were motivated by genuine kindness. He was also a jocular sort of fellow, always ready for a lark. 
Smith married late in life and left behind a large family. He died on 26 November 1877 at his home, Oval House, Kennington Park, London, an old man, forgotten and in near poverty; his wife, Isabel, survived him. He was buried in Brompton cemetery on 1 December 1877. Despite the great numbers of people he had helped, there were barely half a dozen at his funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 39376


Elen, Ernest Augustus (1862-1940), music-hall singer, was born on 22 July 1862 at 103 Pulford Street, Pimlico, London, son of Edwin Elen, a viewer of cloth in a military store, and Mercy Elen, 'nee' Letherbarrow. His early life in this relatively poor working-class district contained spells as a draper's assistant, an egg-packer, and a programme seller at the Royal Aquarium. He began his entertainment career singing in London public houses and in army canteens in Aldershot. He may also have been a street singer and worked as a supernumerary at the Opera Comique in 1882. By 1884 he had developed a black-face routine and performed with a minstrel troupe in Ramsgate, and as half of a double act in provincial halls. Following the death of his partner in 1885, he turned solo and began a steady ascent to the peak of the variety profession. 
Although always essentially a comic singer, Elen did not initially adopt a distinctive style, with his advertising card claiming that 'Elen is alike at home in Comic, Eccentric or Dramatic ditties... no two characters the same' ('The Era', 2 May 1891). However, in April 1891 he introduced a 'coster' song, 'Never introduce your donah [sweetheart] to a pal', into his act. Coster singers, adopting the persona of the London costermonger or street fruit and vegetable vendor, had appeared on the halls from the 1860s but the huge success of Albert Chevalier's coster routine at the London Pavilion in February 1891 began a new vogue which Elen exploited. While he was to retain a mixed routine for some time, it was his coster material that made him one of music-hall's biggest stars in the 1890s and 1900s: when he was finally tempted to visit the United States in 1907, he reputedly commanded a salary of $300 a week. Although most of his key songs and characterizations were produced in the 1890s he remained a popular turn until his retirement at the end of the First World War. 
Elen's songs, performed in almost exact replica of costermonger or other London street costume, were delivered in a friendly if occasionally harsh voice and punctuated by a series of almost falsetto 'breaks' which added both emphasis and comic effect. They were mainly rather wry and sardonic commentaries on the daily life of a distinct section of the London working class and, although Elen in his personal pronouncements was firmly wedded to values of self-discipline and thrift, they sometimes contained a gentle challenge to Victorian notions of respectability. ''Arf a pint of ale', for example, in which the ''arf' eventually became 'a barrel and an 'arf', celebrated the pleasures of beer, while 'Wait until the work comes round' and ''E talks just like a picture book' hymned the joys of idleness. These mildly satirical tendencies and his avoidance of the excessive sentimentality often associated with late Victorian and Edwardian popular song (along with the size and relative availability of his recorded output) made him a particular favourite of latter-day music-hall historians and cultural commentators. In particular, he has often been compared favourably with his middle-class rival Albert Chevalier, deemed to have presented a rather generalized and less 'authentic' portrayal of London life. 
Elen originally wrote some of his own material but from the early 1890s he relied largely upon professional writers, albeit cutting their songs 'about a good deal before producing them' ('The Era', 23 Sept 1905). He was especially well served by lyricists Edgar Bateman, usually partnered by melodist George Le Brunn, and Harry Wright, who worked with Fred Eplett. Bateman provided the words for Elen's two best known songs, 'It's a great big shame' (1896), which charted the problems of a newly-wed friend of 'six foot free' nagged by a wife of 'four foot two', and 'If it wasn't for the 'ouses in between' (1894). This classic music-hall song dealt with a cockney's knowing pretence about the view from his back garden and featured such lines as: '
if yer eyesight didn't fail yer, 

yer could see right to Australia, 

if it wasn't for the 'ouses in between. 

' As these song quotations and such song titles as 'It's a marvel 'ow 'e does it but he do' suggest, Elen made good if sometimes stylized use of London's demotic speech and idiom. Interestingly, he was extremely popular outside of the capital and 'Never introduce your donah', although first performed in London, appears to have become a major success during the course of a lengthy provincial tour in the autumn of 1891. Through his depiction of a distinct, local character, Elen both played a role in reinforcing provincial images of the Londoner and in creating a space for explorations of local and regional characterization which Scottish and northern singers were later able to exploit. 
From 1898 Elen lived largely in Balham, where he bred poultry and took up photography. He also became a keen fisherman, particularly during a spell in residence on the south coast, and enjoyed shooting. He was married, but nothing is known about his wife beyond the fact that she helped him with his extensive charitable activities. As a result of the nostalgia for music-hall's 'golden days' which was a notable feature of the 1930s, Elen made a brief comeback in 1931 and then appeared at the 1935 royal variety performance in a 'Cavalcade of Variety'. He had recorded songs as early as 1899, but he rerecorded much of his material in 1931 and 1932. After a short, final retirement, he died of liver cancer at his home, Edith Villa, 3 Thurleigh Avenue, Balham, on 17 February 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 39378


Hill, Jenny (1848-1896), music-hall entertainer, was born in Paddington, Middlesex. Her childhood is obscured by legends spread by herself and others. Her father, Michael Thompson (1812/13-1881), was reported to be a watcher at a cab stand. Her stage debut was made at the age of six or seven, when she performed as the legs of the goose in 'Mother Goose' (Aquarium Theatre, Westminster), and her first appearance at a London music-hall took place about 1860 at the Dr Johnson, a pot-house in Fleet Street, at the usual fee of 3's'. a night with refreshments. All accounts state that about 1862 she was apprenticed under articles to a Bradford tavern singsong for five or seven years, entailing drudgery and starvation which seriously jeopardized her health. Her first weekly salary was $1 at the Winchester Music-Hall, Stockwell, in 1863. 
Hill may have broken her indenture by marrying John Wilson Woodley (died 1890), an acrobat under the name Jean Pasta, on 28 May 1866. The agent Maurice de Frece is credited with taking her back to London, where her first double turns took place at Deacon's and the Raglan, at a wage of 30's'. per hall. By 1871 she was earning $6 a week at the London Pavilion. Another agent, Hugh J. Didcott, bestowed on her the sobriquet the 'Vital Spark', which stuck. 
From 1868 to 1893 Hill was a star of the London and north-country halls. Part of her success lay in a ready wit and voluble exchanges with the audience, improvised to fit each district. Small, sharp-featured, pretty at a distance, but scarred by smallpox, she is credited with originating female low comedy in the halls. The comedian Harry Randall considered her the most versatile artist he had ever seen; she could put across racy patter, perform an energetic cellar-flap dance, yodel a ballad, and then reduce her public to tears with her pathos. Until the late 1870s she sang songs launched by others, but then introduced ''Arry', written for her by E. V. Page, in which she impersonated a bantering coster swell. In 1886 she introduced dramatic character songs, which 'made a decided change in the style of the ballads of the day' ('New York Clipper'), pathetic dramatic 'scenas' like her favourite, 'The Little Stowaway', by Fred Bowyer. The most durable of these were 'The City Waif' and 'Masks and Faces', inspired by Charles Dickens and G. R. Sims. John Hollingshead speculated that 'her sense of character -- low life, of course -- and her dramatic power of conjuring up solid pictures of men and women who never appeared bodily on the stage, would have delighted the elder Mathews' (Hollingshead, 1.99), and a later commentator referred to her 'democratic appeal based on an intimacy with the poorest members of her audience' (Scott, 207). 
At the height of her career Hill earned $30 a night per hall, often appearing at three or four locations nightly. Her forays into music-hall management were less happy. In London she was the proprietor of the Star Music Hall in June 1879, and of Springthorpe's (Mechanics' Hall), Grimston Street, for a week, and from 11 July 1882 to 1883 she kept the Albert Arms public house, Southwark. A more ambitious venture was the purchase of the Rainbow Music Hall (renamed the Gaiety Theatre) in Southampton in July 1884; opened in September of that year, it burnt to the ground two months later. 
Hill entered burlesque in the 1877-8 season, in 'A Frog he would a-Wooing Go' (London, Aquarium). For two seasons (1878-80) she took over Nelly Farren's principal-boy roles at the (London) Gaiety Theatre. Thereafter (until 1888) she became a favourite in pantomime in the northern provinces. In legitimate drama, she played Mrs Micawber to Joe Eldridge's Micawber and Nan in the revival of J. B. Buckstone's 'Good for Nothing Nan' (Grecian Theatre, 1889), but with mediocre success. 
Hill was noted for her charities and her hospitality, much of it dispensed from The Hermitage, Streatham, a bungalow on farmland whose produce she tried to hawk in London. With John Woodley she had three children: Lettie (the music-hall performer Peggy Pryde), Jenny Hill, and a boy who seems not to have survived. After Woodley's death on 8 January 1890, Hill married Edward Turnbull, a music-hall manager. By 1889 her engagements were interrupted by illness, and in December 1890 she was given a testimonial at Canterbury Hall. 
The American vaudeville impresario Tony Pastor took Hill to New York for sixteen weeks from 23 February 1891. Despite extensive publicity, she was not appreciated by audiences, which had to be provided with glossaries of London slang. She became seriously ill in 1892 and was given a benefit at the Canterbury in September, but returned to the London Pavilion on 12 June 1893, when she introduced two new songs. She embarked on a tour of Birmingham, Manchester, Liverpool, and Bradford, but when her doctors recommended that she not winter in England, Hill sold off the furniture of her London house, and, at the invitation of the South African manager Luscombe Searelle, went to Johannesburg in December. She could merely be wheeled onto the stage, where she shook hands with the public. She returned to London in May 1894, and moved to Bournemouth for her health. She died at Peggy Pryde's home in Brixton, London, on 28 June 1896, of pulmonary tuberculosis, and was buried in Nunhead cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 39379


Leybourne, George (1842-1884), music-hall entertainer, popularly known as Champagne Charlie, was born on 17 March 1842 in Stourbridge, Gateshead, the son of Joseph Leybourne, a currier and sometime theatre musician, and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Bullerwell. Leybourne's early life remains obscure and misreported, but he is known to have moved to London with his family at the age of three. Poorly educated, he worked first as an engine fitter or engineer, and began his career as an entertainer in his late teens under the stage name Joe Saunders, playing the smaller music-halls and penny gaffs of London's East End and the provinces. He married Sarah Ann Fisher, a former dressmaker's apprentice, on 12 March 1865 in London. A versatile performer, he was by then appearing under his real name at the major metropolitan halls, singing and dancing in a variety of styles. 
In 1866, already enjoying considerable popularity, Leybourne became a major star with the hit song 'Champagne Charlie', written in collaboration with Alfred Lee. Typical of a new genre of commercially produced music-hall songs and performed with a self-assertive comic realism, it celebrated the exploits of the swell, a lordly man about town of resplendent dress, confident air, and heroic appetite for champagne and admiring women. Leybourne was one of a new generation of young male stars in the same style -- the 'lions comiques' -- but secured his prominence with a well-publicized contract with the music-hall proprietor William Holland at London's Canterbury Hall in 1868. In return for the sensational annual salary of $1500, Leybourne was obliged to play the swell off as well as on stage, appearing richly dressed at all times, driving to engagements in a carriage and four, and plying his public with champagne provided by the wine shippers. Tall, handsome, and with a 'curious faculty of filling the stage', Leybourne scandalized polite society with his vulgar appropriation of upper-class dress and manners, but offered a compelling model for young lower middle- and working-class male aspirants to gentility, who popularized the Champagne Charlie hat in his honour. (The Salvation Army paid homage by converting his hit into a hymn.) In 1869-70, in acknowledgement of his own working-class roots and in a rare political statement, Leybourne gave benefit performances in support of the Nine Hours Movement for a shorter working day. He did not, however, reduce his own work schedule. Widely employed in London, he also undertook frequent provincial tours, living out the same flamboyant and demanding persona and establishing himself as a national as well as a metropolitan favourite. He made his family home in London, though he moved several times; recorded addresses include Islington and Kennington (a music-hall artists' colony). There were allusions to a country estate. Leybourne was accused of sharp practice by fellow artists, and proprietors complained of his unpunctuality, but his public loved him. According to an oft-repeated story, in private he despaired of the emptiness of fame and the absence of true friendship amid the enthusiastic crowds, yet he remained the good fellow of his most successful stage role; dubbed 'honorary high almoner to the profession', he was notably generous with hand-outs as well as drink. Leybourne enjoyed success with other song hits -- 'The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze' (1866), 'Up in a Balloon' (1868), 'If ever I cease to love' (1871) -- but continued to style himself the Original Champagne Charlie. His later career is difficult to assess. He seems to have retained his popularity, but his health declined and his appearances became more sporadic. He ventured into management in minor London halls and experimented with a double act with his daughter, Florence. (Florence later married the music-hall star Albert Chevalier; Leybourne's other child, George junior, became Chevalier's manager.) Reports of Leybourne's increasing indispositions attributed them to consumption, but his death certificate records exhaustion and abscess (perhaps cirrhosis) of the liver. Much indebted, he died on 15 September 1884 at his home, 136 Englefield Road, Islington, London, and was buried at Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington, on 20 September. 
In keeping with music-hall's increasing pretensions to respectability, later spokesmen for the industry disavowed Leybourne and the 'lions comiques' as 'the most vulgar and objectionable creatures' who 'gloried in sex and drink' and 'turned the music halls into veritable sinks'. More recent scholarly critics have not liked Leybourne and his kind any better, interpreting their songs in praise of the aristocratic style as a dilution of an older, more combative working-class consciousness and a damning example of music-hall's social conservatism. The upper-class swell and his variants have none the less proved a durable type in the popular repertory, and Leybourne himself underwent some rehabilitation in the 1944 film 'Champagne Charlie' (featuring comedian Tommy Trinder in the name part), though this paid scant regard to historical accuracy. 
Leybourne was a product of the music-halls' first great boom, and his career exemplified the opportunities and hazards of stardom in a prototype modern capitalist entertainment industry. Embodying traditional elements of male licence in carnivalesque pursuit of the good time, his characterizations also gave voice to the more culturally assertive mid-Victorian lower classes in an era of increased earnings, greater leisure time, more and cheaper consumer goods (including champagne), and the extension of the franchise. Leybourne's style of 'magnificent cheek' was that of the common man on the rise in a modern liberal democracy, though any delusions were undercut by a strong note of parody. 


@@@@@


doc= 39382


Soldene, Emily (1838?-1912), singer and theatre manager, was allegedly born in Clerkenwell on 30 September 1838, and was brought up as the daughter of Edward Fuller Solden (1805-1873) and his apparently bigamous wife, Priscilla, 'nee' Swain (1812-1900). She married law clerk John Powell (1834?-1881) on 17 March 1859, and was a mother before she began to study singing (1861) with William Howard Glover. She made her first public appearance in a concert given by Glover in 1862, and her professional debut, performing operatic selections and mezzo-soprano ballads at the Oxford Music Hall under the name Miss FitzHenry, in 1863. Miss FitzHenry established herself as one of the outstanding vocalists of the 1860s music halls, and Miss Soldene's classical career was allowed to fade away. 
In 1869, with the first vernacular productions of French 'opera bouffe' being mounted in England, attractive actresses who could combine sophisticated comedy and vocal talents of an operatic level were at a premium, and Miss FitzHenry was hired from the halls by Covent Garden's John Russell to take over the star role in his tour of 'La grande-duchesse'. For the occasion she returned to being Miss Emily Soldene. She scored a hit, and Miss FitzHenry was duly buried. 
Soldene made her West End theatre debut in 1870, playing Marguerite in Herve's 'opera bouffe' 'Le petit Faust', but superstardom came only in 1871, when Charles Morton produced Offenbach's 'Genevieve de Brabant' at the Islington Philharmonic. The show caused a sensation, the theatre became the Mecca of high society and the well-heeled theatregoer, and Emily Soldene, who played the star role of the little pastry-cook Drogan, became the toast of the London musical stage. She confirmed this success as the lusciously plotting Mlle Lange in 'La fille de Madame Angot' (1873), before leading a company playing both shows, along with 'La grande-duchesse', Herve's 'Chilperic', and Offenbach's new 'Madame l'archiduc', to America (1874-5) to similar triumph. 
In the following years Soldene toured her repertory through Britain, America, and, with memorable success, New Zealand and Australia (1877-8), adding, at various times, 'Barbe-Bleue', 'La belle Helene', 'Trial by Jury', 'The Waterman', 'Poulet et Poulette', 'Girofle-Girofla', 'La Perichole', and 'La jolie parfumeuse' to her list of shows. On returning to Britain in 1879 she starred in three productions at the Alhambra before taking her own company on the road, memorably introducing the English-language version of Bizet's 'Carmen' to the British provinces. 
The death of Soldene's husband, an underfunded and unsuccessful third tour of America, and an ill-fated attempt to run the Gaiety Theatre, Hastings (1883), put a temporary hitch in her career, but she continued successfully and starrily to tour her hit shows, until age and embonpoint forced her to abandon the sexy sophistications of 'opera bouffe'. She was forty-eight years old and 13 stone when she switched to playing a character role for the first time, in 'Frivoli' at Drury Lane (1886). Hired out of 'Frivoli' by America's top musical manager, John McCaull, she returned to America and played there in comic opera, vaudeville, variety musical, and briefly on Broadway in a self-adapted French melodrama, before settling in San Francisco, where from 1890 to 1892 she played heavy ladies in comic opera repertoire at the Tivoli and the Orpheum. 
In 1892 Emily Soldene was persuaded to return to the scene of her 1877 triumphs, Australia, for a season, but the venture was a disaster and the underfunded singer had to look for alternative employment. An old admirer, a well-connected newspaper man, got her hired as music and drama critic on the Sydney 'Evening News', and Emily Soldene -- Madame, as she was fondly known to all -- stepped out of the theatre and into journalism. For the next seventeen years she turned out several heavily bylined weekly columns of cheerful, idiosyncratic London social chatter for the 'Evening News' and later 'The Sun' in a second career almost as successful as her first. She died at her lodgings, 21 Upper Woburn Place, Bloomsbury, on 8 April 1912, while her last column was in the mail to Sydney. 


@@@@@


doc= 39383


Boulton, (Thomas) Ernest (1847-1904), transvestite, was born at Kings Road, Tottenham, London, on 18 December 1847, the elder of two sons of Thomas Alfred Boulton (1816/17-1887), wine merchant, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Levick ('b'. 1822/3). From his sixth year he showed an aptitude for playing female characters. He would dress as a parlourmaid, and once waited at table upon his grandmother, who said when he left the room, 'I wonder, having sons, that you have so flippant a girl about you' ('Annual Register', 223). His parents, who lived at Greenwich, accepted his public cross-dressing. He worked for his uncle, who was a City stockbroker, and as a clerk in the London and County Bank (1866-7). He was thought to be consumptive, suffered from a fistula, and underwent several operations. 
Boulton became the inseparable friend of Frederick William Park (whose father was master in the court of common pleas) and the lover of the duke of Newcastle's son, Lord Arthur Pelham Clinton, MP for Newark. From 1867 Boulton and Park, who were known in their set as Stella and Fanny, travelled in the English provinces impersonating female characters at private theatricals. Boulton, who possessed a fine soprano voice, received as many as fourteen bouquets at each performance. Boulton and Park rented a bedroom with sitting room at 13 Wakefield Street, off Regent Square, where they kept an extensive wardrobe of women's clothes and ornaments. They began appearing, dressed as women, at music-halls, theatres, restaurants, shopping arcades, and other resorts near Mayfair. Their conversation, which centred on theatricals, was frivolous and lively. When dressed as women, they painted their faces, chirruped with their lips, and coquetted. Courageous and generous, they were not prostitutes but sometimes asked their admirers for money. 
In April 1870 Boulton and Park were arrested in company with a man who believed they were women, although they had repeatedly told him they were men. At his first appearance in the dock Boulton wore a cherry-coloured silk evening dress trimmed with white lace, bracelets on bare arms, a wig, and plaited chignon. They were originally charged with intent to commit a felony, but eight physicians who illegally subjected them to anal examination in Newgate found little evidence of sodomy; instead they were committed for trial in May on milder charges of conspiring to commit felonious crimes and of outraging decency by going about dressed as women. Though their supposed soliciting of men while cross-dressing was central to the prosecution, they prinked themselves to ape the antics of women rather than to seduce men: their intentions seem less sexual than exhibitionistic or even burlesque. The easy-going levity of the throng at their committal proceedings excited the indignation of public moralists. After the Society for the Suppression of Vice requested all evidence to be taken in secrecy, the public were excluded from some police-court hearings. Nevertheless, leaving in a police van, Boulton and Park were saluted in the streets by crowds waving their hats. The police seized a huge mass of correspondence which, though camp, contained not one word of indecency. They failed to cajole the parties to denounce each other or to muster convincing witnesses. Lord Arthur died in June aged twenty-nine (officially of scarlet fever aggravated by anxiety, but perhaps by suicide), yet was vindictively kept on the charge sheet, together with two other young men, Louis Hurt, a clerk in the Post Office, and John Fiske, American consul at Leith. 
The trial opened before Lord Chief Justice Cockburn on 9 May 1871, when Boulton was twenty-two, and lasted six days. Prosecuting counsel included Sir Robert Collier (later Lord Monkswell), Sir John Coleridge, Hardinge Giffard (later earl of Halsbury), and Henry James. The case is important for showing that police, physicians, and lawyers were inexperienced in preparing such prosecutions, and that pathological models of homosexuality were not yet established in Britain. Boulton and Park employed as their solicitor George Lewis, who devised an effective defence that the youths were silly but not criminal. It was doubtless at his insistence that Boulton grew a moustache and Park whiskers. When the defendants were acquitted, Boulton fainted. 
After the trial Boulton performed as a female impersonator in variety theatres around the county, before going to the USA. His occupation was recorded as actor when he died, on 30 September 1904, of a brain tumour, at the National Hospital, Queen Square, London. 
By Henry Matthews (later Viscount Llandaff) Boulton was described as 'a dainty and pleasing boy who was generally treated as a young girl' (Roughead, 178) and by Simeon Solomon as 'not quite beautiful but supremely pretty, a perfect figure, manner and voice' (Croft-Cooke, 47). Boulton and Park feature in Jack Saul's pornographic 'The Sins of the Cities of the Plain' (1881) and are the subject of a Victorian limerick: '
There was an old person of Sark 

Who buggered a pig in the dark; 

The swine in surprise 

Murmured: 'God blast your eyes 

Do you take me for Boulton or Park?' 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 39386


Ward, Dame (Lucy) Genevieve Teresa (1837-1922), singer and actress, the only daughter of Samuel Ward, a diplomatist, and his wife, Lucy, 'nee' Leigh, was born in New York on 27 March 1837. She accompanied her parents in 1840 to Europe, where she later showed early promise as a singer and was introduced to Rossini, who arranged for her tuition in Florence. At the age of seventeen she met a Russian nobleman, Count Constantine de Guerbel, whom she married at a civil ceremony in Nice on 10 November 1855. Although this was to have been followed by a religious service in Paris, de Guerbel defaulted. Only after considerable diplomatic intervention was he compelled to meet his obligations at a ceremony in Warsaw. Ward and he separated immediately afterwards and she returned to Italy to resume her studies. 
Ward began her operatic career as a soprano, at La Scala, Milan, under the stage name Madame Ginevra Guerrabella in 1857, playing in Donizetti's 'Lucrezia Borgia'. After appearing in Italy and in Paris, where she performed as Elvira in Mozart's 'Don Giovanni' (Theatre des Italiens, 1859), she and her mother travelled to England, where Ward began oratorio lessons and made herself known through a series of concerts. She was offered by the Pyne-Harrison Opera Company the role of Maid Marian in George Macfarren's 'Robin Hood', which opened at Covent Garden on 8 November 1861, and a further role in Vincent Wallace's 'Maritana' (29 November 1861). With her appearance as Elvira in Bellini's 'I puritani' at Her Majesty's Theatre on 10 May 1862, her future as an operatic singer seemed assured. She returned to New York and made her American debut at the Academy of Music, performing Violetta in Verdi's 'La traviata' (10 November 1862). A strenuous tour with an opera company in the south of the United States, however, followed by a season in Cuba, resulted in vocal strain which, with the complication of diphtheria, brought her operatic career to an end. 
From 1862 to 1873 Ward recuperated and readjusted her sights on a dramatic career. She taught singing while herself taking lessons from Fanny Morant in New York. She saw Charlotte Cushman and corresponded with her during the latter's last years as a performer, while developing the basis of a future repertory of roles, including Lady Macbeth, Queen Katharine in 'Henry VIII', Adrienne Lecouvreur, and Medea. 
Ward left America having reassumed her maiden name, and with the recommendations of Lewis Wingfield and George Augustus Sala appeared in Manchester at the Theatre Royal as Lady Macbeth (1 October 1873). After touring to Dublin, she made her dramatic debut in London at the Adelphi Theatre, as Alexina in 'Elizabeth, or, The Exiles of Siberia', but it was her dual roles as Blanche de Valois and Unarita at the same theatre in Benjamin Webster's 'The Prayer in the Storm' that really attracted attention to her abilities: 'our stage has received a valuable addition' ('The Times', 30 March 1874). Ward consolidated her position in the years up to 1878 by extensive tours in Ireland and Scotland, then returned to Manchester, where she played Queen Katharine in Charles Calvert's production of 'Henry VIII' and Beatrice in 'Much Ado about Nothing'. Quite consciously she positioned herself within a tradition which stretched back into the eighteenth century by assuming roles which had been identified with Mrs Siddons: Mrs Haller in Kotzebue's 'The Stranger' and Belvidera in Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd', which Ward played at the Gaiety in 1876 on 18 March and 19 April respectively. During this period she also came into contact with Adelaide Ristori, whom she helped with her English version of Lady Macbeth. It initiated a friendship which lasted until Ristori's death in 1906 and a histrionic indebtedness which critics would increasingly notice. 
In 1878 Ward revisited America for the first time as a dramatic actress, and opened in New York at Booth's Theatre (2 September 1878) in W. G. Wills's version of Nicholas Rowe's 'Jane Shore'. The 'New York Times' admired her conception and technique but found her imagination wanting (3 September 1878). After performing her Shakespearian roles she returned to London in April 1879 and took over the management of the Lyceum during Irving's summer recess. Although she was less than successful in J. Palgrave Simpson and Claude Templar's 'Zillah', it was her performance as Stephanie de Mohrivart in Herman Merivale and F. C. Grove's 'Forget-me-Not' (21 August 1879) which brought her critical acclaim and a role which she would adopt as her own for the remainder of her career; she played it for the last time in September 1914. 
The roles of the badly treated 'adventuress' willing to challenge social and personal modes of conduct or the passionate woman who seeks retribution for past wrongs particularly attracted Ward, as her performances of Medea, Antigone, and Meg Merrilies in 'Guy Mannering' showed. She took 'Forget-me-Not' on her second visit to the United States in 1881-2. William Winter saw her and, although he was troubled by the morality of the play and that of her character, her performance 'was an image of imperial will, made radiant with beauty and electric with flashes of passion' ('The Wallet of Time', 2.410). 
Ward returned to England in late 1882 and leased the Olympic Theatre for a season, which lasted from January to June 1883. She repeated her round of characters, adding to them the role of Sarah Churchill in Sydney Grundy's 'The Queen's Favourite', an adaptation of Scribe's 'Le verre d'eau' (2 June 1883). Restless and adventurous by temperament, she gathered together a company, expanded her repertory again, and began a tour in December 1883 to include North America, Australia, and New Zealand which lasted until the beginning of 1887. Accompanied by W. H. Vernon as her leading man, she toured the east coast of Australia extensively from Brisbane to Adelaide, with lengthy stays in Sydney and Melbourne, as well as crossing to New Zealand, playing in 'Forget-me-Not', 'The Queen's Favourite', 'Macbeth', 'Henry VIII', 'Lucrezia Borgia', and another Grundy play adapted for her, 'Rachel'. She left Australia on 1 December 1885 and returned to England in May 1886 via San Francisco and New York. This, however, was only a brief hiatus, as she continued her demanding tour of North America from September 1886 to April 1887. After opening in New York (24 September 1886) in 'Forget-me-Not', she and Vernon visited Ottawa and Montreal before embarking on a series of short engagements throughout the southern and Midwestern states of America, then Toronto, Hamilton, and London, Ontario. 
The period after her return to England until 1891 was taken up with provincial tours with occasional appearances in London. Ward also began a career as an acting teacher in 1890. She was joined by Vernon, and continued to teach until his death in 1905. In 1889 Ward played Lona Hessel in Ibsen's 'Pillars of Society' (Opera Comique, 17 July), the first of two attempts she made to come to terms with the 'new drama'. On 25 November 1891, together with Vernon, she began a tour of South Africa, supported by a company under the management of Luscombe Searelle. She opened in Cape Town with 'Forget-me-Not' (10 December) before continuing on to Pretoria, Johannesburg, Bloemfontein, and East London. In addition to her established repertory, she added new plays: 'Hamlet', 'The Merchant of Venice', 'Othello', J. P. Simpson's adaptation of Sardou's 'Les pattes de mouche' called 'A Scrap of Paper', Boucicault's 'London Assurance', Oxenford's 'The Two Orphans', and J. B. Buckstone's comedy 'Married Life'. Though Ward did not perform in all the plays, she and Vernon were responsible for their productions. She claimed to have mounted twenty-six plays in nine months before returning to England in October 1892. 
Ward never again embarked on tours outside England, but continued her provincial touring virtually until her death. The period to 1899, however, was marked by her appearances for Irving at the Lyceum. She played Eleanor of Aquitaine in the original production of Tennyson's 'Becket' (6 February 1893), her old role of Queen Katharine in 'Henry VIII' (10 July 1893), Morgan le Fay in Comyns Carr's 'King Arthur' (12 January 1895), the Queen in 'Cymbeline' (22 September 1896), and Margaret of Anjou in 'Richard III', a role she continued to revive. Her second essay into Ibsen took place on 3 May 1897 under the auspices of the New Century Theatre, when she played Mrs Borkman in a production of 'John Gabriel Borkman', with Vernon as Borkman and Elizabeth Robins as Ella Rentheim. She found the experience a tedious one. 'The truth is, her tragic style, derived from Ristori, was not made for Ibsen', wrote Shaw ('Saturday Review', 8 May 1897), although he had appreciated her performance in the earlier production. 
During the remainder of her career Ward appeared infrequently on the London stage. She did, however, join F. R. Benson's company from time to time and added one last great role to her repertory when she played Volumnia in 'Coriolanus' at the Comedy Theatre (13 February 1901). A. B. Walkley in 'The Times' compared her performance directly with that of Sarah Siddons (14 February 1901). She repeated this on tours with Benson at Stratford and at the Old Vic. From that time Ward appeared occasionally at benefit concerts. Her last role in London was that of the duchess of Autevielle in L. N. Parker's 'The Aristocrat' at the invitation of George Alexander (St James's Theatre, 25 January 1917): 'an aged 'grande dame', aged but not vulnerable, caustic of speech, regretting that she has outlived her sins' ('The Times', 26 Jan 1917). Ward was created a dame commander in the Order of the British Empire (27 March 1921) 'in recognition of the distinguished position which she has occupied for so long in her profession, and of the services rendered by her to dramatic art' ('The Times', 19 Aug 1922). She died on 18 August 1922 at 22 Avenue Road, London, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on the 21st. 
Genevieve Ward saw herself primarily as a tragic actress embodying a tradition which stretched back to Mrs Barry and Sarah Siddons. She was also much influenced in her style and choice of material by Fanny Kemble and Charlotte Cushman. Her cosmopolitan early life and her involvement with Italian opera also brought her into contact with European performers whose overt emotionalism she absorbed: she became particularly noted in roles which demanded violent emotional oscillations. Bram Stoker in his reminiscences of Irving remarked on the blazing eyes of 'a particularly 'strong' actress, good at invective' (Stoker, 2.175). She was drawn towards resolute and individualistic female characters outside tragedy, ones which pitted her against ruthless men in a clash of wills. In this she was fortunate to secure an excellent foil in W. H. Vernon and in Sydney Grundy, who adapted and wrote plays to suit their partnership. Drawn to the 'new drama' and its expansion of the thematic boundaries especially for women, she found herself repelled by Ibsen's suburban drabness and the fact that the plays offered no clear-cut dramatic intentions which audiences could understand (Ward and Whiteing, 196-202). Her indefatigable touring reflected both her interest in people and her understanding of the role of theatre as a cultural bond. 


@@@@@


doc= 39387


Summers, (Augustus) Montague (1880-1948), literary scholar, occultist, and eccentric, was born in Pembroke Lodge, Clifton, near Bristol, on 10 April 1880, the youngest of the seven children of Augustus William Summers, a wealthy banker, and his wife, Ellen Bush. He grew up in Tellisford House, Clifton Down, in the evangelical Anglican faith of his parents, and was educated in the extensive library of his home, at the Misses Lucas's academy, and, after his fourteenth year, as a day-boy at Clifton College. He entered Trinity College, Oxford, in 1899, and after a university career in which he attracted attention by his dandyism, wit, and unusual learning, went down in 1903 with a fourth-class degree in theology. He graduated BA in 1905 and MA in 1906. He attended Lichfield Theological College as a candidate for holy orders, and in 1908 he was ordained as deacon and appointed first to a curacy in Bath and then at Bitton in Bristol. Rumours of studies in Satanism and a charge of pederasty, of which he was acquitted, terminated this phase of his career. 
On 19 July 1909 Summers was received into the Church of Rome and was granted the clerical tonsure on 28 December 1910; after this his clerical career became murky and remains so. He may have received minor orders as a deacon, but no record of his ordination has ever been found. During his lifetime, he was addressed as the Revd Montague Summers, celebrated mass in his own chapel and those of friends, adopted two names in religion, and invariably wore the dress pertaining to Roman priesthood; his appearance in soutane, buckled shoes, and shovel hat, later with an umbrella of the Sairey Gamp order, was familiar in London and Oxford. He became increasingly eccentric and was described as combining a manifest benignity with a whiff of the Widow Twankey. Some spoke of an aura of evil. It was charitably assumed by his friends that he was indeed a priest, and his devotion was never in question; his biographer Joseph Jerome (Father Broccard Sewell) records that all his life Summers wore the Carmelite scapular. 
After religion Summers's great pursuit was the theatre, and it is as a scholar of the Restoration drama that he is remembered. As a child he and his siblings played seriously with a toy theatre. Until the death of his father (who left him a comfortable independence) he supported himself as a schoolmaster and during that time came under the influence of Arthur Henry Bullen of the Shakespeare Head Press. It was Bullen who encouraged Summers to produce his excellent edition of Villiers's 'The Rehearsal' (1914) and 'The Works of Aphra Behn' (6 vols., 1915). There followed 'Restoration Comedies' (1921) and 'Shakespeare Adaptations' (1921), opening up a neglected area of scholarship to which Summers made extensive additions with 'The Complete Works of William Congreve' (4 vols., 1923), 'The Complete Works of William Wycherley' (4 vols., 1924), 'The Complete Works of Thomas Otway' (3 vols., 1927), 'The Complete Works of Thomas Shadwell' (3 vols., 1927), an edition of John Downes's 'Roscius Anglicanus' (1928), and 'Dryden, Dramatic Works' (6 vols., 1932). 
These handsome books made available for the first time the substance of a period of English drama formerly neglected and dismissed by such critics as Macaulay as unmeritable and indecent. Summers's 'Introductions' may well be the finest things he ever wrote, being in Edmund Gosse's words, 'astonishingly full of marrowy information'. Although sometimes careless in detail, and although the wrongs suffered by his church obtrude needlessly here and there, the scope and depth of his knowledge is awesome. 
Summers was a moving spirit in the founding of the Phoenix Theatre (1919-25), which presented much admired productions of Restoration plays hitherto unknown to playgoers, with casts of players of the first rank. Summers provided copious and excellent programme notes, and at rehearsal was a mine of information about the manner of performance. The Phoenix was succeeded by the Renaissance Theatre, which gave performances sporadically until 1928, Summers providing the same scholarly understructure. He was very popular with the theatre folk, and was devoted to them and their art. 
In addition to his writing on the drama Summers published several volumes about demonology, witchcraft, vampires, and werewolves. They are enlightening reading even when the credulity of the reader does not match that of the writer. He also wrote a history of the Gothic novel in two volumes, 'The Gothic Quest' (1938) and 'A Gothic Bibliography' (1940). 
Summers died suddenly at his home, 4 Dynevor Road, Richmond, on 10 August 1948, and was buried three days later in Richmond cemetery, garbed in his priest's vestments and with the coat of his dog, Tango. All his life Summers was a notable eccentric, and legends about him, benign and malign, are numerous. 


@@@@@


doc= 39390


Haigh, John George (1909-1949), murderer, was born at home at 22 King's Road, Stamford, Lincolnshire, on 24 July 1909, to John Robert Haigh (1872-1955), an electrical engineer, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Hudson (1868-1955), both natives of Yorkshire and married for eleven years. They were members of the strict religious body the Plymouth Brethren. When Haigh was one year old the family moved to Outwood, Yorkshire, where his father gained employment as an electrician at the nearby colliery. His upbringing was strict, in accordance with the faith of his parents, who affectionately called him Sonnie. The young Haigh soon displayed a musical talent that won him, at the age of ten, a choral scholarship to Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Wakefield. Seen as a smart, polite, intelligent boy with a good character and home life, he became a choirboy at the cathedral and later at Leeds parish church. He left school at the age of seventeen and, as he was lazy by nature, forgery and deception became the easy alternatives to work. 
The suave, dapper Haigh discovered he could make money to finance his expensive tastes in cars and clothes without having to work too hard. On 6 July 1934, at Bridlington register office, he married Beatrice (Betty) Hamer ('b'. 1911), a former waitress and model, daughter of Harold Cleasby Hamer, artist. His occupation at this time was given as company director, and both gave their residence as the Alexandra Hotel, Bridlington. His business was fraudulent hire purchase and selling non-existent cars. The marriage did not last long. In December 1934, at Leeds assizes, Haigh received fifteen months' imprisonment for fraud offences, with six offences taken into consideration. He saw his wife only once again. She had borne a daughter while Haigh was in prison and the baby was adopted. Haigh never made a paternity claim and never saw the child. 
A life of fraud still seemed the easy option and in November 1937 Haigh was sentenced at Surrey assizes to four years' imprisonment for false pretences with twenty-two offences taken into account. In wartime Haigh became a fire-watcher during the enemy raids on London; however, he was sentenced in June 1941, at the London sessions, to twenty-one months' hard labour for stealing bunks, kitchen and curtain material, and a refrigerator. In Lincoln prison he worked in the tinsmith's shop, where he gained a knowledge of sulphuric acid and its use. Late in 1943 he moved to Crawley, Sussex, where he lived with a family named Stephens. Ever the dapper, polite, businessman, he wore a small moustache and greased, slicked-back hair. He was always impeccably dressed. He became fond of the Stephenses' attractive teenage daughter Barbara, a friendship which lasted to the end. 
Around this time Haigh took a room in the Onslow Court Hotel, South Kensington. The comfortable hotel was favoured by retired elderly ladies and the charming Haigh was a desirable table companion. There Haigh became friendly with a wealthy 69-year-old widow, Mrs Henrietta Helen Olivia Robarts (Olive) Durand-Deacon, who was amenable to business ideas. She was interested in marketing cosmetics. On 18 February 1949 Haigh took her to see his 'factory' in Leopold Road, Crawley. There he shot her and put her body into a 40 gallon drum, which he filled with sulphuric acid, wearing a gas mask, rubber gloves, and apron to protect himself. He took her valuables, including jewellery and a Persian lamb coat. She was reported missing by a friend at the hotel, who was accompanied to the police station by Haigh. He came under suspicion, his criminal record was checked, and he was arrested. Mrs Durand-Deacon's property was traced to where he had sold it, for he had needed the cash to settle debts. 
The search of the premises at Crawley was a triumph in forensic medicine for the pathologist Dr Keith Simpson. Remains consisting of a few bone fragments, fat, three gallstones, false teeth, plastic handbag, and a few personal items were recovered. With blood tests on stains found in the 'factory' these were enough to prove he had murdered her, despite the lack of a body. Haigh then confessed to the murders of William Donald McSwann and his parents, William and Amy McSwann, in 1944-5, and of Dr Archibald Henderson and his wife, Rosalie, in 1948, all for gain. They too had been disposed of in a similar manner. To avoid the hangman's rope his only recourse was a plea of insanity. He told of lurid blood-filled dreams and claimed that he had tapped blood from the necks of his victims and drunk it from a glass. The press gave him the nickname 'the Vampire Killer'. He claimed three more unknown past victims, presumably to enhance his insanity plea. 
The trial opened at Lewes assizes on 18 July 1949. He was found guilty, and on 19 July the judge, Mr Justice Humphreys, pronounced sentence of death on Haigh. Executed by Albert Pierrepoint at Wandsworth prison at 9 a.m. on Monday 10 August 1949, he was buried the same day within the precincts of the prison. The 'Acid Bath Murderer', as he was known, left clothing to Madame Tussaud's waxworks to dress his effigy, which remains there to this day. 


@@@@@


doc= 39392


Cumming, Sir William Gordon Gordon-, fourth baronet (1848-1930), disgraced socialite, was born on 20 July 1848 at Sanquhar House, near Forres, Moray, the eldest son and second of four children of Alexander Penrose Gordon-Cumming (1816-1866), later third baronet, of Altyre and Gordonstoun, landowner and army officer, and his wife, Anne Pitcairn Campbell (died 1888). He was a nephew of Roualeyn George Gordon-Cumming (1820-1866), pioneer big-game hunter, and of Constance Frederica Gordon-Cumming (1837-1924), travel writer. 
Educated at Eton College and Wellington College, Gordon-Cumming inherited his baronetcy at the age of eighteen. This title dated from 1804 but, as chief of the clan Cumming (or Comyn), he traced his descent to the fourth century via Charlemagne. His three Moray estates -- Altyre, near Forres; Gordonstoun, near Elgin; and Dallas -- totalled 38,500 unlucrative acres. In 1868 he purchased a commission in the Scots Fusilier Guards (renamed the Scots Guards in 1877). Asthma and blindness in the right eye did not prevent him seeking adventure. He volunteered for the Carlist War in Spain, hunted in the Rocky Mountains, stalked tigers on foot in India, and suffered shipwreck off Cape Town. He fought with his regiment at Ulundi in Zululand (1879), Tell al-Kebir in Egypt (1882), and Abu Klea in Sudan (1884). The army chose him to convey its condolences to the exiled Empress Eugenie of France on the death of the prince imperial in 1879. As a lieutenant-colonel he exhibited dashing style. His speech was characterized by swearing in English and Hindustani; he did not have a Scottish accent. 
An 'habitue' of the racecourse and gaming table, Gordon-Cumming won the friendship of Albert Edward, prince of Wales. He dined at Marlborough House, thrice stayed at Sandringham, and let the prince use his Belgravia home (2 Harriet Street) for secret liaisons. He too aspired to 'perforate' -- his own expression -- large numbers of 'the sex', including Lillie Langtry, Sarah Bernhardt, Lady Randolph Churchill, and Daisy Brooke. Regular features, a fine moustache, persistence, and brazenness helped him: 'All the married women try me' (Leslie, 143). The 'fast set' relished racy tales of Bill Cumming's audacity and insolent wit. He gloried in the sobriquet of the most arrogant man in London. 
In September 1890 the prince of Wales had Gordon-Cumming invited to a house party at Tranby Croft, the home of shipping magnate Arthur Wilson, near Hull in the East Riding of Yorkshire. Baccarat, a gambling game using playing cards and counters, provided entertainment, with the prince acting as banker. Afterwards the host's son (Arthur) Stanley Wilson told his mother, his brother-in-law Edward Lycett Green, and his friend Berkeley Levett that he had seen Gordon-Cumming cheat by changing his stakes once the cards had been declared. The next day Mr and Mrs Lycett Green and Mrs Wilson thought they saw the same. They informed the senior courtiers present, Lord Coventry, master of the buckhounds, and Lieutenant-General Owen Williams. Lycett Green threatened to expose Gordon-Cumming (who may once have propositioned his wife). This risked compromising everyone involved, as baccarat had been illegal since 1885. In their anxiety to save the prince from scandal, Coventry and Williams did not pause to investigate the allegation. Instead they pressed Gordon-Cumming to sign a pledge never to play cards again in return for total secrecy. He reluctantly agreed while protesting his innocence. 
The secret was not kept. Stung by gossip, Gordon-Cumming on 6 February 1891 instigated an action for slander against the Wilsons (mother and son), the Lycett Greens, and Levett, claiming $5000 in damages. The trial opened on 1 June 1891 at the law courts in the Strand, presided over by Lord Coleridge, with Sir Edward Clarke appearing for the plaintiff, and Sir Charles Russell and H. H. Asquith for the five defendants. The prince of Wales was summoned as a witness. The case became a popular sensation, inspiring not only extensive press coverage but also several music-hall songs and jokes about 'backing a rat'. The defendants maintained that the plaintiff had cheated. He denied that his subsequent pledge denoted an admission of guilt. He had been using the 'coup de trois' system of betting, leaving his stake on and adding to it. His winnings amounted to $225. None of the seasoned gamblers present had noticed anything wrong. When the jury found for the defendants after thirteen minutes on 9 June, hissing filled the courtroom. Many opined that the judge's summing-up had been unacceptably biased, and sympathizers regarded Gordon-Cumming as the victim of a botched royal cover-up. Others felt that he was just the type to have cheated at cards for the hell of it. Stern moralists denounced all illicit gambling; the prince had never been so unpopular. 
The next day -- 10 June 1891 -- saw Gordon-Cumming dismissed from the army and married at Holy Trinity Church, Chelsea, before a mere half-dozen people. His bride was Florence Josephine Garner ('c'.1869-1922), usually known as Flip, an orphaned American heiress, whose grandfather had made a fortune in textiles at Garnersville, New York. Her annual income stood in the region of $80,000. In refusing to break off the engagement, she horrified her family, who realized the severity of her husband's social ostracism. He resigned from his clubs (the Carlton, Guards', Marlborough, and Turf), while the future king declined to meet anyone who henceforth acknowledged the Scottish baronet. Gordon-Cumming said that he had twenty close friends, none of whom ever spoke to him again. Others relented only after the death of Edward VII. 
The Gordon-Cummings, when not abroad, spent summers at Gordonstoun and winters at Altyre. Flip expensively renovated both mansions and bought one of the first motor cars in the highlands. About 1905, however, her investments suddenly slumped. Thereafter the big houses were let or shut up, Dallas had to be sold, and they lived at Bridge House, Dawlish, Devon, with only seven servants. Sir William was too proud a man to express bitterness at his isolation or to let himself run to seed; too proud also to adapt. His values remained precisely those of the society that rejected him. That said, needing company, he slightly masked his scorn for the second-rate and 'nouveaux riches'. In his eyes, though, Dawlish was frankly a 'hole', Flip had become a fat little frump, and her churchgoing friends were tedious 'trouts'. He filled his time with golf, croquet, billiards, cricket, bridge, riding, shooting, curling, fishing, collecting postmarks, and walking his pet monkey. The 'Morning Post', 'Bystander', and 'Sporting Times' comprised his reading. Dogs mattered much to him, as did his children. Two daughters and three sons, born between 1892 and 1904, found their father humorous and more easy-going than their mother. The marriage had been soured by his sexual infidelities. Her ladyship said that she longed to be a nun and reminded him who paid the bills. She latterly took to drink. 
Gordon-Cumming revisited South Africa in 1913-14. During the First World War the couple rented a home in Cheyne Gardens, Chelsea, and Pitmilly House, Boarhills, Fife. They increasingly lived apart. An instinctive tory, in 1916 he took the lead in getting Ramsay MacDonald, an opponent of the war, expelled from the Moray golf club (one of his tenants), though his daughter Cecily later befriended the Labour leader. Widowed in 1922, Gordon-Cumming retired to Altyre with his heir, Alexander (or Alastair), who moved into Blairs House, the former parsonage. It was there that Sir William died of natural causes on 20 May 1930. He was buried three days later at the Michael Kirk, Gordonstoun, generally remembered exclusively in the context of the 'royal baccarat scandal'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39395


Monckton, (John) Lionel Alexander (1861-1924), composer and songwriter, was born in London on 18 December 1861, the eldest son of Sir John Braddick Monckton (1832-1902), town clerk to the City of London, and his wife, Maria Louisa Long (died 1920). Lady Monckton was an enthusiastic amateur actress. The young Monckton was educated at Charterhouse School and at Oriel College, Oxford (1880-85), where he took part in college theatricals and composed music for the dramatic society's productions. Called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1885, he subsequently practised as a lawyer but worked simultaneously as a theatre critic and a songwriter. His first stage piece, an operetta called 'Mummies and Marriage', was produced by amateurs in 1888. 
Monckton broke through in the professional theatre when George Edwardes put his song 'What will you have to Drink?' into the burlesque 'Cinder-Ellen up-too-Late' (1891), and he afterwards had individual songs heard in several other London shows before Edwardes gave him the job of supplying additional numbers to Ivan Caryll's score for the Gaiety Theatre's 'The Shop Girl' (1894) ['see 'Caryll, Ivan]. Monckton's 'Beautiful Bountiful Bertie' and 'Brown of Colorado' proved to be among the show's favourite numbers. The association with Edwardes, the Gaiety, and Caryll thus established continued for some fifteen years: the tuneful Monckton by and large supplied the melodies for featured songs while the musically educated Caryll took care of the more plotful pieces and the ensemble work. During the period in which the pair provided the Gaiety's music, Edwardes's theatre was the most popular musical house in London, and the shows produced there -- 'The Circus Girl' (1896), 'A Runaway Girl' (1898), 'The Messenger Boy' (1900), 'The Toreador' (1901), 'The Orchid' (1903), 'The Spring Chicken' (1905), 'The Girls of Gottenberg' (1907), 'Our Miss Gibbs' (1909) -- went round the world, popularizing Monckton's songs such as 'Soldiers in the Park', 'Maisie', 'Keep off the Grass', and 'Moonstruck' not only throughout the English-speaking world, but even around Europe, as the product of the Gaiety Theatre established itself as the favourite musical-theatre entertainment of the 'fin de siecle' years. 
Alongside his contribution to the Gaiety's lightweight musical comedies, Monckton wrote additional numbers for Edwardes's other major theatre, Daly's, where a more substantial kind of romantic musical play was produced, and where the house's chief composer was Sidney Jones. Monckton began his Daly's career by supplying several numbers for Jones's 'The Geisha' (1896, 'Jack's the Boy', 'The Toy Monkey'), and, while that show went on to become the most internationally successful English-language musical play of the nineteenth century, he followed up with numbers for 'A Greek Slave' and another major worldwide hit, 'San Toy'. 
In 1902, when Jones moved on, Edwardes gave Monckton his first opportunity to compose a full score for the London stage. 'A Country Girl' (1902, for which the additional numbers were by the rising Paul Rubens) gave the producer and composer another enormous success. Its successor 'The Cingalee' (1904), however, brought all sorts of problems with it, and Edwardes switched to importing continental shows for Daly's. As a result Monckton ended up composing his next show score for Robert Courtneidge. The outcome was 'The Arcadians' (with Howard Talbot), the classic musical play of the Edwardian era. Like 'The Geisha', and like 'A Country Girl', 'The Arcadians' (1909) became a worldwide success, and its favourite songs -- 'The Pipes of Pan', 'The Girl with the Brogue', and 'All Down Piccadilly' -- held their own with the melodies of the now fashionable Viennese operetta as the song hits of the period. 
When Edwardes purchased the lease of the Adelphi Theatre, Monckton and his wife, the Gaiety star 'ingenue' Gertie Millar, whom he had married on 20 December 1902, were deployed there, and Monckton supplied the music for the house's biggest success, 'The Quaker Girl' (1910, 'The Quaker Girl', 'Come to the Ball', 'Tony from America'). He nevertheless wrote music for only three more book shows for the London stage after 'The Quaker Girl'. After providing Courtneidge with the score for a 'Geisha' clone called 'The Mousme' (1911) and the Adelphi and Miss Millar with the pretty but unexceptional 'The Dancing Mistress' (1912) he had one last major hit when he combined once more with Talbot to provide the songs for 'The Boy' (1917), a musical version of Sir Arthur Wing Pinero's 'The Magistrate', which was one of the greatest hits of the wartime years. 
The death of George Edwardes and the changing fashions in popular music sparked by the introduction of syncopated American dance music to British shores in the years before the war had, however, discouraged the composer and, although he for a while tried his hand at writing for the newly popular genre which called itself revue ('Bric a Brac', 'We're All in it', 'Airs and Graces'), he soon renounced and went into retirement. He died at his home, 49 Golden Square, London, on 15 February 1924. His widow remarried later that year, becoming the countess of Dudley. 
One of the most successful writers of popular melodies of the Victorian era (his arrangements and orchestrations were inevitably left to everybody's favourite arranger, Carl Kiefert), Monckton contributed materially to the success of a quarter of a century of musical shows. 


@@@@@


doc= 39398


Bateson, Gregory (1904-1980), anthropologist and communications theorist, was born on 9 May 1904 at Grantchester, Cambridgeshire, the youngest of three sons of William Bateson (1861-1926), zoologist and geneticist, and his wife, (Caroline) Beatrice (1870?-1941), daughter of Arthur Durham and his wife, Mary Ellis; his parents were both English. Bateson attended Warden House (1913-17) and Charterhouse (1917-21) schools, and then Cambridge University (BA, 1926; MA, 1930). 
Bateson's father, also a Cambridge man, was renowned for championing the work of Gregor Mendel on genetic mutation, at a time when work on the evolution of species focused in narrowly Darwinian terms on natural selection. Gregory Bateson became equally innovative (and idiosyncratic) in rediscovering for anthropology an aesthetic holism which he associated with the poet William Blake. In efforts to elucidate a pervading unity underlying all the world's phenomena, he made incisive contributions to communication theory, family therapy, dolphin studies, and ecology -- and was recognized in these fields sometimes with more alacrity and respect than in his 'native' discipline and land. Only a non-specialist, interdisciplinary anthropology, he contended, could expect to treat the vast intricacies of social milieux. 
Bateson studied anthropology at Cambridge with A. C. Haddon (having switched from part one of the natural sciences tripos). He first undertook fieldwork in New Britain, among the Baining and Sulka, and New Guinea, among the Iatmul (1927-30); there he met Margaret Mead, also fieldworking, with her then husband Reo Fortune. Bateson's fieldwork resulted in an unconventional ethnography, 'Naven: a survey of problems suggested by the composite picture of the culture of a New Guinea tribe drawn from three points of view' (1936; 2nd edn 1958). 'Naven' concerned cultural style and form, village formation, initiation, and gender relations; it was also a disquisition on the perspectivalism or context which underlies scientists' supposedly objective inductions. In language somewhat reminiscent of the work of Ruth Benedict, Bateson spoke of the 'ethos' (emotional tone) and 'eidos' (intellectual patterning) of Iatmul culture. He distinguished between 'centripetal' and 'peripheral' mechanisms of social organization. The first was based on a complementarity of members' behaviour, different and yet compatible; and the second was based on a symmetricality -- the same and hence equivalent. He described how 'schismogenesis' ('complementary' or 'symmetrical') could occur if the cumulative reactions of people or groups to one another's behaviour was not counteracted. 'Schismogenesis' was his own term, which he used to define 'the origin of differentiation between groups and cultures caused by the reciprocal exaggeration of behaviour patterns and responses that may result in the destruction of the social balance' ('Oxford English Dictionary'). 
The exponential curve of schismogenesis, and that of its opposite, mutual love, Bateson extrapolated, pertained not just to the Iatmul but universally, and is evidenced in class war, the arms race, megalomania, and true love. Indeed, the universality of feedback mechanisms, of circular or 'recursive' causal systems, in both biology and society, was advocated by Bateson throughout his life. In advance of Habermas, Giddens, or Bourdieu, he emphasized how (in the words of his biographer, Peter Harries-Jones, 'A Recursive Vision', Toronto, 1995, 3) informations 'continually enter into, become entangled with, and then re-enter the universe they describe'. So analysis must acknowledge the cumulative effects of interaction between entities and at the same time recognize the importance of homeostatic or steady-state systems. Preaching this at the famous Macy conferences of 1946-8, together with Norbert Wiener, Bateson became one of the founders of the new science of cybernetics. 
Bateson married Margaret Mead (1901-1978), on 13 March 1936, and set out with her for an ethnographic field trip to Bali (1936-8). Researching into posture, gesture, painting, childhood relationships, play, and the 'schizophrenia' of trance, Bateson took some 25,000 photographs, some of which appeared in their joint publication, 'Balinese Character: A Photographic Analysis' (1942). Bateson and Mead separated in 1948 and were divorced two years later; their daughter, Mary Catherine Bateson, wrote an insightful narrative of their lives together, 'With a Daughter's Eye' (1984). Bateson had by then also exchanged St John's College, Cambridge, for the New School for Social Research, New York (1946), and then Harvard University (1947); soon he moved to the Langley Porter Clinic, University of California medical school, in San Francisco. 
At Langley Porter (1948-9) Bateson worked with psychiatrist Jurgen Ruesch and produced 'Communication: the Social Matrix of Psychiatry' (1951), a book which developed Norbert Wiener's insight that 'information' was synonymous with 'negative entropy' or order. In other words, patterns of social interaction -- the habitual communication of information -- lie beneath life in society: its structure and order, its sense of value and propriety, and its aesthetics and cosmology. The what and the how of reiterative communication provided the vital context within which 'behaviour' came to be learned. Indeed, learning to learn ('deutero-learning') was a matter of coming to know oneself in a habitual context. 
In 1950 Bateson married Elizabeth Sumner; they had a son, John, in 1951 and subsequently divorced. He then married Lois Cammack in 1961 and they had a daughter, Nora, in 1969. From 1949 to 1963 Bateson headed a research team at Veterans Administration Hospital, Palo Alto, California, further exploring communicative practices among dogs, otters, monkeys, and wolves, and among human alcoholics; also the place that paradox seemed to assume in the communication of play, humour, and jokes. Between 1954 and 1959 this came together in a psychotherapeutic project on schizophrenic communication which Bateson directed. Schizophrenics, it was surmised, display abnormal communicative behaviour which derives from their experiencing a repetitive pattern of paradoxical injunctions at some stage in their lives (the 'double-bind' theory). 
From Palo Alto, Bateson moved to be associate director of the Communications Institute at St Thomas, in the Virgin Islands (1963-4), followed by an associate directorship at the Oceanic Institute, Waimanalo, Hawaii (1965-72). Over nine years he worked with John Lilly on various projects exploring dolphin communication. This culminated in perhaps his most influential work, 'Steps to an ecology of mind: collected essays in anthropology, psychiatry, evolution and epistemology' (1972). In this series of papers spanning his career Bateson worked to disclose the patterns connecting different points of view in an ecological field. All living organisms contributed to the patterning within an ecosystem and to its regeneration, he argued. Indeed, organism-plus-environment made a single recursive system of ongoing life, with parts and whole continuously modifying one another. 
In 1976 Bateson was appointed to the board of regents of the University of California, a mark of the estimation in which he was now held within the American academy; but he resigned three years later in protest over the 'evil' of nuclear weapons. His final work, 'Mind and Nature: a Necessary Unity' (1979), was a Blakean reflection on the patterns -- complex and beautiful -- which connect human consciousness to much of the natural world. He died of cancer on 4 July 1980 at the Zen Center, San Francisco, California, and was cremated three days later at Marin county; his ashes were scattered at Esalen Institute cliffs, San Francisco. 
It was said of Bateson by the celebrated psychiatrist, R. D. Laing (echoing a comment of Erving Goffman's), that he possessed 'the most distinctive perceptual capacities of anyone I've met' (R. Evans, 'R. D. Laing', New York, 1976, 75). Claude Levi-Strauss, meanwhile, lauded his culture theory and Konrad Lorenz his theoretical ethology. In combining insights into culture and character formation, into the logic and paradoxes of perception and learning, into the recursive effects of messages in communicative circuits, and into the mathematics of progression and stability, Bateson was a most distinctive anthropologist. He anticipated some innovative trends in late twentieth-century anthropology, such as exploration of the culturally viable relations between 'nature' and 'culture', of environmentalism, and the application of anthropology to the study of natural science. His diverse writings will continue to be mined for stimulating ideas. 


@@@@@


doc= 39408


Forbes, Nevill (1883-1929), Slavonic scholar, was born on 19 February 1883 at Forbes's (later Ashbee's), Godden Green, Seal, near Sevenoaks, Kent, the younger child of Francis Augustine Forbes (1844-1911), stockbroker, and his wife, Jessie Mary, 'nee' Carrick (1842-1925). His mother's family was resident in Kronstadt, Russia, but both his parents were of Scottish descent. Nevill was educated at home by a governess until he was eight or nine, when he was sent as a weekly boarder to a local preparatory school. In January 1897 he entered Marlborough College, but left prematurely owing to tuberculosis. As his mother's brother George was a specialist on the koumiss remedy for this disease and had a sanatorium near Orenburg, in southern Russia, it was decided to send him there for treatment. After two separate summer visits to the sanatorium in 1900 and 1901, during which he studied Russian, he travelled with his mother to the Caucasus and the Crimea (autumn 1901 to spring 1902). He made a full recovery and his tuberculosis never recurred. 
In October 1903 Forbes entered Balliol College, Oxford, as a commoner, and in his first term won the Taylorian scholarship in Russian. A pupil of William Richard Morfill, he graduated BA (first class) in modern languages in 1906, being the first candidate at Oxford ever to offer Russian in finals. Morfill intended him to continue his studies under Vatroslav Jagic in Vienna, but Forbes's other teacher, Joseph Wright, insisted on the University of Leipzig, where he himself had studied nearly twenty years earlier. Considering Wright the more influential of his two patrons, Forbes registered at Leipzig in autumn 1908. His research there, supervised by (Johann Heinrich) August Leskien, resulted in his dissertation 'Der Gebrauch der Relativpronomina im Altrussischen' (1910), for which he gained the degree of doctor of philosophy. Morfill died in November 1909 and in 1910 Forbes was appointed as his successor at Oxford, at first only as reader, but from November 1921 as professor of and reader in Russian and the other Slavonic languages. Additionally (from 1920) he was lecturer in Russian at the Queen's College. During the First World War he was unfit for active service but became a lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, worked in the intelligence department of the Admiralty, and in 1918 was serving in Salonica. 
The importance of Forbes's contribution to Slavonic studies in Britain lies primarily in the influence of his introductory grammars and textbooks, of which there had previously been very few, on generations of students. His 'Russian Grammar' (1914), which for a long time was unrivalled, remained in print throughout most of the twentieth century, the third edition (revised and enlarged by John Dumbreck) being last reissued in 1990. Forbes also edited several elementary Russian readers and collaborated with Dragutin Subotic in publishing a 'Serbian Grammar' (1915) and an English grammar ('Engleska gramatika', 1920) for Serbs. His interest in the south Slavs was further reflected in the chapters on Bulgaria and Serbia he contributed to 'The Balkans' (1915), and in his pamphlet entitled 'The Southern Slavs' (1915). With C. Raymond Beazley and G. A. Birkett he published 'Russia: a History from the Varangians to the Bolsheviks' (1918). Though a poor lecturer, he was an excellent tutor and not short of pupils. 
Forbes was a homosexual and never married. He was fond of children and translated a series of Russian children's stories which were published with illustrations by his cousin Valery Carrick as 'Picture Tales from the Russian' (1913), 'More Russian Picture Tales' (1914), and 'Still More Russian Picture Tales' (1915). He was a great traveller: in addition to many European countries he had, before the First World War, visited India. He had a gentle disposition, was thin and delicate in appearance, and, being short-sighted, wore glasses. A tendency to hypochondria was revealed in his habit of enquiring, before kissing his nieces, whether they had colds. A skilled amateur pianist with a large repertory known by heart, he was devoted to music and liked concerts. His artistic temperament was also revealed in a love of the theatre and, above all, of bright colours. From 1919 until his death he resided in a house overlooking the River Thames at 17 Botley Road, Oxford, known as Bridge House (later the River Hotel), where he spent much time cultivating his garden. His sister, visiting Oxford in the spring of 1926, saw him 'happy in his lot and content' and noted 'it is evident that wherever he goes he is liked and welcomed' (Ashbee, 90). Early in 1929 Forbes became concerned about the condition of his teeth. His dentist sent him to a bacteriologist, whose report worried him. Fears about his health preyed on his mind and on 9 February 1929 he was found in his bath, semi-conscious and bleeding from self-inflicted wounds. His doctor was called and attempts were made to save his life, but he died the same day. A member of the Church of England, he was buried in the churchyard of the parish church of St Peter and St Paul, Seal, near Sevenoaks, in the Forbes family grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 39409


Gardner, Monica Mary (1873-1941), writer on Poland and Polish literature, was born on 26 June 1873 at Subiaco Lodge, Roehampton Lane, London, the fifth of the six children of John Gardner (1839-1887), a stockjobber, and his wife, Amy Vernon, 'nee' Garratt (died 1937). (John) Edmund Garratt Gardner (1869-1935) was her brother. Monica Gardner, who was a devout Roman Catholic (her originally Anglican parents having converted), was educated at the Sacred Heart Convent, Roehampton Lane. Her interest in Poland originated while she was still at school, when she participated in a competition in which each entrant had to write an essay on a favourite historical figure. Having chosen to write on Bonnie Prince Charlie, she discovered that his mother, Clementina Sobieska, was Polish and so decided to probe further into Polish history. Subsequently she decided to teach herself Polish and, with the assistance of Edmund Naganowski (1853-1915), a Polish writer and Anglophile who lived in England from 1899 to 1903, became sufficiently proficient to read Polish books. 
Monica Gardner began publishing articles on Polish literature and soon became the leading British scholar in the field. Her ability to make full use of critical studies in Polish, already manifest in her first book, 'Adam Mickiewicz: the National Poet of Poland' (1911), was the more impressive in view of her complete lack of academic training. She published at least seven more books including 'Poland: a Study in National Idealism' (1915), 'The Anonymous Poet of Poland: Zygmunt Krasinski' (1919), and 'The Patriot Novelist of Poland: Henryk Sienkiewicz' (1926), and many articles and translations. Writing for an audience unfamiliar with the authors under discussion, she did not aspire to scholarly analysis, but as a pioneer introducing Polish literature to the English-speaking public she was unequalled in her lifetime. Although her commitment to the Polish cause was uncompromising and her enthusiasm was said to be 'sometimes bordering on exaltation' (Krajewska, 52), in literary matters she was capable of impartial discernment. 
Monica Gardner never married. During the 1920s and 1930s she lived with her brother Edmund Garratt Gardner (1869-1935), a distinguished scholar of Italian literature, and their mother at 5 Ruskin Close, Meadway, London. Accompanied by Edmund she spent a few weeks in Poland in August and September 1922, visiting Poznan and Cracow. This was probably her only visit to the country to which she devoted her life's work, but there is slender evidence to suggest a second brief visit in 1930. Her house in London was a well-known port of call for Polish visitors, and she corresponded with many prominent Poles, including the statesman Roman Dmowski, the composer Feliks Nowowiejski, the poet Kazimiera ILLakowiczowna, and the literary historians WacLaw Borowy, Julian Krzyzanowski, and Roman Dyboski. In 1927 the cross of officer of the order of Polonia Restituta was conferred on her by the president of the republic of Poland and she was elected to membership of the literary history commission of the Polska Akademia Umiejetnosci (Polish Academy of Sciences) in Cracow. In appearance she was tall and angular with looks that were distinctive and intelligent but without pretension to either elegance or beauty. She had rather thin wispy hair, which she wore in a bun, kept up precariously by hairpins. Though austere in face and manner, she was neither intolerant nor intimidating. One account describes her as having 'the face of a visionary' (Kuncewiczowa, 121). She looked not unlike Virginia Woolf, to whom she was distantly related. 
Following the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939, and especially after the establishment of the Polish government in London in 1940, Gardner's work acquired a new topicality and she was much in demand. She was working on an English translation of O. Halecki's 'History of Poland' (1942). Her family and friends pleaded with her, in view of the German air raids, to leave London, but she refused, asserting that her Polish interests kept her in London and that her literary work was her way of fighting Hitler. 'This is my war work', she used to say. She was killed in the early hours of 17 April 1941 by a German land-mine falling on the house where she was then living at 8 Fellows Road, Hampstead, London. Some of her possessions, including books and manuscripts, were recovered from the ruins by her friend Mary Corbridge-Patkaniowska, who completed the translation of Halecki and saw it through the press, but the manuscript of a book on the poet Juliusz SLowacki, which Monica Gardner was known to have been writing, was never found. The funeral, arranged by the Polish embassy with almost military honours, took place on 23 April in the presence of representatives of the Polish government, including the president. She was buried at Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 39410


Rose, William John (1885-1968), historian, was born at Minnedosa, Manitoba, Canada, on 7 August 1885, the eldest of ten children of Henry Rose (1852-1923), farmer, and his wife, Prudence, 'nee' McKinney (1857-1927). From 1900 to 1905 he studied classics at Wesley College, Winnipeg, whence he gained a Rhodes scholarship to Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1905. He graduated with a third-class degree in 'literae humaniores' in 1908. From 1908 to 1912 he was a lecturer in history at the University of Manitoba. On 5 June 1912, at Pilot Mound, Manitoba, he married Emily Mary Cuthbert. There were no children of the marriage. 
Intending to take a doctorate in classics, in 1912 Rose returned to Europe, accompanied by his wife, and enrolled at Leipzig University. In 1913, however, he moved to the Charles University, Prague, as a representative of the World Student Christian Movement (he was throughout his life a devout nonconformist Christian), on whose behalf in the summer of 1914 he organized a conference at Ligotka, in Cieszyn Silesia, then part of the Austro-Hungarian empire. On the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 the Roses were liable to internment, but they were permitted a degree of liberty, under supervision, living in Ligotka with a Polish Lutheran pastor. Rose set about learning Polish and studying Polish history and literature. In October 1918, as Austrian authority in Silesia began to collapse, a Polish national committee was formed in Cieszyn, which commissioned Rose to go to Vienna, find representatives of the allies there, and present to them the case for an independent Poland, including Cieszyn. He eventually arrived at the peace conference in Paris, where he reported on the Silesian situation. Friendships formed there led to his involvement in 1920 in the foundation of the British Institute of International Affairs (later the Royal Institute of International Affairs). 
Meanwhile, in 1919, Rose had returned to Poland, employed by the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA) on student relief. He registered to study at the University of Warsaw, but in 1920 his employers transferred him to Cracow. There, while continuing to work for the YMCA, he enrolled as a doctoral student at the Jagellonian University and wrote a thesis on the eighteenth-century educational reformer StanisLaw Konarski. He received his doctorate in 1926 and the thesis was published in London in 1929 as 'Stanislas Konarski: Reformer of Education in XVIIIth Century Poland'. In 1926-7 the Roses resided at Milanowek, outside Warsaw. 
In 1927 Rose was appointed assistant professor of sociology at Dartmouth College in New Hampshire, USA, but his stay there was interrupted in 1932 by an invitation to study the Upper Silesian problem. The fruit of the next two years, during which he had his headquarters in Katowice, was his penetrating analysis 'The Drama of Upper Silesia' (1936), which secured him international status. In 1935 he was appointed reader in Polish studies at the School of Slavonic and East European Studies in the University of London, and three years later he became professor of Polish literature and history there, a position he held until 1950. From 1939 to 1947 he was simultaneously director of the school. On the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 the school was moved to Oxford, where it was accommodated in Regent's Park College. Rose worked in Balliol College in the foreign research and press service of the Foreign Office, which was culling information from the world's press for intelligence purposes. In February 1943 he returned to London, where the School of Slavonic and East European Studies had resumed work in May 1941, operating in bomb-damaged buildings. In 1947 Rose resigned as director, when it was decided to make the directorship a full-time post, but he continued to hold his chair until retirement in 1950. 
After his retirement Rose returned to Canada as a visiting professor at the University of British Columbia, Vancouver. He was the author of some 300 published works, including six books (one of them a 'Penguin Special' on Poland in 1939), and in recognition of his scholarly output in 1953 the University of British Columbia elected him doctor of laws 'honoris causa'. Although most of his output was written in a popularizing vein, introducing the English-speaking world to various facets of Polish culture and history, his original contributions to Polish historiography were significant, notably in 'Stanislas Konarski' and 'The Drama of Upper Silesia'. His work was not always unbiased, however, for he saw his role, broadly speaking, as explaining the Polish point of view. In 1956 he moved to the Christian Leadership Training School in Naramata, British Columbia, where he taught history. A widower since the early 1950s, he lived for the rest of his life in a small white cottage on Lake Okanagan. He had an athletic bent and loved the outdoor life. In the summer he wore shorts and a broad-brimmed straw hat, and even when over eighty he would still plunge daily into the cold waters of Lake Okanagan. A pipe-smoker and a keen chess-player, known to his friends and students as Uncle Bill, he also found pleasure in golf, gardening, and classical music. He died in Vancouver on 10 March 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 39412


Ernest Thurtle (1884-1954), politician, was born at Port Jervis, New York state, USA, on 11 November 1884, the second son of the three sons and two daughters of Philip Thurtle (died 1890), a trainer of sporting dogs, and his wife, Emma, 'nee' Robinson (died 1912). His parents were British and, when he was two, they settled at Alfrick, Worcestershire. When his father died his mother moved to Griffithstown, near Pontypool, in Monmouthshire, supporting the family by running a general store and taking in sewing. After elementary schooling at Alfrick and Griffithstown, he found work in the weighing machine office of the steelworks of Alfred Baldwin Ltd, and became involved in Labour politics, joining the ILP about 1907. After moving to London he became chairman of the London district council of the National Union of Clerks, and obtained employment as a salesman for an asphalt company, which took him to Belgium and North America. During the First World War he enlisted in the London regiment, served on the western front, was commissioned in 1917, and was seriously wounded at Cambrai. 


@@@@@


doc= 39413


Woods, Samuel (1846-1915), trade unionist and politician, was born on 10 May 1846, at Peasley Cross, St Helens, the son of Thomas Woods, a miner, and his wife, Margaret ('nee' Rothwell), until 1840 also a mine worker. Woods's first introduction to mining was at the age of seven. He returned to school from the age of nine to thirteen, but then went back to the pits. He was an assiduous attender at night school, and this education was reinforced by his durable and strong commitment to the Baptist church. He was a lay preacher and a total abstainer. He married a miner's daughter, Sarah Lee, in 1867; they had twelve children. 
Woods's fellow workers elected him to the post of checkweighman in 1875 and three years later he started to organize the miners in the St Helens and Haydock districts of the Lancashire coalfield. From 1881 he was a significant figure in the newly formed Lancashire and Cheshire Miners' Federation, becoming the first Lancashire president in 1884. When delegates from several coalfields met at Newport in 1889 and formed the Miners' Federation of Great Britain (MFGB), Woods became the new organization's vice-president. 
Woods was a thorough advocate of the central policies of the MFGB -- the eight-hour day by legislation, and the achievement of a system of mutual defence between coalfields on the wages question. He was heavily involved in the 1893 lock-out which strengthened the credibility of the MFGB: it led to government intervention and the establishment of a conciliation board. 
In the 1892 general election, Woods was returned for the Ince division of Lancashire. He campaigned 'first and foremost as a Labour candidate' ('Wigan Observer', 25 June 1892), but also acknowledged he was a 'Home Ruler and a Radical' (ibid., 30 June 1892) and welcomed Liberal Party support. His victory over the incumbent, a Conservative employer, was followed by a frustrating period at Westminster. He successfully moved the second reading of the miners' 'Eight Hours Bill' in May 1893. The bill progressed no further. The miners members -- all Liberals -- were divided. Those within the MFGB, including Woods, were keen advocates; those from the still independent Northumberland and Durham unions were opposed. 
Woods was defeated at the 1895 general election, but early in 1897 he returned to the Commons after a by-election victory in a very different constituency, Walthamstow. His victory was something of a surprise and he was subsequently defeated at the 1900 election. His position on the South African War was attacked by his Conservative opponent; he responded by acknowledging his opposition to the diplomacy that had preceded the war, but claimed he had subsequently backed the government's policy. This was the end of his parliamentary career. He was subsequently associated with the National Democratic League, a combination of radicals and labour leaders. 
In 1894 Woods was elected secretary of the Trades Union Congress's parliamentary committee in a three-cornered contest. Woods's defeat of the incumbent, the Northumbrian Charles Fenwick, was that of an MFGB official over another miner who was a strong opponent of the 'Eight Hours Bill'. His secretaryship covered the years when the Labour Representation Committee was formed and several trade unions affiliated to the new political organization. Initially the political significance of this development was unclear and Woods as a Liberal could accommodate to it without great difficulty. As secretary to the parliamentary committee, Woods was at first industrious and efficient, but from 1900 his health deteriorated and complaints grew about his performance. He retired in 1904 and that was almost the end of his public career. He continued as MFGB vice-president until 1909; in the later years this was an honorific appointment supported by the MFGB's Liberals as a means of blocking the socialist, Robert Smillie. Woods died at his home, 238 Wigan Road, Brynn Ashton, near Wigan, on 23 November 1915. 
Woods played a significant part in constructing both the Lancashire Miners' Federation and the MFGB and was a thorough advocate of the latter's policies. His religious enthusiasm meant that he was a reassuring figure for those nonconformists who were concerned about 'Labour agitators' ('St Helens Newspaper and Advertiser'). By the late 1890s he was a respected figure in Liberal circles, but his links with the coalfield were increasingly tenuous. His record was perhaps overshadowed by the emergence and subsequent dominance of independent labour politics. William Brace, a miners' leader of the next generation, remembered him for 'his genial companionship and kindly ways... a dapper gentle kind of soul' (Arnot, 204). 


@@@@@


doc= 39414


Chapman, Herbert (1878-1934), football manager, was born on 19 January 1878 at 17 Kiveton Wales, Kiveton Park, Yorkshire, a small mining village between Worksop and Sheffield. His father, John, was a coalminer who with his wife, Emma Haynes, had five other sons and one daughter. Chapman went to the local elementary school and with his brothers became an enthusiastic footballer when it was all the rage in the 1890s. On leaving school he was apprenticed at the local colliery and began a course in mining engineering at Sheffield Technical College. The Sheffield area was a hotbed of football and Chapman played for several local clubs while he was in his teens. But in 1897 he signed for Stalybridge Rovers in the Lancashire league and began a very mobile period in his life in which it was not clear whether he was looking for work or looking for football. While still an amateur -- at work by day and, allegedly, studying at night -- he played for Rochdale, Grimsby Town, Swindon Town, Sheppey United, and Worksop Town, all by 1900. 
Chapman was not a great player, but obviously a useful one. He was on the small side and, though sturdily built, had a tendency to put on weight; this had the disadvantage of slowing him down but meant he was not easy, in a physical sport, to knock off the ball. His brother Harry was much more skilful, and became a professional with Sheffield Wednesday and a regular goalscorer in the team which won two first division titles between 1902 and 1904. Perhaps this success influenced Herbert, because in 1901 he signed professional forms with Northampton Town of the southern league. 
But Chapman did not stay there long; he played briefly for Sheffield United in 1902, Notts County in 1903, had returned to Northampton in 1904, and in March 1905 was transferred to Tottenham Hotspur for a fee of $70. This brought some stability -- he actually stayed for two years -- but more important in this respect was his marriage, in the same year (12 September 1905), to Annie Bennett Poxon ('b'. 1880/81), the daughter of John Poxon, colliery manager. She was an elementary school teacher whom he had met in Kiveton. The couple lived in north London, and Mrs Chapman was a supply teacher at the Silver Street School in Edmonton, where she survived by only one vote after the local education committee had debated whether, as a married woman, she should be allowed to continue in post. In 1908 their first child, Kenneth, was born; he was later followed by Joyce, Molly, and Bruce. Chapman was fond of his family and, when asked by a journalist what had been his proudest moment, replied that it was when his son had qualified as a solicitor. 
Chapman's playing career could hardly be said to have been planned (at the time of his marriage he still described his profession as 'colliery manager'), and his first step in football management must also have been a surprise. Northampton Town had asked several players and former players before offering him the job in 1907. Northampton was a rugby town in a soccer county and with the team bottom of the league the club was losing money as gates declined. Chapman turned the club round to such effect that by Christmas 1908 it was top of the southern league and eventually won the championship with a record number of wins, points, and goals. Chapman stayed at Northampton for five years, building a reputation as a shrewd man-manager and tactician until he was offered the secretary-managership of Leeds City in May 1912. The West Riding of Yorkshire was another rugby stronghold with soccer, rugby, and the northern union game all competing for middle-class pounds and working-class pence. Again Chapman revived an ailing club in two years, taking them from bottom of the second division to their highest-ever position of fourth. But his reputation was tarnished by his role in a case of illegal payments to players. On the one hand it was largely a technical offence and on the other it was Chapman who persuaded his directors to ask for an inquiry, but he was still fined and censured. 
With football on a war footing from 1915 Chapman was only part-time at Leeds City and from 1916 full-time at a munitions factory at Barnbow, near Leeds. With the war over, he surprisingly resigned from the Leeds City job to go into full-time management at the Olympia oil and cake mills in Selby of Joseph Watson & Son. Barely six months later another joint Football Association (FA) and Football League commission was set up to investigate allegations of illegal payments to Leeds City players during the war. The inquiry did not travel far down the road to justice because the club's directors refused to produce the books. As a result, the club became the first to be expelled from the league. Chapman and five others were banned from football management. Chapman looked to have no future in football and his prospects deteriorated further with the closure of the Olympia mills. But early in 1921 he was approached by the directors of Huddersfield Town to become the assistant of their manager, Ambrose Langley. The FA allowed itself to be persuaded that he had not been guilty at Leeds, or -- as there were no books -- guilt could not be proved. Perhaps his honesty of 1912 helped. Only one month after he went to Huddersfield, Langley and his trainer resigned and Chapman took over. Huddersfield was also a stronghold of rugby, but Chapman quickly built a successful side, which won the cup in 1922, finished third in the league in 1922-3, and the following season won an exciting title race on the last day of the season on goal average from Cardiff City. The next season, 1924-5, Huddersfield won the championship again and their reserves won the central league. There was general agreement among press and public that Chapman was the brains behind the team, a Napoleon of football. 
On 11 May 1925 Arsenal advertised for a team manager, insisting that 'Gentlemen whose sole ability to build up a good side depends on the payment of heavy and exorbitant transfer fees need not apply' ('Athletic News', 11 May 1925). But Arsenal were struggling in the first division and Chapman quickly charmed and persuaded their dictatorial chairman, Sir Henry Norris, to revise his ideas on transfers, most spectacularly by signing the experienced forward Charlie Buchan from Sunderland. However, the Norris-Chapman partnership was not long-lasting as Norris was found guilty of financial irregularities and forced to resign in 1927. He later claimed that Chapman knew about the compensation paid to Buchan on his transfer for the loss of his sports shop in Sunderland and sued the FA. Chapman denied it and the court upheld the FA's verdict. At Arsenal, Chapman built a new team for a new era, though it took four years to secure the right players. A second place and a cup final defeat were followed by victory at Wembley in 1930 against his old team Huddersfield, both a sign of and a prelude to the triumphs to follow. Chapman may not have invented the 'WM' formation nor the centre-half as third back, but the Arsenal team which he constructed adapted best to the liberalization of the offside law. In five years from 1930 Arsenal won four league titles, including three in succession (to equal Huddersfield's record), and in the other year, 1931-2, finished runners-up in both league and cup. These were the years which confirmed Herbert Chapman's reputation as the first and greatest modern football manager. 
Chapman believed in tactical planning, at a time when it was not very common in English football. He sought intelligent players who could contribute to both the devising and the application of attractive methods. He also valued enthusiasm and a willingness to adapt to change. Early on in his career he realized that a team could attack too much, provoking the opposition to pack their defence and thus making scoring difficult. Chapman wanted a team that could switch quickly from solid defence to devastating attack and he built one at Arsenal in the early 1930s. Arsenal could soak up pressure but then win with breakaway goals. Polite critics called them lucky, but it was thoughtful efficiency applied to football. 
Chapman's own experience taught him that players should be treated with more consideration. He improved dressing-room and training facilities and under Tom Whittaker built an up-to-the-minute medical centre often used by other sportsmen. He pioneered golf as an aid to relaxation and a savings scheme to help young men manage their money, and he introduced team talks designed to boost self-confidence among the players. He emphasized the importance to the club of the reserves, and stressed the value of team spirit as well as planning for the future. At Arsenal he achieved a symbiotic snugness between players and system. His was a human approach to football management, which attempted to strike the right balance between encouragement and discipline. In many respects he liked players similar to himself, clever but with careful and sober lifestyles. He could find the more flamboyant difficult to handle. He was fond of applying the happy family metaphor to football and stressed the importance of directors, officials, and players all pulling together. The phrase 'benevolent dictator' comes to mind. On the other hand, he seems to have been a good listener, especially to the more reflective footballer. 
Chapman certainly embraced football modernity; his broadcasts and journalism were full of ideas about the future development of the football business. He was in favour of floodlights, of numbering players' shirts, and of making Arsenal stadium more attractive for spectators. One of his shrewdest moves was to persuade the London Electric Railway in 1932 to change the name of their Piccadilly Line station adjacent to Highbury from the mundane Gillespie Road to the charismatic Arsenal. He was among the first to recognize the growing threat of European football to British superiority. He thought the size of the selection committee of the England team should be reduced from twelve to three. He had a European-wide reputation and looked forward to a European nations' championship. 
Herbert Chapman was a workaholic who was never satisfied. As secretary-manager of Arsenal he had wide responsibilities, and not only on the playing side. No member of staff was permitted to leave until he or she had phoned Chapman's office at six o'clock and asked if it was all right to go. It was this commitment which led to his death when a cold turned to pneumonia and he died suddenly at his home, 6 Haslemere Avenue, Hendon, Middlesex, on 6 January 1934, after watching Arsenal reserves at Guildford. He was buried four days later at St Mary's, Hendon. His wife survived him. 
Great success is easily turned into myth, especially in football. Arsenal's victories were not all magically pre-planned, and if the system worked it was Chapman's intelligent choice of player that made it do so. Other clubs repaid Arsenal by imitating their method but did not replicate their success. Moreover, Arsenal had large resources and Chapman was ruthless in the exploitation of them. But his achievements proved enduring and the bust by Jacob Epstein commissioned by a dozen of his friends has been a constant reminder. Between 1936 and 2006 Epstein's bust stood in the main entrance to the east stand at Highbury, and it was then moved to the entrance hall of Arsenal's new Emirates stadium. No wonder that in later less successful times, when beset by footballing difficulties, chairman Denis Hill-Wood would say to secretary Bob Wall 'What would Herbert Chapman have done?' (Studd, 138). 


@@@@@


doc= 39417


Tobin, Sir John (1763-1851), merchant, was born on the Isle of Man, the eldest son of Patrick Tobin (1735-1794), merchant. His family came originally from Dublin, but had lived on the Isle of Man since 1728. He began his career as a merchant seaman sailing from Liverpool, and by the 1790s was a master, operating in the slave trade between Africa and the Caribbean. During the early years of the war with France he was a highly successful privateer, capturing several French slaving ships. 
In 1798 Tobin married Sarah Aspinall (1770-1853), daughter of James Aspinall (1729-1787), a prominent Liverpool slave trader. They had eight children -- five daughters and three sons, of whom three daughters and one son survived Tobin. This marriage may have brought him capital, for by 1799 he was trading on his own account, as John Tobin & Co., and by 1803 he had left the sea and settled in Liverpool. The abolition of the British slave trade in 1807 proved to be the making of his business for he was to be one of the pioneers of the trade in 'legitimate' products between west Africa and Britain, particularly in palm oil for industrial and railway lubrication and for the manufacture of soap and candles. His success lay in his development of the trade from Calabar, the centre of the palm-oil trade in these years, and his close ties with the ruling elite in that state. The rapid increase in the trade in the 1810s and 1820s made his fortune as well as that of his brother Thomas; by the early 1830s he was probably the largest African trader in Britain. 
His success in the African trade allowed Tobin to pursue an active political career. He was one of the leading tories in Liverpool, a friend of George Canning and William Huskisson, and closely connected to the Gladstone family. With John Gladstone MP he was a prominent member of a local committee set up to defend the crown and constitution in the troubled climate of 1819. In the same year he stood for election as mayor of Liverpool and was elected in what his political opponents described as one of 'the most barefaced acts of bribery that ever disgraced even the electioneering annals of this venal rotten borough' ('Liverpool Mercury', 22 Oct 1819). He received a knighthood in May 1820 on the accession of George IV. He remained a member of Liverpool common council for many years and was at the centre of a network of tory and African trading interests on it. 
Tobin's business interests covered a variety of spheres. During the early 1820s he was involved in promoting a railway between Liverpool and Manchester and in 1838 was one of the directors that formed the Transatlantic Steam Company, operating between Liverpool and New York. In 1837 he built the 'Liverpool' (1150 tons), at that time the largest steamship launched on Mersyside, for the transatlantic run. His ships were also to be found trading to India for cloth and to the West Indies for sugar, tobacco, and rum, all items needed for the African trade. By the 1830s he had moved into insurance broking. He also became involved in land speculation on Merseyside in the late 1820s, purchasing land in Wallasey with William Laird, which shortly afterwards was bought by the Liverpool council, netting him a substantial profit. 
In 1819 Tobin purchased Oak Hill House, Old Swan, Liverpool, and lived there until 1835, when he built Liscard Hall on land he had bought in Wallasey. He retired from the African trade shortly after 1840 and died, at Liscard Hall, on 27 February 1851. He was buried at St John's Church, Egremont, Wallasey. 


@@@@@


doc= 39419


Alexander Macmillan (1818-1896), entered the London publishing world in the early 1840s. The original family seat appears to have been Dunmore, in Argyll, where a tongue of land known as North Knapdale belonged to the clan. At the end of the seventeenth or early in the eighteenth century the family migrated to the island of Arran off the western Scottish coast. 
About Daniel Macmillan, great-grandfather of Daniel and Alexander Macmillan, little is known other than that he was industrious and staunchly religious. His son, Malcolm, was described as a kindly man, although austere; at some point he moved his family to Cork farm, where they continued for thirty years. He served as an elder in the established church. Of his ten children, the two eldest sons served on board the king's cutter in the preventive service, and a third, Duncan (1770-1823), married Katherine Crawford (1772-1835) and inherited a small farm in Upper Corrie on the island of Arran from his father-in-law. It was here that Daniel Macmillan was born, on 13 September 1813. In or about 1816, however, Duncan Macmillan moved his family, which would eventually consist of twelve children, to Irvine in Ayrshire on the Scottish mainland, and Alexander Macmillan was born here on 3 October 1818. At times Duncan Macmillan kept cattle and cultivated a small portion of land; at others he was a carter, usually carrying coal from the pits to the Irvine harbour. He was kind to children, cared greatly for his family, and was deeply religious. 
Although Daniel was but nine and Alexander only four when their father died, they ever after remembered and honoured his memory. Henceforth, they would look to their elder brothers, Malcolm (died 1840) and William (died 1838) for guidance and kindness. It was the boys' mother, however, who was to have the greatest influence over their lives, particularly Daniel's. Although there is no record of her education, she was literate, reading to them from her 'Bible' and teaching them from strong religious principles. She also had a pleasantly musical voice with which she sang native ballads and hymns to her children by the hearthside. Almost forty years after her death Alexander wrote: 'She had a very noble sweet nature and a certain serenity and clearness of mind that I have hardly ever met with in any other human being' (Graves, 'Life and Letters of Alexander Macmillan', 6). 
With no education beyond that which four or five years at the village school could provide, along with what he gleaned from 'Bible' reading, Daniel nevertheless set out to make his way in life through the world of books. On 1 January 1824, at the age of ten, he bound himself to Maxwell Dicks, an Irvine bookseller and bookbinder, for a 'wage of 1's'. 6died per week for the first year, with a rise of 1's'. a week for each of the remaining six years' (Hughes, 5). His contract was completed successfully on 14 February 1831, with high recommendations from his employer. He next went to Glasgow to work in Mr Atkinson's bookshop, a fine business in the literary heart of the city. This promising career was to be interrupted, however, by the onset of severe illness which left him coughing up blood, and required him to return to Irvine for nursing by his mother. This was the first manifestation of the tuberculosis which would ultimately kill him. 
Even before his recovery Daniel was exploring, with his Glasgow friend James MacLehose who had by then moved to London, the possibility of finding a situation for himself in the metropolis. By September 1833 he was well enough to travel, and spent a few days in London where he was unable to find suitable employment. At length he compromised and accepted an offer from a Mr Johnson of Cambridge to work in his shop at an annual salary of $30. Daniel would be able to board with the Johnsons and attend Baptist church services with the family. Here he remained for the next three years, his salary inching up to $35 in the third, while he mastered the business, made valuable contacts among Cambridge dons, and lost no opportunity to read widely as he pursued a programme of self-education. Still he longed to make the leap to London. In the absence of an offer he took ship to Scotland but on the voyage, through exposure to the cold, he became seriously ill. He stopped in Edinburgh, where the mother of his friend George Wilson nursed him in her home. Finally, through the intervention of MacLehose, he received an offer to work at Messrs Seeley in Fleet Street at $60 per year. 
Meanwhile his younger brother Alexander was floundering. It is a confusing time in his history and solid facts are few. He taught at various country schools in the Irvine neighbourhood, including a three-month stint where he filled in for the headmaster at Scott's School, at the age of fifteen or sixteen. Later he worked as assistant to George Gallio, a bookseller in Glasgow, but left, disgusted at his employer's disapproval of novel-reading. For a while he worked for a Mr Atkinson in Glasgow. At one point he considered entering either the medical or the nautical profession. In 1836 disillusionment and despair caused him to become a sailor and ship to America, at the end of which time he landed back in Glasgow, penniless. Finally, owing to Daniel's success at Seeleys, the firm agreed to extend an offer to Alexander, also at $60; he arrived to take up his duties on 3 October 1839, his twenty-first birthday. Henceforth the brothers' partnership in the book business remained unbroken until Daniel's death in 1857. 
Both Macmillan brothers were now well positioned in London. They were hard workers, and gave satisfaction to their employers, but were also ambitious and looking for new opportunity. Realizing that their lack of formal education was a handicap, they seized every spare moment to read widely, in the classics and among such authors as P. B. Shelley, Thomas Carlyle, and Alexander Scott. Scott brought Daniel into correspondence with Julius Charles Hare, archdeacon of Lewes, and this resulted in a friendship which would later prove most useful. Hare introduced Daniel to F. D. Maurice, the Christian socialist, who became one of the Macmillans' closest associates. 
By the autumn and winter of 1842 the Macmillan brothers began to think of establishing their own bookshop, together with a small publishing house. In February 1843 they occupied space at 57 Aldersgate Street and their first two titles were published later the same year: 'The Philosophy of Training' by A. R. Craig, and 'The Three Questions: What Am I? Whence Came I? And Whither do I Go?' by William Haig Miller, the latter published for the Religious Tract Society. The first work dealt with training for teachers of the middle class, while the latter took a hopeful view of mankind's destiny. These early books established trends in Macmillan publishing philosophy which would influence their lists far into the future: sincere interest in education and profound religious belief. 
Once established, the Macmillans moved swiftly. With the help of a loan of $500 from Archdeacon Hare, the brothers purchased, also in 1843, the bookshop of a Mr Newby at 17 Trinity Street, Cambridge; the plan was for Daniel to preside over the Cambridge shop while Alexander remained in London. In the end this was not feasible and by late in the year both brothers settled in Cambridge. By 1845 the opportunity arose to purchase, from Thomas Stevenson, a larger shop, in a better location, which was prestigious for having been established in the eighteenth century. To do so they had to take the distasteful step of acquiring a partner, a Mr Barclay, a wholesale druggist, who invested $6000, despite knowing nothing about either the book or the publishing business. Temporarily the firm became Macmillan, Barclay, and Macmillan, but later, when they retired the debt, it quickly reverted to Macmillan & Co. 
During the years 1845-57 the Macmillan brothers laid the foundation for the future of the company. Their list addressed serious subjects, such as education, Christianity, and classical literature, but was also early in recognizing growing public interest in science and mathematics. Because of their location in a university town they published syllabuses for Cambridge courses, educational guides and companions, and handbooks for student use such as 'A Short and Easy Course of Algebra' (1850), 'Arithmetic: Rules and Reasons' (1850) by J. H. Boardman, and 'Arithmetic Examples' (1851). In fact, by 1852, of the 131 titles so far published by Macmillan, seventy-five, or three-fifths, concerned either Cambridge scholarship or Cambridge classes. Libraries in the various Cambridge colleges offered opportunities for publishing bibliographies and lists of manuscript collections. Contemporary events, such as the death of the duke of Wellington, prompted publication of numerous sermons and sonnets reflecting on his great service to the nation. During this time of conservative growth, and despite a severely limited list, Macmillan was very early in finding places for two books by women: 'Hours of Reflection' (1845) by Ellen Taylor Hudson and 'Sketches of Character' (1849) by Anna T. Potts. The young firm also took considerable risk in publishing such periodicals as the 'Cambridge Mathematical Journal' (1846); the 'Journal of Classical and Sacred Philology' (1854); and 'Academia: an Occasional Journal' (1858). These were not successful ventures, largely because the firm had not enough capital to sustain the journals until they achieved sufficient circulation to pay for themselves. 
Because the Macmillans had a clear understanding of the importance of the personal element in publishing, they saw to it that 1 Trinity Street was a place for easy and convivial exchange of ideas. They cultivated acquaintance with both university dons and townspeople, and welcomed bright young students, all of whom were free to meet for conversation in an upper common room reserved for that purpose. They also began a practice, which continued through the years, of offering generous terms to their authors. Three maxims -- interest in education, belief in religion, and generosity in business -- became the bedrock of the Macmillan family company. 
By 1850, with business prospering, the Macmillan brothers contemplated marriage. Frances Eliza Orridge (1821-1867), the daughter of a chemist who was also a Cambridge magistrate, became Daniel's wife on 4 September 1850, and Alexander married Caroline Brimley (died 1871), eldest sister of his friend George Brimley, librarian of Trinity College, on 15 August 1851. The first Macmillan union produced four children: Frederick Orridge Macmillan ['see below'], Maurice Crawford (1853-1936), Katherine ('b'. 1855), and Arthur (1857-1876). Alexander and his wife had five children: Malcolm Kingsley (1852-1889), George Augustin (1855-1936), Margaret ('b'. 1857), Olive ('b'. 1859), and William Alexander (1864-1966). 
In F. D. Maurice, whom Alexander referred to as their prophet, the Macmillans found their first truly prolific author. Maurice, professor of English literature and modern history at King's College, London, chaplain of Guy's Hospital, London, and author of the influential 'Kingdom of Christ' (1838), was a well-known figure in academic circles. He appeared on Macmillan's list initially in 1844 with an introduction to a reprint edition of Mandeville's 'Fable of the Bees' (1714). He wrote three items each in 1853 and 1854 and fifteen publications in 1855. These were largely either collections of sermons or long open letters on topics of current importance. While the Macmillans had no intention of allowing their list to become top-heavy with one author or one subject, they also knew that Maurice was an influential figure in Cambridge who might well serve as a magnet to draw other scholars to the young firm. This he certainly did, but perhaps his greatest contribution was to introduce his publishers to Charles Kingsley, rector of Eversley, in Hampshire, and a former pupil of Maurice. 
Using the pseudonym Parson Lot, Kingsley was first published by Macmillan in 1850 in a pamphlet, 'Cheap Clothes and Nasty', in which he attacked the shocking working conditions in the London tailors' trade. 'Phaeton, or, Loose Thoughts for Loose Thinkers' (1852) was next to appear, followed by his lectures 'Alexandria and her Schools' (1854), originally delivered to the Philosophical Institution of Edinburgh. His fascination with marine biology led to the very successful 'Glaucus, or, Wonders of the Shore' (1855) which was reprinted ten times by 1887. Kingsley brought excellent profits from his work but he was also responsible for a major shift in publishing policy when the firm brought out his 'Westward Ho!' (1855), Macmillan's first venture into fiction. That Daniel was cognizant of the influence of Mudie's circulating library in determining the success of novels is shown by his assurance to Kingsley that Mudie would advertise 'Westward Ho!' in both London and Manchester newspapers to ensure that other libraries would buy it. An Elizabethan romance, it introduced the notion of 'muscular Christianity' and was intended as a spur to Victorian society to fight the evils in its midst. That it coincided with Victorian dismay and disenchantment over conduct of the Crimean War only added to its message and it became a best-seller. As a three-decker, it had an initial print-run of 2000 (500 more than usual); the 6's'. edition sold 50,000 copies by 1880; and the 6died edition of 1889 sold 500,000 copies. 'The Water-Babies' (1863) was equally popular and earned huge profits for the firm. 
The Macmillans were fortunate to find another popular novelist, Thomas Hughes, also a good friend, to continue the novel tradition. Hughes proposed a book based on a schoolboy's exploits at Rugby when Thomas Arnold was headmaster. 'Tom Brown's School Days' (1857), first published anonymously, sold 11,000 copies (at a time when the usual first printing was 1500) before the year's end, with a sixth edition appearing in 1858. The new policy of publishing fiction proved enormously profitable for both the Macmillans and their authors. 
Daniel and Alexander complemented one another smoothly as a team. The older brother was restless, always seeking new opportunities, pushing for excellence. While Alexander was not lacking in these qualities, he was more stolid, very intuitive about the business, and congenial in society. Unfortunately, all through the 1840s and 1850s Daniel suffered recurring health problems. It was in 1841 that consumptive symptoms first overtook him, and early in 1844, shortly after he moved to Cambridge to supervise the business, he suffered a violent haemorrhage and was forced to spend time recuperating. Because the brothers worked unusually long hours at the shop, and sometimes denied themselves even modest comforts, Daniel's health broke down time after time, forcing him to go to Torquay for sea air and rest. During his wedding journey in 1850 he suffered from the cold in Scotland and spent the final two weeks in Torquay resting and fighting his disease. There was a spell in 1855 that was particularly worrisome and left him a semi-invalid the rest of his life. 
As Daniel's health weakened, more and more responsibility for building the Macmillan business fell on Alexander's shoulders. Their letters show that the younger brother was always careful to consult Daniel, but inevitably some decisions could not wait and the burdens and worries were borne by Alexander alone. Daniel's letters show his patience under suffering, but also his frustration that he could no longer be active in the business. On 7 May 1857 an attack of pleurisy added to his problems, and soon a throat ulcer left him unable either to eat or to drink. At length the blow fell, and Daniel died at his Cambridge home on 26 June 1857, after terrible suffering; he was buried in the Mill Road cemetery, Cambridge, on 1 July. His last child, Arthur, was not yet two months old. As Alexander contemplated the future, he saw clearly that it belonged to him for the present, but ultimately to the next generation, to Daniel's and his own sons, and from that moment he began to prepare. 
Alexander's first thought was for Daniel's family, which he now took under his own roof, raising Daniel's children as his own. He was very compatible with his sister-in-law, Mrs Daniel, as he called her; she became valuable to him in business matters and he came to trust her judgement implicitly. Next he set about establishing a London branch of the company, a move Daniel had contemplated as early as 1852 but had been unable to accomplish. A nephew, Robert Bowes, was placed in charge of the premises at 23 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden. With a new London headquarters, Alexander began his practice of coming to town on Thursdays to host an informal gathering of authors and friends, which came to be known as his 'Tobacco Parliaments'. Men of such diverse tastes and talents as Alfred Tennyson, Herbert Spencer, T. H. Huxley, Francis Turner Palgrave, Coventry Patmore, F. D. Maurice, Charles Kingsley, and Thomas Hughes gathered for a light supper, followed by tobacco and spirits, to engage the topics of the day in this leisurely setting. 
The imprint for Macmillan changed with the new location. 'Macmillan & Co.' now became either 'Cambridge: Macmillan & Co.', or 'Cambridge: Macmillan & Co. and 23 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London'. Changes also occurred in the Macmillan list, reflecting both shifts in contemporary taste and the more metropolitan location. While books on education, religion, mathematics, sermons, and university affairs were never discontinued, new material was explored. David Masson's two works 'Sketch of the British Novelists' (1859) and 'The Life of John Milton' (1859) were the first examples of literary criticism, of which more would follow. James Clerk Maxwell's 'Essay on the Stability of the Motion of Saturn's Rings' (1859) reflected the general public's growing interest in astronomy. Macmillan's first woman novelist appeared, Margaret Oliphant, writing 'Agnes Hopetoun's Schools and Holidays: the Experiences of a Little Girl' (1859), as did an anonymous 'Out of the Depths: the Story of a Woman's Life' (1859). 
A good deal of talk at the Tobacco Parliaments was given over to the possibility of Macmillan joining the trend of the 1850s among publishing houses and establishing a shilling magazine of its own. During the course of 1859 Alexander Macmillan, after careful consideration, decided to proceed, and the first issue of 'Macmillan's Magazine' appeared on 1 November 1859, with a celebratory dinner that evening at Henrietta Street. David Masson was the first editor and the following men contributed articles for the first number: Masson, Hughes, George Wilson, F. G. Stephens, Franklin Lushington, and J. M. Ludlow. 
During the planning phase Alexander Macmillan's old friend Ludlow had argued forcefully that a publishing house with a journal, which could publish novels first serially and later in volume form, would vastly increase the profits to both author and publisher. Although acceptance as a serial did not automatically guarantee publication in book form, Macmillan did go on to publish many of his serials, such as Hughes's 'Tom Brown at Oxford' (November 1859 - July 1861); Charles Kingsley's 'The Water-Babies' (August 1862 - March 1863); Oliphant's 'A Son of the Soil' (November 1863 - April 1865); Charlotte Mary Yonge's 'The Dove in the Eagle's Nest' (May 1865 - December 1865); Anthony Trollope's 'Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite' (May 1870 - December 1870); William Black's 'Strange Adventures of a Phaeton' (January 1872 - November 1872); Annie Keary's 'Castle Daly' (February 1874 - July 1875); Henry James's 'The Portrait of a Lady' (October 1880 - November 1881); and Thomas Hardy's 'The Woodlanders' (May 1886 - February 1887). Royalties for serials were determined by the editor, while royalties for books were negotiated individually, determined to some degree by the previous popularity of the serial. 
During its early years, 1859-1874, 'Macmillan's' was notable for the opportunities it offered to women journalists. In its first fifteen years sixty-three women made contributions, including 11 serials, 61 pieces of poetry, and 120 prose articles. Christina Rossetti was a steady contributor, as were Frances Power Cobbe, Dinah Maria Craik, the Hon. Mrs Caroline Norton, Lady (Lucie) Duff-Gordon, Millicent Garrett Fawcett, and Octavia Hill. Even more importantly, the women wrote, not on fashion or cookery, but on substantial matters of the day, such as evolution, the death of Prince Albert, the American Civil War, justice for downtrodden Egyptians, education for women, and the Franco-Prussian War. Almost without exception the women boldly signed their names, contrary to contemporary custom. 
The years 1860 to 1872 were ones of enormous accomplishment for Alexander Macmillan, as he inaugurated one new publishing series after another, began new ventures, and moved the firm's headquarters from Cambridge to 16 Bedford Street, London. In doing so, he displayed a talent for innovation, although always tempered by a cautious business sense, and he built Macmillan into one of London's leading publishing houses. 
Alexander Macmillan's interests were wide and varied. First and foremost, of course, was his responsibility for managing the business and overseeing its list of publications. His interest in things American led to his strong support for the North during the civil war. He worried about the problems of international copyright. When the publisher John W. Parker failed, he arranged to secure for Macmillan the already published early works of Kingsley, Maurice, Archbishop Trench, and C. M. Yonge. After moving the headquarters to London he took a spacious home in Upper Tooting, suitable for the two families under one roof, and named it Knapdale after the ancestral property. Here he was free to offer expansive hospitality, in the Macmillan tradition, to friends and authors. In 1863 Macmillan undertook some special projects for Oxford University, an appointment which continued until 1880, at which time he was awarded an honorary MA degree out of gratitude for his services. 
One of Alexander Macmillan's foremost new ventures began with F. T. Palgrave's 'Golden Treasury of the Best Songs and Lyrical Poems in the English Language' (1861), where the author brought together a selection of what he considered the best songs and poems. This technique served to encourage the growth of a new genre, the anthology. It is possible to argue with Palgrave's judgement; he rejected the poetry of John Donne, William Blake, and Emily Bronte, and made only limited selections from the work of Coleridge, Henry Vaughan, Richard Crashaw, and George Herbert. But one cannot argue with the fact that this approach became enormously popular with the British public. Showing its chief's usual caution, Macmillan initially ordered a printing of only 2000 copies. Popular demand, however, was such that by 1888 there had been twenty-three new editions and reprints. 
Sensing that this was an important new approach, Alexander Macmillan at once set out to commission new works in what became the 'Golden Treasury' series. Some of the more popular selections, out of the many titles which eventually comprised the series, included Roundell Palmer's 'Book of Praise' (1862); William Allingham's 'Ballad Book' (1864); and C. M. Yonge's 'Book of Golden Deeds of All Time' (1864), 'Book of Thoughts' (1865), and 'Book of Worthies Gathered from Old Histories' (1869). Some enduring volumes in the series were Patmore's 'Children's Garland' (1862), M. C. Aitken's 'Scottish Song' (1874), Matthew Arnold's selections from William Wordsworth (1879) and Lord Byron (1881), and T. H. Ward's 'The English Poets' (1880). Other books by Palgrave included 'Songs and Sonnets by William Shakespeare' (1865), 'Essays on Art' (1866), 'Hymns' (1867), 'Lyrical Poems' (1871), and 'Chrysomela' (1877), a selection from the lyrics of Robert Herrick. (The last volume in this series was not published until 1961.) 
A new venture, begun in 1864, was the 'Statesman's Year Book', first edited by Frederick Martin; it was a fresh concept which provided a 'statistical, genealogical, and historic account of the states and sovereigns of the civilized world' (VanArsdel, 183). It proved to be an invaluable political and diplomatic tool, which was still in publication at the end of the twentieth century. 
In the mid-1860s, with business complexities mounting, Alexander Macmillan felt keenly the need for additional help he could rely on. His first step was to appoint a partner to the firm, whose job would be to supervise the day-to-day operations. For this post, after consulting with MacLehose, he chose a fellow Scotsman, George Lillie Craik, who came to work in 1865 and stayed, a valued and trusted employee, until he died in 1905. Next Macmillan drew about him a group of several men whose judgement he could trust to serve as advisers, people with whom he could consult on difficult questions. These included John Morley, George Grove, and Norman Lockyer. Nor was he idle himself. Among works he initiated or supported were Alexander Gilchrist's biography of the then-neglected poet William Blake (1863); William Allingham's 'The Ballad Book' (1864); and the very popular 'Jest Book' (1864) by Mark Lemon, featuring a collection of anecdotes and sayings. There was a selection of poetry suitable for children to read on Sundays by Mrs C. F. Alexander, 'The Sunday Book of Poetry' (1864); and Alexander Smith's edition of Robert Burns (1865). In addition Macmillan began commissioning textbooks on botany, chemistry, and geology for children in elementary schools, in keeping with the firm's original commitment to education. 
An important series of books for children and young adults began appearing in the 1860s, beginning with Georgina M. Craik's 'My First Journal: a Book for the Young' and Dinah Maria Craik's 'Our Year: a Child's Book in Prose and Verse' (both 1860). Westland Marston's novel 'A Lady in her Own Right' (1860) was followed by more novels in 1861: May Beverley's 'The Moor Cottage'; Oliver Wendell Holmes's 'Elsie Venner'; and Hughes's 'Tom Brown at Oxford'. In 1862 there were Arthur Hugh Clough's 'Poems with a Memoir', Christina Rossetti's 'Goblin Market and other Poems', and Caroline Norton's 'The Lady of La Garaye'. J. E. Cairnes's 'The Slave Power' (1863) attempted to analyse the issues behind the American Civil War. The first Macmillan book by Matthew Arnold appeared in 1864, 'A French Eton', followed by 'Essays in Criticism' in 1865. Also in 1865, Lewis Carroll's 'Alice's Adventures in Wonderland' was published, at 7's'. 6died, complete with forty-two illustrations by John Tenniel: second, third, fourth, and fifth editions followed each year for the next four years. 'Through the Looking-Glass and What Alice Found There' appeared in 1872, with fifty Tenniel illustrations, and was reprinted twelve times up to 1887. Carroll was a difficult author to deal with, being unusually fussy about textual matters, but Alexander Macmillan treated him with much understanding. He went to great lengths, repeatedly, to do Carroll personal favours, even procuring special pantomime tickets for the author's young relative. But the publisher's forbearance paid off, for Carroll had a long association with Macmillan, and gave the firm, among many works, such future successes as 'The Hunting of the Snark' (1872), and 'Alice's Adventures Underground' (1886). 
Alexander Macmillan also proposed, in 1865, a series to be called the 'Sunday Library for Household Reading' which would consist of children's books published in monthly parts. As editors he suggested two Macmillan readers for educational and devotional books, C. M. Yonge and Frances Martin. The first to appear were Yonge's 'Pupils of St. John the Divine' (1868); George Macdonald's 'Pioneers and Founders: England's Antiphon' (1868); and Annie Keary's 'Nations Around' (1870). Other titles were by Kingsley, Hughes, Archdeacon Frederic William Farrar, and Mrs Oliphant. 
The year 1867 marked a new enterprise for the company: after a visit to the United States, Alexander decided that a New York branch would be feasible. He sent George Brett to open it in 1869, who was so successful that two years later Frederick Macmillan, Daniel's eldest son, was sent to receive training there. 
Alexander continued to be interested in the work of women, as first demonstrated in the 1840s, and was fortunate to secure the early work of a number who would later be prominent in the struggle for women's rights. Some of these works were Sophia Jex-Blake's 'Some American Schools and Colleges' (1867); Josephine Butler's 'The Education and Employment of Women' (1868); Harriet Martineau's 'Biographical Sketches' (1869) and 'A Letter to the Deaf' (1869); 'Woman's Work and Woman's Culture' (1869) edited by Butler; and Millicent Garrett Fawcett's 'Political Economy for Beginners' (1870). Although Lady (Mary Anne) Barker was not a women's rights activist she nevertheless produced an unexpected success in her 'Station Life in New Zealand', which went through four editions between 1870 and 1883, and was reprinted in 1887. 
One of the jewels in the firm's crown, and a truly original project for its time, was due entirely to Alexander Macmillan's far-sighted vision. An uncommonly fine edition of 'The Works of William Shakespeare' was being produced, under the general editorship of W. G. Clark, the public orator of Cambridge, and John Glover, the librarian of Trinity. Using, among other sources, the Capell collection of quartos housed in the library of Trinity College, eventually the project would grow to nine volumes, but when the first one appeared in 1863 it sparked Alexander Macmillan's thinking. Although the original edition, known as 'The Cambridge Shakespeare', was designed primarily for Shakespearian students and scholars, and unusual care had been taken with the textual editing, Macmillan saw it another way, as well. Why not a popular edition, using the same text, but priced for the general consumer? Thus was born the 'Globe Shakespeare' (1864). The publisher described it as 'immeasurably the cheapest, most beautiful and handy book that has appeared of 'any kind, except the' 'Bible'' (Graves, 'Life and Letters of Alexander Macmillan', 223), and ordered a first printing of 50,000 copies priced at 3's'. 6died As with the 'Golden Treasury' books, success of the first volume inspired another series produced similarly and sold cheaply for the general reading public. The format of large print and special size, the 'Globe' octavo, and the popular price were retained to produce volumes on Robert Burns (1868), Oliver Goldsmith (1869), Alexander Pope (1869), Edmund Spenser (1869), William Cowper (1870), John Dryden (1870), Virgil (1871), Horace (1873), and Milton (1877). 
Although Macmillan & Co. had no success with its first journals, in 1869, on the strong recommendation of Norman Lockyer, a respected astronomer and spectroscopist, the firm founded 'Nature', a weekly scientific paper designed to appeal to the general public as well as to offer a means for scientists to communicate with one another. It captured an audience because of growing interest in science among the lay population and also because it had the backing of such prominent Victorian scientists as Thomas Huxley, Charles Darwin, John Tyndall, and Henry Enfield Roscoe. Lockyer, the first editor, remained at his post for a remarkable fifty years (until 1919) and succeeded in building a journal respected worldwide. Other journals founded by Macmillan in the nineteenth century included: the 'Journal of Physiology' (1878); 'Brain' (1878); and the 'Economic Journal' (1891). A non-scientific journal, the 'English Illustrated Magazine' (1883), coincided with the growing trend towards magazine illustration and was sustained by such leading illustrators as Hugh Thomson, A. D. McCormick, Herbert Railton, Joseph Pennell, and Walter Crane. Some of its contributors also published their work in 'Macmillan's Magazine', including Henry James, Robert Louis Stevenson, and Rudyard Kipling, while others, such as George Meredith and Algernon Swinburne, contributed only to the illustrated publication. The first editor of the 'English Illustrated Magazine' was Joseph William Comyns Carr, who was succeeded by Sir Clement Kinloch-Cooke; after ten years of dwindling circulation ownership was transferred to another publisher and it continued until 1913. 
Although the business continued as varied and as briskly as ever, three particular publishing events distinguished the 1870s for Macmillan & Co.: J. R. Green's history; the 'English Men of Letters' series; and the Grove dictionary of music. 
In 1874 Green's 'Short History of the English People' appeared in one volume of 847 pages, and brought an entirely new philosophy to the recording of history. Green had originally contacted Alexander Macmillan five years earlier about this project and the publisher had offered much encouragement. Originally intended as a school manual or handbook, it focused on the social, economic, and intellectual aspects of history, eschewing accounts of atrocity, war, and conquest. Green's aim was to chart the growth of a society, using a broad approach and simple style, and the book became instantly, enormously, and unexpectedly popular, going on to achieve a remarkable publishing history. The British people were fascinated and the book sold 35,000 copies in eighteen months. It was reprinted with corrections fifteen times in the next twelve years. A second edition was called for in 1887, also reprinted several times, and another version appeared in parts in 1889, with analysis by C. W. A. Tait. Meanwhile Green prepared another, expanded, version, which appeared in four volumes between 1877 and 1880. Alexander Macmillan, always generous with his authors, rewrote Green's contract after he realized how successful the book would be. Originally, the firm had offered him $350 outright, with another $100 after the sale of 2000 copies; later they substituted a royalty arrangement which was much more profitable for the author. In a sense his history made both a fortune and a career for Green, who had been only marginally successful; he had large profits and Macmillan chose him to edit two new series, 'Literary Primers' and 'Historical Primers', which ran to seven and eleven titles respectively. 
John Morley, then editor of the 'Fortnightly Review' and a rising London man of letters, approached Alexander Macmillan in 1877 with a scheme for a new series, to which he originally gave the title 'Short Books on Great Writers'. Macmillan knew Morley well; he had befriended him ten years earlier, when as a young Oxford man he was making his way in the city, by publishing an early work, 'Edmund Burke' (1867). Morley now had wide contacts among fellow literary men and for some time past had been lining up possible authors for the subjects he proposed. Writing to his son, Malcolm Macmillan, Alexander reported: 'He has got [R. H.] Hutton for Sir Walter Scott, Goldwin Smith for Wordsworth [in actuality the work was done by F. W. H. Myers], Symonds for Shelley, Pattison for Milton, Leslie Stephen for Johnson, Morrison for Gibbon'. He also told Malcolm: 'The idea is a sort of essay -- biographical and critical... about twice as long as a 'Quarterly' article, and in a little volume to sell at half-a-crown' (Graves, 'Life and Letters of Alexander Macmillan', 342). 
The title finally settled on was 'English Men of Letters' and it became one of the most distinguished and influential series Macmillan & Co. would ever publish. To begin, scholars of the first rank were selected to do the work, which gave the books authority, and made them suitable either for the general reader or as a point of departure for specialists. It was an idea whose time had come, in an era when the standard three-volume testamentary lives underwritten by grieving families did not provide really reliable information about their subjects. In more recent years scholars have worked to produce new, 'definitive' portraits, but for their time the 'English Men of Letters' studies were reliable, well produced, and for nearly fifty years set the standard for critical and biographical texts. 
In 1878 five volumes began the series: 'Gibbon' by James Cotter Morison; 'Goldsmith' by William Black; 'Johnson' by Leslie Stephen; 'Scott' by Richard H. Hutton; and 'Shelley' by John Addington Symonds. Nine volumes followed in 1879, among them 'Milton' by Mark Pattison and 'Thackeray' by Anthony Trollope. Eight further volumes appeared between 1880 and the end of 1881; seven more were published in 1882, including Edmund Gosse's 'Gray', and Alfred Ainger's 'Lamb'. Nine additional volumes were to be printed, at irregular intervals up to 1892, at which time the series was complete. 
The third significant venture of the 1870s for Macmillan & Co. was George Grove's 'Dictionary of Music and Musicians' published in four volumes (1877, 1880, 1883, and 1889), a major English reference work. Grove had had a varied life, beginning his career as a civil engineer, a post which took him to the West Indies. He was also a biblical scholar as well as a first-class music historian. He served as editor of 'Macmillan's Magazine' from 1868 to 1883, leaving when he became director of the Royal School of Music in 1883, the year in which he also received his knighthood. His dictionary was not the first attempt at musical compilation in the language, but was by far the most comprehensive and was another set of Macmillan volumes to have a distinguished publishing history. Although there are no sales records of the first edition of Grove because it was originally envisaged as a part-work (the first volume was issued in parts), there was a second edition in five volumes (1904-10), edited by J. A. Fuller Maitland, which sold 7000 sets. A third edition edited by H. C. Colles appeared in 1927; Colles also supervised the 1940 fourth edition, which added a supplement to the revised five-volume set. By 1980 a sixth edition, edited by Stanley Sadie and entitled 'The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians', ran to twenty volumes. The enduring popularity of this reference work reflected a steadily growing interest on the part of the public in musical scholarship and history which had its origins squarely in late Victorian England. 
The interesting point which links the three foregoing projects is the tremendous impact which each had on the public and its perception of Macmillan & Co. Both generalist and specialist readers as well as scholars showed their confidence by purchasing record numbers of copies; if it had not been before, Macmillan was certainly now a dominant London publishing house. The projects succeeded because of the strong faith Alexander Macmillan had in each. Two readers for the firm expressed decidedly adverse opinions about the Green history, but Alexander's faith never wavered and was in the end fully justified. There were similar reservations among some about committing so much of the company's financial resources to the 'English Men of Letters' series, which proved to be long-term substantial sellers. Again, the Grove project involved a large financial risk with no indication of the possible market for such an ambitious reference work. However, it initiated a work, 'Grove's Musical Dictionary', which was visionary for its time, yet went on to be a world leader in its field throughout the twentieth century. In each case, Alexander's intuition about public response succeeded in guiding Macmillan along the course of prudent finance and innovative publishing. 
Despite the many successes, Alexander Macmillan's life was now undergoing many changes. In 1871 his wife, Caroline, died after an extended illness, during which her husband was unfailingly attentive. On 24 October 1872, he married a family friend, (Jeanne Barbe) Emma Pignatel, with whom he had two additional children, Mary ('b'. 1874) and John Victor (1877-1956). Although Alexander Macmillan certainly remained active in the business, he was beginning to plan ahead for the eventual succession of Daniel's and his own sons. Daniel's eldest, 


@@@@@


doc= 39420


Crippen, Hawley Harvey (1862-1910), murderer, was born in Coldwater, Michigan, the only child of storekeeper Myron Augustus Crippen (1827-1910) and his wife, Andresse Skinner (died 1909). After studying in Michigan, London, and the Homoeopathic Hospital College, Cleveland, Ohio, he qualified as a homoeopathic doctor in 1884. In 1887 he married a nurse, Charlotte Jane Bell (died 1892). Their son Otto was born in 1889, but Charlotte died three years later. Crippen placed Otto with Myron and Andresse and entered general practice in New York. There he married on 1 September 1892 Kunigunde (1873-1910), daughter of Joe Mackamotzki, a Pole who had kept a fruit stand in Brooklyn. She was at this time someone else's mistress and was known as Cora Turner. 
In 1894 Crippen's practice failed and he took employment with Munyon's Homoeopathic Remedies. They sent him to establish a branch in London in 1897, but fired him in 1899 for managing his wife's indifferent career as a music-hall singer. He was London manager of the disreputable Drouet's Institute for the Deaf from 1901 until its bankruptcy in 1908. From 1908 Crippen was partner in a dental practice called the Yale Tooth Specialists at Albion House, 61 New Oxford Street. 
At Drouet's, Crippen employed as a typist Ethel Clara Le Neve (1883-1967) and about 1903 they fell in love. In 1905 the Crippens moved from a flat near Oxford Street to 39 Hilldrop Crescent, Holloway, and took in lodgers. In December 1906 Crippen found Cora (who now called herself Belle Elmore) in bed with a lodger. She had cuckolded Hawley for several years, but this incident provoked him to consummate his hitherto blameless love for Ethel. Belle maintained her shaky connection with the stage by serving the charitable Music Hall Ladies' Guild, whose office was also in Albion House. This led to occasional confrontations between Belle and Ethel. 
Overtly the Crippens' marriage was happy. In reality Belle Elmore was a tipsy, plump, and unfaithful shrew with inordinate vanity and a miserly streak; her docile and submissive husband chafed at her dominion. On Monday 31 January 1910 two friends of Belle's dined with the Crippens before leaving Hilldrop Crescent at 1.30 a.m. Belle Elmore was never seen again. Crippen said she had gone to America for a few months. In February Ethel was seen wearing a piece of Belle's jewellery. In March Crippen moved her into Hilldrop Crescent and gave out that Belle had died in California. He proved evasive about details, and the Music Hall Ladies' Guild suspected foul play. They established that no Belle Elmore or Cora Crippen had crossed the Atlantic or died in California. 
Crippen took two short holidays in Dieppe with Le Neve, and brought back a French maid for her. But his lies led vaudevillians John and Lil Nash to Scotland Yard, and Detective-Inspector Walter Dew was sent to interview Crippen on 8 July. Crippen told a plausible tale of being deserted by Belle, and lying because he felt humiliated. But panicked by Dew's visit, he fled the following day. The police searched the house, but found nothing until Dew took up the flooring of the kitchen coal cellar. Underneath was a woman's headless, limbless, desexed, and boneless flesh, wrapped in a man's pyjama jacket. It contained hyoscine, a poison Crippen had bought shortly before Belle's disappearance. A two-week international hunt for Crippen and Le Neve followed. 
They had bought boy's clothes for Le Neve and gone to Brussels. On 20 July they sailed from Antwerp to Montreal on the 'Montrose', with Crippen posing as John Philo Robinson, taking his sixteen-year-old son. The ship's captain, Henry Kendall, mistrusted the Robinsons' loving hand-holding and decided that they were Crippen and his paramour. When he informed his owners by Marconigram they contacted Scotland Yard, and passed all Kendall's subsequent descriptions of the runaways to the press, which followed Dew's pursuit of them in the faster liner 'Laurentic' to reach Montreal three days ahead of the 'Montrose'. Dew arrested the pair before they could disembark. 
Crippen's lackadaisical defence at his trial (18-22 October 1910) was that the remains must have been in the cellar when he bought the house. The prosecution, however, proved that the pyjamas were made after he came to Hilldrop Crescent. Pathologist Bernard Spilsbury, in his first widely publicized case, demonstrated that the flesh bore an abdominal scar matching Belle's ovariectomy. Crippen, who was imperturbable but unconvincing under cross-examination, and showed a brand of heroism in his determination to protect Le Neve, was sentenced to death. But he had achieved his purpose of minimizing the damage to Le Neve, who was acquitted in a separate trial on 25 October of a charge of being an accessory after the fact. 
From prison Crippen exchanged love letters with Ethel until his execution at Pentonville prison on 23 November 1910. He was buried within the prison precincts. His posthumous reputation as one of the most frightful murderers of his generation was unjustified. Everyone who knew him was astonished by this polite little man's crime. He was deeply in love with Ethel and not the calculating seducer portrayed at her trial. He refused to mount any serious defence, as that might have compromised her, and he was the first murderer caught by ship's radio-telegraph. Crippen was a commonplace, bespectacled little man, with a sandy moustache and domed forehead, who abstained from tobacco, wine, and spirits. He was courteous and considerate socially, though his professional life as a quack dealing in patent medicines must sometimes have been calculating and predatory. He proved a bungling murderer, who covered his victim's remains in slaked lime, which preserves human flesh, rather than quick lime, which destroys them. His essentially sordid 'crime passionnel', committed in a humdrum backwater of London suburbia, excited an intense and enduring notoriety. 


@@@@@


doc= 39421


Sands, Robert Gerald (1954-1981), Irish republican and hunger striker, was born in Abbot's Cross in Newtownabbey, a northern suburb of Belfast, on 9 March 1954, the son of John Sands, a Post Office worker, and his wife, Rosaleen. The eldest of four children, he was educated at Stella Maris primary school and the local Catholic secondary school. He left school in June 1969 and attended Newtownabbey Technical College for nine months before getting a job as an apprentice coach builder. Sands, who was a keen and able sportsman, played football for a local team with a mixed membership and was also a member of Willowfield Temperance Harriers, a well known and predominantly protestant running club. His family moved into the Rathcoole housing estate in Newtownabbey when he was seven. Rathcoole was a new public authority estate, the largest in western Europe, and until the outbreak of the troubles in August 1969 it had a substantial number of Catholic tenants. By the time Sands left school the deepening political crisis was generating tense inter-community relations and the beginning of the ugly process of intimidation of minorities in housing estates and workplaces throughout Belfast. Catholics were the minority in Newtownabbey and Rathcoole, and from 1969 onwards there was a growing exodus to areas such as the Catholic Twinbrook estate in west Belfast, where Sands's family was forced to move in June 1972. 
There was no history of republican involvement in his family, and Bobby Sands was typical of a generation of young working-class Catholics whose republicanism was born out of the sectarian conflagration of August 1969 which brought British troops onto the streets of Belfast and Londonderry. Sands joined the provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) in 1972 and was arrested for the first time in October 1972. While on remand he married on 3 March 1973 Geraldine Noade, a seventeen-year-old shop assistant. They had a son. Geraldine Sands moved to England after Sands was imprisoned in 1977. Charged with possession of four handguns and sentenced to five years in April 1973, he was sent to Long Kesh prison (renamed the Maze in 1976) near Lisburn. Granted special category status by the British government in June 1972, the paramilitary groups controlled their own compounds inside the prison. Sands was in cage 11. It was here that Sands and other young republicans acquired a political education that was a mixture of traditional republicanism and revolutionary theories then current in the developing world. Sands became 'officer commanding' one of the huts in the compound and took a leading role in organizing political education and Irish language classes as well as beginning his own attempts at political analysis and politicized verse. 
Released in April 1976, within six months Sands was involved in an IRA attempt to bomb a furniture showroom in south-west Belfast which was interrupted by the Royal Ulster Constabulary. Sentenced to fourteen years in September 1977, he was sent back to Long Kesh (as republicans continued to call it). In the interim special category status had been abolished for all new paramilitary offenders and Sands was put in the new cellular accommodation known as the H blocks. Republican prisoners had launched a campaign for the restoration of special category status which involved the refusal to wear prison uniforms: the 'blanket protest'. This developed into the 'dirty protest' as, refused permission to leave their cells to go to the toilet unless they wore prison uniform, they began to smear their cells with excrement. By late 1980 there were 837 republican prisoners in Long Kesh, of whom 341 were on the dirty protest. Frustrated by the failure of the protest to shift the British government and the lack of active support in the Catholic community for their demands, seven prisoners began a hunger strike on 27 October 1980. It ended after fifty-three days with an ambiguous understanding between the government and the leadership of the republican movement. This soon broke down and a second hunger strike began on 1 March 1981. Ten men had been chosen to follow one another in a phased process, with Sands, who was now the IRA leader in Long Kesh, the first. 
Sands had now become the prisoners' most effective literary voice, with a stream of prose pieces and poems smuggled out for publication under the pseudonym of Marcella. These were written during his involvement in the prison protests, which he had joined as soon as he entered Long Kesh in September 1977. They reveal a literary talent wedded to a romantic-fatalist acceptance of death rather than compromise. He died on 5 May 1981 after sixty-six days without food (the government rejected the possibility of force-feeding the prisoners), and nine more prisoners were to die before the hunger strike was called off. More than 100,000 people attended his funeral at Milltown cemetery, Belfast, on 7 May. Even before his death he contributed powerfully to the emergence of Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, as a significant political force in Northern Ireland. Sinn Fein organized for him to be nominated as H block candidate in a by-election for the Fermanagh and South Tyrone seat at Westminster. His victory on 9 April 1981 was a powerful impetus for the group of republican revisionists around Gerry Adams who, while still wedded to the armed struggle, believed that it could be defeated unless assisted by a political breakthrough. The victory of Sands allowed Adams to persuade the traditionalists in the movement that Sinn Fein's involvement in electoral politics would complement and not undermine armed struggle. 


@@@@@


doc= 39422


Cuffe, Hamilton John Agmondesham, fifth earl of Desart (1848-1934), lawyer and public servant, was born on 30 August 1848, the second son of John Otway O'Connor Cuffe, third earl of Desart (1818-1865), and Lady Elizabeth (1822-1898), third daughter of John Frederick Campbell, first Earl Cawdor, and his wife, Elizabeth Thynne, daughter of the second marquess of Bath. As a boy Cuffe served as a midshipman in the Royal Navy from 1860 to 1863. He was educated at Radley and at Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1869. At the age of twenty-four, in 1872, he was called to the bar by the Inner Temple, in due course becoming a bencher in 1905. 
On 19 July 1876 Cuffe married Lady Margaret Joan (1853-1927), second daughter of Henry Thynne Lascelles, the fourth earl of Harewood, and Elizabeth Joanna, daughter of the first marquess of Clanricarde. They had two daughters, Joan Elizabeth Mary, who married Sir Harry Lloyd Verney, and Sybil Marjorie, who married William Bayard Cutting, Geoffrey Scott, and Percy Lubbock. Lord Desart succeeded to the peerage (Irish) as fifth earl on the death of his brother, the fourth earl, in 1898. 
Desart had a long and distinguished career in the public service. In 1877 he became secretary to the judicature acts commission, which was responsible for implementing the amalgamation of common law and equity in the new Supreme Court of Judicature and the building of the new Royal Courts of Justice in the Strand. In 1878 he was appointed assistant solicitor to the Treasury, and between 1884 and 1894 served as assistant director of public prosecutions. At the age of forty-six he reached the peak of his career, being appointed solicitor to the Treasury (solicitor to the government) and queen's proctor (solicitor on behalf of the crown principally concerned to ensure that there was no abuse of the divorce laws) in 1894. He also succeeded Sir Augustus Stephenson as director of public prosecutions (DPP), the head of the state prosecution department, a post established only a few years previously. 
As DPP, Desart kept a low profile, and did not publicly respond to public criticism. 'Causes celebres' for the prosecution of which he was responsible included the Jameson raid (1896); Jabez Balfour and the Liberator frauds (1895); Florence Maybrick (1889); the Moat Farm murder; Neil Cream; the prosecution of Lord Russell for bigamy before the House of Lords (1901); Oscar Wilde (1895); Adolph Beck (1895). He was averse to invoking the criminal law in matters of morals. As Treasury solicitor he conducted an inquiry into the kidnapping of Dr Sun Yatsen by the Chinese legation in London in 1896. 
Desart was a cautious public servant, in the civil service tradition. His period of office as DPP was one of relative tranquillity. He refused to discuss individual cases publicly, although for some years until 1905 his annual report did contain details of 'causes celebres', albeit expressed in rather bland style. He was involved in a dispute with the Law Society over the prosecution of fraudulent solicitors, but he adhered to a quiet but firm line. 
The vesting of three such important public offices in one person was seen as acceptable in the nineteenth century, but became unworkable in the early twentieth century. In 1907 the 'Criminal Appeal Act', which gave a right of appeal and established the court of criminal appeal, created substantially more work for the DPP. Accordingly the 'Prosecution of Offences Act' of 1908 made the DPP the independent head of an independent department, directly answerable to the attorney-general. Charles Matthews became DPP, and Desart remained Treasury solicitor until his retirement in 1909. In the same year, on the recommendation of H. H. Asquith, he was created Baron Desart of Desart, co. Kilkenny, in the peerage of the United Kingdom, in recognition of his considerable public service. 
Desart was sceptical about the usefulness of his role as queen's (and subsequently king's) proctor, which involved intervening in divorce cases, taking the view that most divorce cases were in fact by consent, then not permitted. As he told the divorce commission in 1912, he felt he did more harm than good. 
Desart was a British member in the North Sea Inquiry in Paris in 1905, investigating how on its way to the Far East the Russian fleet off Dogger Bank fired on British seamen, apparently thinking them to be the Japanese fleet. Following the Hague Convention of 1907, he was British plenipotentiary and president at the International Naval Conference in London in 1908-9, which produced the declaration of London, proposing prize rules for international law. Although never ratified, it was accepted by the great powers, though in the event abandoned in the First World War in 1916. In 1910 Desart became one of the four British members of the International Court of Arbitration at The Hague. He presided over the United Kingdom prize claim committee in 1915. 
In the House of Lords, Desart was a moderate Conservative. He voted for the 'Parliament Bill' in 1911, and against the 'Welsh Church Disestablishment Bill' in 1913. He was elected to the Irish senate in 1921. He received many honours and appointments: justice of the peace; CB (1894); KCB (1898); privy councillor (1913); knight of the Order of St Patrick (1919); his majesty's lieutenant for the county of Kilkenny (1920). He was devoted to Ireland, adopting a moderating and conciliatory approach to Irish affairs. 'Why am I a Unionist? Because I am an Irishman.' Recognizing the seeming inevitability of some form of Irish home rule, as a southern unionist he opposed the 'Government of Ireland Bill' of 1912-14 because of the exclusion of Ulster, as he was opposed to the severance of Ireland in any form. He foresaw the danger of civil war in Ireland, but none the less expressed the wish to see Ireland prosper and its parliament succeed. 
A man of strong character and great ability, Desart was an experienced statesmanlike figure who knew everybody of significance in public life. A lovable man and a magnificent friend, he had many friends. An Anglican churchman, he was a profoundly religious man. His principal hobby was shooting, and his clubs were the Travellers and the MCC. He lived at 2 Rutland Gardens, Knightsbridge, London; his house in Ireland, Desart Court, was burnt down by Sinn Feiners. He died aged eighty-six on 4 November 1934 at 29 Wimpole Street, London, leaving no male heir, and no heir presumptive, and the peerage thus became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 39423


Currie, Bertram Wodehouse (1827-1896), banker, was born on 25 November 1827, at Harley Street, Marylebone, Middlesex, the second son of Raikes Currie (1801-1881), banker and MP for Northampton (1835-57), and his wife, the Hon. Laura Sophia (died 1869), daughter of the second Baron Wodehouse. John Wodehouse, first earl of Kimberley, was his cousin. He had three brothers (of whom the youngest, Philip Henry Wodehouse Currie, was created Baron Currie in 1899) and two sisters. He was educated at Cheam under the progressive Dr Mayo, who taught him with such terrifying realism about the 'last trump' that he would jump out of his skin when someone blew a cornet in the street. Afterwards he was at Eton College (1840-45) and he also studied at Weimar, in Germany, where he became proficient in foreign languages. 
After returning to London, Currie entered his father's banking business at 29 Cornhill, in the City, in 1847. He was not his father's favourite son, and his acute business sense was not fully appreciated until at his instigation the bank amalgamated with Glyn, Mills to become Glyn, Mills, Currie, in 1864. He married on 31 October 1860 Caroline Louisa (1836/7-1902), daughter of Sir William Lawrence Young, fourth baronet, Conservative MP for Buckinghamshire from 1835 to 1842. They had two sons. 
After the Overend Gurney crisis of 1866 Currie emerged as the dominant partner in the bank, and he soon secured his reputation as one of the most intelligent leaders of the banking community. The first chairman of Glyn, Mills, Currie was George Glyn, afterwards first Baron Wolverton; Currie's reservations about him reveal his own epicureanism and his admiration for versatility, erudition, and vision: 'If he had not been so engrossed in the details of business, and if his domestic environment had been a little more intellectual and aesthetic, his natural talent for conversation and society would... have been developed... but the puritanical and philistine element which prevailed in his days in the banking and mercantile world checked his flight, and made his private life somewhat colourless. ('Recollections', 1.95)' Currie's ambitions for himself were cut in the opposite pattern to Wolverton's. He took broad views, and had wide interests outside the bank parlour, but never compromised his dedication to private banking by accepting other commercial responsibilities. It was at Currie's prompting that Glyn, Mills, Currie became a joint-stock company in 1885. Currie was instrumental in financing the Manchester Ship Canal in the late 1880s. He had a lifelong friendship with Edward Baring, first Baron Revelstoke, and together with William Lidderdale of the Bank of England he was crucial during the Baring crisis of 1890 in averting a collapse in financial confidence. On 11 February 1891 E. W. Hamilton of the Treasury called him 'the ablest of all City authorities' (BL, Add. MS 48655, fol. 27). 
In the City, Currie was not a representative figure. He advocated reformation of the corporation of London: 'The perpetual guzzling of Aldermen and Common Councillors, the jobbing in City lands, in which some of them were notoriously engaged, their want of public spirit, the cadging for subscriptions on every possible occasion, the thirst of Mayors and Recorders for titles and orders -- all these excited my bile. ('Recollections', 1.83-4)' Currie was chairman of the City of London Liberal Association at a time when most City leaders had abandoned Liberalism. The 'boredom and banality' of parliamentary life, however, deterred him from a candidacy ('Recollections', 1.82-3). He advised W. E. Gladstone on financial topics, lent his Whitehall house to the Gladstones when they left Downing Street in 1885, and also put at their disposal his Surrey house, where the Grand Old Man once held a meeting of ministers. Gladstone much appreciated Currie's 'unbounded kindness' on these occasions (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 11.129). Currie supported Gladstone's Irish policy, and in 1892 he mediated on his behalf with Henry Labouchere when the latter pressed his claim to office in the incoming Liberal administration. 'To have known Mr Gladstone, and to have enjoyed his friendship, is among the most interesting events of my life... I have never conversed with any man whose intellectual superiority I was so ready to acknowledge, or who... was so free from the demon of commonplace. ('Recollections', 1.84)' Currie was not a democrat, but exclusive and invidious in his judgements; he supported Robert Lowe's arguments against extending the franchise in 1866 and he mistrusted Rosebery's admiration of Bismarck. He described himself as having an 'anxious and apprehensive temperament' ('Recollections', 1.53). 
Currie's opinions were valued by Sir Reginald Welby and other Treasury officials. As financial member of the Council of India from 1880 to 1895, he steadily gained in authority and expertise. He also testified to the gold and silver commission in 1887, was a delegate at the Brussels International Monetary Conference of 1892, where he was a ruthless, sarcastic opponent of bimetallism, and served on the Indian currency committee, in 1893, and on the Irish finance committee. As a monometallist he contributed to the 'National Review' in June 1895 and promoted the Gold Standard Defence Association in that year (he was chairman in 1895-6). 
Currie bought a suburban villa, Coombe Warren, near Kingston upon Thames in Surrey, which had been built in 1868 by the father of John Galsworthy and which was immortalized in 'The Forsyte Saga'. There and at Minley Manor on Bagshot Heath in Hampshire, which he inherited from his father, he indulged his 'mania for building and making gardens' ('Recollections', 1.58). In both counties he was a magistrate; he was also high sheriff of London in 1892, and high steward of Kingston upon Thames in 1893. He despised the mediocrity of his suburban neighbours: 'Nothing can be so utterly banal and uninspiring for the young as the associations of the modern suburban villa. Villadom has already given its name to a school of politicians distinguished for the absence of ideas, for the glorification of chauvinism, for faith in such patriots as that precious pair of knights, Sir Ashmead Bartlett and Sir Howard Vincent. ('Recollections', 1.37)' Such fastidious scorn explains the description of him by Constance Smith (mother of Vivian Smith, first Baron Bicester): 'extremely clever, intellectual and agreeable... an avowed and mocking Atheist, extremely satirical and cynical, and I have never dined there without hearing him pass bitter and ironical remarks upon people' (Kynaston, 1.295). Currie visited Brazil in 1849 and the USA in 1850, and travelled extensively in Europe, but latterly railed against the effects of mass tourism. 
In December 1895 Currie underwent an operation for cancer of the tongue; after cancer reappeared in his neck glands he was told in August 1896 by Henry Butlin that his case was hopeless. He retired immediately from business. Two months later he was received into the Roman Catholic church to the high gratification of his wife (who had converted in 1862). Although Hamilton believed Currie's conversion was chiefly intended 'to please his wife before his death' (BL, Add. MS 48670, fol. 89), the religious testimony which he wrote at this time has the hallmark of sincerity. He died on 29 December 1896, at 1 Richmond Terrace, Whitehall, London, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 39425


Lowe, Arthur (1915-1982), actor, was born on 22 September 1915 at Hayfield, Derbyshire, the only child of Arthur Lowe ('fl'. 1900-1950), railwayman, and his wife, Mary Ford ('fl'. 1900-1960). Between the wars the family lived in Manchester, where Mr Lowe worked as a bookings manager for excursion trains. After grammar school, where he was a promising boxer, young Arthur started work at sixteen pushing a barrow for a cotton mill. He had a spell with Fairey Aviation, then joined another local firm, Brown Brothers, selling motor parts. His skill at mimicking the foremen showed where his real talent lay, and the Second World War gave him the chance to exploit it. Fellow recruits had been amused at his characterization of a Nazi officer with the catchphrase 'Velcome to my vahr' and when Lowe was posted to a REME (Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers) depot in Egypt he formed a theatre group. After producing 'The Monkey's Paw' he joined a field entertainment unit and helped to run fortnightly repertory in Alexandria. 
Home again in 1945, Lowe decided on a stage career. His father, whose customers included touring theatre companies, persuaded the impresario Frank H. Fortescue to give him an audition, and he was soon in demand for character parts at the Hulme Hippodrome, Manchester. There he met a married actress, Joan Cooper (1923-1987?), later to be his wife and stage partner. She was instantly struck by his ability to claim an audience's attention in the most minor role. They spent 1947 with a company in Hereford, where Lowe appeared in forty-two plays; a lasting tendency not to know his lines properly was already evident. Joan Cooper divorced and on 10 January 1948, while playing in repertory around London's southern fringe, they married. A year later Lowe made the most of the part of a reporter in the film 'Kind Hearts and Coronets'. The notebook in which he recorded a lifetime's work lists nearly fifty plays in Bromley during 1950 and 1951. He escaped briefly for a first West End appearance in the Guy Bolton comedy 'Larger than Life', but in 1952 began an eighteen-month run as Senator Brockbank in the musical 'Call me Madam'. His talent for singing and dancing brought him parts in 'Pal Joey' and 'The Pajama Game' (1954 and 1955), but in a later career resume he maintained he first 'really came to notice' in 'A Dead Secret' by Rodney Ackland at the Piccadilly Theatre in 1957. Philip Hope-Wallace in the 'Manchester Guardian' noted 'the mean, respectable cousin (beautifully played by Arthur Lowe)' (Lowe, 58). By this time a son, Stephen, had been born, and, together with Joan's son David, the family lived in a succession of Knightsbridge flats. Acting then as his own agent, Lowe was never slow to remind producers of his availability, and worked regularly in films, broadcasting, and commercials. 'I took everything that was going,' he said. 'How can you say you're an actor if you're not acting?' (Morley). 
During the early 1960s Lowe reached a wider audience as the self-important Leonard Swindley in the television series 'Coronation Street', but was contracted for only half the year and made notable appearances in Lindsay Anderson's film 'This Sporting Life' (1963) and in the John Osborne play 'Inadmissible Evidence' at the Royal Court. Reviewing Henry Livings's play 'Stop it Whoever You Are', one critic wrote that Arthur Lowe seemed less like an actor than a Manchester alderman who had strayed by accident onto the stage of the Arts Theatre (Lowe, 64). It was one of many tributes to the naturalness of his performances. His portrayal of Mr Swindley, the draper fussily upholding the standards of forty years before, became so popular that in 1965 he left 'Coronation Street' to play the same part in a new series, 'Pardon the Expression'. The following year he earned high praise as the cuckold Sir Davy Dunce in 'The Soldier's Fortune' by Thomas Otway at the Royal Court. 'Mr Lowe can speak the most insignificant line with such a point that it gets a laugh... His pathos is all the deeper for being expressed in comic terms', said the 'Financial Times' (ibid., 91). In 1968 he played an ineffectual housemaster in Lindsay Anderson's film 'If...' but it was another part during the same year which transformed him from a well-regarded actor into an enduring national favourite. 
When Jimmy Perry suggested Arthur Lowe for the role of Captain Mainwaring in a television comedy series he had devised about the Home Guard, the BBC were doubtful. The response -- 'We don't know him, do we?' -- indicated a sniffy view of Lowe's starring roles for ITV (Lowe, 102). Perry persisted and he and his co-writer and producer David Croft invited Lowe to lunch. The meeting got off to a bad start, with Lowe expressing reservations about the sitcom genre, and unguardedly citing 'Hugh and I', which Croft had produced, as particularly dreadful. Croft let it pass and the three went on to establish a classic of British sitcom. There were eighty-three episodes of 'Dad's Army' between 1968 and 1977, and the repeats later became part of the staple of television, attracting large audiences long after most of the participants were dead. As Mainwaring, the bank manager-cum-Home Guard officer, Lowe defended his dignity against a world unwilling to acknowledge it, and led a memorable supporting cast through action and cross-talk of high inventiveness. His genius was to put his physical limitations -- short sight and stature, baldness, and 'embonpoint' -- at the service of his art -- timing and mastery of vocal and facial expression. The alchemy turned standard scriptwriter's fare into gold, so that when he declared (of a Lewis gun position), 'This'll cover the High Street from Timothy Whites to the Novelty Rock Emporium', he made millions laugh at the incongruity. Mainwaring's determination to excel was doomed to failure -- fate and the rest of the platoon saw to that. He was guaranteed to come off worse in his exchanges with the effortlessly superior Wilson (John Le Mesurier) -- his junior in the bank 'and' the Home Guard, but several rungs higher on the social ladder. 
Lowe's triumph was to make Mainwaring likeable despite the testiness and vainglory. That he was able to do so without always being confident of his lines only adds to the achievement. Many stories were told of his delaying tactics as he put off the moment for proper study of the script. Once when David Croft suggested he take a copy home he replied: 'I don't want a thing like that in my house' (Lowe, 106). Colleagues suspected the hesitations that became Mainwaring's stock-in-trade ('I say, Jo... Jo... Jo... Jones...') gave Lowe the chance to think of the next line. In one episode Mainwaring's social pretensions were threatened by a visit from his brother, a bibulous traveller in novelties. The two characters were poles apart, but Lowe played both with a virtuosity which made Perry rate him among the best comic actors of the century. Away from work he was a private man who shrank from the demands of celebrity, yet everything he did had the air of a performance. Choosing from a menu took on the solemnity of a board meeting, with earnest enquiries into whether the ham was off the bone, or the kippers still had their heads. There was something of Mainwaring in him, which he played up for effect, muttering 'That'll have to change' to one of the production staff when a junior member of the cast hailed him as 'Arthur' on the location bus. It was very much in the mould of his withering 'Stupid boy!', directed at Private Pike, which soon went into the language. 
In latter years the Lowes moved to Little Venice in London, and bought a boat, 'Amazon', which they moored at Teddington and occasionally took to France or the Isle of Wight. He remained hectically busy, with much-praised performances in films -- playing a boozy and rebellious butler in 'The Ruling Class' (1972), and three different parts in 'O Lucky Man!' (1973), which won him a British Film Academy award for best supporting actor. On stage he appeared as Ben Jonson in 'Bingo' with Sir John Gielgud, and took the 'Dad's Army Stage Show' into the West End and on tour. There were further television series, radio adaptations of 'Dad's Army', and many voice-overs for commercials. But behind the success, Lowe's last years were difficult. He began to suffer from narcolepsy and would fall asleep without warning, even on stage. Life was further complicated by his wife's alcoholism. Only the discipline of the theatre kept her sober, and when offered a play he would stipulate that she must appear with him. The scheme worked on tour, but West End managements doubted her competence and Lowe turned down a number of opportunities because there was no part for her. He found solace in entertaining old friends on the boat, and in food, of which he consumed large quantities. He was touring in R. C. Sheriff's play 'Home at Seven' when he died on 15 April 1982 in the General Hospital, Birmingham, having had a stroke in his dressing-room at the Alexandra Theatre, Birmingham. He was sixty-six, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 39427


Rossiter, Leonard (1926-1984), actor, was born on 21 October 1926 at 19 Cretan Road, Wavertree, Liverpool, the elder son of John Rossiter (died 1942), barber, illegal bookmaker, and wartime voluntary ambulance man, and his wife, Elizabeth Howell. Rossiter was educated at the collegiate grammar school in Liverpool, and was conscripted into the army education corps towards the end of the war. Although he displayed considerable abilities in various directions, Rossiter's horizons were severely limited as a result of his father's death in an air raid in Liverpool when he was sixteen. He had plans to study modern languages at university and ambitions to be a teacher, which were developed during his army service. He had a gift for sports, was a talented cricketer, not far away from professional standards, and later became an enthusiastic squash player. 
The need to support his mother shelved all ambitions and led Rossiter to work as a clerk in an insurance company for six years, sustained by amateur dramatics in the evenings. He finally turned professional at the age of twenty-seven in 'The Gay Dog' at Preston in 1954, and soon found steady employment in cameo appearances in television and films. His first big break came in 1963 as Fred Midway in David Turner's 'Semi-Detached' at the Belgrade Theatre, Coventry, and in New York -- the first of a profitable line of characters who were, indeed, semi-detached in a variety of ways from the world we live in, ranging from the desperate to the over-confident and crooked. This range of characters became Rossiter's stock-in-trade, almost as if a 'commedia dell'arte' stereotype had been turned loose in contemporary drama. His portrayal of Bertolt Brecht's Arturo Ui won him both Critics' and Variety Club awards. On 27 September 1958 he married the actress Josephine Ann Tewson ('b'. 1930/31), daughter of William Tewson, an engineer; but the marriage was soon dissolved. In 1962 Rossiter met his second wife, another actress, Gillian Mary Lorraine ('b'. 1926/7), daughter of Hilary Pilkington Kaufmann, a civil servant; she performed under the stage name Gillian Raine. They married on 27 March 1972 and had a daughter. 
There are some actors who appear to have invented acting from scratch. Rossiter was one such, making up for a lack of formal training by a dedication to working out the problems posed by performance in his own way, out of his physical make-up and athleticism. He always appeared to be a bundle of nerves, continually moving on spring heels, shadowing the moves and speech of the other actors. Even when still, he presented a bundle of kinetic energy ready to be released as movement when his next cue came up. In almost any other actor these trade marks would have made him unemployable, but Rossiter brought with them a ferocious concentration, an oversized reaction and gesture, and a transparent revelation of the negative side of the positive motivation his character was presenting to the world. He was above all a dialectical actor whose clowning took the audience back to the world of the silent films, a style of acting in which the wildest absurdities were played with the utmost seriousness. He was noted as a perfectionist who left nothing to chance. Contemporaries saw him as a unique, one-off actor, who put everything he had into a role. 'The suit acted, the shoes acted, the whole body was a force-field... He ionised the world he moved through' (Alan Coren, 'Kaleidoscope', Radio 4, 8 Oct 1984). 
What Leonard Rossiter will always be remembered for, in spite of all his other achievements, are his roles in the television situation comedies 'Rising Damp' (1974-8) and 'The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin' (BBC, 1976-80). In these he played two figures of our time, the two sides of one coin: one the squalid, would-be suave, landlord; the other a business executive, crushed by the incompetence and inanity of business culture and the monotony of extended family relationships. In 'Rising Damp' his attempts, as Rigsby, to impress his superiority in many ways on his university student lodgers were constantly doomed to failure by his inability to balance an argument between attack and defence. Constantly on the attack, his face (and mind) well ahead of his body, he was easy meat for the laid-back put-downs of Richard Beckinsale and Don Warrington; his efforts romantically to pursue Miss Jones were hampered by his inability to control the leer which preceded his every advance and undermined his expressed intentions. Reginald Perrin was a much more complex characterization, Mr Punch in a three-piece suit: a talented, spirited character, restrained and repressed by lesser talented, cliche-spouting superiors, sponged on by insensitive and boring relatives. He responds with unperceived ironic mutterings under his breath, silent caustic comments. At the very mention of his mother-in-law his subconscious throws up an image of a hippopotamus in his mind. Even the clothes he wears seem to imprison him and his one doomed attempt at freedom involves his throwing off his clothes on Brighton beach only to find the sea is cold. It is a mark of the endurance and quality of 'Rising Damp' and 'The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin' that both were revived, by the BBC and ITV, in 2000 and were given an extended run. A series of adverts for Cinzano, with Joan Collins, called for a further variation of Rossiter's misfits, a would-be bon viveur, whose attempts to impress Collins invariably ended in her being drenched with Cinzano. Through these, Rossiter became a national figure. 
An enthusiastic sportsman and physical exerciser, Leonard Rossiter succumbed most ironically to a heart attack, due to a congenital disease of the heart muscles, while playing Truscott, the corrupt policeman, in Joe Orton's 'Loot', on 5 October 1984, a part he was made to play and to which he added a rare distinction. He was declared dead at the Middlesex Hospital, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 39430


Wailes, Reginald (1901-1986), engineer, was born at Hadley Wood, Middlesex, on 6 March 1901, the elder son of Reginald Percy Wailes and his wife, Florence. Though baptized Reginald, he used Rex as his first name. He was educated at Oundle School where his enthusiasm for history won him the school prize in that subject. From school he proceeded to an apprenticeship with Robey & Co. of Lincoln as a precursor to his employment in the family firm of George Wailes & Co. in London. This firm had been founded by his grandfather and was employed in the manufacture of castings, machinery, and equipment. The nearby University College was a major customer, ordering items for research projects, and machinery, and several models were made for the Science Museum. 
Wailes joined George Wailes & Co. in 1924, became manager in 1940, and continued to manage the firm until 1960 when it was compulsorily closed for the widening of the Euston Road. The company had a good reputation for sound and careful workmanship, and during the Second World War was busy with wartime production. In 1930 he married Enid Berridge, a professional violinist; they had two daughters. He served as an associate member of the council of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers from 1934 until 1937, when he became a fellow. 
Wailes is best known for his authoritative work on windmills. When he was with Robey & Co. he received a request from K. J. Tarrant for information about Lincolnshire windmills, and because of his work on the subject was invited in 1925 to join the Newcomen Society for the Study of the History of Engineering and Technology. During his long membership of this society he presented forty-three papers of which all but three were devoted to windmills. Two of his books -- 'Windmills in England' (1948) and 'The English Windmill' (1954) -- are models of his careful study of the way in which windmills have come into being and have developed over the centuries. The Newcomen Society honoured him by making him its president from 1953 to 1955 and by electing him as an honorary member in 1977. As a committee member in the society's earlier years he was responsible for much of its sound development. 
In 1929 the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings was persuaded by the national press to add windmills to its working brief and Wailes was invited to assist as the honorary technical adviser on windmills. Two years later the windmill section came into being and since 1946 has been the wind and watermill section. Wailes was made president of the section in 1978 having served on its committee since its inception. 
When Wailes retired on the closure of the family firm he became consultant to the Industrial Monuments Survey, firstly under the Council for British Archaeology but, after 1969, under the aegis of the then Ministry of Public Building and Works. He was made OBE in the new year's honours list in 1974. He also contributed to international work on windmills. He attended the first symposium of the International Molinological Society in 1965 and presented papers to the first four symposia. He supervised the reconstruction of the windmill at colonial Williamsburg in Virginia and advised on the watermill at Sleepy Hollow on the Hudson River. 
Rex Wailes was admired for the care with which he encouraged others working in the same field, and in many instances helped to train them. His courtesy, humour, and love of music were strong elements in his relationship with all who knew him. He died at Davidge Cottage, Knotty Green, Beaconsfield, where he had lived throughout his married life, on 7 January 1986. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 39431


Innes, John (1829-1904), property developer, and philanthropist, was born on 20 January 1829 in Hampstead, Middlesex, and baptized on 23 February 1829 at All Souls, St Marylebone, the sixth of seven known children of John Innes (1786-1869), a West Indies merchant of Mincing Lane and Moorgate Street in the City of London, and his wife, Mary Reid (1792-1849). His father was the author of reports to the government on the West Indies and the abolition of slavery, and his mother was the daughter of Andrew Reid MP, of Lyonsdown, Barnet, Hertfordshire, the founder of Reid's Brewery. His paternal grandparents were from Huntly, Scotland. John Innes never married. 
After living in family homes in Kensington Square and then in Porchester Terrace in the parish of Paddington, Innes attended boarding-school in Brighton until the age of sixteen. He and his elder brother James, a London merchant (later of Roffey Park, Sussex), became wine importers of Mincing Lane, in the City. In 1864 they founded the City of London Real Property Company in Mark Lane; it subsequently became a subsidiary of Land Securities plc. In 1903 John followed James as director and chairman after the latter's death. 
From the mid-1860s the brothers acquired land in Merton and Morden, Surrey, including several farms. John Innes rebuilt the farmhouse of Manor Farm, Merton, as his home, Manor House. He visited his father and sister in Porchester Terrace frequently. While James Innes concentrated on the City company, John, in association with the architect H. G. Quartermain, was more concerned with developing what was to be Merton Park, an early garden suburb centred on the old village, around the church of St Mary the Virgin. Quartermain built houses there between the early 1870s and 1904 (these are described by B. Cherry and N. Pevsner in 'The Buildings of England, London 2, South'). The estate did not extend as far as planned during Innes's lifetime, but he achieved his aim of wide avenues of trees and holly hedges, houses for City men, cottages for farm and estate workers, a boys' club, a men's club, and a masonic hall. Lower Merton railway station was renamed Merton Park. 
About 1872 Innes became lord of the manor of Merton. He was a JP, a churchwarden, and an overseer and guardian. He represented Merton on Croydon rural district council, and he was a trustee of the Merton schools and a manager of Abbey Road School. He purchased Bay Tree, a house on Kingston Road, to establish a place of temperance, and he considered the welfare of his estate workers and their widows; he also provided land for allotments and accommodated sports and fetes in his gardens. He farmed pigs, sheep, and a dairy herd, in Merton, Morden, and Hedgerley, Berkshire. As chairman of the trustees of the Rutlish Charity, to finance the apprenticeship of poor children of Merton he was closely involved when Rutlish Science School opened in 1895 to the east of the railway; he became chairman of its management board. As Rutlish School it later came to include Innes's original grounds, incorporating the building that was once his house. 
John Innes died suddenly on 8 August 1904 at his home, Manor House, Merton, after a brief illness of uncertain cause. He was buried at Merton Park, Surrey, on 12 August at St Mary's Church, where four Burne-Jones windows, made in stained glass at Morris & Co. of Merton Abbey, were erected in his memory. An obituary on 13 August 1904 in the 'Wimbledon News' described him as 'somewhat stern in demeanour', but generous, 'his purse always open for the furtherance of any good object'; and 'an all-round patron of all the social work of the parish'. 
In his will Innes bequeathed his house and 5 acres of land for the establishment of a 'school of horticulture' with workshops, tools, scientific apparatus, libraries, and lecture and exhibition halls. The remainder of his estate was intended for a public park; later the John Innes Park came into being. The John Innes Horticultural Institution was founded in Merton Park in 1910, and was the earliest research institute for plant breeding and genetics in the UK. It later moved to Bayfordbury, Hertfordshire, where, in 1960, it became the John Innes Institute. In 1967 it transferred to Colney, near Norwich. It is now part of the John Innes Centre which is of international repute. The famous 'John Innes' compost was named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 39433


McNaughtan, Daniel (1802/3-1865), criminal lunatic, born in Scotland (probably in Glasgow), was a wood-turner and political radical in Glasgow prior to the events of 20 January 1843 which earned him a place in the legal history of the plea of insanity, as the eponymist of the McNaughtan (or McNaghten) rules. On that day he shot Edward Drummond, private secretary to Sir Robert Peel, mistaking him for the prime minister. Five days later Drummond died of complications from his pistol wound. The assassin was charged with murder in the first degree and tried on 3 and 4 March at the central criminal court in London, the Old Bailey. 
McNaughtan's defence rested upon the state of his mind at the time he committed the act, not upon the denial of the act itself. His counsel, Alexander Cockburn, proclaimed McNaughtan 'the victim of a fierce and fearful delusion' that caused him to believe the tories were his enemies. The prosecution argued that McNaughtan was merely insane on the subject of politics and, unless proven to be generally incapable of knowing 'right from wrong', was legally responsible for his crime. The defence responded by introducing the testimony of nine medical experts. When the prosecution chose not to counter this evidence the trial ended, and the jury found McNaughtan 'not guilty by reason of insanity'. 
The public -- including Queen Victoria, whose assailant in 1840, Edward Oxford, had been found insane -- were alarmed by McNaughtan's acquittal. They feared that madmen could now kill with impunity. Debate in the House of Lords established a precedent that continued to exert a powerful influence in Anglo-American law throughout the twentieth century: the 'right from wrong' rules were the sole test of criminal responsibility until 1957, when they were largely replaced by the Scottish concept of 'diminished responsibility'. In the United States the McNaughtan rules remained in effect in twenty-four states at the end of the twentieth century. 
Most scholarly interest in McNaughtan has limited itself to legal and psychiatric difficulties in applying the rules. Until recently McNaughtan was universally regarded as a criminal lunatic. New evidence has emerged, however, suggesting McNaughtan was a political activist who was financed to assassinate the prime minister. Banking records from the Glasgow and Ship Bank indicate that McNaughtan accumulated most of the $750 found on him at the time of the shooting during the two years prior to the assassination, which he spent travelling round Great Britain and France. There is strong evidence that McNaughtan was intensely involved in radical politics. In 1835, when Abram Duncan came to work as a wood-turner in McNaughtan's shop, Duncan was already a well-known Chartist leader. In the next five years, however, Duncan became the chief spokesman for the trade unions in Glasgow and the west of Scotland. In addition, McNaughtan's reading ticket from the mechanics' institution in Glasgow indicates the former actor and medical student was familiar with the symptoms of insanity, and that he may have been feigning insanity. 
On 13 March 1843 Daniel McNaughtan was sent to Bethlem Hospital, St George-in-the-Fields, London, to 'await the Crown's Pleasure' -- the equivalent of a life sentence. McNaughtan spent the next twenty-one years confined in a stone cell measuring 81/2 by 101/2 feet. When Broadmoor opened in 1864 McNaughtan was transferred to the new state criminal lunatic asylum at Crowthorne in Berkshire. By the age of fifty his health had deteriorated and he complained of 'palpitations of the heart'. On 3 May 1865 he 'gradually sank and died at 1:10 a.m.'. A forgotten man, Daniel McNaughtan was buried on the grounds of the asylum. 'The Times', which had devoted much attention to his crime, took no notice of his passing. 


@@@@@


doc= 39434


Hatton, Denys George Finch- (1887-1931), settler in Kenya and lover of Karen Blixen, was born on 24 April 1887 at 22 Prince of Wales Terrace, Kensington, London, the younger son of Henry Stormont Finch-Hatton, thirteenth earl of Winchilsea (1852-1927) and Annie Jane (died 1924), eldest daughter of Sir Henry John Codrington KCB (1808-1877), admiral of the fleet, and his first wife, Helen Jane Smith. His father's brother was Harold Heneage Finch-Hatton. With his parents, elder sister, and brother he lived in a dower house on the Haverholme estate, near Sleaford, Lincolnshire, when family finances permitted. At Eton College (1900-06) he gained a reputation for charm and easy success in sport and music, but he failed to gain the scholarship to Balliol which he expected, and went up instead to Brasenose, from where he graduated BA in 1910 with a fourth-class degree in modern history and a golf blue. 
In the same year Finch-Hatton sailed for British East Africa, reaching Nairobi in 1911. With uncertain finances and no experience of business or farming his aims were unclear, but he was immediately fascinated by the country and its people. He bought farmland at Sosiani (later Eldoret) and Naivasha and traded on a small scale, but his plans, such as they were, were disrupted by the First World War. He joined the East Africa Protectorate forces in 1914 as a temporary captain and saw action in the guerrilla war against General von Lettow-Vorbeck's troops with the force raised by his close friend Berkeley Cole known as Cole's Scouts. He served with distinction, being mentioned in dispatches and awarded the Military Cross. He was later ordered to Mesopotamia where in 1918 he joined the Royal Flying Corps and qualified as a pilot before returning to Kenya after the end of the war. 
In 1918 Finch-Hatton first met Karen Blixen (1885-1962), then the wife of Baron Bror von Blixen-Finecke and a struggling coffee farmer; later she became a famous writer under various names including Isak Dinesen. They quite openly became lovers before the Blixens formally separated: indeed at one point the two men used the same bedroom in the Blixen house between safaris. After her husband's departure Finch-Hatton moved his possessions into her house, which he regarded as his home. Suggestions that theirs was a companionate relationship, fostered by Blixen's great discretion in her writings, are refuted by Blixen's manuscripts, which show that she twice thought herself pregnant by Finch-Hatton (Thurman, 174, 208). To her disappointment, but not his, her expectations ended in miscarriage or the realization that she had been mistaken, and both died childless. Many of their circle expected them to marry after Blixen's divorce was finalized in 1925, but the marriage never took place. From about 1924 Finch-Hatton increasingly turned to leading safaris for a living. His talents for meticulous organization and hunting itself were widely admired, and in 1928 and 1930 he led the prince of Wales on highly successful safaris. His success as a guide enhanced his own reputation, but strained his relationship with Blixen as it prolonged his absences from her farm and cut her off from his life, particularly when, as with the prince of Wales's safaris, he worked with her former husband and his new wife, or when he led parties interested principally in photography. She shared his enthusiasm for hunting, but not photography. Their affair ended in a bitter quarrel in 1931 shortly before his death and her departure for Denmark. 
Though a friend of Lord Delamere (they shared a bungalow after the war) Finch-Hatton took little part in the debate surrounding east Africa's destiny as a white settler or an African colony. His own rather desultory efforts at farming suggest he was little moved by the notion of a settler colony. He was more concerned with the great expansion of hunting. He condemned the indiscriminate slaughter practised by many hunters (for example in an article in 'The Times' of 21 January 1928), but it was the excess, not the killing 'per se' which he disliked. He advocated shooting with the camera as a means of combining the excitement of hunting while conserving game stocks, though such photographic hunts still involved considerable slaughter. 
In 1930 Finch-Hatton took out from England a Gipsy Moth aircraft, partly for the sheer enjoyment, but also to locate animals for his safaris, a practice employed by Beryl Markham (1902-1986), the pioneer aviator with whom he was having an affair and who might have been carrying his child (Wheeler, 234). He and his passenger, his African servant, died when his aircraft crashed at Voi on 14 May 1931 shortly after taking off. He was buried later that month high in the Ngong hills, a place chosen earlier by him and Blixen as their graves. Finch-Hatton's brother later erected an obelisk on the spot. A stone bridge designed by Lutyens was erected in his memory by his school contemporaries at Eton. 
Finch-Hatton is best known through Karen Blixen's 'Out of Africa' (1st edn 1937) and 'Shadows on the Grass' (1960) and especially in the film version of the former (1985, script Kurt Luedtke, direction Sydney Pollack), in which Robert Redford played Finch-Hatton to Meryl Streep's Blixen. In her book Blixen portrays their relationship as one of equals: he shares her home and hospitality, and in return reveals the landscape to her on safari and from the air. They share equally in the triumphs of hunting and simultaneously appreciate the pleasures of European civilization and empathize with Africa and its people. He teaches her Latin and to read the 'Bible' and the Greek poets, and she describes how he knew great parts of the 'Old Testament' by heart and how he had the 'Bible' with him on all his journeys. He reveals to her pleasure in music and fine wine: she provides stories, and fine china, food, and glass. The film script and Errol Trzebinski's 'Silence will Speak', on which it is based, are less sympathetic. Finch-Hatton dictates the nature of their relationship, appearing when it suits him, but rejecting the more permanent ties she seeks after her estrangement from her husband. Blixen is a social climber whose jealousy ultimately drives away Finch-Hatton. Subsequent archival research has revealed how far her farm, to which she clung desperately, depended on his financial support. He was universally thought captivating, both physically (he was tall, slim, and handsome, though his blond hair fell out prematurely, leading him to adopt a characteristic blue bowler hat to hide his baldness) and in personality (his taste and cultivation set him apart from most of his contemporaries). Blixen describes him and his companion Berkeley Cole as outcasts: 'It was not a society that had thrown them out, and not any place in the world either, but time had done it, they did not belong to their century. No other nation than the English could have produced them, but they were examples of atavism, and theirs was an earlier England, a world which no longer existed. In the present epoch they had no home, but had got to wander here and there... He did cut a figure... but it did not quite fit in anywhere. (Blixen, 184, 186)' She captures the contradictions of a man who continues to arouse sympathetic curiosity, despite having left few marks. 


@@@@@


doc= 39435


Thistlethwayte, Laura Eliza Jane Seymour (1831?-1894), courtesan and lay preacher, was the daughter of Captain Robert H. Bell of Bellbrook, Glenavy, co. Antrim, and his second wife, Laura Jane Seymour, an illegitimate daughter of the third marquess of Hertford. She is believed to have been born at Glenavy, probably on 18 October 1831. After an unsupervised childhood, she left home at an early age to become a shop-girl and prostitute in Belfast, where she also appeared briefly and unsuccessfully on the stage. A move to Dublin about 1846 secured her finances to the extent that she was able to drive in Phoenix Park in her own carriage. It is difficult to establish the identities of her clientele, but she was reputed to have had an association with Dr William Wilde, the father of Oscar, and it is alleged that at this time she made the acquaintance of an unnamed official at Dublin Castle. 
About 1849 Laura Bell moved to London, where she worked as a shop-girl in Jay's General Mourning House in Regent Street, whence she was removed by the Nepalese envoy, Prince Jang Bahadur, who set her up in a house in Wilton Place. He was recalled shortly afterwards, having lavished large sums of money upon her. Continuing her life as a courtesan in London and Paris, she drew much attention and admiration for her golden hair, blue eyes, beautiful figure, and sparkling demeanour by riding and driving a smart equipage in Hyde Park. Several lovers were attributed to her in this period, including Arthur Thistlethwayte who died in the Crimea in 1854, the brother of her future husband. There is also evidence that she was a friend of Sir Edwin Landseer, and may have had some hand in the modelling of one of the lions on his monument to Nelson in Trafalgar Square. 
On 21 January 1852 Laura Bell retired from her profession and married (Augustus) Frederick Thistlethwayte (1830-1887), a rich army subaltern, the son of Thomas Thistlethwayte and his second wife, Tryphena Bathurst, daughter of Henry Bathurst, bishop of Norwich. They first lived at 100 Westbourne Terrace, and moved in 1856 to 15 Grosvenor Square. The marriage was not a success, and there were no children. She was a spendthrift, and ran up huge debts, for which her husband was obliged more than once to deny responsibility, even going to court to limit his liabilities. In an unlikely turn of events, Laura Thistlethwayte became a lay preacher. There is no evidence of a conversion experience, and little to explain her actions. She declared herself to be a Methodist, and was invited to preach in Plymouth Brethren chapels and in the Polytechnic in London. Her greatest triumphs were in the Dingwall area of Scotland, where she had rented property from Lady Ashburton, and where her beauty, her jewellery, and her preaching held audiences spellbound; but she fell foul of the Free Church ministers and was held at arm's length by society. 
In London, Laura Thistlethwayte held dinner parties for politicians and public figures, which gatherings her husband did not always attend, despite their almost exclusively male composition. In 1864 she began an extensive correspondence with William Ewart Gladstone, who was the executor of the late duke of Newcastle's will. Her connection with Newcastle may have dated from his period as chief secretary in Dublin in 1846; he had also been a guest at her dinner parties. The correspondence with Gladstone (printed in appendices in volumes 7 and 12 of the Gladstone 'Diaries') lasted until her death in 1894, and reveals, in its first seven years, an intense intimacy potentially dangerous for the politician who addressed her as his 'Dear Spirit'. Eventually Gladstone resolved to encourage her to mend her marriage, which had come close to complete breakdown, although he did not discontinue his visits to her house or end the correspondence. She persisted in making Gladstone gifts which she would not allow him to return, and which were to prove an embarrassment when she and her husband were sued for debts in 1878 and 1879. She became importunate in her demands for his attendance at social occasions when he was occupied with politics, and after this period the correspondence was continued on a more level tone. Their relationship was to be the subject of much salacious speculation, which was refuted by Gladstone's sons on evidence provided by him shortly before his death. 
Frederick Thistlethwayte died on 7 August 1887 from a self-inflicted shot wound: he had been accustomed to summoning his servants by firing his pistol. His widow retired to Woodbine Cottage, Fortune Green Lane, Hampstead, where she died on 30 May 1894. She left her estate, some $41,000, to Lord Edward Pelham-Clinton, the second son of the duke of Newcastle, with the condition that after his death the funds were to be used to provide 'a retreat for clergymen of all denominations, true believers and literary men' at Woodbine Cottage; the foundation never came into existence. She was buried in Paddington Green cemetery, beside her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 39436


Opdebeck, Lady Susan Harriet Catherine (1814-1889), figure of scandal, was born on 9 June 1814, the only daughter of Alexander Douglas-Hamilton, tenth duke of Hamilton (1767-1852), and his wife, Susan Euphemia (1786-1859), daughter of William Beckford of Fonthill. Her only brother, William Alexander Anthony Archibald Douglas-Hamilton, succeeded as eleventh duke. Her childhood was spent on the family estates in Scotland and in France, where her father sought (unsuccessfully) to claim the dukedom of Chatelherault. She was a much-indulged, attractive child, with chestnut hair and slightly protruding teeth, calling herself 'Toosey'. She soon learned to manipulate her close-knit family by resorting to illness to avoid the consequences of her actions. 
On 27 November 1832 she married Henry Pelham Fiennes Pelham-Clinton (1811-1864), then Lord Lincoln, the eldest son of the fourth duke of Newcastle. The marriage initially produced two sons -- Henry ('b'. 1834) and Edward ('b'. 1836) -- but rapidly began to break down, Lady Lincoln alleging that her husband forced sexual relations on her too soon after the births of her children. She began an affair with one of her brothers-in-law, or so her maid claimed in 1837. Lady Lincoln was removed by her indulgent parents to Paris where she became very ill, with what appears to have been the mixture of hysterical and physical ailments which were the pattern of her response to criticism. She was treated with homoeopathic cures, hypnosis, and laudanum, to which she became addicted. A reconciliation was effected, and the Lincolns travelled for some months in Germany and Italy. A daughter, also Susan, was born in 1839, and a son, Arthur, in 1840, but the marriage remained unstable. She had a series of affairs, during which she left her husband and children, but again returned to Lincoln and bore another son, Albert, in 1845. Society was divided in its response to Lady Lincoln, but Prince Albert stood sponsor for this last child, suggesting a surprising degree of ignorance or tolerance from the prudish court circle. 
In 1848 Lady Lincoln went alone to Baden, ostensibly to seek medical attention for her deteriorating health, but in fact to join her latest lover, Horatio, Lord Walpole (1813-1894), eldest son of the third earl of Orford, and a notorious rake. They travelled together to Italy, sometimes claiming to be cousins, sometimes brother and sister. Lincoln instituted discussions with his friends Sir Robert Peel, Henry Manning, and William Gladstone, as to how to persuade 'the errant Suzie' to return, despite the scandal now attached to her name. Gladstone agreed to go to Italy, armed with letters of forgiveness; his diary records in detail the 3000 mile journey which he completed in twenty-seven days. Finding that the lady who called herself Mrs Laurence (or Laurance or Laurentz) was heavily pregnant, and having satisfied himself that she was really Lady Lincoln, Gladstone returned home without her. The baby, registered as Horatio, son of Horatio Walpole Laurent and Harriet, was born on 2 August 1849 in Verona. Lincoln finally sued for a parliamentary divorce, the bill first being heard in the House of Lords in May 1850. Many witnesses to Lady Lincoln's behaviour were called, and the divorce was finally granted on 14 August 1850. 
Lady Lincoln, meanwhile, remained in Italy, and resumed the name Lady Susan Hamilton. Walpole soon deserted her, and she turned their son over to the care of Italian nuns. She employed a number of couriers on her various travels, and on 2 January 1860 she married the last of these, Jean Alexis Opdebeck, the son of a Belgian farmer. The marriage, which was apparently re-solemnized in 1862, was, according to Lady Susan, a happy one. By 1880 she was back in England, living at Burgess Hill, Sussex. Money had run short, despite her income from her parents' families (Opdebeck was rumoured to be a gambler); through Gladstone, one of the trustees of the Newcastle estates, her grandson, the seventh duke, was persuaded to make her an allowance of $400 a year. 
Lady Susan Opdebeck died at Burgess Hill on 28 November 1889; Jean Opdebeck, her husband of nearly thirty years, reported her death. She was buried at Burgess Hill. Her small estate was wiped out by her creditors. Of her five legitimate children, none but Lord Edward Pelham-Clinton either survived her or enjoyed a reputable career. He was eventually master of the queen's household. Her only daughter, Lady Susan (1839-1875), had a marital career as turbulent as that of her mother, marrying, against her father's wishes, Lord Adolphus Vane-Tempest (1825-1864), second son of the third marquess of Londonderry, who was insane and physically violent, and having an illegitimate child by Edward VII. 


@@@@@


doc= 39437


Hay, Josslyn Victor, twenty-second earl of Erroll (1901-1941), colonist in Kenya and philanderer, was born on 11 May 1901 at 17 Hertford Street, Mayfair, the elder son of Victor Alexander Sereld Hay (1876-1928), then styled Lord Kilmarnock, who succeeded as twenty-first earl of Erroll in 1927. His mother was (Mary) Lucy Victoria (1875-1957), only daughter of Sir Allan Mackenzie, second baronet. The hereditary office of lord high constable of Scotland had been conferred upon the Hays by Robert the Bruce in 1314 and was expressly reserved to them by the treaty of union. Its ancient prerogatives, including the command in the king's absence of all his armies in the field, had been reduced by the 1920s to bearing a silver baton in coronation processions. Successive earls of Erroll, however, remained the first subjects in Scotland after the blood royal with precedence before every other hereditary honour. The sale by the twentieth earl in 1916 of Slains Castle, with the family's last 4000 acres in Aberdeenshire, severed the Hays' territorial connection with Scotland; the old man moved to a small property at Ravenglass before settling in the terraced house near Paddington Station where he died. 
Josslyn Hay, as the most handsome boy at Eton College, was followed down the street by half 'Pop'; perhaps in consequence of this effect on the older boys he was sacked from the school after two years, in 1916. His father, Kilmarnock, was a diplomat of charm and ability (he learnt Japanese when posted to Tokyo) who acted as charge d'affaires at Berlin from the resumption of diplomatic relations with Germany until the arrival of the new ambassador, Viscount D'Abernon. On 12 January 1920 Josslyn Hay was appointed honorary attache at Berlin under his father, who afterwards became British high commissioner on the inter-allied Rhineland commission with the local rank of ambassador (1921-8). Hay, however, remained under D'Abernon in Berlin, until his resignation on 6 March 1922. He had at this time 'wonderful good looks', augmented by 'straight pale gold hair' and 'great sartorial elegance', but an 'impudent' manner and 'scornful way of looking at people -- an oblique blue glance under half-closed lids' (Fielding, 93). Though he passed the Foreign Office examinations, the plan that he should follow his father into diplomacy was ruined by his infatuation with an older married woman. Lady (Myra) Idina Sackville (1893-1955), elder daughter of the eighth Earl De La Warr and divorced wife of the Conservative politician Euan Wallace, was then married to Charles Gordon, whom she swiftly divorced. Hay married her at the earliest opportunity, on 22 September 1923, in Kensington. Their only child, a daughter, later inherited Erroll's Scottish titles. 
This 'mesalliance' mortified Hay's parents and raised a society scandal. In 1924 the Hays settled in Kenya, initially occupying a bungalow which they called Slains, after the lost family castle in Aberdeenshire. The new Slains lay on the slopes of the Aberdare Mountains, where white settlers were establishing high altitude farms. In 1925 the Hays moved to a thatched mansion, Clouds, in a valley beneath the Aberdares, which became notorious as Happy Valley. The Happy Valley set (which also congregated in the Muthaiga country club) were displaced patricians seeking to re-establish their hegemony in a malleable, rural society clean of the taint of modern industrial democracy. 'Life out there was', said Baroness Blixen, 'rather like eighteenth-century England: one might often be hard up for cash, but life was still rich in many ways, with the lovely landscape, dozens of horses and dogs, and a multitude of servants' ('Writers at Work', 10). Mentally undisciplined and physically restless, Erroll's set pursued a raffish life of adulteries, binge drinking, cocaine, card sharping, bilked tradesmen, spasmodic violence, and insanity. His debts accumulated as did his tally of adulteries. He was a sensualist with no sense of irony, whose conquests were an exercise of power over women and of humiliating dominance over their menfolk. 'To hell with husbands' was one of his favourite sayings. It amused him to borrow fivers from men he had recently cuckolded. His wife divorced him in 1929 because he was cheating her financially. With mercenary motives he swiftly married, at St Martin's register office, on 8 February 1930, another older woman, Edith Mildred Mary Agnes (1893-1939), daughter of Richard Watson Maude (1850-1921); her former husband, Cyril Ramsay-Hill, had cited Erroll in a turbulent divorce. Erroll encouraged his wife in the self-destructive combination of drink, morphine, and heroin. They lived in Oserian, a crenellated, white-washed, Moroccan-style house on the shores of Lake Naivasha. 
After his father's death at Koblenz Hay had inherited the earldom, together with the lord high constableship (1928), and rose to prominence among what his friend Ewart Grogan called Kenya's 'large, virile and articulate European population' (Grogan, 83). Erroll joined Sir Oswald Mosley's British Union of Fascists (1934-5), but though his political instincts were both violent and reactionary, his extremism receded. Accordingly he was elected president of the Convention of Associations, known as the Settlers' Parliament (1935), and to the legislative council as member for Kiambu (1939). Commissioned as a captain in the Kenya regiment (1939), he was an exacting and efficient deputy director of manpower and military secretary to east Africa command from 1940. Though he had coarsened, and weighed 15 stone, Erroll continued to attract women. On 30 November 1940 at the Muthaiga club he met the young, newly married wife of Sir Delves Broughton; they were soon lovers. Broughton played the part of a complaisant husband, but was goaded by spiteful anonymous letters. On 21 January 1941 both men consulted lawyers about the Broughtons' divorce. After an evening which they spent together at the Muthaiga club, Erroll was ambushed and shot under the left ear on 24 January 1941, on the Nairobi-Ngong Road, while motoring in his Buick. He was buried at Nairobi on 25 January. 


Broughton had married, on 8 July 1913, at the Guards' Chapel, Wellington Barracks, London, Vera Edyth (1894-1968), daughter of Boscawen Trevor Griffith-Boscawen of Trevalyn Hall, Trefalun, Denbighshire. They had one son and one daughter. Vera Broughton was a hard, pleasure-loving woman whose passion for big-game hunting first took them to Kenya in 1919-20. After affairs with the third earl of Wharncliffe and the first Baron Sherwood, she deserted Broughton in 1935 for Walter Guinness, first Baron Moyne. The aridity of Broughton's marriage increased his tendency to sourness, sulks, loneliness, and self-pity. From 1935 he pursued another cold, hard 'femme fatale' of implacable chic, Diana (1913-1987), divorced wife of a society musician, Vernon Motion, daughter of Seymour Caldwell, gambler, and sister of the marchioness of Willingdon. She ran the Blue Goose cocktail club in Bruton Mews, Mayfair, and was a fashionable aviator. Broughton's wife began divorce proceedings in 1939 in expectation of marrying Moyne. Following the dissolution of the marriage, Broughton married Diana Caldwell (5 November 1940) in a register office at Durban, South Africa. Three weeks later his wife met Erroll, who was murdered within three months. Broughton was arrested (10 March 1941) and stood trial from 26 May. The prosecution's ballistic evidence was weak, there was no eyewitness connecting him with the crime, and his witness-box performance was effective. Despite his acquittal on 1 July, evidence of a confession published forty years later confirmed the probability of his guilt. After a miserable interval Broughton returned to England (November 1942) to find that he was the object of police investigations into the insurance frauds. Having injected himself fourteen times with a morphine derivative, he died on 5 December 1942 in an ambulance speeding from the Adelphi Hotel to Northern Hospital, Liverpool, and was interred on 10 December at Broughton church, Eccleshall, Staffordshire. The Erroll murder was depicted in Michael White's film 'White Mischief' (1987). 


@@@@@


doc= 39439


Armstrong, Sir Walter (1849-1918), museum director and art historian, was born at Hawick, Roxburghshire, on 7 February 1849, the elder of the two sons and three daughters of Walter Armstrong, a merchant described as 'a man of handsome fortune' (Spielmann), and his wife, Mary Graham, and he was baptized on 18 May that year. He was educated at Harrow School and Exeter College, Oxford, where he is said to have 'worked not much' (Spielmann), obtaining only a pass degree. On 11 June 1873 he married Jane Emily Rose, daughter of Charles Cotton Ferrard of Ascot Place, Berkshire; they had five daughters and at least one son. 
Soon after Armstrong's marriage his father was financially ruined by the great fraud committed by Messrs Alexander and William Collie against the London and Westminster Bank and the young Armstrong faced difficulties. Fortunately he was just beginning to establish himself as a perceptive art critic and from 1880 began to work for various papers and journals including the 'Pall Mall Gazette', the 'St James's Gazette', the 'Manchester Guardian', and 'The Examiner'; J. Comyns Carr also employed him on the 'English Illustrated Magazine'. During the 1880s he also began to publish studies of recent British artists -- the sculptor Alfred Stevens (1818-1875) in 1881, and the painters Peter DeWint (1784-1849) in 1888 and Briton Riviere (1840-1920) in 1891. He also revised the second volume of Bryan's 'Dictionary of Painters and Engravers' (1889) and both translated and edited Georges Perrot's and Charles Chipiez's 'Histoire de l'art dans l'antiquite' (1885). His growing reputation as an expert in seventeenth-century Dutch painting and eighteenth-century British art meant that his advice was sought by collectors, including Samuel Joseph. 
Armstrong had a keen eye for a painting and a sure touch as a critic and by the time of his appointment as successor to Henry Edward Doyle as director of the National Gallery of Ireland, in 1892, his personal and professional standing among contemporary artists and art historians was assured. Armstrong's references for the position came from Lord Leighton, who predicted that Armstrong would act with 'zeal and solicitude' (Potterton, xxii), and Abraham Bredius, director of the Mauritshuis, The Hague, who wrote that Armstrong was 'one of the best among the very few real connoisseurs of the old Dutch School in England' (Potterton, xxii). He was in fact the first scholar-director of the gallery and held the post until 1914. During his time as director Armstrong initiated a number of important changes within the gallery. Modern museum practices were introduced with pictures systematically cleaned, framed, and glazed. He completely revised the gallery's catalogue, largely rewriting it to provide a much more detailed and comprehensive account of the gallery's holdings; in this undertaking he was doubtless aided by his 'excellent assistant' (Sutton, 74) the registrar, K. W. Strickland. His acquisitions policy was broad, adding to the gallery's collection of Irish and British paintings, as well as acquiring a number of significant works by Dutch and Italian masters; major acquisitions included Mantegna's 'Judith and Holofernes' (from the collection of John Malcolm of Poltalloch) and Goya's 'Conde de Tajo'. He also secured the collection of Edward Nugent, sixth earl of Milltown, by gift of his widow in 1897. The collection included works by Batoni, C.-J. Vernet, Lorenzo Lippi, Poussin's 'Holy Family with Ten Figures' (1649), and a number of caricature groups of grand tourists by Sir Joshua Reynolds, probably executed for the first earl or his son. However, disputes arose over the number of works to be acquired by the gallery; Armstrong originally selected seventy-two, but Lady Milltown insisted that a far larger number be accepted. In response to the gift the gallery was considerably extended; Armstrong, who played a role in the new design, described the completed building as 'the best Picture Gallery in the United Kingdom' (Potterton, xxv). Armstrong became a JP, and was elected an honorary member of the Royal Hibernian Academy in 1899, in which year he was also knighted. 
Armstrong is also remembered for his series of massive monographs, with accompanying catalogues, of some of the major British painters of the second half of the eighteenth century and the early nineteenth, 'Gainsborough' (1894), 'Reynolds' (1900), 'Raeburn' (with J. L. Caw and R. A. M. Stevenson; 1901), 'Turner' (1902), and, on a smaller scale, 'Lawrence' (1913). These handsome tomes, the earlier ones illustrated with photogravure plates and colour lithographs, are geared for use in a country-house library rather than for the student's limited bookshelf space. The catalogue entries have now been superseded, but Armstrong was a pioneer; without these volumes later scholars would have found their task much more difficult. His texts are always thoughtful and possess a literary quality. He also wrote on Velazquez for the 'Portfolio' series in 1896. He died of angina pectoris at his home, 63 Carlisle Mansions, Westminster, London, on 8 August 1918, his wife surviving him. As a footnote it is worth recording that his three sisters, Mrs Tennant Dunlop, Mrs Secker, and Mrs Ponsonby Blennerhassett, are the sitters in Sir John Everett Millais's celebrated group 'Hearts are Trumps', now in the Tate collection, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 39440


Ashcroft, Dame Edith Margaret Emily (1907-1991), actress, was born on 22 December 1907 in Croydon, Surrey, the second of two children of William Worsley Ashcroft (1878-1918), a land agent, and his wife, Violetta Maud, 'nee' Bernheim (1874-1926), a keen amateur actress of Danish and German-Jewish descent. Known from childhood as Peggy, Ashcroft was brought up in a comfortable, bookish, middle-class world destroyed by the First World War, in which her father (a major) died in action in 1918. But, in the course of her education at Woodford School, Croydon, she came under the inspirational spell of an elocution teacher, Gwen Lally, who furthered her childhood passion for Shakespeare: in Miss Lally's annual Shakespeare productions Ashcroft shared leading roles with Diana Wynyard, another future actress, even incorporating business she had read about in Henry Irving's performances or seen for herself in Charles Doran's touring productions. 
Fired by her love of Shakespeare and Shaw, English poetry and theatrical history, Ashcroft decided at sixteen, against fierce maternal and educational opposition, to go on the stage: the first sign of an obduracy that was to sustain her throughout her career. She enrolled at the Central School of Speech and Drama, which was based in the Albert Hall and run by a formidable female Napoleon, Elsie Fogerty. The emphasis was on vocal rather than dramatic training, against which both Ashcroft and a shock-haired fellow-student, Laurence Olivier, secretly chafed. What changed Ashcroft's life were two experiences that happened outside the school. In 1924 she read the first English translation of Stanislavsky's 'My Life in Art': its account of the ensemble idealism of the Moscow Art Theatre and of the actor's need for 'an artistic sensitivity to truth' opened her eyes to a new kind of theatre. In 1926 she went to a season of four Russian plays directed by the Russian emigre Theodore Komisarjevsky (1882-1954) at a suburban theatre in Barnes: this taught her that a theatrical text, in the hands of a master director, could become an orchestrated score in which acting, lighting, and design all played their part. From the age of nineteen Ashcroft longed to be part of a permanent company: that dream, rather than any hunger for individual stardom, became the driving force of her career. In the 1920s no such company existed in the haphazard, predominantly commercial, climate of British theatre. But she possessed an eager, darting impulsiveness and a clear, musical voice that quickly got her work. 
Ashcroft made her professional debut in 1926, while still a student, playing the fantasy-daughter to Ralph Richardson's childless, would-be artist in J. M. Barrie's 'Dear Brutus' at Birmingham Repertory Theatre. She returned to Birmingham a year later to play opposite Laurence Olivier in John Drinkwater's 'Bird in Hand': well as she got on with her contemporary, she never entirely believed his later assertion that only the sudden noise of a flushing lavatory prevented his proposing marriage to her over tea in Birmingham digs. Her first marriage, in fact, was to a tall, good-looking young actor with an Eton and Oxford background, Rupert Charles Hart-Davis (1907-1999), the only son of Richard Vaughan Hart-Davis and his wife, Sybil Mary, 'nee' Cooper, the elder sister of Alfred Duff Cooper, first Viscount Norwich. Ashcroft got to know Hart-Davis during a tour of 'She Stoops to Conquer' in 1929. They married on 23 December 1929. According to Hart-Davis, in later years, it was 'chiefly an intellectual and spiritual passion, tied up with poetry, music, drama, youth and spring' (Billington, 33). 
But, although the marriage had little physical basis and quickly foundered, it led to a lifelong friendship. Hart-Davis went on to an extremely successful career as a publisher and author. 
Whatever her marital disappointment, Ashcroft's reputation as an actress steadily grew: in an age of affected 'ingenues' with cut-glass voices she was conspicuous for her vocal naturalness and psychological truth. She was admired as the maidenly Naemi who plunges melodramatically to her death in Ashley Dukes's version of 'Jew Suss' and even more for her Desdemona opposite Paul Robeson's Othello at the Savoy in 1930: 'when Peggy came on in the Senate scene', wrote Gielgud, 'it was as if all the lights in the theatre had suddenly gone up' (Billington, 40). Gielgud was, in fact, to prove a crucial influence on Ashcroft's career. In 1932 he directed her in an Oxford University Dramatic Society production of 'Romeo and Juliet' that brought together a group of talents that were to have a decisive effect on British theatre. The production was designed by three young women, Elizabeth Montgomery, Margaret Harris, and Sophia Harris, who were to combine under the collective name of Motley; Edith Evans was the Nurse; and, among the undergraduate cast, George Devine played Mercutio, Hugh Hunt Friar Lawrence, and Terence Rattigan a masker who, each night, following Juliet's presumed death, got an inexplicable laugh on the line 'Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone'. Ashcroft, conveying the ardour of young love, responded warmly to Gielgud's direction. 
Ashcroft fell under the spell of another magus when she appeared in a Sunday-night production of 'Le cocu magnifique' for Komisarjevsky, whom she subsequently lived with and, on 1 December 1934, married: from him she learned the vital importance of discipline, perfectionism, and the idea that the actor, even during passages of emotional stress, must remain 'a thinking human being'. Just how difficult it was to put those ideals into practice she learned when she played ten leading roles in pell-mell succession at the Old Vic in 1932-3: only Gielgud's fairy-tale production of 'The Merchant of Venice', in which Ashcroft's Portia was praised for its sincerity and truth, rose above the general level of tumultuous tat. 
Ashcroft, an accomplished classical actress in search of a real company, now found herself appearing in a succession of continental disasters, though one of them revealed her instinctive hatred of injustice. In 1933 an anti-fascist claque vehemently demonstrated on the first night against the appearance of the famous German actor Werner Krauss in an adaptation of Hauptmann's 'Before Sunset'. Ashcroft, appearing in the same production, was sent before the curtain where she launched a passionate appeal for calm. It worked; but only on a later visit to Berlin, when Krauss offered her an introduction to Hitler, did she realize that he had collaborated with the Nazis in order to sustain his career. The episode demonstrated Ashcroft's reflex hatred of intolerance. But by 1935, already abandoned by Komisarjevsky and with her career still at the mercy of the freelance jungle, Ashcroft seemed as far as ever from her dream of a company. The turning point came with an approach from Gielgud to play Juliet at the New Theatre with himself and Olivier alternating as Romeo and Mercutio. It was to be a straight West End run, but Gielgud, in addition to Motley as designer, retained many of the actors -- including Harry Andrews, Alec Guinness, and George Devine -- with whom he had worked at the New in the previous two seasons. A classical company was being formed in a commercial context, and the result was a landmark production in which Ashcroft was praised for adding tragic depth to her earlier portrait of Juliet's eagerness and innocence. Many of the same family of actors stayed together for a production of 'The Seagull', directed by Komisarjevsky at the New: even though it was difficult for Ashcroft as Nina to be directed by her former husband she was praised for capturing the crucial, last-act transition whereby, in the words of Charles Morgan, she seemed 'changed by suffering but not obliterated by it so that what she was is visible through what she has become' (Billington, 83). 
After a brief excursion to New York, where she felt out of place in Manhattan's show-business village, Ashcroft returned to London in 1937 for a four-play Gielgud season at the Queen's, where she played the Queen in 'Richard II', Lady Teazle in 'The School for Scandal', Irina in 'Three Sisters', and Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice'. The directors were Gielgud himself, Tyrone Guthrie, and Michel Saint-Denis. The company, in addition to the Gielgud regulars, included Michael Redgrave, Anthony Quayle, Glen Byam Shaw, and Rachel Kempson. In effect the foundations were being laid for the post-war seasons at Stratford upon Avon, which in turn sowed the seeds for the Royal Shakespeare Company and the National Theatre. For Ashcroft herself it was like a spiritual homecoming, and even if an attempt to perpetuate the company ideal at the Phoenix Theatre under Saint-Denis fell foul of the Munich crisis, it still enabled Ashcroft to play her first Viola and to prove her passionate belief that nothing could be achieved in theatre without permanence. 
Inevitably any prospect of establishing a long-term company was demolished by the outbreak of the Second World War. For Ashcroft herself it was also a time of personal reassessment. During the phoney war in the spring of 1940 she was on tour in a play by Clemence Dane, 'Cousin Muriel', when she was visited in her Brighton dressing room by Jeremy Nicolas Hutchinson ('b'. 1915), a barrister and the only son of St John Hutchinson, a famous criminal lawyer, and his wife, Mary, a notable Bloomsbury hostess and only daughter of Sir Hugh Shakespear Barnes, civil servant in India. After a whirlwind wartime courtship Hutchinson and Ashcroft married on 14 September 1940 and, while Hutchinson was away on active service with Mountbatten's fleet in the Mediterranean, surviving the sinking of HMS 'Kelly', their daughter Eliza was born in June 1941. Acting, for Ashcroft, came second to motherhood in the war, though in 1943 she became a founder member of the Apollo Society, which combined poetry recitals and music, and she appeared spasmodically in the West End. In 1944 she joined Gielgud's third attempt to found a classical company, playing Ophelia, Titania, and the Duchess of Malfi at the Haymarket. It was only a modest success: many of the original pre-war 'family' were on active service, two of the productions by Nevill Coghill and George Rylands were ploddingly old fashioned, and the whole venture was upstaged by the exciting Olivier-Richardson Old Vic seasons at the New Theatre. When the Haymarket season ended in 1945 Ashcroft took a two-year break from acting both to help campaign for her husband, who stood as a Labour candidate in the general election, and to have a second child, Nicholas, in 1946. 
If Ashcroft's classical aspirations were stalled by war and motherhood, she returned to the stage with a visibly increased emotional depth. She astonished everyone with her graphic portrait of alcoholic disintegration in 'Edward, my Son', by Robert Morley and Noel Langley. She triumphed as the plain, unloved, cruelly maltreated Catherine Sloper in 'The Heiress', opposite Ralph Richardson. She also conquered her own self-doubt to score a success in Terence Rattigan's 'The Deep Blue Sea', as the highly sexed high-court judge's wife, Hester Collyer, who falls in love with a callow test pilot. She once confessed to John Osborne that she got bored because she found Hester 'such a silly bitch': Frith Banbury, the play's director, believes that Ashcroft initially drew back from the character because it required a degree of self-revelation. Whatever her private agonies, the result was, in Kenneth Tynan's phrase, 'a scorchingly realistic portrait of a woman in love beyond her lover's means' (Billington, 142). 
The 1950s was a decade in which Ashcroft constantly confounded expectations. She scaled the austere peaks of Greek tragedy in 'Electra'. As a Stratford Cleopatra she proved that she could encompass erotic fulfilment as well as sexual suffering. She was also a brilliantly flinty Hedda Gabler, embodying her own private note on the character, 'that Hedda must be like an iceberg with fire underneath' (Billington, 154). Even her occasional failures, such as her appearance in the dual roles of the good-hearted prostitute and her capitalist male cousin in 'The Good Woman of Setzuan', were the product of excess audacity: not many actresses would have made the move, as Ashcroft did in 1956, from playing Enid Bagnold's 'The Chalk Garden' at the Haymarket to Brecht's moral fable at the Royal Court. In fact her radical temperament and espousal of left-wing causes led the West End producer Binkie Beaumont to dub her the Red Dame on her acceptance of a DBE in 1956. If that remark betrays a faint peevishness, it was because Ashcroft was gradually withdrawing from the West End to the kind of company ideal she had long championed. 
Ashcroft not only allied herself with the Royal Court. Late in 1958 Peter Hall outlined to her his bold new plan for a 'Shakespeare Memorial Theatre' that would involve three-year contracts, a mixture of classical and contemporary work, and dual homes for a new company in Stratford upon Avon and London. She instantly agreed to become a part of it. As Hall said, 'The creation of the RSC owes a great deal to her presence. Not just because of the superlative work she did but because of her moral example.' That moral example was seen in her wholesale commitment to Hall's first Stratford season in 1960. She played Kate in 'The Taming of the Shrew', for which she was arguably too old; Paulina in 'The Winter's Tale', for which she was too young; and the title role in Webster's 'The Duchess of Malfi', which she had already played fifteen years before: needless to say, she scored a great success in each role. Her devotion to the company ideal was never more evident than in her commitment to 'The Wars of the Roses', the massive historical epic that Peter Hall and John Barton fashioned out of Shakespeare's 'Henry VI' trilogy and 'Richard III'. Just as the twelve-week rehearsal was about to start in 1963, Peter Hall, its prime director, collapsed. While his doctors prescribed six months' rest, Ashcroft along with Peter Brook urged him to get back to work: she also offered him unstinting support throughout the rehearsal process. At the same time she was fashioning her own monumental performance as Margaret of Anjou. It began with her as an auburn-haired French bride of startling girlishness; progressed in the middle section to the isolated foreign queen and maddened, blood-streaked, battle-hungry she-wolf; and ended with her as a sad, bedraggled figure, haunting the court she had once entered as a young bride. It was not merely her protean range that astonished -- it was the revelation of an untapped demonism lurking within Ashcroft herself and of an overwhelming imaginative power. Her performance finally laid to rest the accusation that she was simply an exquisite miniaturist: this was acting on the 'the Big Bow-Wow' scale. 
Ashcroft's greatest theatrical triumph coincided with a period of considerable turmoil in her own private life: in the early 1960s her marriage to Jeremy Hutchinson had begun to fall apart, leading to a divorce in 1966. But, for Ashcroft, work seemed to provide a salve to unhappiness and she embraced, with ever greater fervour, the work of the most adventurous living dramatists. She appeared in Marguerite Duras's 'Days in the Trees' and 'The Lovers of Viorne', in Edward Albee's 'A Delicate Balance' and 'All over', and in Harold Pinter's 'Landscape' and 'A Slight Ache'. She seemed to have an especial affinity with Pinter: as Beth in 'Landscape' she sat in a humble kitchen chair with a cardigan draped around her shoulders, remembering the past with erotic ecstasy but entirely estranged from the husband sitting opposite her. It was as if a door had come down between them. 'Not, I feel, an ordinary door,' said Pinter, 'but a great big clanking, iron door that she had pulled down between her and the rest of the world' (Billington, 222). 
Ashcroft's later years were characterized by many fine performances for both the Royal Shakespeare Company and the National Theatre: Winnie in Beckett's 'Happy Days', Ella Rentheim in Ibsen's 'John Gabriel Borkman', and, above all, a Countess in 'All's Well that Ends Well', blessed with an amused tolerance and wisdom born, one felt, of the actress's own life experience. But the most startling aspect of Ashcroft's final period was her delighted immersion in the world of film and television. She had acted spasmodically in film from the early 1930s, when she had appeared in 'The Wandering Jew' and in Hitchcock's 'The 39 Steps'. But her ability to distil her art for the camera became apparent in a superb series of performances in the 1980s. As Frau Messner in the BBC television film of Stephen Poliakoff's 'Caught on a Train' she captured, with the help of archive recordings of Lotte Lehmann, the precise tones of an imperious old Viennese party travelling through Europe with a prickly young publisher. Even more remarkable was her performance as the former missionary teacher Barbie Batchelor in Granada Television's fourteen-part version of Paul Scott's 'The Jewel in the Crown' -- a performance that caught the tragedy of an elderly eccentric constantly dislodged from one bolt-hole to another and finally subsiding from voluble decency into a fierce, dumb despair. Ashcroft's Indian summer was extended further by her performance as Mrs Moore in David Lean's film of 'A Passage to India': she took a character who, on the page, is a saintly blur and endowed her with a radiant good sense and spiritual glow for which she was justly rewarded with an Oscar for best supporting actress. 
Ashcroft went on acting to within two years of her death, which took place at the Royal Free Hospital, Hampstead, London, on 14 June 1991, following a stroke. She was survived by the son and daughter of her third marriage. A memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 30 November 1991, at which Harold Pinter and Sir Peter Hall gave addresses. She had received many honours, including the king's gold medal, Norway, 1955, and honorary degrees from five universities, the first being Oxford (1961). She was an honorary fellow of St Hugh's College, Oxford. Off-stage Ashcroft was a woman who had a profound impact on all who came into contact with her. She was passionate, loyal, downright, earthy, adamant in her espousal of liberal causes (she was an ardent supporter of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament), intensely curious in her attitude to the world, and fiercely reticent when it came to investigation of her private life. Making a film and writing a book about her in her later years, I was always stimulated by her willingness to discuss theatre, politics, books, cricket, and people, yet also aware of an aura of solitude, as if she lacked the consolation of permanent companionship. But, professionally, she was a great actress who combined emotional attack, imaginative sympathy, and tonal accuracy. She was, even more importantly, a born crusader who helped to change the British theatre by her visionary belief in companies and by her practical dedication to making them happen. She was born an Edwardian yet she embraced the modern. She was a star yet she was happiest within the extended family of a theatrical troupe. If acting, as David Hare claimed, is a judgement of character, then Ashcroft's whole career was a testament to her granite-like integrity. 


@@@@@


doc= 39442


Sellar, Walter Carruthers (1898-1951), schoolmaster and humorous writer, was born at Golspie, Sutherland, on 27 December 1898, the second son of Patrick Sellar, a farmer, and his wife, Janet Anne Carruthers (died 1914). He was a descendant of the Patrick Sellar notorious for his role in the highland clearances. In 1912 he won an entrance scholarship to Fettes College, Edinburgh. In 1914 he suffered a personal tragedy when his elder brother, Patrick, died at school, followed a few days later by their mother. The experience may well have induced the melancholy streak later noticed in Sellar but did not prevent his enjoying a successful career at Fettes, and he left as head boy in 1917. He then went into the army, commissioned as a second lieutenant in the King's Own Scottish Borderers, and served in France and Germany, suffering wounds that, though not severe, helped to undermine health that was never robust. On 29 April 1919 he matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, reading modern history, but due to illness took only an aegrotat degree in 1922. 
While at Oxford Sellar met the friend with whose name his own has become inseparably linked. 
In 1928 Sellar left Fettes and seems to have tried to make a career as a full-time writer, living in a cottage at Marlow. About the same time he married (Mary Dorothy) Hope Carruthers, an athlete who played hockey for England. They had two daughters, and it was probably the need for a secure income following his marriage that brought Sellar's literary experiment to an end, for in September 1929 he became a schoolmaster at Canford School, Dorset. He stayed there until he moved in July 1932 to Charterhouse School, Godalming, Surrey, where he remained for the rest of his life. There is no evidence on when his literary collaboration with Yeatman began but it was very likely during his year away from teaching, for on 10 September 1930 'Punch' began to publish extracts from their most famous book, '1066 and All That', the last of them appearing on the day before it was published. It was an instant success, although so little was known about its authors that rumour credited it to the much better-known A. P. Herbert. Three further joint ventures followed: 'And Now All This' (1932), 'Horse Nonsense' (1933), and 'Garden Rubbish' (1936), the first and last also receiving advance publication in 'Punch'. All sold well but without receiving the popular success of '1066', which in 1934 provided the basis for a musical comedy with book and lyrics by Reginald Arkell and music by Alfred Reynolds. 
At Charterhouse Sellar taught history at first but later became senior English master. In January 1939 he became housemaster of Daviesites and fulfilled his responsibilities with great conscientiousness, increasing the capacity of his house despite the outbreak of war. He was very popular with the boys, and not only because he mitigated the effects of rationing by buying extra food for them at his own expense. His health remained poor, however, and he died at St Thomas's Hospital, Hambledon, Surrey, on 11 June 1951. A road at Charterhouse was afterwards named after him. 
Meanwhile Yeatman had by 1937 married Eleanor May Simmonds, a gifted actress, with whom he had a son. He rejoined the army in 1940, serving as a captain in the Royal Artillery until in 1943 he was released to the Ministry of Information, where he worked until 1949. Afterwards he was employed as a copywriter, first by Haddons and then by S. L. Benson Ltd, from which he retired in 1962. He died in London, at 39/41 Royal Avenue, Chelsea, on 13 July 1968. 
Sellar and Yeatman were temperamentally very different. Sellar was somewhat reclusive and inward-looking, with a religious cast of mind that found expression in some of his (unpublished) poetry, although like many shy people he enjoyed acting. Yeatman by contrast was very sociable, with a wide range of friends that included Clark Gable, W. H. Auden, and Christopher Isherwood. Each had a strong sense of humour but its quality differed, as can be seen in the two books that were ostensibly written by both men but were each in fact essentially the work of only one of them. 'Horse Nonsense', almost entirely by Yeatman, contains much wittily satirical comment on the mores and cliches associated with horses and riders: 'The Best People are still horse-conscious -- neigh, animal-minded. In their eyes, persons who betray Blank Ignorance of The Horse, or, worse still, downright brutish Indifference to The Noble Animal, are definitely 'beyond the pail'.' 'Garden Rubbish', largely written by Sellar and gentler in tone, is notable for a series of exuberant puns ('Greta Garbo -- 'I want to be a lawn'') and for the addition of the 'Unpleasaunce' to the traditional stock of garden amenities: 'Every fair-sized garden has one... they differ only in the number and variety of Depressing Things they harbour.' 'And Now All This', a genuine collaboration, is presented as a guide to 'Absolutely General Knowledge', and perhaps for that reason lacks cohesion. It scores a number of bull's-eyes, for instance an account of an Indian official's day (recycled by Yeatman from a contribution to 'Punch' in 1926) -- 'after a hurried bath ('wallah') dresses himself ('collah') is down at a quarter to eight for breakfast ('swallah')' -- but is ultimately too diffuse to be wholly successful. 
No such charge could be laid against Sellar's and Yeatman's first and most famous effort. The unity of '1066 and All That' comes primarily from the idea that does most to give the book its unique quality: that history consists less of what actually happened than of what can be remembered, or more often misremembered, as having happened. But hardly less inspired than the idea itself is the way it is exploited. Simultaneously both a parody of a school textbook and a resume of an incompetent pupil's response to one, many of '1066''s garblings of names and facts serve simply to amuse, but many, too, constitute comments both shrewd and witty on the events described. Thus the definition of Poynings' law, of 1494, as an act 'by which the Irish could have a Parliament of their own, but the English were to pass all the Acts in it', is simultaneously an amusing conceit, the sort of misreading a careless schoolboy might plausibly perpetrate, and a pointed summary of the historical event. 
It may be surmised that the theme of history as memory came from Sellar, whose unpublished essay on nonsense suggests that he had a penchant for general ideas and whose experience as a schoolmaster would certainly have familiarized him with the sort of textbook whose particular qualities '1066' lampoons. In its terms of reference '1066' pays a paradoxical tribute to the education it makes fun of. The reader who hopes to spot every joke will have to know the whole history of England from Roman times to 1918 and to have read widely in English literature as well; it refers directly to nearly all Shakespeare's history plays and also to writings by Milton (through a typographical joke), Pope, Gray, Keats, Tennyson, and Newbolt. More generally it is a book of its time in sharing the inter-war trend, found for instance in the humorous writings of J. B. Morton ('Beachcomber'), towards a less reverential attitude to the national past and especially to the Victorian tendency to perceive that past in terms of a glorious and imperial destiny. 
The tone of '1066 and All That' is set by its preface, which acknowledges the authors' debt to 'the Great British People without whose self-sacrificing determination to become top Nation there would have been no (memorable) history', after which the reader is taken into a world of rigid moral judgements in which kings and ministers, all emphatically either good or bad, are regularly confounded by an unanswerable 'Irish Question', in which England is bound to become 'C of E', where patterns are established by waves -- whether of invaders, pretenders, or even beards -- and where all barons are wicked barons. In spite of the preface's tribute to the 'British' people the focus of the book is totally Anglocentric, ludicrously so: the Scots 'come right into History' in the thirteenth century, while Indian history begins only in the eighteenth, just before American history ends. 
The satirical quality of '1066' was most likely Yeatman's essential contribution; probably his were the sharp comments on events like Queen Victoria's wars, which are reliably reported to have made Donald Soper a pacifist: ''War against Zulus'. Cause: the Zulus. Zulus exterminated. Peace with Zulus'. But equally important to '1066''s success is an element of sheer fantasy, where history breaks almost entirely loose from its moorings, as in the account of Charles I and ship money: 'This so upset Charles that he went back to Westminster, and after cinquing several ports burst into the House of Commons and asked in a very royal way for some birds which he said were in there'. This and a continuously inspired misrepresentation of names, sometimes satirical (Viscount Slaughterhouse, Sir Robert Repeel), sometimes purely comic (Harold Harebrush, the Elector Pantomime), which culminates in an uproarious confusion of Lambert Simnel and Perkin Warbeck (Warmnel, Perbeck, Wimneck...), was probably largely Sellar's contribution. 
Their differences of personality notwithstanding, in '1066 and All That' Sellar and Yeatman achieved a perfect unity of theme and style. They were also fortunate in their illustrator. The drawings of John Patrick Reynolds (1909-1935) are as sharp and economical as the accompanying text, and no one who has seen his pictures of King John losing his clothes in the wash or Morton applying his fork is ever likely to forget them. Moreover by representing the jokes rather than the incidents from which they derive the illustrations have helped '1066' to transcend its time. The title defers to Robert Graves's autobiography, 'Goodbye to All That' (1929), but with none of the latter's resentment. Indeed despite its sharp-eyed mockery and its wholesale slaughter of sacred cows the spirit that it conveys is overwhelmingly one of comic exuberance, which in turn has done much to justify its authors' claim to memorability. Sellar and Yeatman have contributed many phrases to the common stock, their comparison of the Cavaliers ('Wrong but Wromantic') with the Roundheads ('Right but Repulsive') being only the most famous. At the opening of the twenty-first century opinion remains consistent that the authors and their book constitute a thoroughly Good Thing. 


@@@@@


doc= 39443


Slater, Gilbert (1864-1938), economist and social reformer, was born at 1 Braidwood Terrace, Plymouth, on 27 August 1864, the son of Daniel Slater MA, a schoolmaster, and his wife, Ellen Augusta, 'nee' Trevor. He was admitted at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1882 and graduated BA in 1885 as twentieth senior optime in the mathematical tripos. For much of the next twenty years he was engaged in political and social activity. He was an early member of the Fabian Society, joining it at Plymouth in 1888, and after the dock strike in the following year helped to organize unskilled workers in Plymouth. He became a committee member of the Gasworkers' Union and stood as an independent labour candidate for the school board. After a spell of schoolteaching in Plymouth he moved in 1893 to London, where he was associated with both Balliol House and Toynbee Hall. He began a long association with adult education by lecturing to university extension students. When he married, on 15 April 1897, Violet Oakeshott of Croydon, the third daughter of the late Joseph Oakeshott, a postmaster of Sunderland, his occupation was given as 'General Teacher'. They had three children, including Eliot Trevor Oakeshott Slater. 
A year before his marriage Woolwich in south London had become the centre of Slater's activities. He had joined the settlement work of Charles H. Grinling. But he soon branched out into a range of political and social activities in the newly formed borough. From 1899 to 1902 he edited 'Comradeship', the journal of the Royal Arsenal Co-operative Society, became a borough councillor (1903-6), and was Woolwich's first Labour mayor in 1906-7. He was chairman, vice-chairman, or secretary of many local committees connected with unemployment, the anti-sweating campaign, and the Labour Representation League. In the mean time he was also a research student at the London School of Economics, obtaining the Hutchison Silver medal in 1901, and was awarded a DSc (Econ) in 1905 for his dissertation, published as 'The English Peasantry and the Common Fields' (1907). 
Slater's social and political activism and his academic background were significant factors in his becoming principal of Ruskin College in 1909. The college had been in turmoil following the dismissal in 1909 of the previous principal, a student strike, and the creation of a separate Central Labour College in intentional opposition to Ruskin College. On his appointment, initially to teach sociology, Ruskin's publicity material gave an outline of his career, emphasizing his work in both the labour movement and education. No member of the small teaching staff up to then had anything like that experience. He was endorsed by the leading lights of the labour movement -- George Lansbury, Keir Hardie, Sidney Webb, Will Crooks, Pete Curran, and J. A. Hobson. In 1912 he became a member of Lloyd George's land enquiry committee, and in 1913 he published 'The Making of Modern England'. 
A major feature of the conflict at Ruskin in 1909 was its constitution. The striking students and their allies demanded that working-class education should be under the control of working-class organizations. Ruskin's governing council included Oxford University dons as well as others from outside the labour movement. Slater made his mark rapidly by recommending a change in the college's structure: in future only representatives of working-class organizations could be represented on the governing council. In February 1910 the provisional committee of the Central Labour College immediately seized upon the significance of the change. It noted that the new Ruskin constitution was precisely the answer to the demands of the striking students and the new college. The committee therefore invited Ruskin and the Central Labour College to meet to consider uniting. Other differences between them proved impossible to resolve, and the two colleges went their own, mutually hostile ways. 
Under Slater's principalship Ruskin College settled down and flourished. Student numbers expanded and there were more international contacts. But the First World War intervened. The college closed and there was no salary for him. He taught at Toynbee Hall, on one occasion so absorbed that he failed to notice a Zeppelin air raid, nor the departure during it of some members of his class. In 1915 he accepted the newly created chair of Indian economics at Madras University, and held that post until 1921. He participated in the proceedings of the imperial board of agriculture, notably on the sub-committee on the Indian famine of 1918. As professor, he inspired his students 'to go beyond their classes and text-books and study the human material ready to their hands' ('The Times', 10 March 1938, 16). His questionnaire was used for these surveys, the results of which were published under his editorship as 'Some South Indian Villages' (1917). He stayed one more year in Madras as the publicity officer for the state and as a member of the Madras legislative council. He produced leaflets explaining government policy to counter the opinions of the Congress Party. 
Although he left India in 1923, Slater maintained his interest in the subcontinent, and later published 'Southern India: its Political and Economic Problems' (1936). In later life he spent his time lecturing and writing on a variety of subjects, including 'Seven Shakespeares' (1931). His book 'Poverty and the State' (1930) was based on lectures for a course arranged by the Church of England Temperance Society in association with the University of London and for Police Court Missionaries. He lectured at the London School of Economics and to Indian Civil Service students at Oxford, where he died at his home, 4 Park Crescent, on 8 March 1938. He was survived by his wife. 
G. D. H. Cole described Slater as 'a keen internationalist, and a firm believer in human brotherhood and equality. A man of very simple, even ascetic tastes, and great moral courage' ('The Times', 11 March 1938, 16). In the Preface to the posthumously published second edition of his 'The Growth of Modern England' (1939; first published 1932), Vera Anstey, 'a friend and pupil', quoted his description of himself as an 'unrepentant Liberal' and an 'active pacifist' (Anstey, vi-vii). She noted that as well as his activity in numerous social movements in England and India 'his writings were characterised by wide social sympathies and interests, which forbade the treatment of economic, or political, or ethical developments as independent specialisms, and necessitated the study of mankind 'in the round'' (ibid., x). 


@@@@@


doc= 39445


Acton, William John (1812/13-1875), surgeon specializing in genito-urinary disorders, was baptized at Shillingstone, Dorset, on 12 May 1814, the second son of Edward Acton (1785/6-1875), curate of the parish, and his wife, Elizabeth ('c'.1788-1817). He had two brothers, John (who also went into the church) and Henry, and at least one sister. Acton's early education is not known, but in 1830 he was under the care of Dr Mant, and in 1831 he became an articled pupil of Charles Wheeler, apothecary to St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. In 1836 Acton went to Paris, the European centre for this subject, to study venereology as an 'externe' at the female venereal hospital under the famous American-born venereologist, Philippe Ricord, whom Acton was always to revere. In 1839 Acton became secretary of the Parisian medical society, but in 1840 he returned to London. He obtained membership of the College of Surgeons in the same year and set up as a consulting surgeon at 5 George Street, Hanover Square, London, publishing the first edition of 'A Practical Treatise on Diseases of the Urinary and Generative Organs' in 1841. In 1842 he was elected to fellowship of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society. He moved to 46 Queen Anne Street, London, in 1843. At about that time he was appointed surgeon to the Islington Dispensary. Throughout the 1840s he contributed to the medical press and introduced a number of innovations in the treatment of venereal diseases. 
By 1851 Acton was a successful consulting surgeon, residing at 46 Queen Anne Street with Robert Tubbs, a 47-year-old widower, magistrate for the cities of London and Westminster. On 6 March 1852 he married Sarah Jane Tabberer ('b'. 1821/2, died 21 March 1875), daughter of Alexander Tabberer, a merchant, and moved to 17 Queen Anne Street. They had at least four children: William John (1853), Emma (1854), Gertrude Jane (1857), and Arthur Henry (1861). Acton's practice was apparently exclusively confined to the disorders of the urinary and generative organs. Although this area was often associated with unscrupulous and commercially minded quacks, Acton's reputation among his fellows was high. Sir James Paget, in a generous obituary tribute to the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, claimed that Acton was 'careful and safe in practice, and had much technical skill' (Paget, 76). Paget attributed Acton's failure to inquire into outstanding questions of the pathology of syphilis to his devotion to the teachings of Ricord. Above all, Paget concluded, 'let it be remembered to his honour, that he practised honourably in the most dangerous of specialities; that he wrote decently on subjects not usually decent; and that he never used the opportunities which his practice offered for quackery or extortion... [He] was always clearly on the side of morality. (ibid.)' Acton was not concerned only with technical aspects of the treatment of venereal diseases but with the wider social issues with which these diseases were intricately connected. During the 1850s he became increasingly involved in writing about and taking action on these wider questions. Besides publishing articles and letters to the press on venereal diseases in the army and navy, prostitution, and illegitimacy, he was active in the Society for the Suppression of Vice, and in prosecuting quacks under the 'Medical Act' 1858. During the 1860s he was a great supporter of the regulation of prostitution through the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' and an advocate for their extension from garrison and port towns to the general populace. 
In 1857 Acton published the two works for which he is best remembered: 'The functions and disorders of the reproductive orders in youth, in adult age, and in advanced life: considered in their physiological, social, and psychological relations' and 'Prostitution, considered in its moral, social, and sanitary aspects, in London and other large cities: with proposals for the mitigation and prevention of its attendant evils', both of which went into several editions. The latter book expanded his 1851 pamphlet on 'Prostitution in Relation to Public Health', previously a chapter in his 'Practical Treatise' (1841). In 'Prostitution' he addressed social problems and made recommendations for dealing with them, while 'Functions and Disorders' addressed problems of the individual. There is a certain disjunction between the message of 'Prostitution' -- that prostitution was ineradicable and regulatory measures were required to obviate its worst social effects -- and that of 'Functions and Disorders', which advocated, presumably with some expectation of the prescription being followed, a stringent degree of male continence both before and within marriage. Although this work contains Acton's most quoted statement, that 'the majority of women... are not very much troubled with sexual feeling of any kind' and submitted to their husbands principally from the desire for maternity (4th edn, 1865, 112-13), it is addressed to, and almost exclusively about, the male. His views on prostitution are, several writers have commented, unusually realistic and humane for the period. 
About 1862 Acton purchased Fern Acres, a country property in the parish of Fulmer, Buckinghamshire, where he subsequently spent much of his time in the enjoyment of farming and other country pursuits, while retaining his flourishing London practice. In 1875 he was subjected to the double blow of his father's death and his wife's dying from breast cancer. Acton was discovered dead in his bathroom at 17 Harley Street on 7 December, the cause being fatty degeneration of the heart. The officiousness of the coroner for central Middlesex in ordering an inquest was rebuked by the 'British Medical Journal', which pointed out that Acton had recently been examined by eminent physicians and that his death was quite consistent with their diagnoses. 


@@@@@


doc= 39446


Charles Robert Drysdale (1828/9-1907), freethinker and birth control activist, attended Edinburgh Academy from 1836 to 1842, but he was eclipsed at school by his elder brother, and began to shine only after George left. He began to read mathematics at Edinburgh University in 1843, but was probably with his brother in Vienna in May 1844. The shock of his idolized brother's supposed death made Charles a mediocre student until George's return. Charles read mathematics at Trinity College, Cambridge (1846-7), then joined the family in Dublin and registered at the school of engineering (16 January 1848). As a pupil of his cousin, George Willoughby Hemans, he surveyed railways in Ireland and on the continent. His paper 'On steep gradients' (8 April 1856) won the Telford medal (1856), yet he registered in medicine at University College, London (1855), obtaining a first-class MD at St Andrews (1859). He had seen poverty in Ireland, studied 'The Elements', and abandoned his career to become George's disciple and mouthpiece. George remained unknown: Charles, as a Malthusian propagandist, accepted scurrilous abuse as the supposed author of 'The Elements'. Both poured their considerable fortunes into the cause. Charles claimed in his 'Memoir', appended to the posthumous thirty-fifth edition of 1905, that George retained his anonymity to protect his mother; the sensitivity of the material makes it as likely that he was protecting his privacy. Their choice of a profession meant secrecy if they were to implement George's conclusions. Charles and Dr Alice Vickery (1844-1929) began their relationship when she was his student at the Ladies' Medical College in the 1870s; they never married and kept secret two children, one of whom was Charles Vickery Drysdale (1874-1961). Charles put his property in their joint names; when Alice died it was worth about $30,000. Both brothers guarded their domesticity at addresses which never reached the 'Medical Directory'. George refused requests (made through Truelove) to debate his ideas. Charles and Alice, needing to work in their profession and maintain a platform presence as Malthusian propagandists, trumpeted George's theories while chafing at a secrecy which humiliatingly compromised their own integrity. 


@@@@@


doc= 39447


Drysdale, George (1824-1904), freethinker and advocate of contraception, was born at 8 Royal Circus, Edinburgh, on 27 December 1824, the fourth son of the city treasurer and tory leader on Edinburgh council, Sir William Drysdale (1781-1843), who was concerned with sanitary reform and was a correspondent of Edwin Chadwick. The five children of Sir William's two deceased wives lived at their Royal Circus house with Margaret Mary (1823-1891), George, and Charles Robert, the children of his third wife, Elizabeth Copeland, 'nee' Pew (1787-1887), a widow with one other son. Lady Drysdale was known for her interest in literary and scientific people, and in Edinburgh George and Charles Drysdale met Charles Dickens, Francis Jeffrey (editor of the 'Edinburgh Review'), and the secular educationist and phrenologist George Combe. When Margaret Mary and her husband, Dr Edward Wickstead Lane (1822-1891), moved in 1854 to their well-known hydro at Moor Park, Surrey, Lady Drysdale helped to manage it. The Malthusians Combe, James Stuart Laurie, and Alexander Bain, were, like George and Charles, frequent visitors, as was Charles Darwin. 
George and Charles Drysdale were educated at Edinburgh Academy, George from 1835. George was particularly brilliant, dux of the school in 1841. About 1839, increasingly overwhelmed by his adolescent sexuality, George's reading convinced him that masturbation was bringing him to mental and physical breakdown. He entered Glasgow University in 1841-2 yet despite excellent results abandoned classics in 1843 and spent two years at home too depressed even to read. He went on a walking tour in May 1844, and was reported drowned in the Danube at Vienna ('The Scotsman', 17 Sept 1844). To his family's incredulous joy he returned in March 1846, having walked from Hungary, where for two years he had been slowly recovering. Lady Drysdale escaped Edinburgh gossip by going with George to Dublin, where in 1847-9 he was well enough to study medicine at Trinity College; he then finished his undistinguished MD in Edinburgh (1855) and interrupted his studies for two years to write 'Physical, Sexual, and Natural Religion' (1855), known after 1857 as 'The Elements of Social Science'. It was accepted by the free thought publisher Edward Truelove. 
Drysdale hid his personal motives for writing 'Physical, Sexual, and Natural Religion' behind a confessional case history which paralleled his own story: early brilliance, adolescent sexual problems, a walking tour and staged drowning, and a return home to attempt life anew after two years of self-imposed exile. The patient recovered only after he had engaged in sex on the advice of Dr Francois Lallemand, whose theories about the necessity of intercourse ('Des pertes seminales involuntaires', 3 vols., 1836-42) Drysdale transmuted in his book into his law of exercise -- it was everyone's duty to engage in joyous sexual activity to preserve physical health and mental balance. 
Drysdale was fired by Thomas Malthus's analysis of the balance between population and food with war, poverty, starvation, disease, and death as the regulators of over-population; he totally rejected Malthus's solution of sexual abstinence, choosing instead contraception. Without it single women withered as involuntary nuns; thoughtful men abstained from premarital sex and married late to avoid births; the irresponsible brought about over-population, poverty, prostitution, and venereal disease. Prostitutes deserved compassion, even respect, as martyrs to male sexuality. Drysdale believed that the churches had denatured women by prescribing a crippling model of excessive modesty and sexual shame. They had taken from women their female healers, and turned medicine over to the religious orders, whose successors were male. Women could not confide gynaecological problems to men; contemporary physicians were ill-informed, prudish, often incapable of examining them properly, and failed to give patients sexual or contraceptive information. 'The Elements' described in plain language male and female sexual anatomy, physiology, and reproduction, the mental and physical results of abstinence, and all the known methods of contraception. Drysdale advocated women doctors, though his profession refused to countenance them. Despite a rather restricted middle-class outlook, he was a feminist when the women's movement had hardly started. Unusual in equating women's sexual nature with men's, he believed contraception would free both sexes to live naturally. He looked forward to a smaller population, where women, whose minds were as good as men's, would have an education as thorough as theirs, be their equally matched companions, and compete with them in all professions and trades. For years Drysdale lived with Letitia Gallafent, 'nee' Radley ('bap'. 1825), who was probably his partner. 
Drysdale was led by his logic to revolutionary conclusions. Since contraception would permit early marriage, youthful errors would require new divorce legislation. With divorce effectively on demand, marriage would become meaningless. He found himself advocating permissive but publicly avowed relationships, a change of partners when relationships failed, and contracts to protect the children. His sexual permissiveness brought 'The Elements' notoriety as 'the 'Bible' of the brothel'. 'The Elements' sold 90,000 copies and was translated into eleven languages, including Hungarian. The cost of new stereotype plates made revision impossible. In 1878 and after Drysdale added appendices, including 'The State Remedy for Poverty', where he proposed fines for those who did not limit their families. He elaborated his views in his 'Political Economist and Journal of Social Science' (1856-7) and 'Population Fallacies' (1860). As 'G.R.' (George Rex, his school nickname) he wrote articles for Charles Bradlaugh's 'National Reformer' during the 1860s. Later expanded as pamphlets, they discussed J. S. Mill, Irish home rule, and European federation. Bradlaugh (accused by his enemies of having written 'The Elements') did not know his contributor's identity; they communicated through Truelove. Known only as Charles's reclusive brother, George was never suspected of writing anything, though he did little else. George Drysdale, who died at 75 Palace Road, Penge, London on 19 November 1904, had begged Charles to fight on for 'The State Remedy' and left him nearly $18,000. He was buried in unconsecrated ground, without a memorial, at West Norwood, London. 


It was Charles who worked among the poor and in a Lock Hospital, specialized in women's diseases and syphilis, lectured on the need for female doctors, and instructed his patients and students on 'preventive intercourse'. When the brothers realized that the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' (1864 and 1866) did not protect but rather penalized prostitutes, George changed a paragraph in 'The State Remedy', but Charles publicly joined those campaigning against the extension of the act. In 1877 'G.R.' wrote medical notes to Charles Knowlton's contraceptive manual, 'The Fruits of Philosophy', but after the trial of Bradlaugh and Annie Besant for publishing it, it was Charles who became president of their newly formed Malthusian League and editor of 'The Malthusian'. After 1895 they all lived at 28 Carson Road, West Dulwich. At the Malthusian League's annual general meeting in 1907 Charles refused congratulations for his supposed success in lowering the birth-rate, attributing it all to George. A founder member in 1907 (with his son C. V. Drysdale) of the Men's League for Women's Suffrage, there was no time for him to contribute in any way. He edited his last 'Malthusian' in November 1907, and died a fortnight later, on 2 December at Carson Road. Inscribed on his tomb in Brookwood cemetery is George's authorship of 'The Elements'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39448


Vickery, Alice (1844-1929), physician and campaigner for women's rights, was baptized on 13 October 1844, the fifth child and second daughter of John Vickery (died in or before 1871), of West Moor Farm, Swimbridge, Devon, and his wife, Frances Mary, 'nee' Leah (died 1891). By 1851 the family had moved to Peckham, in London, where John Vickery followed the trade of piano maker and organ builder, leaving Alice Vickery behind at a local school. 
By 1861 Alice Vickery had joined her family and was employed as a pupil teacher, probably at the secularist William Ellis endowed school in nearby Peckham Fields, Camberwell. In 1869 she began her quest for medical education at the Ladies' Medical College, a controversial establishment providing superior midwifery training for women. Here she met Charles Robert Drysdale (1828/9-1907) ['see under 'Drysdale, George], who became her companion and co-worker; both objected to the institution of marriage and they were never married. Alice Vickery gained her midwifery certificate in 1873, then registered with the British Pharmaceutical Society, which admitted women to courses and examinations, though not to membership. She is said to have been the first woman to pass the examination, probably after working as a dispenser, enabling her to describe herself as 'chemist and druggist'. 
Since no British medical schools admitted women, Vickery went to France in 1873 to study medicine at the University of Paris. Her first son, Charles Vickery Drysdale, was born in Paris in 1874. Although Vickery became proficient in French and published several translations over the years, she did not take her degree in Paris. The London Medical School for Women (LMSW) was inaugurated in 1874 and Vickery registered immediately, although she did not enter at that time. In 1877 her existing qualifications were refused recognition by the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland, the first institution to admit women to medical licensing, and it was only then that she returned to London and entered the LMSW to complete her training. 
In 1877 Vickery became involved in the trial of Charles Bradlaugh and Annie Besant on the grounds of obscenity for publishing Charles Knowlton's contraceptive handbook 'The Fruits of Philosophy' (1877). Vickery was active in the subsequent formation of the Malthusian League, which accepted Malthus's law of population but believed that its corollary was the desirability of birth control, becoming one of the first vice-presidents and a member of its council. Her Malthusian activities, however, were initially curtailed through the intervention of the council of the LMSW, which was reluctant to be openly associated, via one of its students, with this scandalous body. She therefore withdrew from public association with the league until she had obtained the medical qualification for which she had been striving for so long, finally qualifying as a licentiate of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland and licentiate in midwifery in 1880. 
Once qualified, Vickery practised as a doctor. Throughout the 1880s she also gave frequent lectures on Malthusianism, advancing birth control as an essential element for the emancipation of women. Her liaison with Drysdale continued, and their second son, George Vickery, was born about 1881 or 1882. However, the couple did not live together until 1895, when they moved to Dulwich and let it be assumed that they were married. 
Alice Vickery was deeply involved in a number of enterprises critical of the late Victorian social norm. She was among the first few British women to obtain a medical qualification, though lacking the privileged background of other pioneers -- although she must have had Charles Drysdale's financial, as well as moral and professional, support. She was a freethinker and secularist. She was active in the campaign against the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', and was an articulate advocate of the prudential limitation of the family. She appeared on public platforms and engaged in public debate. She lived out in her own life the objections which many contemporary feminists had to the institution of marriage. 
In the 1890s Vickery became involved with the Legitimation League which was set up to protest against the legal penalties borne by the illegitimate but developed a far more wide-ranging agenda critical of existing sexual mores and suggesting remedies and alternatives. She condemned the existing legal position of women, and made sweeping suggestions for its improvement. During the same decade she joined the National Society for Women's Suffrage, later moving on to the more militant Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), and then the Women's Freedom League which seceded from the WSPU in protest at the Pankhurst autocracy. She subscribed generously to the cause and participated in demonstrations but does not seem to have been a major figure in the political struggle, presumably regarding her work for birth control as her most significant contribution to women's emancipation, though it was a subject by no means universally approved of within the suffrage movement. 
After Charles Drysdale's death Alice Vickery continued her work, both as a doctor and for the Malthusian League. About 1910 she was asked by Anna Martin, a welfare worker in Rotherhithe, London, to instruct local women in birth control methods, which she did privately and informally. New causes she took up were eugenics (she was an early member of the Eugenics Education Society), divorce law reform, and the international birth control movement. 
In 1923 Vickery moved to Brighton to be near her elder son and his wife, and became an active president of the local branch of the Women's Freedom League, addressing a meeting only days before her death, at 13 Victoria Road, from pneumonia, on 12 January 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 39449


Coffin, Albert Isaiah (1790/91-1866), medical botanist, claimed to have been born in Ohio, USA, in 1798, but his death certificate suggests 1790 or 1791. Coffin's early life is obscure. According to his own account he received some formal medical instruction at an early age but had to withdraw from study because of an illness which orthodox physicians failed to cure. He recovered after being treated by a Native American woman who had called at his home. Coffin claimed to have been so impressed that he spent time among the Native American people learning about the herbs they used. Such 'foundation myths' were common among practitioners of unorthodox medicine, especially in the United States. Coffin was in practice in Troy, New York, by 1829, but he left the United States for France in 1832 after a court case. In 1838 he came to Britain, advocating a system of medical botany similar to that popularized by Samuel Thomson in the USA. Coffin's key remedies were lobelia (an emetic) and cayenne pepper (for warmth). 
Coffin began to be successful from the mid-1840s, especially in the north of England, where his medico-botanical societies attracted plebeian supporters also interested in temperance and Methodism. Adherents bought copies of his 'Botanic Guide to Health' (1845) and purchased his recommended remedies, which he supplied from his headquarters in Manchester. Coffin attracted official attention in 1847 when one of his agents, Ellis Flitcroft of Bolton, was gaoled for one month for manslaughter and then released to popular rejoicing. From 1848 Coffin was also active in London, though until 1853 he was described as practising in Manchester, in partnership with Thomas Harle. 
Coffin was said to be a large man, weighing 14 stone (196 pounds). He seems to have been a brash American salesman with a simple message that appealed to working people. He argued against 'medical mysteries' and opposed the 'Medical Act' of 1858 which increased the status of orthodox medicine. His many books and periodicals, some of which were regularly reprinted, included 'Medical Botany' (1851), 'A Treatise on Midwifery, and the Diseases of Women and Children' (1849), and his 'Botanical Journal and Medical Reformer', price 1died, which was issued in ten volumes between 1847 and 1861. In these works he advocated self-help and herbal remedies. According to Coffin, bodies, like steam engines, required heat, and women should not be corsetted, nor attended in childbirth by male doctors. 
It was Coffin's custom to appoint assistants, with some of whom he later quarrelled. One of the best-known was John Skelton, a radical politician turned healer. John Boot, father of Jesse Boot, the founder of the pharmaceutical company, was a follower of Skelton. Some of Coffin's followers, and ex-followers, including Skelton, gained orthodox medical qualifications and, as in the USA, styled themselves 'eclectics' -- taking the best from all medical systems. The later institutions of British herbalism, notably the National Institute of Medical Herbalists, can be traced back to Coffin. 
Coffin died of cancer of the stomach on 1 August 1866 at 24 Montague Place, Russell Square, London, the address he shared with the patent medicine dealer John Morris Brooks. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. Coffin's obituary in John Skelton's 'Eclectic Journal and Medical Free Press' claims that his 'name will be ever remembered wheresoever Medical Botany is known... and although he may have had some failings it is the duty of everyone to draw the veil of charity over them' (1.149). 


@@@@@


doc= 39452


Flower, Charles Edward (1830-1892), brewer and benefactor, was born on 3 February 1830 at 2 Payton Street, Stratford upon Avon, the eldest of the three sons of Edward Fordham Flower (1805-1883) and his wife, Selina, 'nee' Greaves (died 1884). Educated first by governesses and briefly at the free school in Stratford, he was sent to Edgbaston preparatory school, returning to Stratford when his master, John Atkinson, was transferred to the King Edward VI School. Sir William Henry Flower, the eminent zoologist, was his brother. 
In June 1845 Flower entered the family brewing firm in Stratford, where he learned all aspects of the trade. In October 1846, while his father travelled for six months in America, he managed the Flower brewery, of which he was made a partner in 1852. Marrying Sarah, youngest daughter of Peter Martineau of Islington, on 13 May the same year, he moved to London and for a year managed the export trade of the newly named Flower & Son brewery from a small store in James Street, Adelphi, before returning to Stratford, where he and his wife lived at the brewery. In 1867 he built Avonbank, their home for the remainder of their lives. 
On his father's retirement in 1863 Flower became head of Flower & Sons and with his brother, Edgar, modernized and expanded the enterprise. In 1870 a new brewery, incorporating the latest brewing technology, was built and oriented to rail, rather than water transport. In 1888 the firm became a limited liability company, whereupon Charles resigned his active involvement with the business, nevertheless remaining a brewery director and active in Stratford. 
Besides having been one of the founders of the Stratford Volunteers, together with his father Flower organized the Stratford Tercentenary in 1864. His greatest achievement, however, was establishing the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, which was begun in 1879 on land donated by him. Despite constant criticism, the project, which included a gallery and a library, was completed in 1883, funded primarily by Flower. An interest in Shakespeare also led him to contribute to the literature concerning the playwright. In 'Shakespeare on Horseback' (1887) and 'Shakespeare No Dog Fancier' (1890), Flower discusses the bard's knowledge of horses and dogs as expressed in his plays. His only other publication, 'Algerian Hints for Tourists', was compiled in 1889 after visiting Algiers, and served as a guidebook for many years. 
Although a passion for travel took him to remote destinations, including America and Africa, Flower travelled less in his later years. In 1875 he purchased an estate of 11,000 acres at Glencassley in Sutherland, of which county he became a JP. Although he frequently visited his property in Scotland, his other civic duties kept him rooted in Stratford. 
His leading role in Stratford involved Flower in many committees and led him to undertake numerous civic and public duties. He served on the town council from 1876 to 1888, and was mayor from 1878 to 1880. He was chairman of the land and buildings committee, the Birthplace Trust executive committee and the records committee which, under his leadership, arranged for the conservation of the hitherto neglected town records. He was a JP for Warwickshire, and for Stratford upon Avon. He was a governor of the Edward VI School, and funded its restoration in 1892. After retiring from the town council, Flower was elected to the Warwickshire county council, on which he served until 3 May 1892, dying of apoplexy during one of their meetings at the court house, Warwick; he was buried four days later at the cemetery, Evesham Road, Stratford upon Avon. 
In his will Flower left a bequest to the Memorial Theatre Fund and the Edward VI School, the latter of which was used to establish a scholarship. He also generously supported his nieces and nephews, as well as brewery managers. Having no children of his own, Flower bequeathed nearly his entire estate to his wife. On her death on 21 July 1908 it was distributed among family members and the various hospitals, committees, and organizations which they had supported throughout their lives. 


@@@@@


doc= 39454


Cunard, Nancy Clara (1896-1965), poet and political activist, was born at Nevill Holt in Leicestershire on 10 March 1896, the only child of Sir Bache Cunard, third baronet (1851-1925), grandson of the founder of the Cunard steamship line, and the American heiress Maud Alice (later known as Emerald) Burke (1872-1948) of San Francisco, whose Irish-American father, James Burke, claimed descent from the Irish patriot Robert Emmet. Lady Cunard left her husband when Nancy was in her teens, and went on to preside over the brightest political and artistic salon in London. The prince of Wales, later Edward VIII, was a regular guest, and she afforded notable social promotion to Wallis Simpson; her pre-eminence as a social hostess was therefore dealt a serious blow by the abdication crisis. A legend persists that the Irish writer George Moore (1852-1933), Lady Cunard's faithful friend from before her marriage, was actually Nancy's father (see A. Frazier, 'George Moore', 2000). There is much to be said against this notion, though he always encouraged Nancy's writing and she later wrote a memoir of him. 
Educated at home in languages, literature, and history; at Miss Woolf's school in London; in Munich for music and German in 1912, and in Paris at a school run by the Misses Ozanne, Nancy also travelled extensively, sharing her mother's passion for art museums and galleries, and for opera and concerts in London and abroad. Her early diaries show a remarkable range of reading, a ready command of languages, and a deep familiarity with the history of European art, music, literature, and dance. She later trained herself as an expert on the arts of Africa. Among her unpublished papers are a monograph on African ivories, notes for a book of images of Africans in European art, and extensive notes on the history of slavery. 
A glamorous and wild society girl among the artists at the Eiffel Tower restaurant in London and a member of a group who called themselves the Corrupt Coterie, the aspiring poet rented a studio to write in with her friend the poet, journalist, and actress Iris Tree. On 15 November 1916 Cunard married an Australian, Sydney George Fairbairn (1892-1943), son of Stephen Fairbairn, the celebrated Australian oarsman. Her husband, a noted cricketer, had enlisted in the Royal Buckinghamshire hussars, and had been wounded at Gallipoli. He subsequently joined the Grenadier Guards and was awarded the MC. After the war he undertook expeditions in east Africa and they lived separately, divorcing in 1925. 
In 1916 Cunard organized with Edith Sitwell the first of a series of fresh and innovative anthologies which appeared annually until 1921, called 'Wheels' after Cunard's signature poem, in which war poems by Wilfred Owen appeared next to avant-garde verse by Aldous Huxley and the Sitwell brothers. Cunard's first volume of poetry was 'Outlaws' (1921), followed by 'Sublunary' (1923), and 'Poems (Two), 1925' (1930). Her most important early poem, 'Parallax', was published by Leonard and Virginia Woolf at the Hogarth Press in 1925. Reviews claimed that it plagiarized T. S. Eliot's 'The Waste Land', which was published by Hogarth in the same series and written as a parallax or slanted view of the London of Eliot's poem. It is now known that one anonymous critic was the left-wing poet Edgell Rickword; it was he, ironically, who later arranged for the publication of Cunard's later works, 'Negro' and 'Authors Take Sides'. Driven from England by this hostile barrage, she began an expatriate life in Paris and a long career as an activist intellectual by joining the surrealists. In the company of, among others, Dali, Breton, and especially the surrealist communist Louis Aragon, with whom she had two passionate affairs, she sharpened her political beliefs, rejected her class background, and embraced American jazz and the music and culture of Africa. A few brilliant columns for 'Vogue' in the mid-1920s show what she might have done in society and arts journalism had she followed the path of her close friend Janet Flanner, who wrote a Paris letter for the 'New Yorker'. 
In Paris, Cunard kept a flat on the rue le Regrattier on Ile St Louis, and set up the Hours Press (1928-31), whose history she later documented in 'These were the Hours' (1969). Based initially at a shop on the rue Guenegaud, from where she also sold African art objects, and later at Le Puits Carre, her home in La Chapelle-Reanville, Normandy, the press published works by, among others, Robert Graves, Laura Riding, George Augustus Moore, Ezra Pound ('XXX Cantos'), and Louis Aragon (his French translation of Lewis Carroll's 'The Hunting of the Snark'). She also discovered Samuel Beckett and published his 'Whoroscope' (1930). The rare volume 'Henry-Music' is a collection of jazz piano tunes by her lover, the African-American musician Henry Crowder, settings for poems by Cunard, Beckett, Walter Lowenfels, and other modernist poets, the best of them a blues song by Nancy herself. 
Nancy Cunard's extraordinary good looks and her reputation for excess in love affairs, dancing to jazz, drinking, and drugs made her the icon of the new woman, the boyish vamp of the twenties. She was famously photographed by Man Ray, wearing African ivory bracelets (1920), and by Curtis Moffat for 'Vogue', wearing a feathered headdress and looking savage, with her then lover, Louis Aragon. Her image was also captured in photos and paintings by Cecil Beaton, to whom she resembled 'a robot woman in a German film' (Williams, 131), Wyndham Lewis, Barbara Ker-Seymer, and others, as well as in Constantin Brancusi's elegant abstract sculptures. 
Michael Arlen's (1895-1956) roman a clef 'The green hat' (1924) and others among his popular novels established Nancy Cunard's reputation as the archetype of the sexually free 'woman of honour'. Staged in London with Talullah Bankhead and in New York with Katherine Cornell playing the Nancy Cunard figure, the play followed the sensational text of the novel, but the silent film with Greta Garbo, 'A Woman of Affairs' (1928), was censored beyond recognition. Cunard was generally recognized as Myra Viveash in Aldous Huxley's 'Antic Hay', Lucy Tantamount in his 'Point Counter Point', and as the subject of other unsavoury literary portraits by Wyndham Lewis and Richard Aldington. The most disturbing contemporary portrait of Nancy Cunard is the Fresca section of T. S. Eliot's 'The Waste Land', with her mother parodied as Lady Kleinwurm, and wisely edited out of Ezra Pound's final draft of the poem ('Facsimile Drafts of The Waste Land', ed. V. Eliot, 1971; L. Gordon, 'Eliot's Early Years', 1977; Chisholm, appx 1). 
In 1931 Cunard brought to London and privately screened a print of the Bunuel-Dali film 'L'age d'or' after it had been attacked by right-wing, Catholic, and antisemitic groups in Paris. She was helped in this venture by Sir Thomas Beecham, her mother's lover. Lady Cunard -- in spite of Beecham's defence of Nancy -- had disinherited her daughter because of the 'blasphemous and immoral film' and her public appearances in London society with Henry Crowder. As the mother-daughter battle escalated Nancy wrote an attack called 'Black Man and White Ladyship', published it in W. E. B. DuBois's Afro-American journal 'The Crisis' in September 1931, and sent it as a privately printed pamphlet at Christmas to Lady Cunard's friends -- effectively a printed version of the slap in the mother's face featured in 'L'age d'or'. 'How come, white man, the rest of the world is to be re-formed in your dreary and decadent image?' the pamphlet asks. This personalizing of the politics of imperialism forever marked her as an outcast in England, and staked out her place on the world's stage as a public intellectual. She had broken all the taboos of loyalty to country, class, and family. Hate mail hounded her efforts on behalf of blacks at the time and untoward comments about her sexuality have since compromised her reputation as a radical activist for black arts and liberation. 
Having thus broken with her past, Cunard set to work on an enormous encyclopaedia of black history, culture, and politics, at first entitled 'Colour', and later 'Negro' (first published in London by Wishart in 1934, after rejections from Cape and Gollancz, among others). Inspired by Crowder, she researched for the work in ethnographic museums with African collections in Europe, most notably the Musee du Congo at Tervueren, outside Brussels, where her assistants Raymond Michelet and Raoul Ubac respectively drew and photographed hundreds of objects. Work on 'Negro' took her to the US twice, and to the West Indies; her efforts to get to Africa were frustrated by her not being allowed to travel with a black man (later, she was able to go to north Africa to report on the condition of the Moors during the Spanish Civil War). She enlisted the contributions of many black intellectuals and leaders, among them Langston Hughes (1902-1967), the activist poet, who became a lifelong friend, the novelist Claude Mackay, and the activists George Padmore (1901-1959) and Marcus Garvey. Among other contributors were Africanists and anthropologists, including an early article by Melville Herskovits (1895-1963); the Belgian Robert Goffin wrote a brilliant piece on jazz; nineteen essays were translated from the French by Samuel Beckett, while Rene Crevel's 'The negress in the brothel' was censored in Britain (Cunard boasted of having surreptitiously re-inserted the offending pages at the bindery). They were joined by Ezra Pound on Frobenius, a manifesto by the surrealist group, studies of African culture in Central and South America, and sections on artists, entertainers (including Josephine Baker), boxers, and Harlem. A piece by Kenneth MacPherson called for a negro film union, and she published several major essays in folklore by Zora Neale Hurston. Musical scores and political manifestos from many different groups were represented, with special emphasis given to black candidates for office in the American Communist Party. 
As editor of 'Negro', Cunard reprimanded W. E. B. DuBois, another of her contributors, for the timidity of his organization, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). At issue was the cause of the Scottsboro Boys, the nine young black men, almost lynched, and then sentenced to the death penalty in Alabama for the supposed rape of two young women on a freight train. Cunard and others contributed essays on the Scottsboro Boys to 'Negro'. She organized many demonstrations in London and Liverpool and raised money on their behalf. Cunard's pro-black activities were under surveillance by British authorities and the FBI; she was later detained at Ellis Island. But as the communists had ceased to regard the black struggle as the vanguard of the revolution by the time 'Negro' appeared in 1934, and as the book was too radical for a mainstream audience, it has never found the wide audience it deserves. Banned in British colonies in Africa and the West Indies, it provoked a furious review in the 'Nation' by Jamaica's former governor, Lord Olivier. African and West Indian activists who sought Cunard out in London and Paris told her often of the experience of having read her book while it was banned. Hugh Ford's abridged version of 'Negro' (1970; repr. 1996) reprints over half the essays but includes images of Cunard herself, in defiance of her own prefatory declaration that all of the book's illustrations were of black people and African objects. She called herself the 'maker' of the book, which she saw as an international collective effort to recognize the black Atlantic as a global source of African cultures, rather than merely a part of the vogue for black art among white Europeans of the 1920s. 
In 1935 Cunard wrote to the head of the Chicago-based international wire service, the Associated Negro Press (ANP), for credentials to cover the Abyssinian crisis and Hailie Selassie's visit to the United Nations in Geneva. It was the beginning of three decades' work as a reporter -- almost exclusively on race issues -- to an international audience of mostly black newspaper readers in the US, Africa, Latin America, and the Caribbean. She also wrote for Sylvia Pankhurst's 'New Times', the General News Service (British colonies, India, and the Far East) and Charles Duff's publications on the Spanish Civil War. For some of her radical journalism she used the pseudonym Ray Holt. George Padmore saw her off on the train for Barcelona on 10 August 1936, and she devoted herself intensively to the cause of Republican Spain for the next three years. Her articles urged Britain, France, and the US to stop their policy of non-intervention in the light of Germany and Italy's support for Franco. In Madrid, at Pablo Neruda's Casa de las Flores, Cunard joined other left intellectuals in collecting poems for Spain, later handset at home on her old printing press at Le Puits Carre as six pamphlets, 'Les poetes du monde defendent le peuple espagnol'. These were produced in English, French, and Spanish, and included her own 'F.A.S.C.I.S.M.E' as well as poems by Neruda, Aragon, Garcia Lorca, Langston Hughes, and most famously W. H. Auden's 'Spain'. 
In 1937 Cunard translated Pablo Neruda's 'To the Mothers of the Dead Militia' and 'Almeria', for the 'Left Review' and wrote an article on Langston Hughes, Jacques Roumain, and Nicolas Guillen called 'Three negro poets'. Her own poems on Spain, including 'To Eat Today' and a translation of Roumain's 'Madrid', were published in 1938. Her 'Authors Take Sides on the Spanish War' appeared as a special issue of 'Left Review' in 1937. This resulted from a call to British writers; of the replies, 126 were for the republic, five were for Franco and six were neutral. Cunard has not been given credit for originating this brilliant political strategy which, in organizing intellectuals to speak out on a political cause, was entirely in the spirit of the 'Negro' anthology. The idea has been widely used since. 'Authors Take Sides' included the signatures of black intellectuals Marcus Garvey, George Padmore, and C. L. R. James, an early and largely unrecognized instance of racial solidarity by the British left. The most effective part of her work for Spain was a series of articles in the 'Manchester Guardian' in 1938 and 1939 on the condition of the Spanish refugees in French concentration camps after the war. She managed to help a great many of them and was greeted as a heroine when she went to Chile in 1940. But her courageous efforts on their behalf in collecting money, clothing, and supplies were not appreciated by the French authorities, who stopped her from taking refugees from Perpignan back to her house in Normandy. 
During the Second World War, Cunard worked as a translator for the BBC and the ministry of information. Here she encountered the pro-fascist broadcasts of her old friend, Ezra Pound, with which she expressed as much mystification as outrage. Much of her time in London was spent at the West African Students' Union and she continued to write race-related war stories for the ANP. Her most important work of the time was a collaboration with George Padmore called 'The White Man's Duty' (1942). She also published another collective volume, 'Poems for France' (1942; in French translation, 1947). 
Returning to France after the war Cunard found that the Germans quartered in her house had destroyed her Hours Press books, most of her letters, her collections of modern paintings and African art, and her ivories. She eventually settled in an old stone house in LaMothe Fenelon in the Dordogne. Here she wrote her history of the Hours Press and her memoirs of Norman Douglas (1954) and George Moore (1956). In the outlaw status of both these men she found a source for imagining her own place as an eccentric rebel among minor characters in British cultural history; these memoirs contain all that there is of her autobiographical writing and have been extensively used by her biographers. She kept up her friendships with the left poets Sylvia Townsend Warner and Valentine Ackland, as well as with Janet Flanner and Solita Solano in Paris. But her behaviour became increasingly erratic, and she sought refuge in alcohol. Shortly after coming to London in 1960 she was committed to an asylum; having recovered somewhat, she persuaded Louis Aragon to secure her release, and returned to France. She died on 16 March 1965 in the Hopital Cochin, Paris, weighing only 26 kilos, but still working on her epic poem against all wars. She was cremated at Pere Lachaise cemetery on 25 March. George Sadoul wrote a tribute to her as the epitome of the jazz age: 'Around her shade float Afro-American blues and spirituals, Spanish Republican ballads and the immortal rhythms of French poetry', praising her 'great heart', 'brilliant intelligence', and 'strong character' ('Les lettres Francaises'). Nancy Cunard was an outlaw, as she had envisaged in her poems, a serious political activist, who lived an intense and lonely life dedicated to her causes. She was also a minor English modernist poet. But she was also that rare creature on the world stage, the woman public intellectual. Her name is important in the history of surrealism and 'le tumulte noir' in Paris, the struggle against Franco and fascism in the Spanish Civil War, and the twentieth-century global struggle for the recognition of African culture and the fight for racial justice. 


