@@@@@


doc= 39455


Hamilton, Mary Agnes (1882-1966), politician and broadcaster, was born on 8 July 1882, at 60 Parsonage Road, Withington, Manchester, the eldest of six children of Robert Adamson (1852-1902), a Scot, professor of logic at Owens College (later part of Manchester University) and subsequently at the universities of Aberdeen and Glasgow, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Duncan, teacher of botany at Manchester High School for Girls before her marriage in 1881. She attended Aberdeen Girls' High School and Glasgow Girls' High School before going to the University of Kiel in 1901 for seven months to learn German. That same year she went up to Newnham College, Cambridge, as Mathilde Blind scholar. She read classics for two years, then economics as the major element of the history tripos. She was awarded first-class honours in 1904. She became intensely interested in politics and her training in the college 'Political' (debating society) together with her strong, low-pitched voice made her a powerful speaker. She complained that Newnham's career advice was 'teach or nothing', so in January 1905 she became assistant to the history professor at University College of South Wales, Cardiff. She married a colleague, Charles J. Hamilton, on 12 September 1905 but the marriage was not a success and they separated. She took up journalism to earn a living, joining 'The Economist' in 1913, where her main interests were women's suffrage and reform of the poor law. She published two books on Greece and Rome and two novels before 1914. 
In 1914 Mary Agnes Hamilton, a pacifist and admirer of Ramsay MacDonald, joined the Independent Labour Party (ILP) and was an original member of the pacifist Union of Democratic Control (UDC), formed the same year. Even though she could not accept the Marxist doctrine of the ILP, she helped draw up its constitution. In 1916 she joined 'Common Sense' as assistant editor, also writing for the monthly 'War and Peace'. She joined the 1917 Club, a group of Liberals of the UDC variety and the Labour left who shared similar pacifist feelings. She became part of Lady Ottoline Morell's anti-war group and moved in the literary circle which included the Woolfs, the Huxleys, D. H. Lawrence, and Lytton Strachey. Her novel 'Dead Yesterday' (1916) described the dilemma faced by British intellectuals at the outbreak of war. By 1918 she was a well-known journalist and speaker. In the 1920s she became, at MacDonald's instigation, assistant editor of the ILP's 'New Labour Leader', to curb the left-wing tendencies of its editor, H. N. Brailsford; the experiment was not a success. During this period, together with novels, she wrote biographies of Ramsay MacDonald, Margaret Bondfield, and Mary Macarthur. 
Mary Agnes Hamilton stood unsuccessfully for parliament in the 1923 general election as Labour candidate for Rochester and Chatham. She was then adopted by Blackburn, where she found herself more in sympathy with the trade unionists than with the intellectuals of the Labour Party, but she lost in the 1924 election. Between 1924 and 1929 she sat on the Balfour committee on trade and industry and signed its minority report. She also served on the royal commission on the civil service (1929-31). 
In 1929 Mary Agnes Hamilton won one of the two seats for Blackburn, obtaining the highest number of votes of any Labour woman candidate. She quickly made her mark in the House of Commons with notable speeches and impressive professionalism (and always wearing red shoes in the house). She became parliamentary private secretary to the postmaster-general, Clement Attlee, who acknowledged her help in his autobiography and wrote to 'The Times' upon her death that she was 'one of the ablest women who entered the House of Commons'. In 1929 she presented the first 'The Week in Westminster' for the BBC, a radio programme designed to teach women about politics. She was appointed one of two women delegates to the League of Nations in Geneva, where she was a great success, in committee and socially. She became an admirer of Arthur Henderson, Labour foreign secretary, later writing his biography (1938). She also became a friend of Hugh Dalton, future chancellor of the exchequer, one of the other delegates. She fully supported the league's search for peace and collective security. 
In the Commons Mary Agnes Hamilton increasingly attacked the Labour Party for failing to remedy the unemployment problem. She did not join the National Government in August 1931 and was elected to the Labour Party parliamentary executive. She sat on the front bench and wound up the speech on the budget for the opposition. After losing her seat in the 1931 general election, she never returned to Westminster and her political activities during the 1930s and 1940s were confined to lecturing and broadcasting. She came out in support of League of Nations sanctions, backed by force, against Italy in 1935; and by 1943 Dalton wrote in his diary that she was now 'quite anti-German as opposed to her attitude in World War One'. She broadcast regularly on the BBC on many topics, including new novels, and was a member of The Brains Trust. She was a governor of the BBC (1933-7) and alderman of the county of London (1937-40). In 1940 she joined the civil service as a temporary, and became head of the United States section in the Ministry of Information. She was rewarded by being made a CBE in 1949. She remained in the civil service until 1952. 
Molly Hamilton (as she was generally known) made many trips and lecture tours to the United States, the first before the First World War, and by 1930 had a feel for the country and many friends there. In 1941 she travelled for the Ministry of Reconstruction expounding the Beveridge proposals. After the war she maintained her close connections with the USA through the English Speaking Union, to whose journal she contributed many articles. She wrote two autobiographical books, 'Remembering my Good Friends' (1944) and 'Uphill All the Way' (1953), an account of the achievements of a remarkable career woman and a study of her changing political and spiritual beliefs. She moved from humanism to partial acceptance of Christianity. During her latter years she disappeared from the public eye because of ill health but continued to write. She died at 28 Kenilworth Road, Ealing, London, on 10 February 1966 and was buried at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 39456


Montefiore, Dora Frances Barrow (1851-1933), suffragist, was born on 20 December 1851 and baptized (as Dora Frances) on 18 January 1852 at St Nicholas's Church, Tooting Graveney, the eighth of thirteen children of Francis Fuller (1807-1887), surveyor and railway entrepreneur, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Drew. Educated at home at Kenley Manor, Surrey, and then at a private school in Brighton, Dora Fuller became her father's amanuensis. In 1874 she went to keep house for her eldest brother in Australia, where she met George Barrow Montefiore, a merchant. After their marriage on 1 February 1881, they lived prosperously in Sydney, where their daughter was born in 1883 and their son in 1887. On being widowed on 17 July 1889, Dora Montefiore discovered that she had no rights of guardianship over her own children unless her husband had willed them to her. She therefore became an advocate of women's rights. The first meeting of the Womanhood Suffrage League of New South Wales was held at her home on 29 March 1891. Dora Montefiore became its corresponding secretary but by 1892 had returned to Europe with her children, first to Paris and finally to England. 
Dora Montefiore's suffragism continued through a range of organizations: the National Society for Women's Suffrage, the League of Practical Suffragists, and later the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU). Never just a member on paper she was on the executive of the first, wrote a pamphlet, 'Women Uitlanders' (1899), for the second, and was for a time an active WSPU organizer in London. She was also part of a network of correspondents centred on Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy. In 1906 Dora Montefiore's Hammersmith home was besieged by bailiffs for six weeks because of her refusal of taxation without representation. Later that year she was sent to Holloway prison after being arrested at a WSPU lobby of parliament. This experience, coupled with severe doubts concerning the WSPU, prompted her resignation even though it cost her cherished friends. In 1907 Montefiore joined the Adult Suffrage Society and was elected its honorary secretary in 1909. 
The vote was never an isolated issue for Dora Montefiore. From the 1890s she sought an organization which reflected her evolving politics. Although for a time a member of the Women's Liberal Association, working for the election of women to local government, Montefiore was soon moving towards socialism and the Marxist Social Democratic Federation (SDF). In 1903 she was elected for the first time to the party's executive. Within the SDF she developed a woman-focused socialism and helped set up the party's women's organization in 1904. An energetic although often dissident worker for the SDF until the end of 1912, Montefiore resigned from what had become the British Socialist Party as an anti-militarist, only to return in 1916. She spoke at the Leeds 'Soviet' in 1917 and was a founder member of the Communist Party of Great Britain in 1920, serving on its first executive. Having become politically active in her late forties, Montefiore sustained her passion and principle into her seventies, only becoming less active when her sight deteriorated. 
Internationalism was also important to Dora Montefiore's politics. Attendance at international suffrage and socialist congresses led to strong links with other activist women, as did her travels throughout the United States, Australia, and South Africa from 1910 to 1912. While in Australia in 1911 she edited the 'International Socialist Review of Australasia'. 
Dora Montefiore's writing knitted together all her political activities. Although she published poetry and translated Maksim Gorky, she was pre-eminently a journalist and pamphleteer. She wrote a women's column in 'New Age' (1902-6) and in 'Justice' (1909-10). Her pamphlets were on women and socialism while 'Our Fight to Save the Kiddies' (1913) described her activities in the Dublin lock-out, which had resulted in her arrest on kidnapping charges. She published an autobiography, 'From a Victorian to a Modern', in 1927. Although there were those who found her difficult, it was hard to deny Dora Montefiore's energy and commitment. There were unsubstantiated rumours of drug abuse and gossip about an 'inappropriate' relationship with a married working-class man, George Belt. 
Dora Montefiore died on 21 December 1933 at her home, Melbourne, Edwin Road, Clive Vale, Hastings, and was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex. She was survived by her daughter, her son having died from the effects of mustard gas in 1921. 


@@@@@


doc= 39459


Perry, John (1850-1920), electrical engineer and mathematician, was born on 14 February 1850 at Garvagh, co. Londonderry, the second son of Samuel Perry and his Scottish-born wife. His early education was inauspicious. At the model school in Belfast (1860-64) his persistent failure at first to do any homework led to his being 'more caned than praised' ('Engineering', 110, 1920, 192), though he showed some precocity by gaining a silver medal for proficiency in science. He then spent four years as an apprentice in the drawing office and pattern shops of the Lagan foundry of Coates Ltd in Belfast, while attending evening classes and winning prizes from the Department of Science and Art. After surprising himself by securing a Whitworth exhibition in 1868 (and then again in 1869), he was able to return full-time to the world of learning. He enrolled to study engineering under Professor James Thomson at Queen's College, and graduated early as Bachelor of Engineering in 1870 with first-class honours, a gold medal, and the Peel prize, followed soon afterwards by a Whitworth scholarship. 
Perry's first teaching post as physics and mathematics master at Clifton College, Bristol, commenced in January 1871. Here, in addition to composing his textbook 'An Elementary Treatise on Steam', he established the first physics laboratory and the second mechanics workshop in an English school. Although at the age of twenty-one he was a lively and inspirational teacher, he evidently had difficulties upholding discipline; once, overwhelmed by requests from his boys to leave the class, he snapped back, 'You may not. You should go out before you come in' ('Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers', 58, 1920, 901-2). From 1874 he was elevated to be honorary assistant to Professor Sir William Thomson (Lord Kelvin), the brother of James Thomson, at the University of Glasgow. After working alongside him in the laboratory for just one year, Perry received Sir William's support in winning his next position -- a professorship in civil engineering at the Imperial College in Tokyo. 
This college was a core component of the Meiji administration's plans for a new industrial era in Japan. Both the college and the country's engineering concerns were ultimately to be managed exclusively by the Japanese themselves, with only initial assistance from foreign professors; hence, Perry was employed only for a fixed term, from 9 September 1875 to 8 September 1878. He lectured on steam power, mechanical structures, and hydrodynamics to Japanese student engineers, including those who would later act as his successors. When not teaching he undertook collaborative research with W. E. Ayrton, resulting in the communication of dozens of papers (chiefly on electrical subjects) to British scientific journals. So impressed was James Clerk-Maxwell by Ayrton and Perry's efforts -- if not always by their results -- that he declared their 'scientific energy' threatened 'to displace the centre of electrical development... quite out of Europe and America to a point much nearer to Japan' ('The Electrician', 2, 1879, 271-2). Perry's brief but highly active period in Tokyo left him with an abiding interest in matters Japanese, particularly in the seismological study of the nation's endemic earthquakes. 
On returning to London in 1879, Perry married Alice (died 1904), the daughter of Thomas Jowitt of Sheffield. They had no children. Perry was employed to reorganize the machinery of Clark and Muirhead's telegraphic works, and also by the City and Guilds Institute in 1881 as its national examiner in mechanical engineering. In 1882 this institute appointed Perry to its chair of mechanical engineering at Finsbury Technical College, at which Ayrton had earlier been appointed to the chair of applied physics. Here the reunited pair translated their unique Japanese experience of laboratory-based technical education into a rather more frugal English form. In response to the fast-growing electrical light and power industry, Ayrton and Perry also collaborated, until about 1889, in a number of inventions, including the electric tricycle and rather speculative plans for 'seeing by electricity'. Among their myriad innovative measuring instruments, the ammeter and voltmeter were the most widely adopted, although by omitting to patent their clock-based domestic power-meter the partnership reputedly lost a substantial fortune. They did enjoy successful patents, however, relating to their magnifying springs for accurate proportional calibration of electrical measurement devices (1883) and their block system for the safe management of multi-vehicle electrical haulage and traction (1882). During this period the pair worked as consultants for the Faure ['sic'] Accumulator Company, arranged the lighting of the Grand Hotel at Charing Cross, and, with Fleeming Jenkin, co-founded the Telepherage Company. This last venture was established to exploit their collective patents in the 'telepherage' system for transporting goods by wires, which came to be widely adopted in the USA. 
Although a busy textbook writer, and an avid reader of novels, Perry enjoyed a vigorous social life. The Perrys' London home was the regular meeting place for some of the most distinguished physicists of the day: Joseph Larmor, Oliver Lodge, and, especially, a fellow Irishman, George Fitzgerald. Perry was thus often at the centre of wide-ranging discussions, relishing the controversies -- usually good-natured -- into which he was often drawn by his characteristically unorthodox or outspoken views. Although protestant by upbringing, he rarely commented on religious matters, not even in the eirenic pamphlet 'On the Age of the Earth' that he privately circulated in 1894 as his contribution to the theologically charged battle then raging between Kelvin and the Darwinists. More heartfelt was the complaint succinctly phrased in the title of his 1901 polemic 'England's Neglect of Science'. 
As professor of mathematics and mechanics from 1896 to 1913 at the Royal College of Science and School of Mines in London (part of Imperial College from 1907), Perry pursued his most colourful campaign: the reform of mathematics teaching. At Finsbury he and Ayrton had developed the pragmatic use of squared paper and mechanical models to teach elementary calculus to engineering students who had little prior knowledge of geometry or algebra. Their successful experience of this approach was epitomized in Perry's series of widely read textbooks, especially 'Calculus for Engineers' (1896), which went through several editions. Perry persistently fought the prevailing view that a thorough mastery of Euclid was essential for all students of mathematics, contending rather that, for non-specialists, the subject should be taught primarily with a view to its 'utility'. The short volume he edited for the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1901, 'Discussion on the Teaching of Mathematics', reveals both the passion of Perry's convictions and the tenor of the opposition that these provoked. His reforming zeal undoubtedly had a major impact on the evolution of mathematical pedagogy in twentieth-century Britain. 
As the culmination of his long-term involvement with the British Association for the Advancement of Science, Perry became its general treasurer in 1904, a year that also saw the death of his wife. On retiring nine years later from active teaching he became a leading member of the South African University Commission. He continued to pursue his interest in spinning tops, a subject on which he had lectured and published often since 1890, and which embodied his wide-ranging concerns from engineering to cosmology. Perry was a member of the Athenaeum and was elected to a fellowship of the Royal Society in 1885; he was also the recipient of many honorary degrees and awards. He died suddenly but peacefully at his London home, 25 Stanley Crescent, Bayswater, on 4 August 1920, and was buried on 8 August next to his wife at Wendover churchyard in Buckinghamshire. An affably disputatious man, Perry was remembered fondly by both allies and one-time opponents. His beaming, leonine, charismatic personality made its mark not only on thousands of engineering students, but also on the Institution of Electrical Engineers and on the Physical Society, of both of which he was an active member and also president (1900-01 and 1910-11 respectively). 


@@@@@


doc= 39460


Flurscheim, Bernhard Jacques (1874-1955), organic and theoretical chemist, was born at Baden-Baden on 27 November 1874, the son of Michael Flurscheim (died 1904), an engineer and socialist who published several books on economics in English, and Marie-Amelie Heilbronne (died 1891). His mother was French; his parents had met during the Franco-Prussian War. His maternal grandmother had been attached to the court of Louis-Philippe and it was the inheritance of her French estates that made him and his sister, Helen, financially independent. He received a classical education at schools in Baden-Baden and at Arnold College, Bournemouth, in England, before, at the age of seventeen, studying metallurgy and engineering at Winterthur, Switzerland, and Brunswick in Germany. At the age of twenty he switched to chemistry, studying successively at the universities of Zurich, where he took his first degree with Alfred Werner (1866-1919), Geneva, Heidelberg (with F. Kehrmann and E. Knoevenagel), where he obtained the PhD in 1901, and finally at Strasbourg with Johannes Thiele (1865-1918). 
In 1902, while in Strasbourg, Flurscheim married Nora Kathleen Marie (died 1973), a talented painter and the only daughter of Henry Northover, farmer, of Fonthill, Wiltshire. They had a son, Cedric Harold, an electrical engineer, and a daughter. In 1905 the couple settled at Crookham, Fleet, Hampshire, where he built a house and separate laboratory in woodland that reminded him of his boyhood in the Black Forest. He joined the Chemical Society in 1906, publishing his work both in English and German journals. He spent the remainder of his life in Fleet apart from a period in America during the First World War, and two periods as a visiting unpaid research worker in the Davy-Faraday laboratories at the Royal Institution, London, 1905-7 and 1925-8. 
Flurscheim was described by C. K. Ingold as 'the last of the great pre-electronic builders of the theory of organic chemistry' (Ingold, 'Journal of the Chemical Society', 1087). In a German paper of 1902, which was inspired by Werner's and Thiele's ideas on the divisibility of affinity among atoms in a compound, Flurscheim speculated that a substituent in a carbon compound caused the distribution of affinities to alternate through a chain of carbon atoms such that different positions became vulnerable to attack by other substituents. He developed a symbolism of thick and thin lines (bonds) to indicate strengthened and weakened affinities, and over the following decades showed how the theory explained the mechanisms of many familiar reactions. In 1904, while engaged in work directed at proving the theory, or resolving its difficulties, he discovered the explosive tetranitroaniline, which he patented as TNA in 1910 (patent nos. 3224, 3907). In 1915, at Lord Moulton's request, Flurscheim went to America to supervise the manufacture of his explosive by Aetna, but came to regret that the discovery, which further increased his wealth, had forced him into commerce. During the 1920s he was active in debates over the emerging electronic theory of chemical reactions. While glad of Ingold's support for his theoretical insights, which Ingold thought superior to those of Robert Robinson, Flurscheim stubbornly refused to accept the shared electron theory of the chemical bond. Realizing that the electronic theory of valency had replaced his theoretical insights, he abandoned research in 1932. 
As a private research worker in an era dominated by academic and industrial science, Flurscheim remains an enigmatic figure; nevertheless he was an individual who had an important influence on twentieth-century theoretical chemistry. He took English nationality, but was not very sociable outside his family circle, though he loved travelling and alpine climbing. He was well read and retained a love of classical languages. Although politically Conservative, in the 1930s he spoke out concerning the Nazi threat, and advocated a military alliance with the Russians. He died at the Trimmers Hospital, Farnham, on 15 June 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 39462


Durbin, Evan Frank Mottram (1906-1948), economist and politician, was born at the manse, Westcroft, Bideford, Devon, on 1 March 1906, the son and last child of the Revd Frank Durbin, a Baptist minister in Devon, and his wife, Mary Louisa Mellor, the daughter of William Mottram, a well-known Congregationalist minister and temperance campaigner. Durbin was educated at elementary schools in Plympton and Exmouth, Heles School, Exeter, and Taunton School, winning an open scholarship at New College, Oxford. From 1924 he read zoology, but laboratory work failed to inspire him and he took a second-class degree in 1927. He then transferred to modern Greats and completed a first-class degree in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1929. With the support of his economics tutor, Lionel Robbins, Durbin was awarded the Ricardo scholarship in 1929 to study underconsumptionist theories at University College, London. In autumn 1930 he was appointed to a lectureship in economics at the London School of Economics (LSE), where he remained until 1940. 
Durbin's nonconformist background provided the foundation for his later work. His strict but loving upbringing imparted to him a confidence and frankness that blended humility with conviction in all his work. Although his faith ebbed during his undergraduate years, like many future Labour politicians he first learned the art of public speaking as a local Baptist preacher. His political interests were evident from the outset at Oxford, where he was active in both the union and the Oxford University Labour Club, serving as chairman of the latter in 1927. He also made many friends at Oxford who shaped his later work. He was introduced there to Reginald Bassett, G. D. H. Cole, and Margaret Cole, and he met Hugh Gaitskell in 1926 when both men were working on behalf of the miners during the general strike, initiating a lifelong friendship and political association. 
Durbin established his credentials as an economist in the early 1930s with a series of books and articles on contemporary economic conditions, including 'Purchasing Power and Trade Depression' (1933), 'Socialist Credit Policy' (1933; revised 1935), and 'The Problem of Credit Policy' (1935), but in its abstract form economics never captured his imagination. He saw instead the role that economists could play in developing a democratic socialist society. The aftermath of the Labour government's defeat in 1931 provided ideal circumstances for Durbin's ideas to become influential in the Labour Party. He was a prominent member of both the New Fabian Research Bureau and the XYZ Club, groups of left-wing intellectuals committed to finding new directions for socialism and economic policy. Through these groups he worked closely with other young economists such as Douglas Jay, James Meade, and Colin Clark to revise Labour's programme in the light of new economic research. The results were evident in the party's growing commitment to economic planning in the late 1930s, paving the way for the introduction of centralized controls during the Second World War and the continuation of a commitment to planning in the post-war Labour government. 
By the mid-1930s Durbin had become committed to economic planning as the most effective means to achieve socialist ends. He believed that a fully planned economy was a precondition for socialism, and his work was increasingly directed towards implementing this idea. But those who knew him best observed that he was a man of conviction who possessed a great deal of what Gaitskell termed 'moral courage'. He was not afraid to take an unpopular line and his ideas often set him apart from the labour movement at this time. In particular, he emphasized the affinities between Soviet communism and European fascism, insisting that both Germany and Russia were dictatorships characterized by similar types of cruelties and injustices against their people. He pointed to the Russians' brutal treatment of kulaks, for example, and likened it to the mass persecution of German Jews. To compare communism to fascism in this way was brave at a time when Soviet-style communism enjoyed much support among prominent British socialists such as Harold Laski, John Strachey, and Sidney and Beatrice Webb. Durbin insisted, however, that communism, just as much as fascism, was incompatible with the commitment to democracy, social justice, and personal freedom that lay at the heart of British socialism. The defence of these values was central to Durbin's anti-Marxism, and his views both set him apart in the 1930s and early 1940s, and proved to be highly influential long after his death. 
Durbin diverged from his colleagues in other ways as well. Almost alone among his friends, he endorsed the Munich agreement in 1938. His support for Chamberlain originated not in pacifism, but -- like so many of his ideas -- in patriotism, because he was convinced that Britain did not yet have the strength to fight. Foreshadowing the frustrations of the Labour government in the late 1940s, he also insisted upon the need for trade unions to recognize the community's interests in efforts to plan the economy, especially in areas such as wage controls. While many other economists in the Labour Party were eager to evaluate Keynes's ideas in a socialist context, Durbin found Keynes's indifference to the moral claims of socialism unacceptable and distrusted his liberal roots. Finally, he was critical of Jay's and Hugh Dalton's economic criteria for socialism when economic theory, for Durbin, was primarily a vehicle to convey social and ethical imperatives within a socialist society. 
Durbin believed strongly that economics should not be studied in isolation. His most original ideas were informed by broad reading in psychology, psychoanalysis, sociology, history, and political science, and the combination of these fields with his economic research resulted in a formulation of democratic socialism that was both distinctive and influential. Durbin joined a study group on psychoanalysis and he urged greater communication and co-operation among social scientists. His work focused increasingly on evaluating the relationship between economics, psychology, and equality, which he believed to be central to the realization of a socialist society. He criticized economists' reluctance to depart from their belief in the unproven benefits of inequality, and he exhorted the profession to reconsider the ethical implications of the assumption that inequality promoted a more efficient economic system. The clearest example of his wide-ranging interests was 'Personal Aggressiveness and War' (1939), which he wrote with the child psychologist John Bowlby. Here Durbin argued that new research into the origins of aggressive behaviour among animals and children by, among others, Solly Zuckerman and Susan Isaacs, might be used to understand and ultimately to prevent the tendency among adults to wage war. 
These ideas not only reflected the anxieties of the time, but also formed the core of Durbin's most complete and influential work, 'The Politics of Democratic Socialism' (1940). Composed against the background of impending war, the book explored the potential for the emergence of a society based upon the twin principles of social democracy and economic planning. Drawing on his research with Bowlby, as well as Freudian concepts such as repression, projection, and transference, Durbin devoted the first section of the book to a discussion of the need for changes in the social and educational environment of children to encourage a preference for co-operation over aggression. Echoing R. H. Tawney, Durbin argued that economic relations had a direct bearing on social relations. Therefore, while he still believed that socialism was impossible without a fully planned economy, he was convinced that socialist societies must be founded around institutions that both met common needs and emphasized the importance of healthy group relations. 
In subsequent sections of 'The Politics of Democratic Socialism', Durbin went on to address alternatives to socialism, outlining the weaknesses of contemporary capitalism and offering a rigorous critique of the internal inconsistencies of Marxism that anticipated Anthony Crosland's similarly clear rejection of an episodic transition to socialism in 'The Future of Socialism' (1956). Durbin rejected, in particular, the idea of a universal historical dialectic that excluded all but economic factors. He observed that other variables such as nationality, government, social relationships, and religion were ignored by Marxists in their pursuit of a growing conflict between two distinct classes. 'It is not so,' Durbin countered. 'We are more complicated than the Marxists have us believe' ('Politics of Democratic Socialism', 1940, 182-3). He concluded the book (which was subtitled 'An essay on social policy') with arguments for the achievement of a democratic socialist society through the Labour Party's programme. He returned repeatedly to the centrality of democracy, the foundation on which he based his certainty that socialism was possible in Britain without revolution. Throughout 'The Politics of Democratic Socialism', Durbin both drew upon and reinforced the indigenous British tradition of democratic socialism. He presented a blend of ideas influenced by ethical socialism in the tradition of Tawney, by the Fabian interest in efficiency, by liberalism, and by advances in economic thought since 1931. It was therefore fitting that when Durbin dedicated the book 'to my friends', he included among them Bassett, Gaitskell, Michael Postan, and Tawney. 
In 1940 the war intervened directly in Durbin's career when he was assigned to the economic section of the war cabinet secretariat. Although he had eagerly volunteered for wartime work, he was unhappy at giving up his teaching and research at the LSE and he soon found that he disliked the civil service. In October 1942, however, he was appointed personal assistant to the deputy prime minister, Clement Attlee, a position he held for three years. This civil service experience expanded his practical knowledge of government and reinforced for him the critical role of economists and social scientists in the negotiation of a new relationship between state and citizen, both in wartime and under the post-war Labour government. 
The war presented Durbin with an opportunity to put into practice his commitment to using force against those who could not be swayed by reason. While serving in the wartime government, he completed his most compelling and accessible work, a short, intensely patriotic tract entitled 'What have we to defend?' (1942). This little book drew on his earlier writing to explore the connection between British socialism and national identity, and to evaluate the potential for economic and social change offered by the war. It was a more impassioned and less technical work than Durbin's earlier writing. Like George Orwell in 'The Lion and the Unicorn' (1941), Durbin argued that nationalism and socialism were not antithetical. He believed that patriotic socialists were not defending the British social order, but rather protecting British values against external aggression. He also identified the threat of forces operating within Britain. He found four 'national faults' at work: economic inequality, social inequality, disregard for national heritage, and lack of imagination. He urged the British people to dream of a better world, a strong and safe society free from poverty, unemployment, and class divisions. 'This society does not yet exist', Durbin concluded, 'but only because we do not see it' ('What have we to defend?', 34). 
In July 1945 Durbin was elected Labour MP for the north London constituency of Edmonton with a majority of 19,069. He had earlier stood unsuccessfully as Labour candidate in East Grinstead and Gillingham, Kent, in 1931 and 1935 respectively. In government he was frustrated by the slow progress of his career. He served as parliamentary private secretary to the chancellor of the exchequer, Dalton, until March 1947, when he was appointed parliamentary secretary to the minister of works, Charles Key. These roles slowed but did not interrupt Durbin's writing, and he continued to comment upon contemporary issues and engage directly with the government's critics, most notably his former LSE colleague, Friedrich Hayek. 
Durbin was no dry intellectual. Married on 29 July 1932 to (Alice) Marjorie ('b'. 1909/10), the daughter of Charles Ernest Green, a teacher, he thrived on family life, enjoying the company of his wife and their three children, two daughters and one son. His openness and capacity for enjoyment attracted a wide circle of friends, among them historians, sociologists, and political scientists. He loved the countryside and the cinema, enjoyed playing racquet sports (though with little skill), and had a passion for detective stories. He once remarked to his friend Gaitskell, 'The three greatest pleasures in my life are food, sleep and sex' (Gaitskell, 13). 
Durbin drowned on 3 September 1948 off the coast of Cornwall at Strangles Beach, Crackington Haven, near Bude, after rescuing one of his daughters and another child in dangerous surf. A memorial service was held at St Margaret's, Westminster, at which Tawney gave an address, and he was buried in New College, Oxford. Durbin's premature death robbed the Labour Party of a man of considerable intellectual rigour, economic expertise, and moral conviction. At the time of his death, Durbin was working on a companion to 'The Politics of Democratic Socialism', provisionally entitled 'The economics of democratic socialism', which built on his post-war concerns about the efficient working of a planned economy, labour relations, nationalized industries, and the steps still required to take Britain from a managed capitalist economy to a fully socialist society. Draft chapters of this work are preserved with Durbin's papers at the LSE, and eleven of his most influential articles were posthumously reprinted as 'Problems of Economic Planning' (1949). 
Subsequent generations of British socialists and social democrats have continued to be influenced by Durbin's ideas. His legacy has been particularly apparent in two periods: first, during the difficulties that beset the Labour Party in opposition throughout the 1950s; and second, in the founding of the Social Democratic Party (SDP) in 1981. In the 1950s Durbin's mantle was inherited by his close friend Gaitskell, who succeeded Clement Attlee as Labour leader in 1955. Gaitskell and his supporters looked to Durbin as a 'revisionist' ally against leftwing 'fundamentalists' in the party whose definition of socialism placed greater emphasis upon the expansion of public control through the nationalization of major industries. Like Durbin, Gaitskell argued that nationalization was a means, and not an end, of socialism, and he therefore supported a far-reaching review of Labour's policies that recommended alternative methods of control. The most prominent theorist of 'revisionism' in this period, Crosland, also clearly felt an affinity with Durbin, whom he had met in the 1940s. Crosland envisioned a 'Durbin-Crosland front' in democratic socialism (22 April 1941, Crosland MSS, BLPES, 3/26/i), not only agreeing with Durbin that capitalism had shown itself to be capable of significant reforms, but also sharing Durbin's deep antipathy towards Marxism and his commitment to the distinctly British ethical and democratic socialist traditions. 
Durbin has also provided a link to the SDP, whose founders have claimed an intellectual lineage from the Gaitskellite 'revisionists.' Bill Rodgers, in particular, was strongly influenced and deeply moved by Durbin's work, and he greatly admired Durbin's conviction that force should be used to defend socialist values if all else failed. For the SDP, Durbin's writing in the 1930s provided a model for a successful fight against the left within the Labour Party, together with a clear rejection of totalitarianism, pacifism, and, by extension, unilateralism. More importantly, Durbin provided a cogent demonstration of Marxism's internal contradictions and the weakness of Marx within the British social democratic tradition. 
Durbin's status as a 'revisionist' should not, however, be overstated. In many respects, Durbin's ideas did not fit the Gaitskellite mould that the SDP admired. Durbin developed his ideas in the 1930s and his major post-war work was unfinished at the time of his death. Nevertheless it is clear that after the war he remained firmly committed to nationalization, economic planning, and controls. Although Durbin recommended flexibility in Labour's policies, his priority was the economic and social management of an expanded public sector, and he had none of Crosland's later confidence in the potential of reformed capitalism. Durbin's anti-Marxism and his commitment to democracy and freedom were attractive to 'revisionists', and subsequently to the SDP, but these general aims are found within a broader tradition of British social democracy, while the substance of Durbin's policy ideas locates him less clearly among 'revisionists'. Throughout his life Durbin placed great emphasis on remaining a man of the left, not only a social democrat, but also a democratic socialist. 


@@@@@


doc= 39463


Hastings, George Woodyatt (1825-1917), social reformer and politician, was born on 28 September 1825 at 43 Foregate Street, Worcester, the second of three children, and the only son, of Sir Charles Hastings (1794-1866), physician and founder of the British Medical Association (BMA), and his wife, Hannah (died 1866), eldest daughter of George Woodyatt MD, physician to the Worcester Infirmary. He was educated at Bromsgrove grammar school and at Christ's College, Cambridge (1844-50), where he took a first class in civil law; he was admitted to the Middle Temple in November 1846 and called to the bar in May 1850. He practised as a barrister for the next twenty-one years. From his father, a Liberal in politics who not only helped organize the medical profession but was active in several causes, including anti-slavery and the improvement of public health, he inherited a taste for public service. He assisted his father and the BMA in drafting, and lobbying for, versions of the bill which became the 1858 'Medical Act' and established the modern medical profession in Britain. In the 1850s he was secretary of the Society for Promoting the Amendment of the Law, a London-based pressure group seeking to rationalize and improve aspects of English law, and of the National Reformatory Union, concerned with the care and moral redemption of young offenders. Lord Brougham, who provided patronage for Hastings, was president of both organizations. In the period from 1855 to 1857 Hastings was instrumental in joining together these two groups with a third constituency -- those women who had come together as the Langham Place circle to publish the 'English Woman's Journal' -- to form the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, which held the first of its annual congresses in 1857 and which disbanded in 1886. 
The Social Science Association, so-called, was modelled on the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and became an important forum for the promotion of institutional and legislative reform in mid-Victorian Britain. It was Hastings's role at the heart of the organization, first as secretary and then, from 1868, in succession to Brougham, as president, which brought him a place in public life. He was known to the whole political and administrative class of the age as an expert on social questions. His interests were broad, including not only legal and penal reform but also the promotion of women's causes. Among other projects, he assisted the foundation of Girton College, Cambridge. 
Hastings was married first, on 10 August 1858, to Catherine Anna, daughter of the Revd Samuel Mence, rector of Ulcombe, Kent. She died without children in 1871. His second wife, Frances Anna (died 1915), whom he married in 1877, was the only child of the Revd W. H. Pillans, rector of Himley, Staffordshire. They had three children. 
From 1854 Hastings was unsuccessful in several attempts to secure the Liberal nomination as a candidate for various seats in parliament. Adopted for West Worcestershire, he failed to win election in 1874 but was elected Liberal MP for Worcestershire East in 1880, which he represented until 1892, sitting after 1886 as a Liberal Unionist. He served in many capacities in Worcestershire, including chairman of the quarter sessions and of the new county council. Hastings was representative of a new type of figure who entered politics through campaigns and movements for social reform. But Victorian Britain had not yet developed professional structures and organizations for this kind of public service, which remained voluntary and unpaid. He was expelled from the House of Commons on 21 March 1892 following his conviction for fraudulent conversion. As sole trustee of a substantial fund for the education of a deceased friend's children, he had used the capital for his own purposes, could not repay it, and was sentenced to five years' penal servitude. He had many outstanding debts in addition: his finances had never been adequate for the life he led as a public figure, and he had speculated without success. On his expulsion, the prime minister, Gladstone, paid tribute to his 'special services to the House'. 
On his release Hastings lived quietly in his native county. In 1909 he published 'A Vindication of Warren Hastings', his famous ancestor, and two years later, 'The Story of the Malverns'. He died on 21 October 1917, and was buried in the churchyard of Guarlford, near Malvern. 


@@@@@


doc= 39464


Shaw, (George William) Hudson (1859-1944), Church of England clergyman and public lecturer, was born on 6 August 1859 at 2 Spencer Villas, Francis Street, Potter Newton, Leeds, first child of Edward Walker Shaw (1824-1871), civil engineer, and Margaret Helen Hudson (1833-1913). Shaw's father died young, leaving the family in difficulties. When his mother, now remarried, emigrated to Australia, a wealthy aunt became his guardian and sent him to Bradford grammar school and then to university. He went up to Oxford in 1879 under the non-collegiate scheme, and was soon captured by Balliol. He won the Stanhope prize (1882), was president of the union (Hilary term 1883), and enjoyed sports, but failed to shine in his modern history final examinations. 
After graduation Shaw was again saved from Australia, this time by an anonymous benefactor (later revealed to be Bolton King), whose support allowed him to undertake ordination in the Church of England. He began to prepare for ordination in 1884, and he also impetuously married Edith Emma Hirst on 1 January; a son was born that year. In some poverty himself, Shaw was burning to serve the urban poor. In 1886 Michael Sadler persuaded him that a travelling lectureship under the Oxford University extension scheme would satisfy his vocation. For much of his twenty-five years with the extension scheme he would combine lecturing with the charge of small parishes. 
The Revd Hudson Shaw was a short, stocky man, forthright in expressing himself. A compelling orator, he spoke with a somewhat harsh and identifiably northern accent. As a history lecturer he was popular everywhere, but his special value to Oxford was his appeal to working men. They flocked to follow even such topics as the history of Florence and Venice; lecture courses on his favourite English social reformers, above all John Ruskin, brought him what Sadler called an 'almost mystical' reputation in the industrial north (Royden, 34). Shaw had a special feeling for south Lancashire; his commitment to extension work at centres such as those in Ancoats (which he called Ancoats University), Bolton, and Oldham was repaid in the adulation of his student followers. 
In 1890 Balliol elected Shaw to a fellowship in recognition of his services as a public lecturer. Three years later came the first of several highly acclaimed tours in the eastern United States. Beneath this outward success private problems multiplied. On 21 April 1890, after the untimely death of his first wife in 1888, he had married a withdrawn and unworldly cousin, Agnes Josephine (Effie) Ringrose. It was another impulsive act, intended to give Effie and her widowed mother some security. After three years Effie bore a son and the unwanted experience plunged her into mental invalidism. Shaw's own vulnerability had been evident for some years: he suffered from mysterious physical complaints and often after the end of the lecture season succumbed to severe depression. In 1901 he met the much younger Maude Royden (1876-1956); their relationship, initially a pastoral prop to her career in social work, soon turned into a chaste love affair and contributed its own rewards and difficulties. In 1905 Shaw's elder son abandoned an Oxford education and fled to America; there the wayward Arnold became agent to J. C. Powys, lecturer and author, and predeceased his father. Arnold's less mercurial half-brother, Bernard, qualified as an engineer, but was killed in the First World War. 
The success of the Workers' Educational Association (WEA) was the turning point of Shaw's public career. Originating in 1903 within the extension movement, it embraced him as its first chairman; by 1908, however, it had assumed a stance of virtual opposition under a younger and more politically acute leadership. Shaw preached that the fate of democracy lay not with working-class assertiveness, but with religion and education, church and university, but his somewhat moralizing and patriarchal liberalism seemed outmoded; he was no longer honoured as a prophet. He did subsequently support the WEA, but off the record continued to insist that it should have remained a subordinate part of the extension system. 
Perhaps it was no coincidence that in 1909 Shaw suffered his worst breakdown. He never properly resumed lecturing. In 1912, at a ceremony marking his final departure from Oxford, Sadler recalled building up the extension scheme and his friend's place as 'the keystone to the arch' ('University Extension Bulletin' 13, 4-5). Out of sheer loyalty Shaw had previously refused offers of more lucrative or sedate employment elsewhere; now influential friends settled the matter by obtaining for him the crown living of St Botolph without Bishopgate in the City of London. At St Botolph, Shaw did not serve quietly; seemingly he could not help taking a combative stand in the diocese, and his efforts to have Maude Royden preach from his pulpit led to unseemly confrontations with the bishop of London. Eventually he turned to less provocative causes, particularly Albert Schweitzer's hospital at Lambarene, but, sick and isolated from fellow clergy, he was becoming an absentee rector. He retired in 1935. 
Effie Shaw died in February 1944. On 2 October of that year Hudson Shaw was married to Maude Royden; on 30 November, at their home, the Old Cottage, Bayley's Hill, Sevenoaks, Kent, he too died. He was buried in the Weald churchyard, Sevenoaks on 4 December. He had long outlived his own reputation. There was a brief posthumous revival of celebrity with the publication of 'A Threefold Cord' (1947), Royden's candid portrayal of her relationship with the Shaws. 
Shaw's publications were scanty and always incidental to some other purpose. His Stanhope prize essay was published. The syllabuses he wrote were routinely issued by Oxford and the American Society for Extension of University Teaching. His syllabus on Ruskin, written in a blaze of energy shortly after the master's death, assumed the proportions of a small textbook. The occasional sermon or lecture delivered at extension summer meetings, invariably revealing of the author's passions, appeared in print. 


@@@@@


doc= 39465


Lowther, Claude William Henry (1870-1929), politician and art connoisseur, was born at Binstead on the Isle of Wight on 26 June 1870, the third child and only son of Francis William Lowther (1841-1908), an officer in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Louise Beatrice de Fonblanque. His father was an illegitimate son of William Lowther, the second earl of Lonsdale, and received a legacy of $125,000 on the latter's death in 1872. Educated at Rugby School, Lowther entered the diplomatic service and was honorary attache at Madrid in 1894. Early in 1900 he joined the eighth battalion, imperial yeomanry, an irregular force of mounted infantrymen who embodied the national resolve to defeat the Boers. On 30 March 1900 he was a member of a composite force, commanded by Sir Charles Warren, defending Faber's Put farmhouse. During the Boer attack Lowther, assisted by two troopers, rescued two severely wounded men under heavy fire, an action which led Warren to recommend him, unsuccessfully, for the Victoria Cross. 
In the 'khaki' election of October 1900 Lowther was elected the Unionist MP for North Cumberland, a constituency which included part of the family's estate. He was defeated in the general election in 1906 and, dismayed by his rejection by the voters, spoke out against the threat which socialism posed, in his view, to the survival of the crown, Lords, and empire. He was an enthusiastic tariff reformer and asserted the cause of 'national efficiency', including provision for infant welfare and pensions. Defence of empire and functional privilege, interest in selective social reform, and indictment of collectivism were sustained themes of his political life. As chairman of the Anti-Socialist Union, in 1908-11, he made bitter, forthright, and often personalized attacks on the leaders of parliamentary Labour. After a further defeat in January 1910, he regained the North Cumberland seat in December 1910, and from 1918 to 1922 he was MP for the Lonsdale division of Lancashire as a coalition Unionist. 
Although Lowther made politics his profession, he cultivated wider interests in the theatre and connoisseurship. Out of friendship Herbert Beerbohm Tree presented his play 'The Gordian Knot' at His Majesty's Theatre in 1903. The text does not survive. It was heartily booed on its first performance and, courageously, Tree came before the curtain at the end of the performance to mollify the audience. Their friendship survived. Max Beerbohm, brother of Tree, drew two caricatures of Lowther. 
In 1910 Lowther bought Herstmonceux Castle, near Hailsham, Sussex, which was the picturesque ruin of one of the finest domestic buildings of the fifteenth century. He rebuilt the great gateway tower, south front, and large parts of the banqueting hall. The inhabitable parts of the castle were refurnished. Lowther collected Flemish tapestries, Jacobean oak furniture, and old English glass to recreate an enchanted twilight castle where he met his guests 'dressed in black knee breeches, black silk stockings and buckled shoes as though for a Court Ball' (Carter, 462-3). 
Lowther owned only 183 acres and was barely capable of obtaining squirearchical influence over the fiercely independent trug makers of Herstmonceux. However, this 'Sussex man' ('Sussex Daily News', 13 Nov 1914) received official sanction to raise new battalions of the Royal Sussex regiment in September 1914 which quickly overtook, in efficiency and popularity, the efforts of traditional raisers of manpower in the county. His three Southdown battalions acquired a distinctive character as 'Lowther's own'. Among the small villages and seaside resorts of Sussex he successfully applied the 'pals' principle which ensured that men who enlisted together, trained, fought (and died) alongside each other. It echoed the imperial yeomanry of 1900 as an expression of active citizenship in time of national crisis. The raisers of service battalions rarely, however, commanded their own formations in France and Lieutenant-Colonel Lowther was no exception. He returned to Herstmonceux Castle a disappointed man. 
In 1916 Lowther clamoured for conscription for both military and industrial purposes. He identified with the powerful sacrificial impulse in wartime Britain. Early in 1918 he urged the creation of an army of veterans above military age because it was 'the tragedy of their lives' for fit older men not to be able to fight for their country ('Hansard 5C', 101, 24 Jan 1918, 1242). He had a Milnerite regard for the uniformed patriotic working man. 
At the end of the war Lowther's preoccupations were those of an anti-modernist. He expressed dissatisfaction with the design of the victory medal and hoped that Kipling would become poet laureate. His voice was among those which demanded massive financial compensation from Germany. At home his attachment to national efficiency was not translated into a vision of social reconstruction but ended in the mire of the 'anti-waste' movement. His support for Horatio Bottomley's 'Economy with Efficiency' campaign confirmed his hostility to Lloyd George. He was among the majority of Unionist MPs who voted to end the coalition with Lloyd George at the celebrated meeting held at the Carlton Club on 19 October 1922. In declining health, he withdrew from politics at the general election held in November 1922. 
Lowther's letters to political allies reveal a pungent and witty observer of high politics. His intellectual arrogance, poetic instinct, mild eccentricities, and hostility to coalition unionism damaged his parliamentary career but conveyed his insistence on remaining an independent-minded country gentleman. His capacity for friendship was demonstrated in his correspondence with Winston Churchill, who in August 1916, at a low point in his political career, was lent a cottage in the grounds of the castle. Lowther died, unmarried, at his London home, 43 Catherine Street, Westminster, on 16 June 1929. No parliamentary colleagues were present at his memorial service. His two sisters erected a plaque in his memory in All Saints' Church, Herstmonceux. In his partial restoration of Herstmonceux Castle, Lowther created a monument of beauty but the contents were auctioned at his death; restoration work at the castle was resumed in 1932 by Sir Paul Latham and his architect, Walter H. Godfrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 39466


Lytton, Neville Stephen Bulwer-, third earl of Lytton (1879-1951), artist and army officer, was born on 6 February 1879 in Calcutta, the fourth son and youngest of seven children of Edward Robert Bulwer-Lytton, second Baron Lytton (1831-1891), who was created earl of Lytton in 1880, and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Villiers (1841-1936). At the time of Neville's birth his father was serving as viceroy of India. Neville Lytton was educated at Eton College (1891-6), and at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts of the Sorbonne in Paris (1896-9). 
As a younger son who had apparently little chance of succeeding to the title (although two of his brothers died before his birth), Lytton was able to develop his wide artistic talents. Fluent in French and an ardent Francophile throughout his life, he fell under the influence of the poet Wilfrid Scawen Blunt while studying art in Paris. He also developed an interest in folk art and the arts and crafts movement. On 2 February 1899 Lytton married Blunt's only child, Judith Anne Dorothea (1873-1957), who succeeded as Baroness Wentworth in her own right in 1917. They had one son, Noel Anthony Scawen, born in 1900, and two daughters. Alternating between Paris, London, and his family home at Balcombe in Sussex, Lytton established a reputation as a society painter; he had his first one-man exhibition at the Carfax gallery in 1904, and gave a paper to the Art-Workers' Guild in London in 1907, subsequently published in 1911 as 'Water-Colour' with a dedication to Blunt, in which he expressed strong opposition to modernism in all its forms. He also owned an ivory flute which he played well, was an accomplished Morris dancer, and won the tennis international amateur cup in Paris three years running (1911-13). 
Lytton's main contribution to public life came quite unexpectedly in the First World War. In 1914, with the rank of captain (he became major in January 1915), he helped raise the 11th (Southdown) battalion of the Royal Sussex regiment ('Lowther's lambs'), part of 116th brigade, 39th division. He served with the battalion on the western front in early 1916 before being slightly wounded, and with the brigade staff during the battle of the Somme. In autumn 1916 he was selected for a general staff appointment with section I (d) of general headquarters of the British army in France, as a press liaison and censorship officer. His outspoken war memoirs, 'The Press and the General Staff', published in 1920 and illustrated with his own drawings, are an invaluable source on the British army's attitude towards the press and propaganda during the war. He finished the war with four mentions in dispatches and the OBE. 
Following the war Lytton settled once more in Sussex. His wartime experience with the press led him to pursue an occasional career as a journalist as well as resuming life as a painter. His discursive and semi-autobiographical book 'The English Country Gentleman', published in 1925, includes commemorative essays on Blunt, who had died in 1922, and on his own sister, Lady Constance Bulwer-Lytton, the suffragette, who had died in 1923. Examples of Lytton's art appear in this book, including the Balcombe frescoes which he completed in 1923. He also edited the volume in the 'Lonsdale Library' series dealing with 'Winter Sports' in 1930. 
In 1923 Lytton's first wife obtained a divorce, and in 1924 he married Rosa Alexandrine (Sandra) Fortel of St Rambert-en-Bugey, near Lyon. The couple had one daughter. They settled in France, where Bulwer-Lytton became a Societere of the Societe Nationale des Beaux Arts as well as a regular contributor to all major exhibitions in France and Britain. In 1936 he exhibited a portrait of his brother Victor in his robes as second earl of Lytton. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War, Lytton was employed by the French foreign office to make propaganda radio broadcasts to the United States. After the French defeat in 1940 he and his wife retired to her home town, which was in Vichy France. In autumn 1941 they obtained permission to leave for Portugal and so returned to Britain, circumstances recounted by Lytton in a series of propaganda articles expanded in 1942 into the book 'Life in Unoccupied France'. 
After the war Lytton and his wife settled in France once more. In 1947 he succeeded his brother as third earl of Lytton, but took no part in public life. He died at home in Paris, 8 rue du Val de Grace, of old age on 9 February 1951. His funeral took place at the British embassy church in Paris on 13 February, and he was buried on the same day at Valmondois, Seine et Oise. The son of his first marriage succeeded as fourth earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 39469


Samuel, Moses (1795-1860), watchmaker and Hebrew scholar, was born in London, the youngest of three sons of Emanuel Menachem Samuel ('c'.1755- 'c'.1800) and Hanna (Hinde). Emanuel Samuel, who bore the Hebrew title 'the learned', had left his birthplace, Kempen in the province of Posen, and settled in London about 1775. At the age of ten Moses moved with his mother to Liverpool where his brothers had already settled. He lived there for the rest of his life, residing for the longest period in Paradise Street. He seems to have received little formal education but was an outstanding autodidact and is said to have mastered twelve languages, including Chinese. Samuel set up in business as a watchmaker and silversmith. In 1821 he married Harriet (1793-1843), daughter of Israel Israel of Bury Street, St Mary Axe, London. They had two daughters and three sons; the latter all married daughters of Schreiner Wolfe of Great Yarmouth, first mayor of Kimberley in the northern Cape Colony. 
Samuel's main source of literary inspiration was the philosophy of Moses Mendelssohn, whom he called 'the grand luminary of science and knowledge' ('Memoirs of Moses Mendelsohn', 1825, vi). Samuel became his chief English interpreter and translator; he published English editions of Mendelssohn's 'Jerusalem' (1838) and of the celebrated correspondence between Mendelssohn and Lavater, published as part of 'Memoirs'. Samuel praised the 'inimitable mellifluence' of Mendelssohn's style and the 'pleasing ductility of his most exquisite cogitations'. Samuel favoured 'a plain, almost literal, flowing, easily comprehended translation' ('Address on the Position of the Jews in Britain', 1844, 11). His renderings of Mendelssohn succeeded in conveying the charm and lucidity of the original and remained the standard English versions for more than a century. 
Samuel also translated into English the pseudepigraphical 'Book of Jasher', a supposedly ancient Hebrew text, which Samuel persuaded himself was authentic. He sold his translation for $150 to the American-Jewish newspaper owner Mordecai M. Noah, who published it in New York in 1840. Samuel's name was not mentioned, since the two men differed over the authenticity of the work. The translation was accepted as accurate but the publication provoked criticism by scholars who rejected the claims made on behalf of the text. It won acceptance, however, by the Mormon prophet Joseph Smith. 
Samuel was a determined foe of Christian proselytization among the Jews and published anti-missionary pamphlets in 1819, 1822, and 1827. A liberal in politics, he was a vigorous campaigner for Jewish emancipation. In 1840, while attending a meeting on the subject, he collapsed and in 1845 he became paralysed. 'My doctor informed me that if I did not give up my abstruse calculations I should have another attack', he later wrote to Lord Brougham (Samuel to Brougham, 24 Feb 1850, UCL, Brougham MSS). Samuel nevertheless persisted in his literary activity and attributed his partial recovery to the embrace of total abstinence. During the later part of his life he earned a living as a teacher of languages. 
Like his hero Mendelssohn, Samuel combined strict orthodoxy with attraction to the ideas of the Enlightenment. While opposed to the incipient Reform movement in Judaism, he favoured modest innovations in synagogal practice, such as the institution of lectures in English. In 1846-7, with D. M. Isaacs, minister to the Liverpool Jewish community, Samuel edited 'Kos Yeshuot' ('Cup of Salvation'), a monthly magazine 'devoted to the advocacy of Orthodox Jewish principles'. Many of the contributions appeared in Hebrew with English translations. The magazine's publication of original articles in Hebrew on secular subjects, for example, one by Samuel celebrating the railway engine, was unusual for the period, particularly in England. 
Unlike his brother Louis (1794-1859), who died a rich man, Samuel remained poor to the end. He nevertheless acquired a library of rare Hebrew books. Samuel's business prospered in the hands of his descendants. By the turn of the century it developed into the first multiple shop jeweller in Britain. Trading as 'H. Samuel' it became the most successful retail watch and jewellery chain in the country. Moses Samuel's great-grandson, Gilbert Samuel Edgar, served as chairman from 1935 to 1978. Moses Samuel died at Ranelagh Place, Mount Pleasant, Liverpool, on 17 April 1860 and was buried in the Liverpool Jewish cemetery. He left 'effects under $100'. His descendants included a Roman Catholic priest, Father Edward Hill, and a Metropolitan Police magistrate, Geoffrey George Raphael. His great-nephew was Herbert Louis Samuel, first Viscount Samuel. 


@@@@@


doc= 39472


Ward, Arthur Henry (1883-1959), writer, was born in Ladywood, Birmingham, on 15 February 1883, the only child of Irish immigrant parents, a clerk, William Ward (1847x51-1932), and Margaret Mary, 'nee' Furey (1849x52-1901). A lifetime spent in autobiographical embroidering means that little reliable information is known about his early life, or his schooling, but we do know that the family moved to London about 1886, and from a young age Ward appears to have devoured thrillers and historical novels, and to have written imaginative stories. 
After various false starts, including a stint in a bank, another as a gas company clerk, and a third as a reporter, Ward -- who replaced his middle name Henry with the more unusual Sarsfield at the time of his mother's death -- began to have success as a music-hall sketch and song writer. He also turned out copy as a hack journalist, and he sold his first piece of fiction in 1903 to 'Chambers's Journal', earning his living from this parcel of activities between 1906 and 1909. In 1905 Ward met a variety-act juggler, Rose Elisabeth Knox (1886-1979), sister of the Crazy Gang comedian Teddy Knox, and they were married in London on 14 January 1909. In 1910 Ward published 'Pause!', a collection of stories in collaboration with George Robey, and in 1911 ghost-wrote an autobiography of Harry Relph (Little Tich). Encouraged by Elisabeth, Ward published his first serial in 'Cassell's Magazine' in 1912, using his Sax Rohmer pseudonym which first appeared with one of his songs in 1908. 'The Sins of Severac Babylon' (published in book form in 1914) was an antisemitic fantasy starring a 'Jewish Robin Hood'. 
But it was Ward's 'Chinese' creation, the villainous Fu Manchu, leader of the secret society the Si-Fan, with whom he remains most strongly identified. Although Chinese themes had always had a niche in collections of mysteries and thriller novels, Ward's were to prove by far the most successful. His inspiration lay squarely in the unapologetic opportunism of a professional hack writer: 'Conditions for launching a Chinese villain on the market', he is reputed to have said, 'were ideal' (Van Ash and Rohmer, 75). The first Fu Manchu story was serialized in 1912-13 in the wake of the 1911 revolution in China. 'The Mystery of Dr Fu Manchu' (1913) launched the career of a villain with all the 'cruel cunning of the entire Eastern race, accumulated in one giant intellect, with all the resources of a wealthy government... Dr Fu Manchu, the yellow peril incarnate in one man' (p. 23). Incarnate in one woman, too, as Fu Manchu's mysterious slave-girl, or later his daughter, supplied somewhat hazily suggestive sex-interest for the works. Ward's villain was regularly killed off over the years, but revived (as late as 1957) by popular demand or at the insistence of Ward's publishers or wallet. The books partly developed with their times: having once aimed to rule the Edwardian world, by 1948 (in 'Shadow of Fu Manchu') the Devil Doctor was trying to save the planet from communism. 
Some fifteen Fu Manchu books appeared in all, and their popularity was exploited and reinforced in turn by film adaptations (serials and single films) and radio series, and also by a legion of copyists. Most of the stories were initially set in London's Limehouse district, then entering a period when the tiny Chinese community was the focus of sensationalist newspaper reportage and literary 'exposes'. These concentrated on relationships between British women and Chinese men, on illegal immigration, and, somewhat relentlessly, on opium. The criminalization of opium and cocaine possession in the wake of the First World War focused the minds of jobbing hacks on the possibilities of Limehouse, which was presented to the popular reading public as an opium-addled 'Orient' in London's East End. Later Fu Manchu tales were located in the United States, and their narrators and heroes were American too, reflecting Ward's appreciation of the power of market forces. 
Limehouse developed as a literary sub-genre in itself and Ward took advantage of its notoriety -- and thereby greatly boosted it -- writing more particular, and equally influential, works in which drug smuggling, 'white slavery', and opium dens played major roles. 'Dope: a Story of Chinatown and the Drug Traffic' (1919), for example, was a speedy, factional retelling of the cocaine-related death of the actress Billie Carleton and the sensational exposure of a Mayfair opium-smoking set which followed. Ward's Chinatown fiction intentionally had the appearance of reportage, while his savvy marketing of things allegedly Chinese further extended to his music-hall songs and monologues, and even to the creation of a perfume, styled Honan, which was produced by a Chinese workforce in Limehouse, and launched with opium-redolent packaging and publicity in 1919. 
A brief period of war service (1915-16) in the Artists' Rifles (from which he was invalided), and some work for MI7 (b), which dealt with press propaganda questions, hardly put Ward off his writing stride. But after 1919 he made concerted efforts to achieve success in a different field, the theatre. His activities began moderately well with 'Round in Fifty' (1922), a reworking of Jules Verne's 'Around the World in 80 Days', but his mystery plays 'The Eye of Siva' (1923) and 'Secret Egypt' (1928) were unsuccessful, and other projects came to nothing, so he returned to fiction writing. Ward had fallen victim to more than one dishonest agent, but still earned enough to build his own house near Reigate in Surrey, travel widely, and indulge in roulette 'systems'. Nevertheless, it seemed that he was always having to write one more book to earn his living. 
As the magazine serial form died out after the Second World War, so Ward's popularity waned, but he was adept at reinventing himself. His biggest market was in the United States, to which the Wards moved in 1947, having been frequent visitors since 1919. Film, radio, and latterly television royalties there became his main source of income. The Fu Manchu character was recycled, initially for a BBC radio serial, as a female criminal, Sumuru. This led to a series of luridly titled books, including 'Nude in Mink' (1950) and 'Virgin in Flames' (1953); Ward's style was fundamentally innocent, and of a different era, but he still made the shift in emphasis from poison in Fu Manchu to sex in the Sumuru series. 
For all of Ward's pretensions as a composer of well-written popular fiction, he was never considered to be more than a writer of lurid lowbrow shockers by his contemporaries. His reputation today rests on his creation of Fu Manchu, but largely because it has become a byword for racist stereotyping of Chinese people. The pervasiveness of the figure of the Chinese villain gave rise to contemporary complaints, and even to efforts by the Chinese nationalist government in the 1930s to thwart Hollywood adaptations of such works. Such moves ultimately had little impact on a widely disseminated stereotype, and the Fu Manchu idea easily survived the death of its creator on 1 June 1959 from pneumonia and a cerebral haemorrhage at University College Hospital, London. Ward was buried in Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery, London. 
As a thriller writer Ward is of little importance. His prose is pompous and ponderous, and his plotting thin, predictable, and repetitious. However, Ward was an entrepreneur with an instinctive knowledge of his market, in the face of rapid developments in popular fiction in the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 39473


Swire, (George) Warren (1883-1949), merchant and businessman, was born on 27 May 1883 in Pembroke Gardens, London, the only child of John Samuel Swire (1825-1898), and his second wife, Mary, 'nee' Warren ('c'.1851-1918). He was educated at Eton College from 1896 to 1901 (and retained a lifelong affection for the school), and then in Weimar, Germany, from 1901 to 1902. He became a partner in the family firm, John Swire & Sons, leading China merchants, in 1904, and acceded to full managerial responsibility at its London headquarters in 1918. 
Swire's early ambivalence about joining the firm was shared by his partners, who thought his character unsuited to business and who accordingly changed the firm to a limited liability company from 1 January 1914. However, Swire slowly settled in, and from 1912 he took a particular interest in the shipping side, especially the firm's China Navigation Company. This had for some years made a loss, and Swire undertook a scheme of new shipbuilding and other improvements which helped to bring it back into profitability. Swire's progress was only partially interrupted by the war. He joined a territorial regiment, the socially prestigious Royal Bucks hussars, in 1907, was mobilized in 1914, and was sent with the regiment to Egypt the following year. He was transferred back to Britain in 1916 to work in the control of shipping, in which he was patently of more use. His career in the army was far from happy: 'the head of JS&S is a bad place to learn subordination & obedience to incompetent fools, who aren't even gentlemen' he wrote at the time (Swire to C. C. Scott, 12 Dec 1915, Swire MSS, JSSI 3/5). 
Swire was chairman of John Swire & Sons from 1927 to 1946, during one of the most traumatic periods of the firm's history. If he lacked the vision and flexibility of his nephew, John Kitson Swire (1893-1983), who was to rehabilitate and expand the company after the Second World War, only he could have held it together through the inter-war period. After 1925 the company was threatened by civil war and revolution in China. The onset of the depression in 1928 badly affected its shipping operations, and the outbreak of the Sino-Japanese War caused further disruption to trade. The nationalistic economic policies and legislation introduced by the Guomindang government in China after 1927 also had an important impact on business. These undermined the treaty privileges enjoyed by Swires and other foreign companies, notably the inland navigation rights which enabled them to dominate China's domestic shipping trade. A man less interested in politics and diplomacy, and less confident in asserting his view of the necessity for adaptation by British companies, as well as the limits of compromise, would not have looked after the interests of the company so well. Swire believed that the firm was destined to stay in China, and was destined also to contribute to China's economic development, regardless of China's nationalist agenda and British government 'defeatism'. This strain of idealism was quite pronounced, and it contrasted sharply with his hard-nosed approach to practical business matters. Swire was an active member of the China Association, a frequent contributor to China discussions at the Royal Institute of International Affairs, and a compulsive writer of strong letters to prime ministers and lesser men. 
Swire was feared by many of his staff, to whom he was often famously rude; equally he could be disarmingly kind. His periodic visits to the Far East were occasions for assessing his staff and for consulting diplomatic representatives. Such visits allowed him to keep a close eye on the minutiae of the firm's operations and its responses to London's policy decisions. While there, especially after 1929, Swire also eased relations with Chinese business and political leaders who had previously, as a class, been largely ignored by British firms. His was also an important voice in the shift of emphasis of the firm towards employing more Chinese staff, better targeting of Chinese customers, and the setting up of Sino-British subsidiary companies, such as the Taikoo Chinese Navigation Company. Swire recognized that nationalism in China was a permanent fixture of the post-1927 landscape, and that British firms had to adapt to its demands, or perish. 
Swire nevertheless firmly believed that the company should be actively involved in furthering the interests of the British empire in China. In this, as in many other areas, he was influenced by his upbringing. He believed in the values of the Conservative Party, in hierarchy, and in race; he remained vocally pro-Nazi long after the Second World War began. In other ways he modelled himself on his father who had died when he was fifteen, and he saw himself more as a merchant adventurer than as a City businessman. Despite his difficult manner, however, he was widely respected by his colleagues and competitors. 
Towards the end of the 1930s Swire began to disagree with his nephew over the direction the company was taking, starting a personal and professional rift that was never healed. After he retired as chairman in 1946 Swire busied himself with, among other projects, his work for the Port of London's Mission to Seamen and as a crown estate paving commissioner. He never married. His interests included music (especially Wagner), and photography. His country estate in Scotland, Glen Affric, and its deer hunting, formed another passion. Increasingly crippled by arthritis in his sixties which he refused to allow to restrict his life, Swire died suddenly on his feet, as he would have wished, of a heart attack, on 18 November 1949, at his home, 22 Chester Terrace, Regent's Park, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 39475


Swire, John Samuel (1825-1898), merchant and shipowner, was born in Liverpool on 24 December 1825, the eldest son of John Swire (1793-1847), merchant, and Maria Louisa, 'nee' Roose ('c'.1794-1858). His father had founded the family import-export business in Liverpool about 1816, and it became John Swire & Sons in 1832. At his death in 1847 the elder Swire left equal shares in the firm, and capital to the value of $1000 each, to John Samuel and his younger brother, William Hudson Swire (1830-1884). 
During his youth Swire sought physical adventure; in maturity he sought fulfilment in business. He spent five months in the American west in 1849, and in September 1854 he sailed for Australia to seek his fortune, working at diggings in New South Wales before founding a branch of the family firm in Melbourne. This episode exhibited two of his most salient personal characteristics: tenacity and commercial long-sightedness. A quick fortune eluded him, however, and he returned to resume his responsibilities in Liverpool; his brother, plagued by ill health, had been finding it difficult to cope with the business on his own. 
One of Swire's first acts on returning to Britain was, on 15 November 1859, to marry Helen Abigail ('b'. 'c'.1837), daughter of Adam Fairrie, a member of a notable sugar-refining family. She died at sea, however, on holiday in the Bay of Smyrna, on 5 May 1862, after only thirty months of marriage, leaving one child, John (Jack) Swire (1861-1933). Swire, shocked by the blow, retreated into the world of work. In the first two decades after the death of their father, the Swire brothers built up their business, establishing a solid presence in New York and Australia, and widening the range of goods they traded. Wine was imported from Le Havre, bottled Guinness was shipped to Australia, and raw cotton was acquired from the United States. By 1867, after twenty years of slow, steady growth, they had placed their enterprise on a secure foundation, sharply symbolized by their removal of the firm's head office to London that year. Swire bought out his brother's share of the company in 1876, but for many years before that the development and fortunes of the firm had been directed by the iron hand of the Senior (as he was nicknamed). 
Swire is chiefly remembered as the great interloper among the foreign firms trading on the China coast, arriving late on the scene at the close of the decades of war and rebellion, and barging his way forcefully and quickly into a position of great prominence. The gentlemanly traders, Jardine Mathesons (the 'Princely Hong'), Dents, and Russell & Co., found their interests and ambitions sharply challenged by the upstart newcomer from the bourgeois English north-west. Unlike most firms already there, Swires was untarred by association with the illegal opium trade; it was also healthily interested in pursuing good relations with prospective Chinese customers. The sight of Swire employees entertaining Chinese merchants frankly appalled their foreign competitors. 
Swires had initially sought new markets in China and Japan because of the disruption of the cotton trade after 1861 by the civil war in the United States. Ten years of extraordinary expansion of those business activities were quietly heralded by John Swire's arrival in Shanghai on 28 November 1866. Within a week of his landing Swire established a branch of the firm in a partnership (dissolved two years later) with Richard Shackleton Butterfield (died 1879). Initially trading in tea, silk, and imports of cotton and piece-goods, the firm of Butterfield and Swire -- Taikoo (from a local term meaning 'ancient and honourable') -- became identified with interests as diverse as shipping, sugar, and insurance. After opening a second branch in Yokohama, Swire returned overland to Britain in mid-1867. 
The key to Swire's success in China lay in his network of international contacts, and especially in his firm's close long-term association with the Ocean Steam Ship Company -- the Blue Funnel Line -- owned by fellow Liverpudlians Alfred and Philip Holt. Swire was an initial investor in the enterprise in 1865 and Taikoo first became Blue Funnel's Shanghai agents, in 1868, and then took on the Hong Kong agency, in 1870. Swire's influence on the Ocean Steam Ship Company's growth was great, and his loyalty solid; his was the broader vision which the Holts lacked; his too was the initiative behind the shipping conferences which regulated competition and unified Far Eastern shipping interests. The relationship was, of course, mutually beneficial: Blue Funnel ships were fed goods and passengers by the Swire-managed China Navigation Company (CNC), which operated on the Yangtze (Yangzi) River. 
The story of CNC pointedly illustrates Swire's business approach. Close supervision of costs, tenacity, and patient long-term planning were combined with a willingness to take risks that others often considered foolish, and to drop schemes that went wrong. The capital for the firm was raised in London in 1872. Two existing ships were acquired for service on the Yangtze, and a further three ordered. By virtue, initially, of a fierce rates war, and latterly of rigid conference schemes, Swire built up the firm, forcing Russells to leave the river and holding his own against Jardines and other competitors. The company's progress illustrates the Senior's gritty idealism: CNC, he believed, deserved a fair share of an expanding trade that could easily support all the competing firms, and so Swire set out to seize that share. By 1883 CNC had twenty ships, and by 1894 it was the largest of the Yangtze shipping fleets with twenty-nine; by 1900 it boasted fifty ships and extensive shore properties, and the company had also established a successful presence in China's coastal trade. Unlike other companies John Swire & Sons kept out of treaty-port politics, and their voice was rarely heard in the special-pleading, China-lobbying groups; both activities diverted attention away from business, which remained the Senior's key passion. 
While Swire's success depended partly on the quality of the men he employed and on the loyalty that his rigorously fair, but absolutely uncompromising, manner engendered, he also kept a close personal eye on activities and personalities in China and elsewhere. He travelled back out to Asia four more times and also revisited Australia twice, and built up the firm relentlessly. When not riding to hounds, or spying out possible horse purchases, he lived and talked business in the 1860s and 1870s. Wealth was not the spur, and he could have retired comfortably when his brother William chose to. 
'I have always gone in for 'glory', and not $ & d', Swire wrote to his prospective second wife in 1881 (Swire to Warren, 24 July 1881, Swire Archives). Lonely since Helen's death it was with some trepidation and great reticence that he embarked on the courtship of Mary ('c'.1851-1918), the daughter of George Warren, a Liverpool shipowner. They married on 18 October 1881, and had one child, (George) Warren Swire (1883-1949). In 1884 the couple moved to Leighton House, in Leighton Buzzard, where they were associated with various philanthropic ventures; apart from hunting, however, Swire played no active role in local public affairs. 
The Senior never relinquished control over the company; and it was only some years after his death that his partners began to inaugurate projects he had previously opposed. In the last decade of his life rheumatoid arthritis caused him much pain, not least the tedium of spa visits to alleviate his suffering. Ill health failed to stop his frequent touring in Europe, but his beloved horse-riding came to an end in 1894. In November 1898 Swire was confined to bed for three weeks with a severe attack of arthritis. On 1 December he died of heart failure, at his London home, 31 Pembridge Square. He was buried at All Saints' Church, Leighton Buzzard, on 6 December 1898. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 39476


Maze, Sir Frederick William (1871-1959), civil servant and customs official in China, was born on 2 July 1871 at 11 Abercorn Terrace in Belfast, the younger son of James Maze, linen merchant, of Ballinderry, and Mary, one of two daughters of Henry Hart of Lisburn. He was educated privately and at Wesley College, Dublin. He followed his uncle, Sir Robert Hart, into the Chinese imperial maritime customs service in 1891 and was appointed in 1899 as acting audit secretary at the inspectorate-general in Peking (Beijing). During the Boxer uprising, 1900, he was acting commissioner at Ichang (Yichang). There followed numerous appointments as deputy commissioner and then commissioner in various provinces, and consequent responsibility for the opening of new customs houses. Maze married, in 1917, an Australian, Laura Gwendoline (1888-1972), younger daughter of Edward Bullmore of Oakwood Station and Ipswich, Queensland. Three times in 1927 Maze was offered and refused the post of southern inspector-general by the Nationalist government, but in 1928 he accepted an appointment as adviser to the national board of reconstruction. In 1929 he became inspector-general of the maritime customs service. In 1932 he was a member of the national loans sinking fund commission. In 1937 he was appointed counsellor to accompany Dr Kung, envoy-extraordinary, to London for the coronation of George VI. 
Maze worked in the customs service through a period of great political upheaval: the fall of the Ch'ing dynasty (China's last) in 1911; the breakdown of the republic; the attempts of the Nationalist Party to unite the country; and the splitting away of the communists and invasions by Japan in the 1930s. However, with great skill and diplomacy, recognized by his creation as KBE in 1932, he was able to keep the service together, particularly during the war with Japan, which controlled many of China's main ports. He preserved the integrity and efficiency of the service by treading a careful line between loyalty to the recognized Chinese government on the one hand and maintaining good relations with the Japanese on the other. 
Maze was interested in, and helped to promote, many aspects of Chinese life and culture, in particular its maritime architecture. He assembled an unrivalled collection of scale models of Chinese junks and sampans, built in Hong Kong and Shanghai by Chinese craftsmen under expert supervision. He presented the collection to the British nation by depositing it with the Science Museum in London in 1938. He was also an honorary member of l'Association des Amis du Musee de Marine, Paris. 
As the Sino-Japanese War was swallowed up by the Second World War the situation in China became impossible. Soon after the attack on Pearl Harbor Maze was one of almost two hundred Britons and Americans held captive at the 'Bridgehouse', once the New Asia Hotel, in Shanghai. On his release the following year he was repatriated to Portuguese East Africa, but he returned to China in an effort to help his staff imprisoned there. He resigned from the service on health grounds in 1943 and was made KCMG in 1944. Foreign governments, to which he had rendered great service over many years, also honoured him; in addition to numerous honours from the Chinese, he received notable distinctions from Japan, Belgium, Portugal, Norway, Denmark, France, and Germany, and was made knight commander of the order of Pius IX by the Holy See. 
After serving briefly as adviser to the ministry of finance, Maze joined his wife in retirement in Cape Town, South Africa, moving to Victoria, British Columbia, in Canada in 1948. They were founder members of the Victoria branch of the English-Speaking Union in 1955. Maze died at the Royal Jubilee Hospital, Victoria, on 25 March 1959 and was buried at Royal Oak burial park on 28 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 39482


Hardoon, Silas Aaron (1851-1931), merchant and property owner, was born in Baghdad, one of the six children of Aaron Hardoon. He moved with his family to Bombay about 1856. His family was poor and he received only an elementary education, possibly supported by the local Baghdadi Jewish community. 
Hardoon's career was made within the trading diaspora of Baghdadi Jews in India and in east Asia. Employed while still in his teens by David Sassoon & Co., the major Baghdadi Jewish merchant house in Asia, he was transferred to its Hong Kong office about 1868, and then to its Shanghai branch in 1874. In its early years the firm competed with Jardine Matheson & Co. in exporting opium from India to China. About 1882 Hardoon left David Sassoon & Co. and after a brief engagement as cotton broker, he joined E. D. Sassoon & Co. (a firm established by one of the sons of David Sassoon) either in 1886 or 1887. In the later nineteenth century E. D. Sassoon & Co. was advancing into cotton mills, brewing, paper mills, shipping, tramways, and banking. Hardoon acted as manager and, after 1893, as partner, and mainly handled opium imports and purchase of properties. He severed his association with this enterprise in 1911. 
Meanwhile, in 1901 Hardoon had founded the Hardoon Company, which also dealt in opium and real estate. It remains difficult to assess the degree of his involvement in the opium trade, but it was probably not the focus of his operations. The key to his commercial success was his continuous and far-sighted purchase of properties in the central district of the Shanghai international settlement, where the value of land rose dramatically after the beginning of the century. In 1916 he became the major owner of properties along Nanking Road, which was the main commercial thoroughfare. He served as councillor of the Conseil Municipal Francais of the Shanghai Concession Francaise from 1892 until 1903. He was also elected, from 1900 until 1904, to the same position in the British-dominated Shanghai municipal council, where he represented the interests of E. D. Sassoon & Co. 
Apart from his economic achievements, Hardoon is mostly remembered for his strong ties with Chinese society. His marriage on 26 September 1886 to Liza Roos (1864-1941), more commonly known as Luo Jialing, a Eurasian Buddhist who identified almost exclusively with her Chinese background, reinforced these links. They married according to Chinese rites, but in 1928 they also entered into a British civil marriage in the Shanghai British consulate-general. Although Hardoon and his wife did not have any offspring, they jointly adopted eleven foreign children who were brought up as Jews. Luo Jialing also adopted numerous Chinese children under her Chinese surname Luo. 
Hardoon sponsored the reprinting of the canon of sacred Buddhist texts (accomplished about 1913), and also funded other Buddhist enterprises, such as the construction of the Pingshe retreat house. Such projects were conceived under the influence of his wife. After the foundation of the Chinese republic in 1911, Hardoon also financed educational and cultural activities within the most conservative Chinese intellectual circles, and he became well respected as a philanthropist. The Peking government duly bestowed on him at least twelve decorations in the seven years following 1917, including, in 1924, the first-class decoration of the Zhaowu order with Big Belt, possibly the highest honour ever conferred on a foreigner. 
Hardoon remained a regular contributor to the religious and philanthropic activities of the Shanghai Jewish community. In 1925 he donated the funds to build the Beth Aharon Synagogue. His participation in community affairs was, however, considered lukewarm compared with his more enthusiastic support for Chinese causes and attracted censure from the Jewish community. 
When Hardoon died, on 19 June 1931 at his private residence in Bubbling Well Road, Shanghai, his assets were estimated to be worth $35 million. He was buried on 21 June in his private garden in Shanghai, and Buddhist monks and Daoist priests attended his Jewish Orthodox funeral. An obituary in the 'Shanghai Evening Post and Mercury' (3 July 1931) described him as a 'unique local character': 'He was a blend of all faiths and hopes, a talented man who lived his life in an exotic setting as he thought best' ('Israel's Messenger', 3 July 1931). Above all, however, he was during the last quarter of his life the pre-eminent property owner in the international settlement and one of the richest foreigners in east Asia. 


@@@@@


doc= 39484


Dickson, James Douglas Hamilton (1849-1931), mathematician, was born on 1 May 1849 at 144 Bath Street, Glasgow, the son of John Robert Dickson, physician; he was the elder brother of Lord Scott Dickson. Dickson attended Hale School. He was fifteen when he matriculated at Glasgow University, where he studied from 1864 to 1869 and graduated in 1870. During his time there, he studied Latin, Greek, logic, mathematics, natural philosophy, and ethics. After taking the degree of master of arts, with second-class honours in mathematics and natural philosophy from Glasgow, he was awarded the Eglington fellowship of Glasgow University from 1870 to 1871. At Glasgow he was under the tutelage of William Thomson. In 1867 Thomson employed Dickson in his laboratory for mathematical work on electricity to determine the relation between electromagnetic and electrostatic units of electricity. Together with W. F. King of Edinburgh and C. Cuttriss of Boston, Massachusetts, Dickson devised the apparatus and made the preliminary experimentation for Thomson's determination of 'V' (the ratio of the electromagnetic to the electrostatic unit of electricity). Dickson also assisted Thomson with his work on deep-sea cables. Thomson made the first attempt to lay the French transatlantic cable in 1857, and until its completion in 1866 Dickson was engineer-in-charge, during which time he assisted Thomson to develop the siphon recorder for telegraph signals. 
In 1870 Thomson urged Dickson to resign his appointment and go up to Peterhouse, Cambridge, to read mathematics. During much of the nineteenth century Peterhouse was a popular college for Scottish students and also had the reputation of being mathematical; Dickson was admitted as a pensioner on 4 July 1870, was coached for the mathematical tripos by Cambridge's chief mathematical coach, Edward John Routh (who was also at the college), and was bracketed fifth wrangler in 1874. Dickson rowed in the college boats and played in the cricket eleven. On 29 October 1874 he was elected to a fellowship which he held for life. When James Porter became master of Peterhouse in 1876, Dickson succeeded him as tutor and held this office from 1877 to 1897; he became senior fellow when Lord Kelvin died in 1907. Probably about 1878, he married Isabella Catherine, daughter of James Banks, an Edinburgh printer; they had a son and a daughter. (Dickson's brother and the chemist James Dewar married Banks's other two daughters.) 
Dickson was also able to assist the statistician and eugenicist Francis Galton when the latter was working on his index of correlation and his regression coefficient. After Galton plotted the regression line from his mid-parental data, he discovered that the data took on the shape of two ellipses; he then wanted to find a single formula to express the results of this table from the ellipses. As he could not remember all the formulae of conic sections, he went up to Cambridge to meet Dickson who examined mathematically the system of concentric ellipses that would correspond to the ellipses described by Galton in his 1885 paper, 'Regression towards mediocrity in heredity stature'. Dickson's calculations confirmed Galton's theory that the value of the mid-parental regression was very nearly one-third. 
Dickson published occasional papers, principally on thermodynamics and thermoelectricity, which appeared in the 'Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh', 'Philosophical Magazine', and the 'Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society'. He was also one of the three literary executors to whom was entrusted the publication of the collected papers of Sir James Dewar. He was a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and a member of the London Mathematical Society and of the Royal Institution. 
Dickson's interests were varied. He became involved in a special study of Japan and the Japanese and assisted Genjiro Yamazaki (who was a student at Peterhouse) in the preparation of catalogues of the Japanese sword-hilts contained in Cambridge and Edinburgh. He contributed biographies of E. J. Routh, P. G. Tait, J. Hamblin Smith, and James Porter (all of whom were mathematicians and fellows at Peterhouse) to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. He was an enthusiastic musician who was for many years president of the Peterhouse Musical Society. Dickson died on 6 February 1931 at his home, 6 Cranmer Road, Cambridge, and was buried three days later in the chapel at Peterhouse. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 39485


Hill, Micaiah John Muller (1856-1929), mathematician, was born at Berhampore, Bengal, on 22 February 1856, the eldest son of the Revd Samuel John Hill, a missionary, and his wife, Leonora Josephine Muller. Sir George Francis Hill, numismatist, was his brother. After attending the School for the Sons of Missionaries, Blackheath, he entered University College, London, in October 1872. In 1874 he obtained his BA from the University of London, coming first in the mathematical honours list, and two years later was awarded the gold medal for his MA. In 1875 he entered Peterhouse, Cambridge, graduating as fourth wrangler and joint first Smith's prizeman in 1879. He briefly served as assistant to his old professor, Olaus Henrici, at University College before being appointed professor of mathematics at Mason College, Birmingham, in 1880. He made his final return to University College four years later when he was elected professor of pure mathematics. 
Hill's research work concentrated on three main topics: hydrodynamics, differential equations, and the theory of proportion. In the first (in 1883-94) he developed the theory of cylindrical vortices of finite section moving in an infinite fluid and published the solution for the axisymmetric spherical vortex, later known as Hill's vortex, the flow of which is somewhat similar to a smoke ring. Between 1888 and 1893 he investigated the various loci connected with first order differential equations and their complete primitives, obtaining many new and important results on the more general question of loci of singular points. Further papers on differential equations were published between 1916 and 1921. It was, however, the critical reappraisal of the fifth and sixth books of Euclid's 'Elements' which was to dominate Hill's mathematical research. Inspired by problems experienced when teaching students the theory of proportion, his analysis is contained in five papers in the 'Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society' (1897-1922), an edition of the two books in question (1900), and his book 'The Theory of Proportion' (1914). In these works, by simplifying many of the proofs and deleting superfluous definitions and axioms, he was able successfully to reformulate Euclid's approach. Unfortunately, coinciding as it did with the period of Euclid's expulsion from the classroom, Hill's work was never properly appreciated. 
Hill was a skilful and popular teacher. Infinitely patient, 'he possessed that rare quality, which students so keenly appreciate, of never slurring over difficulties: time spent on making a demonstration perfect was always to him time well spent' (Filon, 'Journal of the London Mathematical Society', 317). Described as 'one of the most commanding personalities' (Bellot, 390) of University College, he finally retired in 1923, although problems in finding a successor resulted in his staying on as acting professor for a further year. 
A fellow of the Royal Society since 1894, Hill served on its council in 1911-13, and was vice-president of the London Mathematical Society in 1894 and 1895. He also served on the senate of the University of London in 1900-26, as vice-chancellor in 1909-11. His last honour was to be president of the Mathematical Association in 1927-8. He married Minnie Grace (1861-1920), daughter of Marriot Ogle Tarbotton, on 21 December 1892, and they had two sons, the eldest of whom was the renowned air force officer Sir Roderic Maxwell Hill, and a daughter. Illness left Hill totally blind for the last fifteen months of his life. He died at his home, 39 West Heath Drive, Golders Green, Middlesex, on 11 January 1929, and was cremated three days later at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 39487


Henrici, Olaus Magnus Friedrich Erdmann (1840-1918), mathematician, was born in Meldorf, Danish Holstein, the son of Theodor Henrici. Between the ages of nine and sixteen he attended the 'Gymnasium' in Meldorf, before working for three years as an apprentice engineer at Flensburg. When he was nineteen he went to the Karlsruhe 'Polytechnicum', where, following the advice of Rudolf Clebsch, he studied mathematics. From the age of twenty-two he was a student of Ludwig Otto Hesse at Heidelberg, where he obtained his doctorate, and then moved to Berlin, where he studied under Karl Weierstrass and Leopold Kronecker, leading mathematicians there. He then became a 'Privatdozent' at Kiel University but, being unable to support himself, moved to London in 1865. 
Struggling to earn a living, Henrici provided for himself by teaching elementary mathematics to schoolboys, an experience that was to prove invaluable to his subsequent career by developing his power of expression. He obtained an introduction from Hesse to James Joseph Sylvester which enabled him to become acquainted with many of the foremost British mathematicians of the day, including Arthur Cayley, William Kingdon Clifford, and Thomas Archer Hirst, then professor of pure mathematics at University College, London. Henrici became Hirst's assistant and, in 1869, was appointed mathematics professor at Bedford College for Women. 
At Easter 1870 Henrici stood in for Hirst who had fallen ill; a few months later he was appointed the new professor at University College, following Hirst's resignation. He held the chair of pure mathematics for ten years. In 1879 Clifford, the professor of applied mathematics and mechanics, died, and Henrici acted as a temporary replacement before transferring to the applied chair the following year. He introduced projective geometry, vector analysis, and graphical statics into the University College mathematics syllabus -- a radical departure from the analytically biased Cambridge-style course previously taught. 
In 1884 Henrici left University College to become professor of mechanics and mathematics at the newly founded Central Technical College (later part of Imperial College) in South Kensington. There he set up an innovative laboratory of mechanics upon which many others were later based. Being highly proficient in the construction of models and apparatus, Henrici soon filled it with a myriad of machines and devices, including his 'harmonic analyser'. This modified version of a machine originally invented by Lord Kelvin to obtain Fourier coefficients mechanically was perhaps his most original piece of work. 
Henrici was a great perfectionist and would publish only when he was entirely convinced the work was satisfactory. Consequently, his publications are not voluminous, but the quality is very high. Among the most significant, a short book, 'Congruent Figures' (1878), attempted to familiarize students with the new projective methods he was introducing. A second volume dealing with similar figures was planned but never written. Similarly, another small book, 'Vectors and Rotors' (1903), based on his lectures to first-year students, dwelt only on the elementary part of the subject, being intended as the first part of a more comprehensive work which was never completed. Nevertheless, Henrici can be given the credit for introducing vectorial analysis into English mathematical teaching, making much use of it in his classes, where his success is confirmed by student accounts of 'the singular lucidity of his teaching' (Hill, xlix) and the 'masterly ease and freedom' (Bellot, 322) of his exposition. 
Other notable works are two papers read before the London Mathematical Society on the theory of discriminants and singularities of envelopes of series of curves ('Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society', 1st ser., 2, 1869). He also contributed lengthy and perceptive articles to the eleventh edition (1910-11) of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' on calculating machines, Euclidean geometry, projective geometry, and projection, as well as shorter pieces on descriptive geometry and perspective. 
In 1874, Henrici was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and he served on its council in 1882-3. He was also president of the London Mathematical Society from 1882 to 1884. On 15 August 1877 he married Helen Stodart Kennedy of Stepney Green, daughter of John Kennedy, a Congregational minister. Their son, Major Ernst Olaf Henrici of the Royal Engineers, collaborated on Henrici's final published work in 1912, a paper on the theory of measurement by metal tapes and wires in catenary, in which formulae were given to facilitate accurate measurements when using a catenary on any sizeable slope. Henrici retired in 1911 and moved to Chandler's Ford, Hampshire, where he died at his home, Hiltingbury Lodge, on 10 August 1918. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 39488


Foster, George Carey (1835-1919), chemist and physicist, was born in October 1835 at Sabden in Lancashire, the only son of George Foster, calico printer and justice of the peace in Lancashire and the West Riding of Yorkshire. After education at private schools Foster became a student of chemistry at University College, London, in 1852. Graduating with honours and a prize in 1855 he served at the college as an assistant in Professor Williamson's chemistry laboratory. In 1857 Foster joined the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS), presented his research on the nomenclature of organic chemistry at their meeting, and maintained a close involvement thereafter. From 1858 he undertook research in organic chemistry under Kekule at Ghent, later moving to Paris and Heidelberg. Having further pursued the study of heat, light, and electricity, introduced to him by Williamson, in 1862 he was appointed professor of natural philosophy at Anderson's University in Glasgow. During three years there Foster became familiar with the student assisted research undertaken at the natural philosophy laboratory run by William Thomson at Glasgow University. He met Mary Ann Frances Muir of Greenock, whom he married in 1868; his happy marriage produced four sons and four daughters, all of whom survived him, the partnership ending with his wife's death in 1917. 
University College, London, appointed Foster as professor of experimental physics (physics from 1867) in August 1865; there he became a much respected if not especially effective lecturer. Although to some extent modelled on Thomson's archetype in Glasgow, Foster's first achievement was to establish a students' physical laboratory in 1866, the first in Britain to offer systematic instruction in experimental physics to undergraduates. In the same year Foster was invited to join the BAAS committee on electrical standards, and often chaired its meetings. Working with other leading figures in physics and telegraphy such as Thomson, Wheatstone, Fleeming Jenkin, and C. W. Siemens, he acquired much expertise in precision techniques of electrical measurement, especially of resistance and determining current flow, and induction, in relation to the problems of telegraphy. 
Foster was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1869, serving two terms as its vice-president in 1891-3 and 1901-3. He was president of section A of the BAAS in 1877 and was general treasurer of the association from 1888 until 1904. In the course of his many investigations to measure and compare standards of electrical resistance Foster adapted the Wheatstone bridge to measure small differences (rather than ratios) of resistance. This important device, known and widely used for many years as the Carey Foster bridge, was presented at one of the earliest meetings of the Society of Telegraph Engineers in 1871. Foster had been one of the founder members of this society (the Institution of Electrical Engineers from 1888) and served as its president in 1880-81. Foster's reputation as an expert in the practical aspects of physics was further enhanced by the publication in 1875 of his preface to 'Introduction to Experimental Physics', a translation by B. Loewy of A. F. Weinhold's German original, 'Vorschule der Experimentalphysik' (Leipzig, 1874). 
In the thirty-two years that Foster ran his laboratory at University College his students, including W. E. Ayrton, Oliver Lodge, and J. A. Fleming, practised accurate measurement. As dean of the faculty of sciences in 1874 Foster achieved BSc status for experimental physics in 1876, and, with Fleming and Beare, the construction of purpose designed new laboratories in 1893, the physics wing of which was renamed as the Carey Foster Laboratory after he retired from the retitled Quain chair in 1898. 
From the beginning of his professorship at University College, Foster had championed the higher education and equal rights of women, and his efforts were acknowledged as an inspiration and exemplar. Foster was a leading light in the movement to reconstruct University College into a University of London which taught and examined, and throughout the 1880s and 1890s he campaigned to unify its teaching and examining functions, a sensitive debate, his tact being indicated by his appointment as the first principal of University College in 1900 upon his retirement from teaching. In his four-year tenure he oversaw considerable reorganization and development of the college, substantially increasing the provision of accommodation, and cultivating growth in its intellectual and social activities. 
Foster was for many years editor of the 'Philosophical Magazine', working at this task until shortly before his death. His many achievements were recognized by the granting of honorary doctorates -- an LLD from Glasgow, and a DSc from Manchester. A quiet, unassuming man, somewhat nervous in manner, he was disinclined to draw attention to his wide-ranging accomplishments, hence, perhaps, his neglect by historians of physics. 
Foster lived a contented private life with his family in a number of houses in London while employed at University College. After retiring in 1904 Foster and his family moved to Rickmansworth in the Hertfordshire countryside, where he became a justice of the peace and took an active interest in Liberal Party politics. Foster developed congestion of the lungs in January 1919 and died of heart failure on 9 February at his home, Ladywalk, Long Lane, Rickmansworth. He was buried next to his wife in the cemetery at Rickmansworth. 


@@@@@


doc= 39493


Austen, Winifred Marie Louise (1876-1964), artist and illustrator, was born in Ramsgate, Kent, on 12 July 1876, the only daughter of Josiah Austin, a Cornish naval surgeon, and his wife, Fanny, 'nee' Mann. She altered the spelling of her surname from Austin to Austen at the time she began to exhibit. As a child she used to compete in drawing with her four elder brothers and always won the 6died prize awarded by their mother. In 1892 the family moved to Hornsey, London, and Austin attended the London County Council School of Arts and Crafts, studying under Mrs J. M. Jopling and Cuthbert Swan, an animal painter; she also spent time sketching at the zoological gardens in Regent's Park. In 1899 at the age of twenty-three Austen showed a picture of a lion at the Royal Academy; in all she exhibited more than seventy pictures at the academy, the last in 1961 when she was eighty-five. While there she met the artists Charles Detmold and his twin brother, Maurice, who introduced her to the oriental influences so frequently present in Austen's work. 
Although she also worked in both oils and watercolours Austen is most highly regarded as an etcher. In all she made some two hundred etched plates, beginning in 1906 with a series entitled 'The White Heron'. She had particular feeling for birds and small mammals, and the naturalist Sir Peter Scott said 'she was certainly the best bird-etcher of this century' (Haworth, 5). Her finest work combines accuracy of observation with delicacy of line and her images -- such as 'Japanese Bantam' and 'Swallows on the Line' (1948) -- are arranged with a natural sensitivity and poise. She also experimented with aquatint and colour printing. In 1902 Austen was elected to the Society of Women Artists, then in 1907 to the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers, and to the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours in 1933. She was also a fellow of the Royal Zoological Society from 1903. Her first commissioned work was in 1898 for E. Nesbit's 'Book of Dogs'; other illustrated books include 'Marsh and Mudflats' for Kenneth Dawson in 1931 and 'Birds Ashore & Aforeshore' for Patrick Chalmers in 1935. 
Such was Austen's success that she required an agent; she employed Oliver O'Donnell Frick (1868/9-1923), an American from Maryland, for this purpose, and married him on 22 October 1917. After leaving her home in Ealing, Austen and her husband lived briefly in both Yeovil, Somerset, and Dorking, Surrey, before moving to Suffolk in 1922 where Frick died from pneumonia the following year. There were no children. Subsequently Austen lived in a cottage at Orford called Wayside which she shared with her housekeeper, Mrs Field -- known as Mouse -- until the latter's death in 1959. Innumerable pets and animal waifs also became subjects for her work. A printing press was kept in the kitchen. Although reclusive, Austen was keenly involved with the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and the Havergate Island bird sanctuary. Early in her life she took an interest in psychical research; she was also an enthusiastic photographer and had a passion for following the trials of famous criminals. Winifred Austen died at 38 Southborough Road, Bickley, Kent, on 1 November 1964. Sixty-seven of her etchings were sold at Bonhams on 17 September 1992 for up to $150 each. Her work is held by the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and Christchurch Mansion, Ipswich. 


@@@@@


doc= 39497


Athee, Girard d' (fl. 1198-c.1210), mercenary and administrator, was a native of Athee near Tours in north-west France. With hostile intent, the French chronicler Guillaume le Breton claims that he was of servile birth, but in all probability he was a minor knight or subtenant of the neighbouring lord of Amboise. He first appears in August 1198, at the court of Richard I, and by 1201 was serving as official for the seneschal of Poitou at Loches. In August 1202 he was appointed seneschal of the Touraine, and he is said to have led the mercenary soldiers who ravaged Tours and the surrounding region later that same year. With the collapse of Plantagenet power in northern France, and the flight of King John, Girard d'Athee was left behind to command the garrison at Loches, which eventually capitulated to the French in 1205 after a prolonged siege. For the next two years, he was imprisoned by the French at Compiegne, a ransom of at least 2000 marks being paid by King John for his release at some time after May 1206. His wife and children crossed to England in September 1207, and were joined there shortly afterwards by d'Athee. 
Together, d'Athee and his wife were granted custody of the Wiltshire manors of Aldbourne and Wanborough, confiscated from the count of Perche. In January 1208 d'Athee was appointed sheriff of Gloucestershire and constable of Gloucester Castle, an office to which was added custody of Bristol Castle and the vacant bishopric of Bath in March, and of the county and castle of Hereford and the lands of the earldom of Gloucester in May 1208. By September 1208 he also held some sort of custody over the county and castle of Nottingham, for which he accounted as sheriff in 1209. These appointments formed part of a wider upheaval in local government, including the promotion of mercenary soldiers to local offices and the establishment of a series of provincial treasuries, such as those controlled by d'Athee at Gloucester and Bristol, independent of the royal treasury at Westminster. In general, these changes reflect an increasing severity in King John's administration of England, with the adoption of methods that had formerly served as wartime expedients in Normandy, before the collapse of Plantagenet power. As one of the leading royal officials in the west country, d'Athee joined in the harrying of the marcher lord William (III) de Briouze, while as sheriff of Gloucestershire he earned an unsavoury reputation for his attacks upon local liberties, including his seizure of the seven hundreds of Cirencester, claimed by Cirencester Abbey. In 1212 the exiled bishop Hugh of Lincoln bequeathed 40 marks to a Nottinghamshire knight, to save his daughter from a marriage to d'Athee's son. 
Girard d'Athee was dead by June 1215, probably before September 1210, by which time he had been replaced at Gloucester, Nottingham, Bristol, and Hereford by his fellow aliens and kinsmen, Engelard de Cigogne, Philip Mark, and Peter and Gioni de Chanceaux. Although associated, both in France and England, with the worst excesses of mercenary warfare, he was none the less a benefactor of the religious, granting property at Tours to the city convent of St Maurice, with the assent of Lupa, his wife, and John, his son. This latter, John d'Athee, continued to receive a pension from the king, in lieu of land at Kingston in Surrey, until at least 1230. A nephew and namesake of Girard, Girard d'Athee the younger, occurs in the king's pay between 1205 and 1211, and by 1228 appears to have entered the order of the knights templar. D'Athee's other kinsmen and associates -- the various members of the families of Chanceaux, Cigogne, Mark, and Martigny, all of them native to the villages around Athee -- were singled out for attack in clause 50 of 'Magna Carta', which required that they be expelled entirely from England. Their appearance here is explained by the crucial positions they occupied in June 1215 as royal constables in the midlands and west country, while the collective term 'sequela' applied to them in the charter is deliberately disparaging, being generally reserved for a group of serfs, or even a brood of animals. Despite the demands of 'Magna Carta', Girard d'Athee's clan remained prominent in royal service throughout the ensuing civil war. In due course several of them were to acquire English estates in fee, while others became attached to the households of Peter des Roches, the alien bishop of Winchester, and of Richard of Cornwall, brother of Henry III and in his own right count of Poitou. 


@@@@@


doc= 39504


Alnwick, William (c.1275-1333), Franciscan friar and theologian, and bishop of Giovinazzo, took his name from Alnwick in Northumberland. The course of his later career suggests that he was born about 1275. Having become a Franciscan friar, he probably studied theology at his order's studium at Newcastle. However, by 1303 he was a licensed doctor of theology at Paris, being then listed among the few foreign masters who sided with Philippe IV, king of France, in his dispute with Pope Boniface VIII. Alnwick also lectured at other intellectual centres on the continent -- at Montpellier, Bologna, and Naples. But he returned to England, for he is listed as the forty-second Franciscan regent master at Oxford. This would place him as a master at Oxford about 1316, during the years when Henry Harclay was chancellor of the university. 
Notes in the margins of Alnwick's manuscripts indicate that he was in lively debate with the authors of his own and recent times, English and French, including Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventure, Henri de Gand, Pierre Aureole, Giacomo da Ascoli, Godefroi de Fontaines, Henry Harclay, and Thomas Wilton. Mainly, however, he was in conversation with John Duns Scotus, and it was this association that kept his memory alive, particularly among other Scotists, like Peter Thomas and the anonymous Scotist of Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, MS Vat. lat. 869, who disagreed with him. He collaborated with Scotus in the production of the latter's 'Commentary on the 'Sentences'' ('Ordinatio'). He also served as the reporter for one of Scotus's 'Collationes', and compiled the long additions ('Additiones magnae') which were meant to fill the lacunae left in books 1 and 2 of the 'Ordinatio'. But although Alnwick based his philosophy and theology on the fundamental starting points of Scotus's teaching, he often followed his own star. 
Alnwick's commentary on Peter Lombard's 'Sentences' is preserved in whole or part in manuscripts found in Assisi, Cracow, and Padua. A few questions of this commentary have been edited in journals, as have almost a dozen questions of his 'Determinationes', as well as a sermon on the beatific vision, and some questions from his commentary on the 'De anima'. His 'Quodlibet' and 'Quaestiones de esse intelligibili' were published in 1937 as volume 10 of the 'Bibliotheca Franciscana Scholastica Medii Aevi'. 
Alnwick participated in the general chapter of the Franciscan order held at Perugia in 1322, where he joined the theologians who drew up and signed the decree 'De paupertate Christi' attacking the position on apostolic poverty maintained by Pope John XXII. Alnwick may not have been actively involved in the formulation of the decree, but his commitment to it is shown by the public defence he subsequently gave of it in the last question of his 'Determinationes'. There he argued that Christ and his apostles possessed nothing either personally or in common. This opposition to the papal thesis caused Pope John in 1323 to order the bishops of Bologna and Ferrara to initiate a process against Alnwick, who, however, fled to Naples, where King Robert of Sicily befriended him, and in 1330 had him canonically appointed and legitimately confirmed as bishop of Giovinazzo. He died in Avignon in March 1333. 


@@@@@


doc= 39505


Ellerman, Sir John Reeves, second baronet (1909-1973), shipowner and naturalist, was born at 5A Earls Avenue, Folkestone, Kent, on 21 December 1909, the only son and second child (Winifred Ellerman was the eldest child) of Sir John Reeves Ellerman, first baronet (1862-1933), the immensely wealthy shipowner and financier (probably Britain's richest ever businessman), and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Glover (died 1939). At the time of Ellerman's birth, the first Sir John Ellerman was already forty-seven; his son was therefore likely to succeed to the vast Ellerman fortune at a comparatively early age. Ellerman was educated at St Bede's preparatory school at Eastbourne and spent two years at Malvern College, before finishing his education in Switzerland. Although highly intelligent and industrious, with a rapidly growing interest in natural history, he did not attend a university but read for the bar at the Inner Temple and then was taken into the family shipping business at its Moorgate headquarters. 
In July 1933 his father died suddenly, and Ellerman found himself, at the age of twenty-three, a baronet and the heir to a fortune, after death duties, of over $20 million. On 21 August, only a month after his father's death, he married Esther de Sola (died 1984), of a prominent Montreal Jewish family, whose brother was a close friend in London. With his wife Ellerman shared a keen interest in amateur dramatics and Gilbert and Sullivan, and Lady Ellerman was a close companion to him until his death. There were no children of the marriage. 
The first Sir John had built up over a long period a competent group of managers and lieutenants who ran Ellerman Lines, and the management style of the firm was based upon sound conservative principles, a product of both the proven success of this approach and the difficulties of innovation during the depression. Observers who worked with the younger Ellerman regarded him as a sound and sensible businessman. Although lacking his father's financial genius, he was a competent manager without any penchant for personal dissipation or foolish extravagance. After the Second World War, and particularly after the mid-1950s, Ellerman Lines modernized in a deliberate and rational way, placing emphasis on new shipping routes in Australia, east Asia, the United States, and the Middle East. In the mid-1960s Ellerman Lines became one of the first British shipping companies to introduce containerization, purchasing several of the earliest container vessels in Britain. Ellerman proved to be an active chairman, although the day-to-day running of the firm remained in the hands of its managerial staff. 
Although extremely capable, Ellerman had little real interest in business life. From the mid-1930s he became, instead, an internationally noted student of natural history, especially of the rodent family. Between 1940 and 1961 he published five scholarly monographs and seventeen learned articles or notes on these subjects, most significantly a three-volume, 1500 page monograph on 'Families and Genera of Living Rodents', published by the British Museum (Natural History) in 1940-49. Just as his father was at home in the business world, so the younger Ellerman was renowned for his extraordinary memory and wide-ranging knowledge of natural history. He was made a fellow of the Royal Society of South Africa and was also an honorary associate of the department of zoology of the British Museum (Natural History), where he spent much of his time, and was well known around the world as an eminent authority. 
For a man so blameless and retiring, Ellerman attracted a remarkable amount of press commentary, especially from the Beaverbrook press, apparently resulting from an old grudge held by the press lord against his father. He was often the subject of exposes in the 'Daily Express'. Like his father, he became an active investor in the British press, in part so that he could diminish publicity of this sort. In the 1930s he owned a major share of the Odhams Press and in the early 1950s he was among the largest shareholders in the 'Daily Mirror' and the 'Sunday Pictorial'. He was a close friend of Lord Southwood, Odham's proprietor. 
During his lifetime, Ellerman was generally regarded as Britain's richest man. During the closing years of his life estimates of his fortune ranged from $125 million to $500 million. The latter figure was given in several editions of the 'Guinness Book of Records' in its entry for England's richest man. Like his father, he had a passion for privacy which was taken to extremes. He was rarely photographed and played no part in public life. He eschewed the typical lifestyle of the very rich. He divided his time between a house in Chalfont St Giles in Buckinghamshire, a suite he permanently maintained at the Dorchester Hotel, London, and frequent trips to South Africa. He helped many refugees to escape from Nazi Germany and was attacked by name by William Joyce, 'Lord Haw-Haw', in several of his broadcasts, under the mistaken but widely held belief that Ellerman, as well as his wife, was of Jewish descent. In the course of his lifetime he anonymously gave very large sums to charity, especially to assist wounded war veterans and disabled persons. In appearance (in contrast to his father) he was a tall, thin man of distinguished looks. 
Ellerman died suddenly of a heart attack on 17 July 1973, in the Dorchester Hotel, London, shortly after returning from a holiday in southern France. He was later cremated. He left over $52 million, the largest estate ever left by a Briton, and the biggest fortune since his father's death forty years before. As he had no children and groomed no relatives as heirs, his shares in the family firm were reorganized into a charitable trust shortly before his death. He did not begin to rival the perhaps unique standards of business ability set by his father, but proved -- unlike so many with ample means to satisfy every temptation -- to be a decent and constructive human being. 


@@@@@


doc= 39506


Bridgeman, Dame Caroline Beatrix, Viscountess Bridgeman (1873-1961), political activist and churchwoman, was born on 30 June 1873, the third of five children and eldest daughter of the Hon. Cecil Thomas Parker (1845-1931), son of the sixth earl of Macclesfield and land agent for the duke of Westminster, and his wife, Rosamund Esther Harriet Longley (1843/4-1936), daughter of Charles Thomas Longley, archbishop of Canterbury from 1862 until 1868. Educated privately she worked as a school manager in London's East End and for the Charity Organization Society before marrying William Clive Bridgeman (1864-1935) on 30 April 1895. They had three sons (including Sir Maurice Richard Bridgeman and Robert Clive Bridgeman), each of whom went on to distinguished public and private careers, and lived at Leigh Manor, near Minsterley, Shropshire, where she enjoyed landscaping the garden. 
Six weeks after marrying, Caroline Bridgeman assisted her husband with his parliamentary campaign for Mid Derbyshire, and although he lost, the campaign launched a durable political partnership. In 1904 Caroline Bridgeman formed one of the country's first women's unionist associations in Oswestry (for which her husband became MP in 1906), and by 1918 it was one of the largest such associations in the country. Nationally she was active with the British women's covenant committee (opposing Irish home rule) and the Women's Unionist Tariff Reform Association. Once women were enfranchised in 1918 the latter became formally affiliated with the Conservative Party as the Women's Unionist Organization (WUO), which Caroline Bridgeman chaired after obtaining a guarantee of control over all non-financial matters. She urged women to be broad-minded and join political parties rather than feminist societies; and the success of parties, particularly the Conservatives, at attracting women members helps somewhat to account for the decline of women's groups in the 1920s. The admiration which she commanded within the party strengthened the WUO's position, and its effectiveness contributed to the party's later success with women voters. She was a good committee worker and eloquent speaker, who laced her speeches with humour, yet was reserved and rarely at ease with individuals. Most of her close friends were men, as women often found her critical nature intimidating, and the tenants at Leigh regarded her with respect rather than affection. An attractive woman, her erect posture made her appear taller than she was, and she had simple tastes, preferring buses to taxis, though she later permitted herself the luxury of one of Britain's first television sets. 
Bridgeman's contributions to the Conservative Party were recognized with a DBE in 1924. Later that year, when her husband became first lord of the Admiralty, the attendant spousal duties forced her to resign from the WUO leadership. Yet she was not away from the party for long, and in May 1926 she was elected to a one-year term as chair of the central council of the National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations, making her the first woman to hold such a position in any party. She sought a greater role for women in policy making and in 1927 she introduced the requirement that at least one of the four party conference delegates from each constituency was a woman. Within a few years women formed over one third of all delegates. In 1928, when her husband announced his intention to retire as an MP, there was some suggestion that she should stand in his place. However, she regarded her political role as adjunct to his and simultaneously withdrew from politics. Thirty years later, when the first life peeresses were being selected for nomination to the House of Lords, her name was suggested within the party as a possibility, but by 1958 she was too old to embark on a parliamentary career. 
However, Viscountess Bridgeman (as she was styled from 1929, when her husband was created a peer) did have interests outside politics. As the granddaughter of an archbishop (and sister of a bishop of Pretoria, Wilfrid Parker) it was perhaps unsurprising that her non-political energies were devoted to the Church of England. Between 1925 and 1960 she was a member of the house of laity, serving as vice-chair from 1942 until 1947. She believed that the church assembly had to foster directly the nation's spiritual life, and encouraged this with her tireless promotion of religious education and improved clerical pay. The church's survival depended on maintaining a community of believers, she submitted, and this could be accomplished only through religious education, and more particularly by promoting denominational schools. Similarly, increased stipends and pensions for the clergy and their dependants were necessary for sustainable clerical recruitment, and she argued forcefully and successfully for better allowances. These issues demanded the church's highest attention, even if it required short-term economizing on church building and physical improvements. She was the only woman member of the archbishops' commission which sat between 1930 and 1935 to consider the relationship between church and state, following parliament's rejection of the prayer book measure. (Her husband, who shared an ecclesiastical background, had unsuccessfully sponsored the measure in the House of Commons in 1927.) 
Church colleagues hoped that Caroline Bridgeman would promote religious broadcasting after her appointment as a BBC governor in 1935 in succession to her husband, who had died that August. During her four years on the board she monitored carefully the progress of religious broadcasts, but warned against making them too sentimental and maintained that the church should concentrate on the medium of print, since broadcasting had only an emotional appeal and could not make as lasting an impact. In addition to this work she chaired the Florence Nightingale Hospital for Gentlewomen for fifteen years and, during the First World War, the Shropshire women's war agriculture committee and the selection committee of London land workers. She also served on the royal commission on London squares in 1927 and was appointed a magistrate in 1934. While she regarded the church as her life's main cause, the path she charted in politics led the way for other women, particularly those who preferred established parties over feminist societies as outlets for public activity. She died on 26 December 1961. 


@@@@@


doc= 39507


Stanley, Edward Montagu Cavendish, Lord Stanley (1894-1938), politician, was born on 9 July 1894 at 36 Great Cumberland Place, Marylebone, London, the elder son and second of three children of Edward George Villiers Stanley, later seventeenth earl of Derby (1865-1948), and his wife, Lady Alice Maud Olivia Montagu (1862-1957). He inherited his courtesy title in 1908. 
After Eton College, Lord Stanley was sent to Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1912, as a companion for the prince of Wales, though their friendship did not flourish until they became captains in the Grenadier Guards in 1914. Stanley received two wounds and the Military Cross. He was aide-de-camp to Horace Smith-Dorrien (1914) and adjutant of the Household battalion (1916-17). 
In 1917 Archibald Salvidge, the tory party 'boss' of Liverpool, persuaded Stanley to stand for parliament in Abercromby. The prestige of the family name was meant to guarantee his unopposed return, but a one-legged ex-private from the National Federation of Discharged and Demobilized Sailors and Soldiers came forward to protest at the 'Review of Exemptions Act' of 1917, which enforced medical re-examination of all discharged servicemen. Lord Derby, Stanley's father, was then war secretary. The contest attracted much publicity, but Stanley convincingly won the by-election of 28 June 1917 without making a single appearance. On 17 July 1917 he married the Hon. Sibyl Louise Beatrix Cadogan (1893-1969), maid of honour to Queen Mary and always known as Portia. She had been expected to marry the prince of Wales, with whom Stanley was posted to the general headquarters of the British forces in Italy (1917-18). 
Despite taking his seat as its youngest member, Stanley had still not spoken in the House of Commons when the Abercromby constituency disappeared in the 1918 redistribution. He was then MP (1922-38) for the Fylde, a rural area of north Lancashire, where Lord Derby owned 10,000 acres and the poll was uncontested as often as not. When he enlivened his speeches with racing tips, locals hailed a chip off the old block. He did very closely resemble his father: tall and well-built, with a thick moustache. The two worked together happily in the management of their stud farm and numerous estates. The heir emulated the earl in county life too, as vice-lieutenant of Lancashire from 1932. Gentle and genial were adjectives applied to Eddie Stanley, whose politics seemed devoid of partisan bitterness. Fashionable London society found him good fun; some casual acquaintances thought his manner oddly reserved -- for the public was never told that he was hard of hearing. 
Stanley helped Derby, again at the War Office, as parliamentary private secretary (1922-4) before becoming a junior lord of the Treasury (1924-7). As a whip, he spoke in the chamber extremely seldom. Derby gave him Holwood House, Keston, Kent -- one of many transfers of property -- and Eddie had three sons himself by 1926. From November 1927 until July 1929 he was deputy chairman of the Conservative Party. Following the reform of Conservative central office in December 1927, selection of candidates and agents fell within his purview, and his other special concern was the Junior Imperial League, which he chaired until 1933. A smart aristocrat of the war generation hit the right note with the 'Imps' (tories under thirty). Relations with the party chairman were more tense. J. C. C. Davidson accused him of undervaluing the Women's Unionist Organization and usurping the title of co-chairman. Eddie was not quite all amiable simplicity. He carried the burden of tradition: a Lord Stanley who never reached the cabinet would be a discredit to the family. Everyone said that his brother, Oliver Stanley MP, was the clever one. 
Stanley tentatively launched himself in the Commons after 1929. His favourite topics were support for agriculture and the need for more empire-grown cotton to supply the Lancashire mills. As parliamentary and financial secretary to the Admiralty from 10 November 1931, he assisted Sir Bolton Eyres-Monsell with matters of pay and personnel. He presided over the National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations in 1932, accompanied Anthony Eden to the world disarmament conference in 1933, and was sworn of the privy council in 1934. After a brief interlude as parliamentary under-secretary for the dominions (18 June-28 November 1935), the Admiralty welcomed him back when Eyres-Monsell went to the Lords. During the Italo-Ethiopian war, it was Stanley who announced a 35 per cent increase in the naval estimates, signalling the start of rearmament. He also led the British delegation to the Montreux conference which abolished international control of the Dardanelles in July 1936. Thereafter, with Sir Samuel Hoare as first lord, Stanley reverted to his usual low profile. He was promoted on 28 May 1937 to parliamentary under-secretary of state for India and Burma (under Zetland, a peer), but septic rheumatism and an abdominal operation laid him low for much of the year. 
Many were surprised when Neville Chamberlain selected Stanley as dominions secretary on 16 May 1938. He had always been faithful to the National Government, but political insiders wondered how his hearing would cope with discussion in the cabinet room. The first challenge was to deal with Robert Menzies, prime minister of Australia, who came to Britain demanding revision of the UK-Australia trade agreement (1932). A tactful rebuff sufficed. The South African government received like treatment when it pressed for a role in the administration of Swaziland, Bechuanaland, and Basutoland. In August 1938, Stanley went to open the Canadian national exhibition in Toronto. He had a bad limp after twisting his left leg while playing golf; when he returned on 25 September he was gravely ill. Having attended only eleven cabinet meetings -- the last on 28 July -- he took no part in policy making during the Sudeten crisis. 
Lord Stanley died at the age of forty-four on 16 October 1938 at the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, London. The cause of death was lymphosarcoma: a small crack in the femur had released cancerous bone marrow cells into his bloodstream. On 20 October he was buried in St Mary's churchyard, Knowsley, Lancashire. Stanley may not have carried much political weight except as his father's son, but he did achieve his ambition. 


@@@@@


doc= 39510


Chamberlain, Elsie Dorothea (1910-1991), Congregational minister and radio broadcaster, was born on 3 March 1910 at 30 Canonbury Park North, Islington, London, the third child of James Arthur Chamberlain (died 1956), Post Office technician and clerk, and his wife, Annie Maria Hayward (died 1975), clerk. Her father worked for the Post Office all his life and attended the local Anglican church while his wife, Annie, attended the nearby Congregational chapel in Islington. From her childhood, Elsie Chamberlain was immersed in two divergent ecclesial traditions. After four years at Dame Alice Owen School (1916-20), at ten she attended the Channing School for Girls, a fee-paying Unitarian foundation in Highgate. On leaving school in 1927 she took to dress design and maintained a full life in her local Congregational church. Chamberlain began to learn Hebrew and her minister inspired her to a clerical, nonconformist vocation. 
With a view to becoming a Congregational minister, Chamberlain undertook a degree in theology at the (predominantly Anglican) King's College, London ('c'.1936-1939). During that time Dr Nathaniel Micklem, principal of Mansfield College, Oxford, assured her of a place to undertake two years of pastoral training. A fellow student at King's College was John Leslie St Clair Garrington (1912-1978), soon to be ordained in the Church of England. He was from sound Anglican stock, and in order to marry they had to endure a decade of struggle with church authorities. Her determination to become a minister complicated this relationship. In 1939, instead of going to Oxford University, Chamberlain accepted an offer to assist the Revd Muriel Paulden with her ministry in a rundown part of Liverpool. Then in 1941 she herself was called to be the minister at Christ Church, Friern Barnet, Middlesex. She was soon to be heard at Hyde Park Corner standing her ground with the best of soapbox speakers. 
Elsie Chamberlain's friendship, while a theological student at King's College, with Margaret, Lady Stansgate, led to her appointment in 1946 as the first woman chaplain in the RAF. This was much to the irritation of Geoffrey Fisher, archbishop of Canterbury, who warned Viscount Stansgate, secretary of state at the Air Ministry, that 'under no conditions' should Church of England personnel 'either intentionally or by inadvertence attend Services at which she administers the sacraments' (Williams, 30). However, very soon severe arthritis struck and Chamberlain left the RAF. 
Chamberlain's RAF appointment, while controversial in itself, arose from her impending marriage to John Garrington, then an Anglican curate in Kensington. The bishop of London, William Wand, unfortunately insisted that Garrington was unlikely to secure an incumbency so long as Chamberlain remained as a minister in a 'Free Church Pastorate' (Williams, 41). It was a conflict involving ecumenical relations and the place of women in the church: it was still felt that an Anglican clergyman's wife must devote her life to his ministry. It was also implied that Elsie Chamberlain could not serve two ecclesial masters. 
Garrington described their marriage very neatly: 'we did it in the teeth of authority' (Williams, 48). They finally married amid huge publicity on 19 July 1947, Garrington having been appointed vicar of Hampton through the good offices of their supporter and friend Viscount Stansgate. Elsie Chamberlain undertook her role as 'vicar's wife' with gusto and enthusiasm. In November 1947 she became part-time minister of a Richmond congregation, combining both tasks: wife and minister across a deep confessional divide. They adopted a daughter, Janette, who later wrote an account of her mother's life. 
In 1950 Chamberlain joined the BBC through which she was to become almost a household name. 'Lift up your Hearts' was a daily morning radio talks programme (later renamed 'Thought for the Day') for which she was responsible as producer. Her aim was to 'win the ear of the people on the fringes of the Church to whom religion was only a word and not a very interesting word at that!' (Williams, 62). This was subsequently to be the leitmotif of her missionary endeavour. She was the first ordained woman to lead the 'Daily Service', which raised controversial issues for the BBC. However, Elsie Chamberlain resigned from the corporation in 1967. She felt increasingly out of sympathy with the BBC's religious policy, as it shifted away from her 'missionary' aims towards analysis rather than advocacy. 
While still with the BBC, Chamberlain served in 1956-7 as chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales, and was the first woman to hold that post. After leaving the BBC she was on the staff of the City Temple in London (1968-70) with the Revd Kenneth Slack. He was in favour of, but Chamberlain was implacably opposed to, the union of the Congregational church with the English Presbyterians. This eventually took place in 1972 with the creation of the United Reformed church. Although she was subsequently involved with the ecumenical movement Chamberlain nevertheless defended those who wished to continue the ideals of congregationalism. It was therefore fitting that she helped lead the Nottingham-based splinter group, the Congregational Federation, that comprised about 300 independent Congregational churches. 
Chamberlain's husband died in 1978 and in 1980 she moved to the west country to take charge of two federation churches, North Street Church in Taunton and the Congregational church in Chumleigh, north Devon. She later settled in Nottingham as warden of the revamped Castle Gate Congregational Church where her energies were directed to 'the least of my brethren' in the inner city. She supported women's causes, Amnesty International, and many other humanitarian projects. Her vigour seemed boundless but she fell ill and subsequently died on 10 April 1991 at the University Hospital, Nottingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 39512


Ferard, Elizabeth Catherine (1825-1883), Church of England deaconess, was born on 22 February 1825 of Huguenot descent, the daughter of Daniel Ferard (1788-1839), solicitor, of Queen Square, Westminster, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 29 June 1856), daughter of Isaac Clementson, and was the sister of Charles Cotton Ferard (1823-1886) of Ascot Place, Winkfield, Berkshire, barrister, landowner, lord of the manor, and an active churchman described by 'The Guardian' as 'a lay ecclesiastic' (15 Dec 1886). 
The revival of the deaconess order began in the continental reformed churches, the most famous being the establishment at Kaiserwerth in Germany of a deaconess house by Pastor Theodore Fliedner in 1836. The deaconesses lived as a community ministering to the sick and poor, and teaching girls. In England the deaconess order was perceived as an alternative to religious sisterhoods, the latter largely identified with the Oxford Movement. Moreover, it was viewed as the revival of an order which had existed in the early church and which had biblical authority. The scholarly contribution of the biblical scholar John Saul Howson to the growing debate on women's work in the church, and the subsequent discussion in convocation in 1858, set the scene for the deaconess revival in the Church of England. In August 1860 William Pennefather, an Anglican clergyman, established a deaconess institution which later became known as the Mildmay Deaconess Home, but this did not evolve along Anglican lines and had a more direct influence on the deaconess revival within Methodism. 
Following the death of her mother Elizabeth Ferard stayed at Kaiserwerth in 1858 and kept a journal for part of the time. She experienced all aspects of the work but was especially drawn to nursing. She wrote in her journal 'I again heard of the continual spreading of the Deaconess work in every direction except in England, and more than ever wished we could have something of the kind in England, where the materials for it are so abundant, could we but found a Deaconess House on the right principles without falling on the stumbling block of Romanism. (Ferard, 'Journal of a residence at Kaiserwerth on the Rhine')' Back in England she stayed with the sisters of Mercy community of All Hallows at Ditchingham, gaining more experience of life in a women's community. Meanwhile her relation by marriage, the Revd Thomas Pelham Dale (1821-1892), wanted to form a residential society of ladies for charitable work for the poor, including nursing, which would be different from and more flexible than that offered by the Anglican sisterhoods and would entail no vows. He and others founded the North London Deaconesses' Institution in a house, 50 Burton Crescent, King's Cross, London. It was approved by Archibald Campbell Tait, bishop of London, and formally opened in November 1861. Dale became the first secretary and chaplain. Elizabeth Ferard, together with Ellen Meredith and Anna Wilcox, were the first members and dedicated themselves as 'servants of the church'. On 18 July 1862 Elizabeth Ferard was 'set apart' by Bishop Tait as the first deaconess in the Church of England. The original rule of the North London Deaconesses' Institution stated the object as: 'the renewal of the primitive Order of Deaconesses in the Church of England, for the purpose of engaging in works of Christian usefulness... the care of the sick and poor, education for the young... [and] shall be formed as far as circumstances permit upon the model of the Institution at Kaiserwerth. (CSA Archives, Rules for the Deaconesses' Institution, established in the north of London under the sanction of the bishop, to be called the North London Deaconesses' Institution)' A woman wishing to join would serve first as a provisional sister, then as a candidate for two years, before admission to the order. All deaconesses were known as sister but, unlike nuns, they were not then bound by vows (this was introduced in the early twentieth century). There were stringent rules governing daily life, including conduct and dress, attendance at church services, the offices of morning and evening prayer, and time for private prayer and 'Bible' study. 
Elizabeth Ferard became the head sister. She and others who joined wanted a community closer to a sisterhood than Dale had envisaged. Moreover, according to Dale's daughter and biographer, Elizabeth Ferard was: 'a manager of decision and power, and not inclined to brook interference... the Head-Sister's prejudices in favour of autocratic rule became stronger, and her conviction that strict authority was necessary, and, if the work was to prosper, must be in the hands of the Sister Superior, became firmer. ('Life and Letters', 73, 75)' She and Dale, who 'saw his cherished scheme fading away' (ibid., 75), failed to agree, and in 1868 Dale, disappointed, resigned as chaplain. Elizabeth Ferard accepted aspirant deaconesses 'from the higher educated ranks and not from the lower' (Sister Joanna, 220). 
From 1869 the institution was known as the London Diocesan Deaconess Institution, until 1943 when the title changed to the Deaconess Community of St Andrew. From early days there was a combination of religious sisterhood and deaconess ministry, exemplified by the adoption of a rule and the habit, combined with work among the poor, nursing, teaching, visiting, and religious instruction. By 1873 the original premises at Burton Crescent had become too small and the community had moved to St Andrew's House, 12 Tavistock Crescent, Westbourne Park, London. In the same year Elizabeth Ferard resigned as head sister owing to ill health, and she spent her last years running St Catherine's, Redhill, a convalescent home for children which she founded and which closed after her death. She died at 16 Fitzroy Square, London, on 18 April 1883, according to community records, though her death notice in 'The Guardian' and the gravestone inscription at Winkfield, Berkshire, give 19 April. 
Elizabeth Ferard was described as 'a woman of splendid courage and persistence' (Robinson), whose considerable organizational powers resulted in the work steadily increasing. But she was also described as lacking 'some of those gifts which are thought necessary in the leader of a new movement; she did not possess that personal power of attraction which has distinguished the founders of some... sisterhoods' (ibid.). She was remembered as: 'a strict disciplinarian, with an indomitable will and a strong love of justice. She was generous and affectionate, but intensely reserved, with a shy manner that gave her an appearance of haughtiness. She had not that gift of ready sympathy which might have enabled her to win many helpers for the cause, but those who knew her well loved and respected her deeply. (Robinson)' This critical portrait was balanced by the observation that 'she had an intense belief in the cause she represented, and a faith in its future which enabled her to lead what must often in those early days [have] seemed a forlorn hope' (ibid.). Not until 1987 was the deaconess movement fully integrated into the ordained ministry of the church. Although following her death Elizabeth Ferard had merely a one-line notice in 'The Guardian' and no mention in the 'Church Times' or 'The Times', she has from November 1997 been included in the revised calendar of the Church of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 39513


Gunn, Neil Miller (1891-1973), novelist, was born on 8 November 1891 at Dunbeath, Caithness, the seventh of the nine children of James Gunn (1847-1916), fishing boat skipper, and his second wife, Isabella Miller (1855-1926?). 
He was educated at Dunbeath School, where he excelled in English and mathematics but disappointed in history. In his final term a prose piece, 'The Sea Storm', won particular praise, prophesying Gunn's hallmark powers of description of life in northern Scotland. That year, 1904, he flitted to the other end of Scotland, St John's Town of Dalry, Kirkcudbrightshire, where he lived with his married elder sister Mary and her husband, a Dr Keiller. There Gunn received private tuition in Latin from the local headmaster, and tuition in poetry, art, and French from an elderly private tutor, J. G. Carter, once an assistant to John Blackie, the nationalist and classical scholar. Carter imparted to Gunn a love of nineteenth-century poets from Shelley to Tennyson, and of Fitzgerald's 'Omar Khayyam', and he encouraged an interest in native flora and fauna. By Gunn's reckoning, Carter could not keep pace with his pupil's self-taught mathematics. 
In the spring of 1907 Gunn took an exam in Edinburgh for entrance to the civil service. He passed easily. By the summer he was in London, not yet sixteen, working as a clerk in Shepherd's Bush Post Office Savings Bank. His elder brother James, in his mid-twenties, was already a civil servant in the capital, and though Gunn also made friends with Londoners, he became part of an informal but supportive network of young Scottish emigres. In London the spirit of intellectual enquiry which had been gently awakened in him in Dalry was found again listening to debate at speaker's-corner, and reading Wells and T. H. Huxley. It was in London that he began to think of himself as a socialist. Intellectual life, though, had its limits. In Scotland Gunn had enjoyed athletics, curling, and shinty, and poaching salmon in his much-loved local river, Dunbeath Water. In England he played football for his civil service team in west London and occasionally visited the music-hall and opera in town. 
In 1909 Gunn transferred to Edinburgh where he worked for a further two years as a clerk at a tax office. After another successful exam and six weeks' training, on 21 December 1911 he was appointed an officer of the customs and excise. He was based at Inverness where for the next decade he specialized in pensions. This required his covering long distances across northern Scotland. Though later, when he was about forty, he suffered an injury which left him blind in one eye (the accident's cause is to this day obscure), a photograph of Gunn from these earlier days shows him tall (6 feet 1 inch), cigarette on lip, goggles on forehead, and sitting commandingly astride a 500 cc Rudge Multi motorbike, staring determinedly to camera. His job involved assessing claimants by interview, latent material perhaps for the sinister Questioner in his dystopian novel 'The Green Isle of the Great Deep' (1944). He was also required to act as a locum for excise officers attached to distilleries. It was through this that in 1914 he met Maurice Walsh, an exciseman at Forres, Moray, and later author of 'The Quiet Man'. They became close friends and encouraged each other to write. 
At the outbreak of the First World War Gunn's employers did not pressure him into enlisting. Instead, he was stationed at Kinlochleven in Argyll, where, apart from his customs and excise duties, he assisted the Admiralty in issuing mine-evading instructions to ships. Here he began tentatively to write poetry and short fiction, gaining his first publication in a London magazine, 'The Apple-Tree', in May 1918. Gunn's mother, having seen four of her sons sign up, had been keen for him to stay at home. The Home Office also preferred that he remained working for the government in Scotland. Two of Gunn's elder brothers were killed in the war, a third died of heart disease while in the army, and one of Gunn's younger brothers, John, was gassed, though he later recovered. His father died in 1916. Nevertheless, Gunn finally signed up in 1918, days before the armistice. He was not required to serve. 
By 1920 Gunn was in love with Jessie (Daisy) Dallas Frew (1887/8-1963), the daughter of John Rose Frew, a jeweller. Daisy then worked at her father's shop in Dingwall. With a precipitate stationing to Lancashire in 1921, Gunn married Daisy on 24 March of that year at Wigan register office, but by the end of 1922 they had been relocated and were back in Scotland, at Lybster, Caithness. Finally, in 1923, Gunn became the distillery officer at Glen Mhor distillery, Inverness, where he worked for the next fourteen years. From 1926 they lived in a bungalow they had had built, Larachan. With the stability the job gave him, with its relatively gentle workload and his new house, Gunn was able to write in earnest. 
In 1923 his short stories had been championed by C. M. Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid), who published his work in 'Scottish Nation' and 'Northern Review' and encouraged Gunn to see his work as part of the modern 'Scottish Renaissance'. Gunn's stories also found publication in the 'Cornhill': even at this stage his work appealed both to the intelligentsia and to readers humbly in search of a good yarn. By the end of the decade J. B. Salmond's 'Scots Magazine' was Gunn's most consistent publisher of his work, taking short stories, one-act plays, and serializing two novels. His first book, 'The Grey Coast', was published by Cape in 1926 and, as a tale of emotional claustrophobia at the edge of an agoraphobic landscape, is typical of his fiction of the 1920s. In these stories (many in the short story form) the fey Celticism of Fiona Macleod is both an influence and a subject of interrogation; key characters are intensely introspective to the extent of self-defeat; highland harbours and crofts are in decline. The only releases are a Lawrentian eroticism and glimpses of a delighting sensuality. 
Drama was of perennial interest to Gunn. After Maurice Walsh and his wife, Toshon, returned to Ireland in 1922 he would stay with them at least annually, taking advantage of his visits to see performances at the Abbey Theatre in Dublin. He was inspired in his fiction by the outpouring of Irish writing from Pearse to Joyce, and Irish drama was an impetus for his plays. Though never an unqualified success, these were performed over the next twenty-five years at every level of Scottish drama, first on BBC radio in 1929, by the Scottish National Players at Glasgow's Lyric Theatre the same year, by amateur actors in the community theatre movement of the 1930s, on wartime radio, and at the Edinburgh festival in 1952. Through drama Gunn became a close friend of the playwright O. H. Mavor, (James Bridie). 
After 'The Grey Coast' Gunn found it difficult to publish a second novel, though a collection of short stories, 'Hidden Doors', was issued in 1929 by the Edinburgh independent Porpoise Press. Cape regarded him as a one-novel novelist. After other rejections and the shelving of the allegedly anti-English 'The Lost Glen', eventually published in 1932, Gunn returned to Porpoise for the publication of 'Morning Tide' (1931). With a trading agreement linking it to Faber, Porpoise now had editorial back-up, an entree to the London reviews, and, through Faber's links with Harcourt Brace, better access to America. 'Morning Tide', a Book Society choice, was an expansion of an earlier short story about fishermen avoiding disaster at sea with heroism and panache. As so much of Gunn's fiction reworks earlier ideas with new perspectives, it recalls the subject of his prize-winning school essay, written in the first years of the new century. It seems also to offer an alternative to Synge's tragic play 'Riders to the Sea' (1904), and introduces another characteristic of much of Gunn's succeeding fiction: at the heart of often elegiac stories there is usually an earned optimism, a confidence in the continuity of human stoicism, of ingenuity and affection. 
Gunn had joined the National Party of Scotland in 1929, and the next five years were spent as a political activist in nationalist politics. Though on the left, he helped negotiate the merger of the NPS with the more right-wing Scottish Party, forming the Scottish National Party in 1934. Grieve was expelled from the new organization as an extremist. This aggravated a breakdown in their friendship which had begun two years earlier. In letters to Gunn, Grieve had argued for the supremacy of poetry as an art form, dismissing the novel in general and Gunn's novels in particular. After fitful correspondence that lasted until the outbreak of the Second World War meaningful communication between them went dead. Gunn's entry into artistic and political life following the success of 'Morning Tide' and the emergence of the SNP brought him new friends and influential acquaintances. T. S. Eliot visited him in Inverness three times before the war, and Gunn counted as friends or friendly correspondents the writers Catherine Carswell, Naomi Mitchison, Edwin Muir, Nan Shepherd, and the artist Keith Henderson. In the summer of 1934 he also began a secret, lifelong affair with Margaret MacEwen ('b'. 1913), daughter of the nationalist Sir Alexander MacEwen, and during the war a communist. 
Though both Gunn and Daisy came from large families, they were unable to have children. Daisy had successive miscarriages and, fifty years later, in the delirium of the last hours of his life, Gunn mourned a stillborn son. Despite or because of this, one of his achievements in 'Morning Tide' and several later novels is the sensitive portrayal of a boy's growing up, a theme to which his spare but well-observed dialogue and acute appreciation of the sensual world seem well suited. 
Perhaps remembering his poor performance in history at school, lessons which he later suggested were obsessed with dates and English heroes, Gunn published two historical novels in succession. 'Sun Circle' (1933) is a novel about a viking raid, and 'Butcher's Broom' (1934) describes the highland clearances. The latter, in its mixing of social history, polemic, and the recreation of an isolated 'primitive' society, suggests that it is not only for his descriptions of fishing communities that Gunn has been compared to Herman Melville. It was not until 'Highland River' (1937), however, that a more self-conscious novelist emerged. Reorientating flashbacks, the protagonist in philosophical free fall, a subtly ironic portrayal of an intellectual exiled from his community, and a unique use of the third person with past and present tenses, offer this novel as a case study of a human's development from childhood to mature self-consciousness, and reveal a novel of technical virtuosity engaging with large themes. Add to this the novel's meditation on growing up, on the effects of the First World War, and on the very nature of being itself, and 'Highland River' stands as a substantial contribution to later modernism. 
Other, less assured, novels followed. After 'Highland River''s success Gunn had resigned his excise job, had already withdrawn from behind-the-scenes politics, bought a boat to sail round the Hebrides -- (recounted in 'Off in a Boat' (1938)) -- sold Larachan, and in late 1938 settled with Daisy in rented accommodation, Braefarm House near Dingwall. He was now writing for a living, supplementing his income from fiction by journalism on local and national issues, from the fishing industry to Scottish independence. Porpoise had folded, Gunn had been taken on by Faber, and though 'Wild Geese Overhead' (1939), a novel based largely in Glasgow, and 'Second Sight' (1940), set in a hunting lodge, were not failures in terms of sales or contemporary reviews, they seem now awkward responses to the author's sense of a general moral disintegration for which metropolitan life was (he seems to have felt) partly to blame. The defensiveness of these, returned to with equally unsatisfying results in 'The Drinking Well' (1947), 'The Shadow' (1948), and 'The Lost Chart' (1949), is not to be found in 'The Silver Darlings' (1941). This novel describes an infant, Finn, growing up in a Caithness fishing community immediately after the Napoleonic wars. Its synthesis of folklore, folksong, historical detail, episodes of high adventure, acute psychological observation, and symphonic recurrences of intense, almost supernatural experiences, make it a third high point in Gunn's 'oeuvre'. 
After 'The Silver Darlings', 'Young Art and Old Hector' (1942) adopts a more prosaic aesthetic: the conversations and experiences of the eponymous child and old man are set out in affectionate homage to the wit and warmth of Highland life. In the Scottish tradition of literature evoking children's views of the world, 'Young Art' looks back to Stevenson's 'A Child's Garden of Verses' and forward to the earlier poetry of Ian Hamilton Finlay. It was followed immediately by 'The Serpent' (1943), the story of an atheist's intense relationship with his family and community, and then by the only sequel Gunn ever wrote, 'The Green Isle of the Great Deep' (1944). In this dystopia Young Art and Old Hector enter, by way of nearly drowning, a Celtic heaven with a difference: it has been organized on ultra-rationalist lines. Controlled by a bureaucracy armed with sophisticated forms of psychological torture, heaven's people are superficial, dutiful, and humourless (this is five years before 'Nineteen Eighty-Four'). Art and Hector, with the help of one of the few vibrant citizens in this eerie Tir-nan-Og, Mary, finally manage to bring the government of heaven down and help reinstate a fairer one. The allegory finishes deftly with man and boy safely returned to the riverside in real time. 
The novel's spirit of reconstruction is paralleled in Gunn's own work on the post-war hospital committee in Scotland, whose report in 1943 is said to have contributed to the formation of the National Health Service. Gunn would later be called upon for other public duty work including the commission of inquiry into crofting conditions, which resulted in the establishment of the Crofters' Commission. In 1948 he was made an honorary doctor of letters by Edinburgh University. 
After 'The Green Isle' Gunn returned to 'Highland River''s interest in the relationship between academics and intellectuals and the communities they attempt to describe or relate to. 'The Key of the Chest' (1946), 'The Silver Bough' (1948), and 'The Well at the World's End' (1951) gently satirize teacherly romanticism while affirming both the individual's and any given community's ability to survive and even triumph in the face of tragedy. Although these philosophical books were received at the time with some bemusement (Edwin Muir's voice being a notable exception), in the last quarter of the twentieth century they began to have a more positive critical reception. In particular, their playfulness and sophisticated sense of irony found better recognition. Gunn's elegiac optimism is also present in his last novels, the suspenseful 'Bloodhunt' (1952), and the enigmatic 'The Other Landscape' (1954), both taking as a starting point a tragic death (respectively, murder and death in childbirth) and then envisaging the painful but certain reconstruction of the lives of the survivors. 'The Other Landscape' was, however, a substantial departure for Gunn. Its interest in the limits of language and human knowledge and, for example, their analogue in the sea, while recalling his youthful fascination with mathematical systems, has some affinity with W. S. Graham's 'The Nightfishing' (1955). 
Gunn's last book was 'The Atom of Delight' (1956), an essay recounting and analysing incidents in the first two decades of his life. Its comparisons of Western and Far Eastern ideas of self, familiar to a later generation brought up on 'Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance', and its openness to a hyper-material interpretation of consciousness, found it new readers in the 1980s, when it went through two new editions. At the time, however, it had a puzzled reception and this, as well as Gunn's failing energies and increasing ill health, discouraged him from writing further books. 
Daisy died in 1963, and Gunn, of cancer, on 15 January 1973 at the Royal Infirmary, Inverness. They were buried in Dingwall cemetery. On a road on the hills above Dingwall, near Braefarm House, there is a memorial to Gunn. 


@@@@@


doc= 39516


Stewart, William Clouston (1832-1872), tea merchant and writer on fishing, was born on 3 June 1832 at Smith's Place, Leith, Edinburgh, the third of four children of William Stewart (1798-1873), a tea merchant originally from Orkney, and his first wife, Jean (1795-1841), daughter of the Revd William Clouston of Sandwick, Orkney, and his wife, Isabella. When he was a youth the family moved to Dundee, and, following the death of his mother of 'debility' in October 1841, his father remarried in 1843 and returned to Edinburgh in 1848. The anomaly of the nine-year-old William C. Stewart not being resident at Seafield Lane, Dundee, for the 1841 census is notable since it is from that age he dates his angling career. The knowledge and experience distilled within the pages of 'The Practical Angler' strongly suggest he spent his youth and adolescence in Edinburgh and its southern hinterland. 
By the time Stewart was sixteen his father had left the Dundee wine and spirit trade to become a wholesale tea merchant in Edinburgh, which was to be the lifelong profession of his angling son. The debilitating fever William suffered at the age of twenty certainly affected his constitution, and it may have harmed his career in the tea merchanting business, but it patently did not dampen his enthusiasm for angling, because his authoritative and seminal text -- 'The Practical Angler, or, The Art of Trout Fishing, More Particularly Applied to Clear Water' -- appeared in March 1857 when he was a mere twenty-four years old. Republished on at least twenty-one occasions (the most recent being 1994) the unexpected success of the book wrought no great changes to its author's lifestyle. He did become secretary of the Edinburgh Angling Club in 1863, he contributed a chapter to H. Cholmondeley-Pennell's anthology 'Fishing Gossip' (1866), and he left an almost completed companion volume on salmon angling. But Stewart throughout lived and worked in Edinburgh (notwithstanding an 1861 holiday in England). 
A distinctively tall and thin man, affectionately known as 'the Long 'Un' (and the king of anglers), Stewart's character is variously attested to by those that knew him or met him, such as Francis Francis, as being rather unlike the serious figure portrayed in the three known photographs. He was said to have a joyous, cordial manner, and to be a practised conversationalist who had a keen relish for a joke, with a natural aptitude for indoor games of skill or calculation. The modesty with which he apparently bore his angling and literary talent could not, however, prevent him from conducting a vituperative public correspondence with his erstwhile editor, Cholmondeley-Pennell, on the faults of the latter's 'The Modern Practical Angler', as detailed in Stewart's last publication 'A Caution to Anglers' (1871). Recommended reading by no less an angling literature authority than Arthur Ransome, this booklet demonstrates in full measure the acerbity and wit that characterized Stewart's writings. 
Yet less than a year after this vigorous defence of his angling tenets Stewart succumbed to a week-long attack of confluent smallpox and died unmarried at his home, 5 Alva Street, Edinburgh, on 17 January 1872, aged only thirty-nine. In Dean cemetery, where he was laid to rest two days later by his father, the fine red granite monument simply bears his name, his epitaph being proclaimed by the lasting worth and relevance to trout anglers everywhere of his book 'The Practical Angler'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39519


Matthew, Patrick (1790-1874), arboriculturist and social reformer, was born at a farm named Rome on the River Tay near Scone, Perthshire, on 20 October 1790, the son of John Matthew (died 1808), a gentleman farmer, and his wife, Agnes Duncan, a relative of Adam, Viscount Duncan of Camperdown. He was educated at Perth Academy and then matriculated in 1804-5 at Edinburgh University, where he attended classes relevant to the study of medicine. He never completed a degree at Edinburgh after his studies were interrupted by the death of his father. He assumed his lifelong role in managing Gourdiehill, near Errol, an estate that had been in the possession of the Duncan family for about three centuries. Matthew planted an extensive orchard -- numbering in excess of 10,000 trees during his lifetime -- and thereby contributed to making the Carse of Gowrie 'one of the richest fruit-growing districts in Scotland' (Wylie, 51). In Perth, on 25 July 1817, he married his first cousin, Christian (died 1857), daughter of Robert Nicoll of Drumhead; they had eight children. 
Matthew's wealth and position gave him the opportunity to travel: in 1815, for instance, he cut short a visit to France after hearing news of Napoleon's return from Elba. Intellectually he was influenced by late Enlightenment Edinburgh and was familiar with the ideas of continental Europe. He combined materialist science with a radical political agenda to produce an amalgam of free-trade political economy, social (imperialist) evolutionism, catastrophist geology, and biological transformism (that is to say early evolutionism). In the 1830s he became involved with the Chartists and was chosen by the Perth Radical Association to be one of the eight Scottish delegates to the General Convention of the Industrious Classes in London in 1839. He waived his claim to $200 for travel and subsistence expenses on the condition that the money would be used to employ an itinerant lecturer in political economy: a Mr Sime was duly hired and toured the east coast of Scotland. After returning from the London convention to consult his Perthshire and Fife constituents, Matthew tendered his resignation to William Lovett on 12 April 1839. He openly opposed Chartist threats of force and thereby incurred the wrath of Feargus O'Connor who denounced him as a 'middle-class traitor' (Wilson, 75). 
Matthew remained undeterred in promoting his own programme of radical social and educational reform. He published 'Emigration Fields' in 1839, in which he used Scottish poor law debates as a springboard for his call for government-supported transportation of impoverished working-class people to temperate British colonies. Although a Perthshire farmer later remembered Matthew as a man who believed in neither God nor the devil, he was clearly influenced by the Scottish evangelical emphasis on individual responsibility. He denounced England's old and new poor laws and indiscriminate charity in favour of voluntary colonization of Britain's poor, funded by a tax imposed on rent received for land. Convinced that the British were 'evidently a superior race' ('Emigration Fields', 3), he predicted that the reign of Queen Victoria would usher in the defeat of 'barbarism and human misery' (ibid., 11) through colonization. Climate, temperature, and circumstances were, however, fundamentally important to his 'economy of colonization': whereas the Caucasian British race would wither in Australia's arid climate, they would thrive in the mild and moist air of New Zealand. Matthew contended that the climate and native population of New Zealand rendered it the most eligible British colony for philanthropic colonization. Consequently his fourth and fifth sons, Charles and James, emigrated to New Zealand where, armed with seeds from Gourdiehill, they established commercial apple and pear orchards at Matakana, near Auckland. Matthew argued that colonies provided sources of raw materials and opened markets for finished goods; they were part of the grand plan of free trade, or 'the good which a benevolent Providence has designed for man' (ibid., 4). 
Similar ideological commitments had inspired Matthew to publish 'On Naval Timber and Arboriculture' (1831). After all, he argued, navigation was of paramount importance for the spread of the British race, and attendant arts and sciences, throughout the world. And navigation relied upon effective management of woods, especially at a time of increasing local shortages. Although this book was reviewed favourably by the likes of J. C. Loudon ('Gardeners' Magazine', Dec 1832) and is still celebrated as a significant contribution to forestry, its possible anticipation of Charles Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection has been its most lasting historical legacy. In the wake of T. H. Huxley's review in 'The Times' of 'On the Origin of Species' (1859) Matthew informed readers of the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' (7 April 1860) that he had discovered the 'natural law of selection' several decades earlier; and he offered a series of extracts from 'On Naval Timber and Arboriculture' as evidence. Darwin conceded that Matthew had anticipated his explanation of the origin of species by natural selection. He contended that his ignorance of Matthew's priority was understandable because he and fellow naturalists were unaware of the brief comments that appeared in an appendix to a book on naval timber and arboriculture ('Gardeners' Chronicle', 21 April 1860). In the third (1861) and subsequent editions of 'Origin of Species', however, Darwin included Matthew in his 'Historical sketch' of antecedent literature on transmutation. In a later letter to the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' (12 May 1860) Matthew contrasted the genesis of his ideas with Darwin's methodology. Whereas Darwin devoted twenty years to careful reading and experimentation, he simply expelled ideas that he intuited as self-evident truths. This admission, which was perhaps a facetious act of conceit, pointed to significant differences. Unlike Darwin, Matthew was not intent on fundamentally reshaping life sciences. He cited virtually no relevant literature in support of his arguments, and explicitly spurned learned naturalists. His transformism was part of his commitment to social and political reform, anchored in free-trade imperialism. 
Matthew should be understood in the political, social, economic, and cultural context of the 'age of revolutions' of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, rather than as a precursor of Darwin's 'Origin' (1859). More particularly, Matthew's 'Naval Timber and Arboriculture' was significantly shaped by France's July revolution of 1830. The preface indicated that he had addressed 'the question regarding species, variety and habit' to 'correct the aridity' of the book (p. vi). But his closing remarks in the appendices make clear his plan. Ostensibly he began his book with the intention of writing an instructive manual on forestry, a work of rural economy. Events in France, however, convinced him that his treatise on 'the regeneration of trees' could profitably inform 'the regeneration of man' (p. 390), as it was so clearly occurring across the channel. Within the appendices Matthew referred to imminent changes of circumstance for man that will arise 'in the new state of things' (pp. 366, 368). These prognostications reiterated his earlier observation that 'we are... on the eve of great improvements in arboriculture' (p. 76n). These great improvements, he argues, follow from the realization that ''species' may be broken down by art or culture, and that when once the breach is made, there is almost no limit to disorder; the 'mele' ['sic'] that ensues being nearly incapable of reduction' (ibid.). The July revolution replaced a strident and increasingly absolutist monarchy with a constitutional one that was underpinned by merchant and industrial capitalists. Matthew argued that laws 'manifest in nature' proved that constitutional monarchy was the best form of governance, and that the abolition of the stifling and unnatural law of entail and primogeniture was a necessary step towards the natural and superior leadership of the merchants and capitalists. 
To stake his claim to priority over Darwin in the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' thirty years later, Matthew quoted selectively from at least half a dozen different passages in his 391 page monograph. The immediate contexts of these passages must be appreciated to understand the meaning and intent of the book that Matthew had published in 1831. First and foremost, he wished to proffer 'laws of nature' to support his liberal political agenda. He drew on the transformist biology of the likes of Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck and Erasmus Darwin to argue that biological species were not fixed and unchanging. And in a manner similar to T. R. Malthus he constructed an argument grounded in biological and social analogies. When combined, these two strands of thought permitted him to argue that natural and social hierarchies were susceptible to change, according to laws of nature. Thus, 'nobility to be in the highest perfection like the finer varieties of fruit' must mix with 'wilder stocks' or it is doomed to an effete future ('Naval Timber', 366). Similarly, a 'change of seed, that is, a change of place, within certain limits of latitude, is well known to be indispensable to the more sturdy growth and health of many cultivated vegetables; it is probable that this also holds true of the human race. (ibid., 370-71)' Consequently the considerable detail afforded to sowing, planting, and thinning woods in 'Naval Timber' was subsumed in a wider argument about selection of soil and climate for Britain's surplus population: the human species could be improved through emigration. This, he maintained, was in preference to the English 'poor-rate law, contravening natural law' (ibid., 374). His natural law of selection sought to explain the sustenance of 'the lion in his strength, the hare in her swiftness, and the fox in his wiles' (ibid., 364-5), because Matthew desired a natural justification for Britain's 'Universal Empire' (ibid., 363). His political and religious commitments may also have shaped his geological speculations. Unlike Darwin, who espoused a belief in very slow and gradual change that could only be explained with reference to observable present-day forces, Matthew relied upon a variant of Georges Cuvier's catastrophism: aeons of stability were punctuated by catastrophes of a scale and force hitherto unknown. Out of these revolutionary catastrophes arose a new natural order. 
Historians have been less inclined to accept Darwin's curious concession that Matthew's explanation of the origin of species was 'precisely the same' as his and Alfred Russel Wallace's. There were, in fact, fundamental differences in their conceptions of the pace of geological and organic transformations, and in their relative acceptance of random changes among populations of fauna and flora. In the face of general resistance to his mechanism of evolutionary change Darwin perhaps embraced Matthew's concise summary of a 'natural law of selection', which was clearly grounded in years of arboricultural experience of hybridization. This may explain why, after Darwin's concession, Matthew indignantly noted the injustice of denying the 'parent' of Darwin's theory of natural selection his due regard when the British Association for the Advancement of Science rejected his proposed paper on the subject for their Dundee meeting in 1867. 
Matthew's prescience, arguably, would be better seen as an early form of environmentalism rather than as a precursor of Darwin. Man, he asserted, 'has now acquired a dominion over the material world, and a consequent power of increase, so as to render it probable that the whole surface of the earth may soon be overrun by this engrossing anomaly, to the annihilation of every wonderful and beautiful variety of animated existence, which does not administer to his wants principally as laboratories of preparation to befit cruder elemental matter for assimilation of his organs. (Matthew, 'Naval Timber', 387-8)' Matthew wed Lamarck to Malthus and warned of the potential environmental destruction attendant upon human alterations to the natural world. 
Matthew styled himself the 'solver of the problem of species' on the title page of his pamphlet 'Schleswig-Holstein' (1864), which supported the recent Austrian and Prussian occupation of Schleswig and Holstein, on the ground that the territory was the seedbed of the Anglen race. He had travelled extensively in German lands, and had purchased farms in Schleswig-Holstein that were amalgamated into one estate, Schenefeld, between 1845 and 1850. His third son, Alexander, assumed management of Schenefeld, married a German woman, and settled in Germany for the remainder of his life. 
In 1869 Matthew repeated a description of himself as 'a venerable, crotchety old man, with a head stuffed with old-world notions, quite unsuited to the present age of progress' ('Dundee Advertiser', 13 Dec 1869, repr. in Dempster, 335). It was one of five letters that he submitted about the Tay Bridge, and helped to reinforce his historical reputation for prescience. Matthew, a director of the Edinburgh and Northern Railway, criticized the siting and engineering of the bridge, and predicted its collapse, with train atop and loss of life. Ten years later, in December 1879, his predictions proved tragically correct, and he became known as the Seer of Gourdiehill. Matthew, however, did not live to witness the Tay Bridge disaster, having died from heart disease at Gourdiehill on 8 June 1874. He was buried at Errol churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 39520


Synge, Edward (1691-1762), Church of Ireland bishop of Elphin, was born in Cork on 18 October 1691, the eldest son of Edward Synge (1659-1741), then vicar of Christ Church, Cork, and Jane 
(or Anne; died 1723)
, daughter of the Revd Nicholas Proud (or Proude), also of Cork. His younger brother was Nicholas Synge, later bishop of Killaloe. He was educated in Cork by Mr Mulloy and entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1706, and became BA in 1709; in 1710 he became a fellow of the college, and in the same year junior dean. His father became archbishop of Tuam in 1716, and the younger Synge was therefore well placed for advancement. In 1719 he was given the living of St Audoen's, Dublin, which carried with it a prebendal stall in St Patrick's Cathedral. In the following year he married Jane Curtis (died 1737), daughter of Robert Curtis of Roscrea, co. Tipperary, MP for Duleek, and Sarah Curtis. Having been made provost of Tuam in 1726, he was consecrated by his father as bishop of Clonfert in 1730, and in 1731 was translated to Cloyne. In 1733 he was again translated, to Ferns and Leighlin, and in 1740 he went to Elphin where he remained until his death. 
Like his father, Synge took a robust view of the penal laws, which he criticized on the grounds that they encouraged a 'furious and blind zeal for religion' which could disturb the civil state (E. Synge, 'The Care of Toleration Considered', 2nd edn, 1726, 2). In his sermon to the joint houses of parliament in 1725 on the text 'Compel them to come in', he made a clear distinction between legislation to ensure public order and laws controlling private worship. Rather than compelling Catholics to become protestants by law, he advocated the education of Catholic children in protestant schools. This sermon resulted in a pamphlet controversy with Stephen Radcliffe, vicar of Naas, in which Synge, in his response to Radcliffe, set out a form of oath of allegiance suitable for Catholics loyal to the crown. 
In the 1720s Synge was a member of the group who were close to Lord Molesworth, a follower of Shaftesbury. George Berkeley, whose lectures Synge had attended at college, was another member of this circle. It was probably here that Synge met the Presbyterian minister Francis Hutcheson, who had been invited to Dublin in 1720 to start a dissenting academy. Hutcheson acknowledges a deep debt to Synge's critique of the text in his 'Inquiry into the Original of our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue' (1726), and, from Hutcheson's philosophical writing and Synge's correspondence, it is clear that they shared many attitudes. 
Politically Synge was active: Chesterfield, as lord lieutenant in 1746, described him as one of the most able members of the Irish House of Lords. With Lord Roden he involved himself in the regulation of the linen trade. During the money bill dispute of 1753, he took the side of the speaker, Henry Boyle, in opposition to Primate Stone and the lord lieutenant, the duke of Bedford. Synge was intellectually lively and extremely well read, and had a considerable library. He was also musical and made a strong impression on Handel, who described him as 'a Nobleman very learned in Musick', when on his visit to Dublin in 1742 (Luckett, 132). Synge attended the first performance of 'The Messiah' and wrote a warm appreciation of the work to Handel, suggesting a sequel, 'The Penitent'. 
Synge was wealthy through his marriage settlement and because of a life interest he inherited in the estate of his uncle, Samuel Synge, dean of Kildare. He himself acknowledged that he was also prosperous through his active management of his church estates. He was an improving farmer and, as a member of the linen board, he invested in flax seed, looms, and spinning-wheels to encourage the manufacture of cloth in co. Roscommon. Like his father before him he devoted part of his wealth to the improvement of the ministry of the Church of Ireland in his diocese. In Ferns and Leighlin he justified the collection of tithes on dry cattle (tithe agistment) by using the moneys raised to encourage a resident clergy. In Elphin he built a new palace (now in ruins) and new churches. However, his financial judgement was not always wise, and he became involved in a parliamentary enquiry into charitable funds in 1760 because of his rather lax management of a trust. 
Synge and his wife suffered the loss in childhood or early youth of all their children, except the youngest, Alicia; Jane Synge died in December 1737 when Alicia was five years old. It is through Synge's letters to Alicia, written between 1746 and 1752, that we know him best. They show him as a loving father, anxious both for his daughter's health and for her education and manners as the only child of a rich man. 
Synge died at his house in Kevin Street, Dublin, on 27 January 1762. He was buried in the Synge vault in St Patrick's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 39532


Rogers, John (d. 1558), military engineer, is of obscure origins. He was probably apprenticed to a mason and is likely to have been the John Rogers of London, freemason, who worked as a stonesetter and carver at Hampton Court between 1533 and 1537. In the late spring of 1541 he was appointed master mason to Guines Castle, on the southern edge of the Calais pale, and thereafter devoted most of his career to the service of the crown. At Guines he and Richard Lee (surveyor of works) introduced new methods of fortification, drawn partly from Italian military engineers. Rogers started to be noticed favourably by the king, who also employed him as a spy, reporting on French fortifications outside the Calais pale. Increasingly involved in military engineering, Rogers was appointed surveyor of works at Hull in autumn 1541. There he was responsible for the detail, perhaps the overall concept, of the new fortifications; he was chief technical supervisor of the construction work, had administrative duties, and either executed or directed making plans. 
While he was at Hull Rogers began to be employed by Henry VIII as a technical consultant. At a time of increasingly severe Anglo-Scottish hostilities he went in April 1542 to view the fortifications at Berwick, and in June to report on possible improvements to Wark Castle, Northumberland, and to make plans. On 1 January 1543 he was granted an annuity of $36 10's'., more than twice the amount usually paid to the king's master masons. As the work at Hull drew to an end, in the autumn of 1543, Rogers's move to Carlisle was contemplated, though there is no evidence he ever went. He was employed as a spy again; in December he was to go to Tantallon Castle, Haddingtonshire, and he returned to the area in early June 1544. On 28 February 1544 Rogers had been appointed clerk of the ordnance; he was only active until July 1544, but held the office until his death. 
The appointment of Rogers in September 1544 as surveyor of works at Boulogne, immediately after the English capture of the town, led to his attaining eminence as one of the foremost military engineers of his time. He was assisted at first by such advisers as Sir Richard Lee and John Burgate but after one month the works at the haven entrance were placed under Thomas Palmer. By March 1546, however, Rogers was in sole charge. He was a central figure in the transformation of English fortifications and by now both he and Lee were well abreast of the latest continental developments in the science; the fortifications at Boulogne were constructed strictly according to the new Italianate principles. He also acted once more as a spy. In July 1545, he was to make a plan of the French camps and fortifications on the southern side of the River Liane. 
As an architectural and topographical draughtsman Rogers was held in high esteem by his contemporaries. His plans used up-to-date practices; examples survive that are drawn to scale and give scale bars, dimensions, and elevations. These were probably the skills that led to his involvement with the diplomatic negotiations preceding and following the treaty of Camp, signed on 7 June 1546, ending the war between France and England. Rogers was a special diplomatic attache: he surveyed the disputed lands and produced drawings as a basis for the negotiations, participated in some of the discussions, and liaised between diplomats in France and the king in England. 
Rogers reputedly spoke plainly and bluntly, and was often at odds with his administrative superiors. His position became more precarious after Henry VIII, who had trusted Rogers's judgement, died on 28 January 1547, but Edward VI's administration continued to employ him. Consequently, although Rogers remained at Boulogne until the very end of the English occupation in March 1550 (he was still surveyor of works there in the previous month), his growing reputation as a harbour engineer earned him commissions to investigate problems at a number of harbours on the south coast of England. In June 1548 he was sent to Folkestone and Dover; later that summer he became chief technical officer in a project to overcome the silting-up of Sandwich haven, and this work continued until November 1551. 
After Rogers left Boulogne, he gave advice in projects for the defence of Alderney, Guernsey, Folkestone, and possibly Sheerness. In spring 1551 he went to Ireland in connection with proposed fortifications on the south coast, but plans collapsed through lack of funds. In February 1552 he went to inspect Guines Castle and returned via Dover, where he viewed the pier, which he inspected again in October the next year. In May and June 1552 he worked on the fortifications at Portsmouth. 
Rogers did not have an official position again until November 1556, when he was appointed surveyor of the queen's works at Berwick. His tenure was brief; he became surveyor of fortifications, works and repairs at Calais on 6 December, with a yearly salary of $20, a life annuity of $10, and a house. He was probably taken prisoner either on the fall of Calais, on 7 January 1558, or on that of Guines on the twentieth. Still a prisoner on 16 March, he was probably dead by the twenty-fifth. His will, made on 6 August 1557, was proved on 10 May 1559. In a document which may indicate protestant sympathies, he left to his wife, Agnes, and her heirs his house in the parish of St Giles Cripplegate, London (granted to him on 17 January 1548), his lease of the lordship of Street, Somerset (granted to him in May 1552 for twenty-one years), and his lease of Folkestone Priory. In recognition of her late husband's long services, Agnes was granted an annuity of 20 marks on 17 July 1559. 


@@@@@


doc= 39534


Heygate, William Edward (1816-1902), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born on 11 August 1816 at Hackney, Middlesex, the second son of James Heygate (1784-1873) and his wife, Anna (died 1867), second daughter of Edward Longdon Mackmurdo of Old Ford, Middlesex. He had two brothers and three sisters. Sir William Heygate (1782-1844), MP for Sudbury 1818-26 and lord mayor of London 1822-3, created baronet in 1831, was Heygate's only uncle on his father's side. He entered Merchant Taylors' School, London, in 1831, and matriculated as Andrew's exhibitioner at St John's College, Oxford, in 1835. Taking a third class in 'literae humaniores', he graduated BA in 1839 and MA in 1842. 
Ordained deacon and then priest in 1840, Heygate went first as curate to Great Wakering, Essex, before being invalided for two years with chest problems. He then served curacies at South Gerrans in Cornwall, and at Hadleigh and Leigh, both in Essex, supplementing mostly meagre stipends by teaching and writing. On 15 July 1846 he married Mary Elizabeth Penny, daughter of the Revd Edmund Henry Penny, rector of Great Stambridge, Rochford, Essex. They had seven sons and four daughters. In 1869, reputedly after John Keble had commended him to Gladstone as a parish priest deserving of promotion, Heygate was presented to the living of Brighstone (or Brixton) on the Isle of Wight by Samuel Wilberforce, bishop of Winchester. 
A voluminous writer, Heygate was perhaps best known for his fiction, which contributed to the canon of high-church religious and social tales popularized by the Tractarian writers William Gresley and Francis Edward Paget. Typical of these was 'William Blake, or, The English Farmer' (1848), which set out the paternal responsibilities of that class, while 'Godfrey Davenant: a Tale of School Life' (1847) and 'Godfrey Davenant at College' (1849), which chronicled the early moral trials of their protagonist and set out Heygate's educational ideals, also enjoyed some notice. 'Sir Henry Appleton, or, Essex during the Great Rebellion' (1857) drew upon Heygate's local historical knowledge and evinced hostility to puritanism, while a better received sequel, 'The Scholar and the Trooper, or, Oxford during the Great Rebellion', appeared the following year. The first of these led to a correspondence with the prominent American manufacturer, banker, and politician Nathan Appleton (1779-1861), a distant descendant of the book's subject who claimed puritan ancestry. Their dialogue was published anonymously in the USA in 1859 as 'The Doctrines of Original Sin and the Trinity Discussed in a Correspondence'. Two anti-revolutionary novellas were 'Pierre Poussin, or, The Thought of Christ's Presence' (1851) and the anonymous 'Alice of Fobbing, or, The Times of Jack Straw and Wat Tyler' (1860). As well as various individual tales Heygate published eight collections of children's stories, of which 'Allegories and Tales' (1873) and 'An Old Parson's Anecdotes and Tales' (1892) are typical. A collection of his poetry, 'The Fugitive and other Poems', appeared in 1870. 
Heygate also published numerous devotional works. Well-known general guides included 'Ember Hours' (1857), 'The Good Shepherd' (1860) (which W. E. Gladstone used to read while dressing for dinner), and 'The Eucharist' (1874), though others were intended for specific audiences, such as 'The Manual: a Book of Devotion Chiefly Intended for the Poor' (1853) and 'The Evening of Life, or, Meditations and Devotions for the Aged' (1856). He issued several statements of theology, such as 'Catholic Antidotes' (1858), as well as a collection of sermons and various pamphlets on subjects of the day. 
Made an honorary canon of Winchester in 1887, Heygate remained at Brighstone until his death there on 12 December 1902; he was buried in Brighstone churchyard. An ardent high-churchman and Tractarian sympathizer, he volunteered to assist the Revd Bryan King, rector of St George-in-the-East, London, during the ritualist riots of 1859-60, and was a lifelong friend and correspondent both of Keble and, after his settlement at Brighstone, of E. B. Pusey, who had a house at nearby Chale. Of his immediate family, his younger brother Thomas Edmund ('b'. 1826) and three of his seven sons -- the eldest, William Augustine ('b'. 1847), the third, Ambrose ('b'. 1852), and the fifth, Reginald Thomas ('b'. 1858) -- all followed him into Anglican orders. 


@@@@@


doc= 39536


Alcock, Charles William (1842-1907), sports administrator and writer, was born on 2 December 1842 at 10 Norfolk Street, Sunderland, the second child of six sons and three daughters of Charles Alcock (died 1881), a shipowner and later a shipbroker and insurance broker, and his wife, Elizabeth Alcock, 'nee' Forster (died 1890). He was educated at Walter Todd preparatory school in Woodford, and from 1855 to 1859 at Harrow School, following his elder brother, John Forster Alcock. Both were keen footballers and in 1859 the two formed the Forest club. John attended the inaugural meeting of the Football Association (FA) in 1863. In the same year 'Bell's Life' noted that 'the play of Mr C. Alcock of the Forest club elicited great applause'. He stood just under 6 feet and weighed 13 stone 6 lb, and he was 'an excellent dribbler and goal getter, very hard to knock off the ball, and as hard a worker as he was enthusiastic'. He took a lead in founding the Wanderers in 1863, an Old Harrovian side which replaced Forest and won the FA cup five times between 1872 and 1878. He represented England against Scotland at the Oval in 1870 and captained them in the same fixture in 1875, acting as the cup final referee a week later. As a referee he was reputed to be good-natured and indulgent to offenders, and he was the first president of the Referees Association. 'A jovial comrade full of football anecdote', he also enjoyed athletics and golf, and played cricket for the Gentlemen of Essex. 'Wisden' (1908) records that he was 'a steady bat, a fair change fast bowler, and an excellent long stop' and that he once had 'the curious experience of captaining France against Germany at a match in Hamburg'. 
However, it is less as a player than as a prodigiously energetic sports administrator and journalist that Alcock is now remembered. He was undoubtedly the most important figure of his time in the shaping of association football and almost as influential in the development of cricket. As the only official with real power in both emergent summer and winter national sports during their formative years, he was the 'eminence grise' of English sport. He was elected to the committee of the recently formed FA in 1866 at the age of twenty-three, and became its secretary in 1870, a position he held for twenty-five years, the first seventeen of which were unpaid. He was also the president of the Surrey FA, vice-president of the London FA and, in addition to his extensive responsibilities as secretary of Surrey County Cricket Club, he was also chairman of the Richmond Athletic Association and vice-president of Royal Mid-Surrey Golf Club. 
Alcock's first love was football, which was then just emerging, as he later recalled, from 'the rough and semi-barbarous sport' of the previous century. The game was remarkably fortunate in its young advocate, who after scarcely a year in office devised the rules for the FA cup on the basis of the knock-out house competitions he had known at Harrow. He also took a lead in organizing the first unofficial international match between England and Scotland at the Oval in November 1870 and umpired the first official encounter two years later in Glasgow. Although quite badly injured two weeks before the game, he travelled with the team at his own expense 'through the night in draughty carriages with hard seats' to attend a goalless draw played at the West of Scotland cricket club at Partick. 
The sport prospered mightily. 'What was ten or fifteen years ago the recreation of a few has now become the pursuit of thousands', Alcock observed on receiving a testimonial from the FA committee in April 1881 'in consideration of his having been the founder of the Association game'. Recalling the early opposition to football in the medical journal 'The Lancet' and elsewhere, he moved on with typical directness to the new problems of success, of gate money, professionalism, and the relations between north and south. 'The time had arrived to settle the question', for it was evident in the Lancashire cotton towns that players were being paid and 'Scotch professors' imported by teams such as Preston North End, who were suspended by the FA in 1884. The FA committee, mostly staunch public school amateurs, were for a firm line against professionalism. Alcock took a different view: calm, practical, genial, and effective, and drawing on his extensive experience of cricket, he saw the inevitability of the advent of the professional player. Although an amateur himself, he objected to the argument 'that it is immoral to work for a living' -- even if that work took the form of sport. He twice proposed the legalizing of professionalism under strict controls before it was accepted in July 1885, thus averting a schism of the kind that afflicted rugby ten years later. Professionalism was permitted under strict controls and amateur influence preserved. When in 1888 a professional football league was proposed -- almost the only major innovation of the time that was not of his devising -- Alcock proved agreeable, his journalistic instinct for the commercial spectacle overcoming his residual amateur scruples. It was thus that the distinctive and durable dual structure of English football was born. 
Remarkably, Alcock was just as active in cricket as in football. In 1872, the year of the first cup final and official international, he became secretary of Surrey, a post he held for the rest of his life. During this time the county enjoyed great success, winning eight county championships between 1887 and 1895. Alcock, a shrewd and flexible man, appointed the amateur W. W. Read as assistant secretary to 'secure the services of one of the very best cricketers Surrey ever had'. But he also took care to keep the professionals happy, encouraging crowd collections for great performances and introducing innovative 'star contracts' for top players such as Tom Hayward, George Lohmann, George Richardson, and Bobby Abel. Generous and pragmatic though he was, he expected deference from professionals and bridled when these four threatened to strike on the eve of the third test against Australia at the Oval in 1896 unless their match fee of $10 was doubled. The players backed down and apologized; Alcock admitted they had a case but rejected what he saw as 'a peremptory demand not a request for consideration'. His power within association football ensured that big FA fixtures came to the Oval, providing Surrey with a valuable source of income until 1895, when he supervised the building of a new pavilion and tavern. Completed within six months at a cost of $38,000, these helped to ensure the ground's future as a test venue. 
Alcock always had an eye for the great event. Drawing on his experience in promoting international football, he arranged the first test match held in England, against Australia at the Oval in 1880. Two years later, again at the Oval under Alcock, the Australians returned with F. R. Spofforth, whose demolition of England inspired the legend of the Ashes. After the match N. L. Jackson, the founder of the Corinthians, saw Alcock 'sitting down on a huge iron safe, burying his head in his hands, oblivious to everything'. His breathless description of the defeat is memorable: 'Men who were noted for their coolness at critical moments were trembling like a leaf; some were shivering with cold; some even fainted. At times there was an awful silence' (W. A. Bettesworth, 'Chats on the Cricket Field', 1910, 23). Despite the England team's failure, the general arrangements for test matches were henceforth left in his hands by the MCC. 
Alcock witnessed the Ashes test of 1882 as both an official and a journalist. Presumably reliant at first on family money, he soon established himself in the latter role and promoted the better conventions of what was then a new genre of writing. Although tending at times towards hyperbole, he was never crass and always readable. Writing not only supplemented his earnings as an administrator but also gave an outlet to his opinions and his feelings for the sports he loved. For thirty-five years he both made and reported the sporting news, exploiting his exceptional position to the full not just for his own ends -- he was comfortably off and left over $3000 without making a large fortune -- but also for the unity and prosperity of football and cricket. He began his journalistic career in his twenties, writing for 'The Field' and 'The Sportsman' before founding his own specialist magazines including a 'Football Annual', a 'Football' magazine, and in 1882 the weekly 'Cricket'. This has been described as 'the first viable national magazine solely devoted to cricket' (Sissons) and provided a model for future publications, mixing match reports with gossip and player profiles. Alcock also published several books, including 'Football: the Association Game' (1890) and, with Viscount Alverstone, one of the first notable works of sports history, 'Surrey Cricket: its History and Associations' (1902), known at the Oval as 'the 'Old Testament''. 
Alcock married, on 19 December 1864, Eliza Caroline (1841-1937), daughter of Francis Webb Ovenden, watercolourist and marine painter. They had two sons and six daughters. He died on 26 February 1907 at his home at 7 Arundel Road, Brighton, and was survived by his wife and two of their daughters. He was buried on 2 March at Norwood cemetery in a plot acquired for his second son, Charles Ernest, who died at five months in 1874. In 1992 the Football Association agreed to adopt the grave of the man who, in the words of their official historian, was 'the forgotten father of English sport'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39537


Parsons, John Henry (1890-1981), cricketer and Church of England clergyman, was born on 30 May 1890 at St John's Street, Oxford, the second of the six children of William Parsons (1854-1931), chef at Brasenose College, Oxford, and later a hotel manager, and his wife, Kate Horn (died 1919). The family moved to the midlands in 1898 and Parsons attended Bablake School in Coventry. There he became captain of cricket and football before finding employment at the Humber car factory in the city, where he quickly advanced to the responsible role of a car tester. Footballing and cricketing performances on the sports field led to trials with both Coventry City Football Club and Warwickshire County Cricket Club. In August 1910, within one week, he went from being a net bowler with the county to playing first-class cricket, via a double century on his debut for the second eleven. The press comment that 'Warwickshire seem to have struck something good' ('Sporting Argus') led him to make the first of several brave decisions. This was to accept professional terms with a county which had serious financial problems and abandon a career in the prosperous car industry. In the four years before the First World War broke out Parsons was a member of the team which, against all expectations, won the county championship in 1911. He made the first of his thirty-eight centuries in 1913 and appeared for the Players against the Gentlemen in July 1914. His name was pencilled in for the next MCC tour of Australia and it was said he would 'go straight to the top of the tree' ('Wisden', 1915, 124). 
The outbreak of war put paid to these cricket prospects. Parsons served in the Warwickshire yeomanry and took part in the battle of Suvla Bay at Gallipoli before being commissioned in the Worcestershire yeomanry. Both regiments took part in the attack on Huj, near Gaza, in November 1917, when he was one of 181 men who routed a Turkish and Austrian force of over 2000. It proved to be the last cavalry charge in British military history. Success paved the way for General Allenby to take Jerusalem and Parsons was awarded the Military Cross. 
There followed five years serving with the Indian army on the north-west frontier during which Parsons married, on 19 April 1922, Gwendoline Ellen (Gwen) Bassett (1894-1964), a nursing sister in Quetta. They had a son and a daughter. Soon afterwards he took another brave decision: to leave the army and resume a career as a cricketer. The bravery lay in hoping he could re-establish himself in the Warwickshire side. In the social context of the time he was turning his back on a life as an Indian army officer to play cricket as Parsons, J. H. -- a professional. 
In the twelve years which followed (1924-36) Parsons completed a first-class career which yielded 17,969 runs (average 35.72). He toured India with the MCC in 1926-7, while innings of 161 against the 1928 West Indians and 190 against the 1931 New Zealanders again brought press suggestions that he be picked for England. The nearest he got, however, was selection for the Gentlemen against the Players, when in four appearances (1929-31) he averaged 40.12. For the professional had, in 1928, made yet another brave decision when he sought ordination in the Church of England. He trained at St Aidan's Theological College, Birkenhead. While serving his title at Rugby and supervising soup kitchens during the depression, Parsons continued to play occasional first-class cricket as an amateur, and sometimes captained Warwickshire. He 'led a disciplined side and knew what he wanted', recalled his county colleague E. J. 'Tiger' Smith (Howat, 'Cricketer Militant', 83). 
Shortly after war broke out in 1939 -- by which time he was vicar of Liskeard in Cornwall -- Parsons volunteered to be an army chaplain. Two brigadiers recalled those years: 'What a pearl of great price the unit had as their padre' and 'I wish I could strip him of his black buttons and make him one of my company commanders' (Howat, 'Cricketer Militant', 92). After the surrender of Italy in 1943, he became senior chaplain at Taranto, where his spiritual and practical concern for the allied forces, German prisoners of war, and displaced Italian civilians brought him a mention in dispatches. 
On his return to Liskeard after the war (to a parish which had hardly known him) Parsons's incumbency was significant for the fervour of his evangelism and for the size of his congregations, together with his ability to run youth clubs and to raise money. Yet underlying all these -- as in his chaplaincy at Taranto -- was the need for reconciliation. In 1946 he had the sword he had carried at Huj against the Turks made into a ploughshare, echoing the book of 'Micah'. With it he ploughed the field, sowed the seed, reaped the corn, and baked the bread which 'I used at the Communion Service' (Howat, 'Cricketer Militant', 104). He was appointed to a canonry of Truro Cathedral in 1953 and subsequently (1959-65) served the rural parish of Birlingham, near Worcester, while still able to make 65 (with four sixes) against Solihull School when over seventy. 
Jack Parsons died at 11 De La Hay Avenue, Plymouth, on 2 February 1981 and was cremated at St Martin's, Liskeard, three days later. The seriousness of purpose and the fulfilment of aims -- his philosophy of life -- were reflected in his cricket. There was perfection of technique in his batting and he belonged, in essence, to the classical era of cricket in the grace and formalism of his approach. 


@@@@@


doc= 39541


Green, Roger Gilbert Lancelyn (1918-1987), writer, was born on 2 November 1918 at Swanington Hall, Norwich, Norfolk, the eldest of the four children of Gilbert Arthur Lancelyn Green (1887-1947), major, Royal Field Artillery, and his wife, Helena Mary Phyllis, 'nee' Sealy (1885-1972). The history of the family's 900 year-long association with the manors of Poulton-Lancelyn and Bebington is recorded in Roger Lancelyn Green's 'Poulton-Lancelyn: the Story of an Ancestral Home' (1948). Although he claims his account is of 'an undistinguished country family' (Green, 'Poulton-Lancelyn'), it is evident that Poulton Hall, its history and its famous Queen Anne library with the Revd Thomas Green's collection (4496 volumes), furnished the inner landscape of his life and work. Childhood illness interrupted his schooling at Dane Court, Pyrford, Surrey, and Liverpool College, but his father enjoyed reading aloud to his children the books of an earlier generation of writers: Lewis Carroll, Rudyard Kipling, Andrew Lang, H. Rider Haggard, Harrison Ainsworth, Jeffery Farnol, and others. This upbringing left his son with impressions of childhood as a golden age suffused with literary romance and adventure, which he kept intact throughout a lifetime in a period of great social change. 
At Merton College, Oxford (1937-40), Green's interest in romantic fantasy was encouraged by his tutor, C. S. Lewis, whose friend, J. R. R. Tolkien, was writing 'The Lord of the Rings'. Tolkien's 1939 lecture 'On fairy stories' about the 'secondary world' of the imagination confirmed Green's scholarly preferences for traditional fairy- and folk-tales, classical myths and legends, the Arthurian cycle, medieval romances, Norse sagas, the 'Old Testament', and Egyptian history, all of which would form the sources of his later writings. After taking his degree (1940) he had short spells as an actor in Oxford and London (Pirate Noodler in 'Peter Pan'), a schoolmaster, and an antiquarian bookseller before returning to Oxford to take his MA degree and, tutored by Tolkien, to write his BLitt thesis on Andrew Lang (1944). He became deputy librarian of his college (1945-50), had many friends, and pursued a literary career of individual connoisseurship. On 31 March 1948 he married June Burdett ('b'. 1926), actress and speech and drama examiner; they had two sons and one daughter. 
Green will be remembered for 'Tellers of Tales', (1946), a landmark and early example of serious consideration given to children's books as a distinctive literature. In his clear, urbane, man-of-letters style, he presents biographical descriptions of his favourite childhood authors, mostly those who lived between 1850 and 1920. Green's erudition and his acceptance of writing for children as an important literary activity made his book a great success as a source of reference, especially with teachers and librarians. Later editions (1953; 1965) addressed adults more directly, although by 1969, in the last edition, a number of his subjects had become topics of antiquarian interest for specialist readers. The Bodley Head monographs on 'Lewis Carroll' (1960), 'J. M. Barrie' (1960), 'Mrs Molesworth' (1961), 'Andrew Lang' (1962), all members of his pantheon, and of his tutor and friend 'C. S. Lewis' (1963, revised 1969) show Green at his most characteristic. About his distinction as a writer there is no doubt. What he knew best he revisited on behalf of a wide range of readers. 'The Story of Lewis Carroll' (1950) is for the young; their elders have his edition of Carroll's 'Diaries' (1953), 'The Lewis Carroll handbook: being a new version of a handbook of the literature of the Rev. C. L. Dodgson' (1962, rev. edn 1970), and 'The Work of Lewis Carroll', edited by John Tenniel (1965). Other editorial tributes include 'The Readers' Guide to Rudyard Kipling's Work' (1961), 'Kipling: the Critical Heritage' (1971), and 'Plays and Stories of J. M. Barrie' (1962). Green's attachment to creators of 'secondary worlds' is also clear in the somewhat hagiologic biography of C. S. Lewis that he wrote with Walter Hooper (1974). 
As a critic, Green accepted literary values as self-evident. His biographical approach to children's books continued to influence other writings about them for at least twenty-five years after his essay 'The golden age of children's literature' (1962, 59-73). Later, Peter Hunt argued that Green was 'committed to books in a way that few of us could hope to be' ('Signal', 56, 1988, 146) and 'the arcadia from which Green wrote is only available to us if we reject the world as it is' (ibid., 147). Nevertheless, Hunt admits that Green was 'one of the first to take children's literature into the more hallowed academic halls' (ibid., 148). Rarely committing himself to forthright opinions on the works of his contemporaries, Green brought to his own a distinctive kind of scholarly strength. Having tried his hand at writing conventional stories for children, he ruefully acknowledged that their settings in country houses were ''out of date' and not sufficiently 'period' to satisfy the critics' (Hammond, 335). 
Green's continuing reputation rests on his retellings of tales he loved as a child and came to know intrinsically as a scholar. His anthologies owe much to his passion for collecting, as described in 'Tellers of Tales'. But, rather than a simple bringing-together of distinctive genres, each book is a recreative enterprise. During the 1960s and 1970s this work included, for Dent: 'Tales of Make-Believe' (1960), 'Ten Tales of Detection' (1967), 'Thirteen Uncanny Tales' (1970), 'Tales of Terror and Fantasy' (from Edgar Allan Poe; 1971); and for Hamish Hamilton: 'The Hamish Hamilton Book of Dragons' (1970), 'Magicians' (1973), and 'Other Worlds' (1976). In retelling heroic legends Green stays as close as he can to his reading of the originals; in prefaces he lets his readers know about his sources in a way that engages them as fellow scholars. 'King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table' (1953) has brought at least two generations of young readers as near to Malory as they are likely to get. The book has been continuously in print; a new edition was printed in 1994, and as a 'Puffin Classic' it is also an audiobook (1998). Green's dignified, austere language is spell-binding for a more demotic age. The same effect is noticeable in 'Heroes of Greece and Troy' and 'The Tale of Israel' (1969). In 'Mystery at Mycenae' (1959) and 'The Luck of Troy' (1961), devotion to the world of Homer brought him the success in writing fiction and the attention of an audience that had eluded him earlier. 
Green died of cancer at his home, Poulton Hall, Poulton Lancelyn, Bebington, Cheshire, on 8 October 1987, and was buried at St Andrew's Church, Bebington. By dint of his prolific exertions during his life as a country gentleman, he enhanced writing for children with his scholarship and won for himself a unique reputation. His academic distinctions included the William Noble research fellowship in English at the University of Liverpool (1950-52), where he was later a member of council (1964-70) and from which he was awarded an honorary degree of DLitt (1981). At the University of St Andrews (Scotland) he was the Andrew Lang lecturer in 1968. He edited the 'Kipling Journal' from 1957 to 1975. His obituary in the 'Times Educational Supplement' (23 October 1987) recorded that children's literature had 'lost a pioneering researcher and an eloquent advocate'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39545


Taylor, Stephen James Lake, Baron Taylor (1910-1988), physician and politician, was born (before the arrival of the doctor) on 30 December 1910 at Mepos, Marlow Common, a studio in Great Marlow, Buckinghamshire, the son of John Reginald Taylor (1878-1948), civil engineer, and his wife, Beatrice Violet, 'nee' Lake (died 1969), daughter of William Alfred Lake. As his father regularly worked in India, and his wife generally accompanied him, Taylor was brought up mainly by an aunt and grandparents. There were early medical influences, as there were many doctors in his family. 
After preparatory school, where he surprised the staff by declaring that he was a socialist, Taylor went to Stowe School and thence to St Thomas's Hospital, beginning a lifelong relationship with the hospital and medical school. He qualified in 1934 and then worked briefly in general practice and at a junior level in anaesthetics and general medicine. In 1936 he became senior resident medical officer at the largely female Royal Free Hospital. He 'applied for the job quite deliberately because I felt I needed to learn about women' (Taylor, 38), and met his future wife (May Doris) Charity Clifford ['see 'Taylor, (May Doris) Charity, Lady Taylor (1914-1998)], a house officer, a formidable character, and later a renowned prison governor and administrator. Subsequently he held junior psychiatric posts at the Bethlem Royal Hospital and the Maudsley Hospital, and in 1938 he published 'The Suburban Neurosis' (1938), a study of loneliness and associated psychiatric problems among suburban housewives. In 1939 he spent six months as an assistant editor at 'The Lancet'. His experience, like that of many young doctors, was wide and peripatetic, if lacking in depth. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War, Taylor joined the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve as a neuropsychiatrist. On 3 October 1939 he married Charity Clifford; they had three children, Jeremy Stephen ('b'. 1940), Elizabeth Trilby Charity ('b'. 1943), and Charles Richard Herbert ('b'. 1950). In 1941 his personal connections facilitated a move to the Ministry of Information, where he was head of the home intelligence division and set up and directed the wartime social survey, which reflected his interest in post-war planning and social medicine. While in the ministry, he found time to organize, edit, and publish a comprehensive plan for a future health service that reflected the views of younger doctors, in contrast to plans being developed by older voices in the local authorities, the British Medical Association, civil servants, political parties, and the Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust. (He had already, at the end of 1939, written a contentious article for 'The Lancet' in which he saw the wartime emergency hospital service as a sound foundation for the future.) In December 1944 he produced a policy statement for the Labour Party and soon, as one of the few doctors then committed to the idea of a national health service, he was helping with its manifesto. He resigned from the ministry and stood for Labour in Barnet in the 1945 general election, was elected, and spent the next five years in parliament, from 1947 to 1950 as parliamentary private secretary to Herbert Morrison. Morrison and Aneurin Bevan disagreed about the role of local authorities in the National Health Service, Taylor taking Bevan's side. 
Not by nature a political animal, when he lost his seat in 1950 and was short of money Taylor found employment at the Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust, and was appointed a member of the Harlow New Town Development Corporation (1950-64 and 1966-7). He also served as medical director of Harlow Industrial Health Service (1955-64 and 1965-7). In Harlow he fought for health centres, a concept going back to the Dawson report (the interim report of the consultative council on medical and allied services) in 1920, but not generally accepted. He worked to develop group practice centres with dental and nursing support in association with the Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust. His friendship with Richard Costain, the builder who was established both in Lambeth and Harlow, also led him into the field of first aid and industrial medicine, as consultant in occupational health to Richard Costain Ltd (1951-64 and 1966-7). No other first-generation new town was so concerned with the medical welfare of its citizens. 
Arguably Taylor's greatest contribution was to the development of general practice. Criticism of it was rife in the 1950s, especially in the Collings report ('General practice in England today', by J. S. Collings), funded by Nuffield and published in 'The Lancet' in 1950. Anger about this among GPs led Nuffield to commission Taylor to write his own assessment. This he did on the basis of visits to practices regarded as of high quality by other GPs. 'Good General Practice', published in 1954, was an excellent guide to improvement and reinforced the influence of the young College of General Practitioners. His book was submitted in evidence to the Cohen committee on general practice, whose report (in 1954) stimulated developments in group practice at a critical time. Taylor himself aided the development of one of the earliest teaching general practices in London at his old medical school, St Thomas's. 
Taylor was made a life peer, as Baron Taylor, in 1958. When Labour returned to power in 1964, he led for the party on health service issues in the Lords, and was parliamentary under-secretary of state for Commonwealth relations and the colonies. He resigned after eighteen months, returning to his work in Harlow. He remained a Labour peer until 1981 (when he became a cross-bencher) but, disenchanted with party politics, he increasingly turned his attention elsewhere. Having first become involved in Canadian affairs in 1962, when he was asked to help and successfully negotiated an agreement during a strike of doctors in the province of Saskatchewan, in 1967 he accepted an invitation to become president and vice-chancellor of the Memorial University of Newfoundland, where he remained until 1973 and helped to establish a medical school. 
Taylor was a polymath with a sense of fun, a clear speaker who was interested in everything, and absolutely frank. A perennial optimist, his socialist ideals were tempered with pragmatism. He was helpful and supportive to those who looked for assistance. His forays into widely differing branches of health care, politics, and planning were often the result of serendipity and his wide network of friends and colleagues. His career was neither coherent nor usual, nor was his autobiography ('A Natural History of Everyday Life', 1988). However, his accomplishments show how productive an unorthodox path can be. He died on 1 February 1988 at Wrexham Maelor Hospital (near his home in Glynceiriog, Denbighshire), following a heart attack. He was survived by his wife, Charity, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 39546


Heinemann, Margot Claire (1913-1992), writer and teacher, was born on 18 November 1913 at 89 Priory Road, Hampstead, London, the second daughter of Meyer Max Heinemann, a merchant banker, and Selma Schott, a non-Orthodox Jewish couple recently immigrated from Frankfurt, Germany. An only brother was born four years later. Margot Heinemann was educated at South Hampstead high school, King Alfred School, and, finally, Roedean, where in 1931 she won a major scholarship to read English at Newnham College, Cambridge. She gained a double first and was awarded a one-year research studentship. 
During her undergraduate days, at the time of the depression and Hitler's rise to power, Heinemann first became intensely interested in politics and joined the socialist club and, after the passage of a contingent of hunger marchers through Cambridge in February 1934, the Communist Party. In its ranks she met and in 1935 started a relationship with (Rupert) John Cornford (1915-1936), an energetic student leader and poet. Only three weeks after the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in July 1936 Cornford travelled to Spain and enlisted in a republican militia, leaving behind an anguished Margot Heinemann, who wrote the first of several poems inspired by the Spanish Civil War, 'For R.J.C. (summer, 1936)'. Cornford returned safely on this occasion, but only to recruit more volunteers for the republican cause, with whom he set out again in October 1936, this time to join the newly formed International Brigades on what turned out to be a fatal mission. On the news of his death in action towards the end of 1936 Heinemann bravely responded with another poem, 'Grieve in a New Way for New Losses', which balances a reassuring refrain, 'All this is not more than we can deal with', against deeply pained verses: '
To think he lies out there, and changes 

In the process of the earth from what I knew, 

Decays and even there in the grave, shut close 

In the dark, away from me, speechless and cold. 

' Heinemann's 'For R.J.C.' had been reciprocated by Cornford in an untitled poem composed in the Aragon trenches, which begins 'Heart of the heartless world'. It was addressed to Margot Heinemann and for decades circulated, especially in the communist countries of eastern Europe, as 'To Margot Heinemann', following its publication under this title in 'John Cornford: a Memoir' (1938). Heinemann's poems were first published alongside Cornford's dedicatory one in John Lehmann's magazine 'New Writing' in autumn 1937. 
Heinemann's first employment was as a teacher for factory girls in a day continuation school at Bourneville. She left in 1937 to join the staff of the Labour Research Department in London, where for the next twelve years she inquired into wage structures in the various industries, wartime production, and British trade policy. She also lectured to trade unionists, coalminers in particular. Among the journalistic work undertaken during this time and mostly published in 'Labour Research' and 'Labour Monthly', sometimes under the pen-name Margaret Hudson, the frequent articles and books on the conditions in the coalmining industry stand out. In 'Britain's Coal' (1944), a Left Book Club choice prompted by the fuel shortage of the war years, she argued the case for pit nationalization, and in 'Coal must Come First' (1948) she reviewed the progress made since the passing of the industry into public ownership. The mood of the country that put the Labour Party in power in 1945 and prepared the way for the nationalization of key industries is well captured in Heinemann's only novel, 'The Adventurers' (1960), set in a fictitious 'mid-Welsh coalfield'. 
Throughout the 1940s Heinemann contributed to the communist press, and towards the end of that decade moved closer to the centre of communist politics by working full-time for the party, among other things as a researcher and speech-writer for its general secretary Harry Pollitt. She served on the editorial board of the party's intellectual journal the 'Modern Quarterly' (1945-53), and edited the weekly 'World News and Views' from 1949 to 1951, and its literary supplement 'Daylight' (1952-3), which promoted working-class writing. By standing as the Communist candidate for the Lambeth and Vauxhall division in the general election of 1950 and polling just over 500 votes (a mere 1.3 per cent of the votes cast) she experienced the hopeless isolation into which the Communist Party was drifting as a result of the developing cold war. However, this did not deter her from supporting the leadership's unquestioning adoption of Soviet cultural policies (Zhdanovism) in all the crucial inner-party debates of those years. In the 'Caudwell discussion', for example, conducted in the 'Modern Quarterly' in 1950-51, she sided with Maurice Cornforth, who had launched the assault on Christopher Caudwell's unorthodox aesthetics. In this unwavering pro-Soviet stance and demand for orthodoxy she was at one with her partner (John) Desmond Bernal (1901-1971), the eminent scientist and an international celebrity in the world communist movement owing to his indefatigable work for the World Peace Council and the World Federation of Scientific Workers. 
The couple had begun a relationship in 1949. After the birth of their daughter Jane in 1953 Heinemann did not resume full-time party work. But even as a rank-and-file member she remained alert to the debates about the Stalinization of the party and was unsympathetic towards the intellectuals who left 'en masse' in 1956-7 when the leadership defended the suppression of the Hungarian uprising, and belittled Khrushchov's 'revelations' of the mass repression and judicial murders habitual in the Soviet Union. 
Heinemann's hardened stance relented only in the 1960s. By then she had returned to teaching (1959) and to academic life (1965), the latter when she became a lecturer in English at Goldsmiths' College, London. Her two main areas of research now were the 1930s and Renaissance drama, both periods marked for her by their fascinating relation between literature and politics. She collaborated with Noreen Branson, a friend since her Labour Research Department days, on 'Britain in the Nineteen Thirties' (1971), and co-edited 'Culture and Crisis in Britain in the Thirties' (1979), a major reappraisal of the left-wing cultural endeavours of the decade. This book had developed out of lectures at the Communist University, an annual summer school run in the 1970s and 1980s in which she taught a regenerated Marxism to a rejuvenated membership and to radicals from outside the party and the university. 
But wider academic recognition came only with Heinemann's belated appointment as fellow of New Hall, Cambridge, in 1976 and the publication of her celebrated study 'Puritanism and Theatre' (1980). In this book she portrayed Thomas Middleton as a playwright close to the growing number of critics of the court, and traced a thread of continuity between early Stuart theatre and the upsurge of popular pamphleteering in the 1640s. A vigorous lecturer combining lived political experience and a passion for literature and teaching, she was in her later years much in demand as a speaker and a contributor to essay collections, even after retirement. 
Heinemann belonged to a generation of British Marxists whose formative years were during the anti-war and anti-fascist struggles of the first half of the 1930s. Loyalty to the Soviet Union, the country which embodied the hopes of millions of downtrodden people across the world, which alone had delivered arms to the beleaguered republican government of Spain, and which had borne the brunt of the German attack in the Second World War, came naturally. Conversion to communism was a total commitment, and devotion to the cause came before considerations of a career. 
Heinemann always held dear the memory of John Cornford, to the point of becoming embattled against what she felt to be libellous statements about his behaviour. In scholarly debates she would, with sure touch, seize upon the weaknesses in an argument and could be both a formidable opponent and an equally indomitable ally. At the same time, former students and younger colleagues described her as a generous mentor, encouraging and supportive, critical but never evasive. Heinemann was small in stature, but a powerful personality with a piercing gaze which few who encountered her, political friend or foe, were ever likely to forget. 
Heinemann died of bronchitis on 9 June 1992 in The Pines, a nursing home in Putney, London. After cremation her ashes were scattered on a mountain in Ross, Scotland. The Festschrift-to-be, 'Heart of the Heartless World', became a memorial volume. 


@@@@@


doc= 39549


White, Beatrice Mary Irene (1902-1986), literary scholar, was born on 6 July 1902 at 20 Staff Houses, Ely, Cambridgeshire, the youngest of the three children of Robert Joseph White (1867-1951) and Beatrice Mary Louisa Barnard (1872-1949). At the time of her birth her father was a sergeant-major serving with the 4th Suffolk regiment, and the family was living in army accommodation. 
Beatrice White entered King's College, London, in 1919 and was awarded a BA in English with first-class honours in 1923. She remained at King's College and in 1926 gained her MA (with distinction) for a thesis entitled 'A study of the 'Eclogues', life, and literary activities of Alexander Barclay'. This research was conducted under the supervision of Professor A. W. Reed, to whom Beatrice dedicated her subsequent edition of Barclay's 'Eclogues' (1928). She spent 1929-31 in America, having been awarded a fellowship from the Commonwealth Fund to study at Stanford University and at the Henry E. Huntington Library in California. 
On her return to London, White undertook editorial work for the Early English Text Society and the Shakespeare Association. In this early part of her scholarly career she published a number of works which established her reputation in the field of early Renaissance literature. For the Early English Text Society she edited Barclay's 'Eclogues' (1928) and prepared 'The vulgaria of John Stanbridge and the vulgaria of Robert Whittinton' (1932), an edition of two of the numerous school books which preceded Lily's Latin grammar. She also completed Florence Warren's edition of Lydgate's 'The Dance of Death' (1931), work which had been disrupted by the First World War and Warren's death in 1917. In addition to these editorial achievements Beatrice White produced a study entitled 'Mary Tudor' (1935), which sympathetically situated the queen's tragedy in the context of Mary's fidelity to outmoded loyalties. This attempt to correct the warped historical judgement of 'Bloody' Mary was underpinned by an examination of contemporary documents and state papers, an approach which also characterized her slightly earlier volume 'Royal Nonesuch: a Tudor Tapestry' (1933). These were White's principal publications, but she also wrote many articles on a range of medieval and early modern topics, and reviewed extensively in this area for journals such as 'Modern Language Review' and 'Review of English Studies'. She described herself as a Tudor specialist who had been drawn into medieval literature by the obligation to teach it, but this modest self-assessment significantly downplays her contribution to medieval studies. 
In 1936 White became a recognized teacher of the University of London, and in the same year she was appointed as a lecturer in English language and literature at Queen Mary College. In 1939 she took up a lectureship in the same subject at Westfield College, London, and it was here that she spent the rest of her professional career. Her appointment coincided with the college's temporary removal from London during the war (it was billeted at St Peter's, Oxford). Her links with the English Association also seem to have originated during this time. From 1940 to 1943 she covered the chapter on Restoration literature for 'The Year's Work in English Studies' after the previous contributor was called away to a government post. Subsequently she took responsibility for the sections on nineteenth-century literature and (briefly) the chapter on Chaucer, before pressure of other work made her relinquish these contributions. 
White was acting head of the English department at Westfield from 1944 to 1946, and in 1945 she was promoted to a readership. Other academic distinctions include the award of a DLitt from the University of London in 1947 on the strength of her publications, and election to fellowships of the Royal Society of Literature (1945), the Royal Historical Society (1947), and the Society of Antiquaries of London (1952). Her service to her discipline extended far beyond her own department. She was a member of several learned societies, including the Philological Society, the Viking Society, and the Folklore Society. She was president of the Medieval Society of the University of London from 1950 to 1954, and was chair of the board of examiners for the BA in English for the university from 1953 to 1956. She gave public lectures at universities in England and Germany, and at the conference of university professors of English in Paris in 1953. Most prestigiously, in 1956 she was the first woman to lecture to the Medieval Academy of America at Harvard University. She also served as external examiner for several British universities, and in 1956-7 was visiting professor at Connecticut College for Women (USA). From 1961 to 1964 she was vice-principal of Westfield College, and in 1967 she became professor of English language and literature by conferment of title. She became emeritus professor following her retirement in 1969, and in 1976 was appointed an honorary fellow of the college. 
In terms of research, the early modern court remained a source of fascination to White, as may be seen from her book 'Cast of Ravens: the Strange Case of Sir Thomas Overbury' (1965), which reconstructed the events of an early seventeenth-century scandal at the court of James I, involving Overbury's death, apparently by poisoning, and the subsequent trial of the earl and countess of Somerset for his murder. Beatrice White also enjoyed a long career in the English Association. Most significantly she was the co-editor for four years, and the editor for ten, of its major annual bibliography, 'The Year's Work in English Studies'. She became co-editor with Frederick S. Boas in 1952 (responsible for volumes 31-4 for 1950-53), and from 1956 she was its sole editor (volumes 35-44 for 1954-63), though benefiting from the assistance of T. S. Dorsch, who succeeded her as editor. In the preface to the 1964 volume Dorsch wrote of the expansion of 'The Year's Work in English Studies' that occurred under White's editorship, and her response to its growth in size and scope: 'Dr White's scholarship has been equal to all the exacting demands made on it, and all who have worked with her have felt the benefit of her wise and benevolent guidance'. She was also the collector of two issues of 'Essays and Studies' (1962 and 1983), and a contributor to five other volumes; her own Festschrift, edited by T. S. Dorsch, appeared as part of this series in 1972. In addition she served on the association's executive council and on its publications committee, and was a trustee from about 1970. 
Beatrice White never married, but surrounded herself with friends of all ages and from many different parts of the world. As a teacher she took a personal interest in her students, concerning herself with both their academic and their social welfare. She delighted in entertaining students and colleagues as well as friends, and enjoyed a reputation as a generous and vivacious hostess during her tenure at Westfield. After her retirement she made her home in Eastbourne, Sussex, occupying herself with interests which included reading, music, and painting; she also remained active as a scholar, continuing to publish academic essays until the mid-1980s. She died at 4 Abbotsrood, 1 Milnthorpe Road, Eastbourne, on 30 March 1986 after a long struggle with cancer and was buried in Hailsham, Sussex, on Monday 7 April. 
After White's death the next published volume of 'The Year's Work in English Studies' (actually no. 65 for 1984, published 1987), was dedicated to her. The English Association further honoured her memory by instituting an annual prize in her name, awarded for work in the field of English literature written before 1590. White's encouragement of more junior colleagues informed the remit of the prize as 'outstanding articles by, whenever possible, younger scholars'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39553


Hughes, Marian Rebecca (1817-1912), Anglican nun, was born on 14 January 1817 at Shenington, Gloucestershire, the youngest of the three children of the Revd Robert Edward Hughes (died 1846), rector of Shenington, and his wife, Martha Pyner (1786- 'c'.1852). She had a brother, Robert, and a sister, Fanny. 
Marian Hughes is distinguished as being the first woman to take religious vows in the Church of England since the Reformation. The idea of reintroducing Sisters of Mercy within the Church of England had first been suggested by E. B. Pusey in 1839 but it was not until 1845 that the sisterhood at 17 Park Village West began its life. Meanwhile, after reading an essay by Newman, Marian Hughes had resolved to become a Sister of Mercy. She became acquainted with the Revd Charles Seager (1808-1878), a friend of Pusey and of her cousin the Revd Thomas Chamberlain, vicar of St Thomas's, Oxford, and from them she learned that there were no Anglican sisterhoods. 
Despite this, Marian Hughes took the three vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience privately before Pusey at Seager's home early in the morning of Trinity Sunday (6 June) 1841. She then went to St Mary's Church and received holy communion from Newman. Kneeling beside her was Pusey's daughter, Lucy, who was receiving her first holy communion. That night Marian Hughes wrote: 'This day Trinity Sunday 1841, was I enrolled one of Christ's Virgins, espoused to Him and made His handmaid.... Written by me in the 24th year of my life at 12 o'clock at night on my knees' (Hughes, MS diary). Family ties prevented Marian from forming a sisterhood or from joining Park Village but she played an important advisory role in these formative years. Thus a few months after making her vows she accompanied Seager and his wife to Normandy, where she visited several religious orders and studied their rules and constitutions. On returning home she helped Pusey draw up the Park Village rule and also advised Lydia Sellon (1821-1876), who was planning her sisterhood at Devonport. 
After Robert Hughes's death in 1846 Marian's brother became rector of Shenington and Marian stayed there to keep house. Following his marriage in 1849 she and her mother moved to Oxford and lived in Chamberlain's parish, where there was much work to be done among the poor. On 10 December 1849 Bishop Samuel Wilberforce formally sanctioned the foundation of a sisterhood, but it was not until after her move to a house in St John's Street in 1851 and her mother's death shortly afterwards that it assumed the character of a religious community. The Society of the Holy and Undivided Trinity (not to be confused with Lydia Sellon's Society of the Most Holy Trinity) had as its object service of the poor, sick, and needy. Within a few years it ran a number of schools and an orphanage, besides carrying out parish work in the Jericho district of Oxford; in 1854 the sisterhood displayed great heroism in the cholera epidemic. The rule and habit, formulated by Mother Marian, were based on those of the French Ursulines, and the magnificent new convent erected in 1866-8 along the Woodstock Road (later St Antony's College) was known for its austerity. 
Mother Marian Hughes died on 7 May 1912 at the convent, having remained mother superior until her death. She was buried on 9 May in St Sepulchre's cemetery, Walton Street, Oxford, following a requiem in the convent chapel. A large number of clergy and lay people joined in the funeral procession, which was headed by girls from the orphanage carrying flowers, with twenty-four sisters following the bier. 
Mother Marian was described in 'The Times' as: 'a woman of great force of character, great capacity for organisation and government, and remarkable energy'. The church newspaper 'The Guardian' paid similar tribute to her strength of character, and to her 'deep devotion of life', adding that 'she died as she had lived -- in prayer'. Canon Henry Scott Holland remarked that: 'She never let her wonderful past imprison her... and was always a most delightful companion and friend' ('Oxford Magazine'). Her later years had been spent within the convent where she loved to reminisce about Pusey, Newman, and Keble; but while the past may not have imprisoned her, deafness certainly did. Hindsight might question the wisdom of retaining the office of mother superior all those years, but her real achievement lay in that vast act of faith made on Trinity Sunday 1841 when she stood completely alone in the Church of England under the vows she had made -- and which she kept for seventy-one years. 


@@@@@


doc= 39554


Stuart, Janet Erskine (1857-1914), Roman Catholic nun, was born at the rectory, Cottesmore, Rutland, on 11 November 1857, the last of six children born to Godfrey Andrew Stuart (died 1889), rector of Cottesmore and canon of Peterborough, and his second wife, Mary Penelope Noel (died 1859). When she was just over a year old her mother died, and Stuart found a substitute mother in her half-sister, Theodosia, who died of tuberculosis nineteen years later. 
Stuart was educated at home by a succession of Swiss and German governesses. One of these, the daughter of Rinz von Burger, a prominent theologian, introduced Stuart to contemporary German philosophy and theology. Such reading led her to religious scepticism, but she nevertheless played the part of the rector's daughter. She taught Sunday school and took a keen interest in the local tenantry, acquiring a thorough knowledge of livestock and botany. 
At the age of twenty Stuart made the acquaintance of her Noel relatives, who had inherited the Gainsborough title and moved to nearby Exton Manor. This family had recently converted to Roman Catholicism and Stuart developed a strong attraction to the dogma and liturgy of the Catholic church. Through the Noels she met Elizabeth Ross, who in turn introduced her to the Jesuit Peter Gallwey. On 6 March 1879 she was received into the Roman Catholic church at the Jesuit Church of the Immaculate Conception (Farm Street) in London. For the next three years she made her home in London with Elizabeth Ross, travelling often and enjoying hunting and fishing. A turning point came in July 1882 when Stuart made a retreat under Father Gallwey at the Convent of the Sacred Heart, Roehampton. Two months later she entered the Society of the Sacred Heart, receiving the habit on 13 November 1882 and pronouncing vows two years later. 
Stuart's ability singled her out from the start, and while still a novice she was called upon to act as secretary to Mother Mabel Digby, vicaress of the English houses. Though still engaged in her own spiritual and intellectual formation Stuart began to teach in the school and soon gave classes to her fellow sisters in the juniorate. She was also sent to the mother house in Paris to make her probation and profession two years before the customary time. On her return to Roehampton in February 1889 Stuart was appointed councillor, and was given charge of the noviciate in 1892. In August 1894, when Mother Digby was elected assistant-general (and nine months later superior-general of the Society), Stuart replaced her as vicaress and superior at Roehampton. In 1898 she accompanied Mother Digby on a visitation of the North American houses of the society and three years later was sent as visitor to the Latin American houses. 
Concern for the individual characterized both Mother Stuart's educational philosophy and her exercise of religious authority. As novice mistress she impressed upon her charges the necessity of personal development. In an age which favoured cutting novices to a pattern she abhorred copies, even of the best models. To a novice who was modelling herself rather too self-consciously on a canonized Jesuit, Stuart said 'Drop John Berchmans, sister, and be yourself' (Monahan, 81). Eager to further the educational values of the Society, Mother Stuart devoted much effort to developing Sacred Heart schools and colleges in England. She summed up her educational philosophy in 'The Education of Catholic Girls', published by Longman in 1911, and in her study 'The Society of the Sacred Heart', which went to press just after her death. Two volumes of essays and one of poetry were also published posthumously, and her 'Life and Letters', edited by Mother Maud Monahan, went through sixteen impressions. 
Following Mother Digby's death in May 1911, Stuart was elected mother-general. During the four years which remained to her she visited almost every house of the Sacred Heart Society, not only those in Europe and the Americas but also houses in Australia and New Zealand, as well as those more recently established in China and Japan. Reports of her visits make it clear that she was greeted with enthusiasm by her sisters. Her journeyings produced a voluminous travel correspondence. Keenly observant, nothing escaped her pen: astronomical and climatic changes, exotic flora and fauna, local customs and peoples are all described with verve and wit. 
Stuart's generalate was all too short; arriving back at the mother house at Ixelles in July 1914 it was apparent that she was seriously ill. Soon after the start of the First World War the general administration of the society left Belgium for Roehampton, and it was there, after unsuccessful surgery for cancer, that she died on 21 October 1914 and was buried on 30 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 39555


Weld, Thomas (1750-1810), landowner and benefactor, was born on 24 August 1750 at Lulworth Castle, Dorset, the fourth son of Edward Weld (1705-1761) and Mary, 'nee' Vaughan (1713-1754). The Weld family originally came from Cheshire and bought the Lulworth estate, including the castle (built in 1610) from the third earl of Suffolk in 1641. Thomas was educated at the English colleges on the continent run by the Jesuit fathers, first at St Omer (1759-62) and then for the next three years at Bruges. On 27 February 1772 he married Mary (1753-1830), daughter of John Massey Stanley of Hooton Hall, Cheshire. They had fourteen children of whom the eldest son, Thomas Weld (1773-1837), became a cardinal in the Roman Catholic church. 
In 1775 Thomas succeeded his brother Edward (1741-1775) to the family estates. His inheritance made Thomas a wealthy man with five estates including Stonyhurst and Shireburn (both in Lancashire), the latter bequeathed by Elizabeth, heiress of Sir Nicholas Shireburn and wife of William Weld, Thomas's great-grandfather. At Lulworth, Thomas continued the building work started by Edward. He constructed the first free-standing Roman Catholic chapel built since the Reformation. In this chapel in 1790 were consecrated on separate days John Carroll, founder of the Roman Catholic hierarchy in the United States, and bishops John Douglass and William Gibson. In 1789 George III visited Lulworth while staying at Weymouth. He was handsomely entertained and revisited the Weld family five times before 1792. 
Thomas Weld's wealth and position made him an important figure in the Roman Catholic struggle for relief of the penal laws. However, despite his earnest support for the campaign, he was also determined to remain aloof from movements of which he disapproved and which he believed undermined the position of the vicars apostolic. So he refused to become a member either of the Catholic committee which preceded the second 'Relief Act' of 1791 or of the Cisalpine Club which followed it. During the 1790s Weld offered support for continental Roman Catholics who had been displaced by the French Revolution. Particularly close relations were forged between the Franciscan nuns and the Trappists who he helped to establish a monastery in the grounds of Lulworth. A keen sportsman, fond of shooting and hunting, Weld himself followed a strict lifestyle similar to those who benefited from his philanthropy. 
In 1794 Weld offered his house and grounds at Stonyhurst, Lancashire, to a group of twelve exiled Jesuits who had been driven from the English college, then based at Liege. Stonyhurst College quickly developed from this new foundation, and Weld had his younger sons educated at the school. In 1802 he gave a former mill owner's house on the estate to the college, first as a noviciate, and soon after as a preparatory school. Weld died on 1 August 1810 at Stonyhurst, one day after suffering a stroke while attending the school's feast day. He was buried at Lulworth Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 39558


Turner, Joseph (1745-1828), college head and dean of Norwich, was born at Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, on 3 October 1745 into a family long associated with the town. He was the third of four sons of the Revd Francis Turner (1716-1790), minister of St George's Chapel, Great Yarmouth (1742-90), and rector of South Elmham (1743-90), and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Dawson, also from Great Yarmouth. Turner began a lifelong connection with Pembroke College, Cambridge, when he was admitted as a sizar on 26 January 1763 and matriculated at Lent the same year. He graduated BA (senior wrangler) in 1767, MA in 1770, and DD in 1785. 
In October 1773 Turner was elected lecturer in Greek and Hebrew at Pembroke, serving as tutor in mathematics from 1776 alongside George Pretyman, both men including William Pitt the younger among their charges. Turner took a genuine interest in the progress of all the undergraduates, as one of them, Henry Ainslie, reported on 3 November 1777, after completing his examinations, 'when he [Turner] heard I was first he shook my hand for 10 minutes & paid me a thousand compliments' ('Gazette', 15). Turner's teaching and administrative services to Pembroke were recognized by his nomination as master in 1784 in succession to James Brown, a post he held until his death. It was fortunate that Turner's appointment roughly coincided with Pitt's assumption of the premiership. This ensured that Pembroke's welfare (and Turner's own) were not overlooked at the highest levels of government. Turner's quiet efficiency as master contributed to the continuing academic distinction enjoyed by the college in the late eighteenth century. This scholarly revival continued until at least the halfway point in his mastership. Thereafter Turner's increasing age, residence for three or four months yearly in Norwich, and differences of opinion with some of the fellows (he failed in legal proceedings to obtain the use of a property bequest to Pembroke) may have adversely affected the college. 
Turner's administrative abilities were also called upon when he twice served as vice-chancellor of the university (in 1785-6 and 1805-6). During both terms he presented addresses to George III on behalf of the university: the first, attended by William Pitt, Edward Eliot (Pitt's brother-in-law), and George Pretyman, congratulating the king on the preservation of his life after Margaret Nicholson's assassination attempt; the second offering a loyal expression of thanks for Nelson's victory at Trafalgar. 
Turner undoubtedly benefited from Pretyman's role as secretary to William Pitt and subsequently from his promotion to the bishopric of Lincoln in 1787. Pitt secured his former teacher a second major post in 1790 when Turner was named dean of Norwich, being installed and inducted on 24 June. Thereafter he resided for part of the year in Norwich, attended the twice-yearly meeting of the general chapter, and was conscientious in his discharge of chapter business. He married on 5 January 1793, at Lambeth Palace, Mary ('b'. 15 Jan 1764), the eldest daughter of Philip Derbyshire. She died on 10 March 1804, and was buried in Norwich Cathedral on 17 March. Six years later, on 3 January 1810, he married Mary, daughter of John Taylor of Great Yarmouth. During these Norwich years a restoration of the cathedral took place which showed a sensitivity to fittings not always evidenced by late Georgian chapters. Turner oversaw the major repairs to the cathedral fabric undertaken in 1806. These included the provision of a new pulpit and extra seats in the choir. However, failing health in the 1820s curtailed the extent of his appearances in Norwich, and by that date chapter records suggest a perceptible decline in organizational efficiency. 
First and foremost an administrator Turner published nothing, but became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1801. In addition to his mastership and deanery he was also awarded by the crown the wealthy rectories of Sudbourne and Orford in Suffolk in 1787, and held them until his death at the deanery, Norwich, on 2 August 1828. He was buried in the choir of Norwich Cathedral on 12 August, where a brass recalls that: 'The general uprightness and integrity of his character were invariably acknowledged by all with whom the duties of his public situations brought him in connection'. Turner was survived by one son from his first marriage, William Hamilton ('b'. 1803), who became a country clergyman. His second wife died on 25 February 1842 and was buried at St Peter Mancroft, Norwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 39559


Lloyd, Philip (1728/9-1790), dean of Norwich, was the son of Philip Lloyd of Greenwich, gentleman. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 15 May 1746; he graduated BA (1749) and proceeded MA (1752) and DD (1763), and was elected a student. He was tutor, at Stowe in Buckinghamshire, to the family of the first Earl Temple, and remained close to his pupils, the future second earl and his brother, William Grenville. He and his wife, Joyce (1722/3-1801), were childless. 
Lloyd was appointed a prebendary of Westminster in 1763, and resigned in 1765 on being presented to the rectory of Puddletown in Dorset and the deanery of Norwich. He owed his preferment chiefly to the Grenvilles, and gossip had it that 'A recommendation from any of the Temple family would do everything with him' ('Neville', 308). He was reckoned to be 'the commanding officer' of the diocese of Norwich in Bishop Yonge's time, and a person of great influence (ibid.). 
Lloyd proved an energetic dean. Within three months of his installation a major renovation of the cathedral was agreed by the dean and chapter, to be paid for from their own funds, at the rate of $300 a year for three years. Thomas Pitt, who had previously worked for the Grenvilles at Stowe, advised, and the architect was probably Thomas Ivory of Norwich. The medieval choir stalls were renovated, the screen which had been put across the apse was removed, and the window at the east end, blocked when the lady chapel was demolished, was opened and glazed. Other major repairs undertaken during Lloyd's time included overhauling the turrets on the transepts and strengthening the spire. A programme was put in hand for repairing the lead roofs and repointing and replacing decayed stone. A 'moving scaffold' was constructed to clean the vaults. 
In 1776 painted glass, given to the chapter by Norwich corporation, was fitted in windows at the east end of the choir, and in 1777 Joyce Lloyd designed a painted window for the choir clerestory; in 1780 she designed another window based on Raphael's 'Transfiguration'. 
Lloyd had a technical interest in the building. The reason for reopening the blocked east window was to create a through draught which, he said, would 'keep the church free from damp' (memoranda book, Norfolk RO, DCN 118/1). In 1770 he consulted the Royal Society about installing a lightning conductor on the spire. He was concerned for the quality of music at cathedral services, securing the assent of the chapter to the appointment of an additional counter-tenor to the choir. He also ensured that daily prayers should continue in the cathedral undisturbed by workmen during the restoration of the choir. He was a careful administrator, and personally maintained a record of the repairs to the cathedral and its properties, along with careful notes on the administration of the estates managed by the dean and chapter. He also had the accounts of the cathedral priory arranged in chronological order from 1274 to 1537, noting that: 'from them might be extracted a 'Chronicon Pretionum' which would include not only the price of every kind of Grain (which the Bailiffs bought and sold) but of almost every article of consumption and the wages of every kind of Workman' (ibid.). 
Lloyd died on 31 May 1790, and was buried in the choir of Norwich Cathedral, where he is commemorated by a wall monument by John Ivory. His wife died on 4 April 1801, aged seventy-eight. 
At his death the 'Norfolk Chronicle' noted: 'If an inflexible firmness of mind in resisting the importunities of the powerful, when inconsistent with the most refined attention to the interest of the body over which he presided can endear this good man to posterity, we can assure ourselves of the justest tribute of applause to his memory.' 



@@@@@


doc= 39560


Walton, Henry (bap. 1746, d. 1813), painter and picture dealer, was baptized on 5 January 1746 at Dickleburgh, Norfolk. Walton was the second of three children of Samuel Walton (1710-1797), yeoman farmer, and his wife, Ann Newstead (1711-1797). His father was also a churchwarden and overseer of the poor. Walton's early education is unknown, although the contents of his library, sold after his wife's death, indicate that he was able to read Greek, Latin, and French. In 1765, aged nineteen, Walton moved to London, although not apparently with the intention of becoming an artist. Walton's earliest recorded portraits -- of Mr and Mrs John Frere -- date from 1768 (priv. coll.). In 1770 he began studying art at the Maiden Lane Academy, in Covent Garden, London. It was about this time that he became a pupil of Johan Zoffany, to whom he was probably introduced by his friend Ambrose Humphreys, who featured in one of Walton's early group portraits, 'William Mason and John Mason with Mr Humphreys Playing Cricket at Harrow' (1772; priv. coll.). While with Zoffany, Walton copied his 'Beggars on the Road to Stanmore' of 1769-70 (priv. coll.). In 1771 Walton was living at Great Chandos Street, Covent Garden, painting portraits in oil and miniatures, and often featuring close friends and family. At this time he took on an apprentice, the miniature painter Edward Miles (1752-1828), of Great Yarmouth. Miles, who made a number of copies after Walton, remained with him until 1794. In 1771 Walton was elected a fellow of the Society of Artists, where he exhibited two portraits. In 1772 he was elected a director of the society, showing four works at that year's exhibition. He exhibited there again in 1773 and 1776. 
On 10 September 1771 Walton married Elizabeth Rust (1746-1828) of Wortham, Suffolk, the daughter of a wool draper, and herself a miniature painter. They did not have children. Shortly after the marriage Walton purchased Oak Tree Farm, in the village of Burgate, near Wortham, where he converted one of the cottages into a house and studio. There Walton apparently painted landscapes, although these remain unidentified. During the early to mid-1770s Walton seems to have worked principally as a portrait painter, among his most celebrated sitters being Edward Gibbon, whom he painted on no fewer than six occasions (including NPG). Other prominent sitters included the Revd William Gilpin, Horatio Walpole, first earl of Orford, and Lord Cornwallis. All these portraits were engraved during the artist's lifetime, the print after Lord Cornwallis reputedly hanging in virtually every household in Suffolk (Farrer, 146). At some time during 1773 to 1774 it has been supposed that Walton travelled to Paris, making the acquaintance of the French artist Jean-Baptiste Simeon Chardin. According to his friend Dawson Turner, Walton frequently went there 'with a view of studying or of buying pictures' (Turner, 22). In 1776 Walton exhibited his first genre subject, 'A Girl Plucking a Turkey' (Tate collection), at the Society of Artists. This was followed by other genre subjects, notably 'The Silver Age' (Yale U. CBA), 'A Girl Buying a Ballad' (Tate collection), and 'A Group of Figures with a Fruit Barrow' (priv. coll.), exhibited at the Royal Academy respectively in 1777, 1778, and 1779. 
In November 1778 Walton was turned down for membership of the Royal Academy, allegedly because of his prior affiliation to the rival Society of Artists. Feeling snubbed, he showed only two more works there in 1779 after which he ceased to exhibit altogether. During the 1780s Walton devoted himself increasingly to his farm in Burgate. He also travelled to Yorkshire, where he painted portraits of important local families. Among his more significant portraits and conversation pieces of this later period are 'William Crowfoot and the Burroughes Brothers Boating on the River Waveney' ('c'.1780; priv. coll.), 'Sir Bellingham Graham, 5th Bt. and his Children' ('c'.1785; priv. coll.), and 'Sir Robert Buxton and Lady Buxton with their Daughter Anne' (1786; Norfolk Museum Services). Walton also painted the figures in several sporting pictures by Sawrey Gilpin and George Barratt. By the early 1790s he was established as a picture dealer and adviser to some major private collectors, notably Lord Lansdowne, Lord Fitzwilliam, and Sir Thomas Beauchamp-Proctor, to whom he sold a Poussin from the collection of Sir Joshua Reynolds. Walton's expertise was apparently such that 'there was scarcely a picture of note in this country, with the history of which he was unacquainted' (Turner, 22). Walton continued to paint local Norfolk and Suffolk families well into the early 1800s, among his last works being an unfinished portrait of John Trew (priv. coll.), an old servant of his friends the Frere family, painted in 1810. By now Walton was in poor health, having contracted a fever 'which caused a great alteration in his appearance' (Farington, 'Diary', 12.4362). One evening in May 1813, on returning from a party to his London lodgings in New Bond Street, Walton complained of feeling ill. He was found dead in bed the next morning, the immediate cause of death being described as hydrothorax and pleurisy. His obituary appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' on 13 May 1813. Walton was buried near his parents in the churchyard at Brome, Suffolk. His will, dated 29 March 1812, was proved on 4 September 1813 and on 6 December 1828, following his wife's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 39561


Buller, William (1735-1796), bishop of Exeter, was born at Morval, Cornwall, on 9 August 1735, the fourth son of John Francis Buller ('bap'. 1695, died 1751) of Morval and Shillingham, and his wife, Rebecca (died 1743), third daughter and coheir of Sir Jonathan Trelawny, bishop of Winchester. William matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, on 10 April 1753, aged seventeen, but soon moved to Christ Church. He graduated BA in 1757 and MA in 1759; he subsequently took the degrees of BD and DD in 1781. 
Buller's career in the church owed a great deal to an astute marriage, on 19 April 1762, to Anne (died 1800), daughter and coheir of John Thomas (1696-1781), bishop of Winchester and, from 1763, clerk of the closet to George III. Buller's father-in-law had previously granted him the lucrative rectory of Brightwell in Berkshire, which he held until 1766, and named him canon of the twelfth prebend in Winchester Cathedral. Buller subsequently received the rectories of Wonston and Houghton in Hampshire, followed by the rectories of Alresford and Overton in 1776. A mandamus was issued for Buller's preferment as a canon of Windsor on 22 December 1773. 
Buller resigned this last stall when he was elected dean of Exeter on 25 March 1784. The high point of his office was entertaining George III, Queen Charlotte, and members of their family at the deanery during the royal visit to Exeter in August 1789. Buller, who was 'very civil and in high glee' ('Diary and Letters', 1.310), followed a service in the cathedral with a private tour for the party and made sure it was he rather than the city authorities who entertained the king and queen. A grateful monarch took a special interest in enabling Buller, in 1790, to exchange one deanery for another, namely Canterbury, on George Horne's promotion to the episcopate. Buller was not slow to follow Horne to the House of Lords, returning to Exeter as bishop in 1792 in a career move that was unusual for the Hanoverian church but popular locally because of Buller's west-country background. As with Horne, Buller was past his best by the time of his last promotion, suffering from continuous ill health and domestic loss. He was a dutiful, orthodox cleric whose family associations and connections held the key to his advancement. As a bishop his major undertaking was to hold a primary visitation for the Exeter diocese in 1793-4, and was one of the supporters of the 1796 act to improve the income of poor curates. Indeed, the number of ordinands in the diocese ran at its highest level for the century during Buller's episcopate. He was made a freeman of Exeter in August 1793. 
Buller enjoyed episcopal rank for only four years before dying of dropsy in the chest on 12 December 1796 at Downes, near Crediton in Devon, the seat of his son-in-law. He was buried in the south choir aisle of Exeter Cathedral on 17 December. His wife, Anne, died on 28 August 1800 and was buried on 3 September 1800. One son, Richard, survived him as did two daughters, Anne and Susannah Catherine. He published only sermons, including one preached before the House of Lords on 9 March 1796 for the general fast. 


@@@@@


doc= 39562


Poyntz, Charles (1734/5-1809), Church of England clergyman, was baptized in July 1735, the second son of Stephen Poyntz (bap. 1685, d. 1750) and his wife, Anna Maria Mordaunt (died 1771). (Margaret) Georgiana Spencer (1737-1814) was his sister. The godson of Princess Amelia, as a child Poyntz moved in royal circles; his father was governor to the duke of Cumberland, his mother had been maid of honour to Queen Caroline. With his elder brother, William, he was sent abroad, on Cumberland's bidding, to complete his education after the death of their father. Poyntz matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 13 December 1752, aged seventeen; he graduated BA in 1756, and proceeded MA in 1759 and DD in 1769. Though from a whig family, while at university he entered the circle of high-churchmen such as Samuel Glasse, George Horne, and William Jones, who were slightly older than himself. Their influence left an enduring impress on his churchmanship. Poyntz took holy orders and his friend George Horne wrote for him 'A Letter to a Young Gentleman Just Admitted into Holy Orders', dated 9 October 1759. As a charming and personable young man, the scion of a well-connected family, Poyntz might have expected to go far in his chosen career. As his mother put it in the early 1760s: 'If there was a Bishop of Hereford, and the Town could choose him, Charles would be the man, for he is adored here' (Maclean, 214). But Charles Poyntz was not chosen. His maturity coincided with the demise of Pelhamite power and he was left with patrons unable to help him. 
Poyntz lived as a country parson all his adult life. He was named rector of North Creake, Norfolk, in 1760 and remained in post until his death, nearly half a century later. He was conscientious in his duties, for instance trying to hold monthly communion services for the people of North Creake, preaching occasionally in Norwich Cathedral, taking private pupils (such as Lord Duncannon in 1779), planting trees and walks on his glebe lands, and corresponding with friends. Though he was the brother of the first Countess Spencer, Poyntz was never able to obtain much in the patronage stakes beyond prebendal stalls at Llandaff (1769) and at Durham (1784). He preached in Oxford at the invitation of the vice-chancellor (George Horne) in 1780, and there was talk of his name going forward for the deanery of Worcester, which fell vacant while his political allies of the Fox-North coalition held office in 1783, but nothing came of it; had the whigs taken power in 1788-9, during the regency crisis, and had the second Earl Spencer gone to Dublin as lord lieutenant, Poyntz would have been favourite as chaplain. That scheme, too, was a non-starter. A lucrative additional promotion, to alleviate his troubled financial affairs, was his constant hope, but he obtained nothing further except occasional duties as one of the deputy clerks of the closet. He had taken on many of his mother's debts while chronically unable (like other members of his family) to handle money himself. Poyntz was a spendthrift, albeit a charitable one, and he invariably helped friends in financial need, such as George Berkeley, vice-dean of Canterbury. Periodically he took refuge abroad from his creditors. He passed the years 1800-07 on the continent, mainly in Gottingen, and died, unmarried, at the London house of his sister, the dowager Lady Spencer, on 10 May 1809. Despite the creation of a family trust his debts by that date were immense and Poyntz was begging his sister for ready money. On his death his executors were confronted with innumerable demands on his estate. He had once written, 'I am not that sad man the world suspects me to be' (Spencer MSS, E. 16), but though his friends knew other sides to him he could not dispel that overriding impression. 


@@@@@


doc= 39563


Spencer, (Margaret) Georgiana, Countess Spencer (1737-1814), philanthropist, was born on 8 May 1737 at St James's Palace, London, the fourth surviving child of Stephen Poyntz (bap. 1685, d. 1750), steward to the household of the duke of Cumberland, and Anna Maria Mordaunt (died 1771), daughter of Brigadier-General the Hon. Lewis Mordaunt and granddaughter of the earl of Peterborough. Her paternal grandfather was a successful linen draper who sent his clever son to Eton College, and thereby launched him into a career and a life in society. Her mother was a maid of honour to Queen Caroline and 'a great royal favorite' (Friedman, 52), and her godfather was George II. Charles Poyntz (1734/5-1809) was her brother. On 20 December 1755 she married John Spencer (1734-1783), later first Earl Spencer, who through the inheritance from his great-grandmother, Sarah Churchill, was one of the richest young men in England. 
The countess lived a varied and active life, corresponding with an enormously divergent series of people. Her correspondence with her friend the Hon. Mrs Howe is reputed to be the largest single private collection of letters in the British Library. Exceptionally intelligent and well educated, she could write and speak faultless French and Italian, make puns in Greek, and was accomplished in botany and skilled at the viola de gamba, hunting, and billiards. Above all, however, she was known by her contemporaries as a woman of a philanthropic bent, actively involved in projects both among her neighbours, in the world of associated or charitable institutions, and as a founding member of the Ladies Society, one of the first philanthropic organizations systematically to investigate the characters and circumstances of those who appealed to them for assistance. This technique was later to be embodied in the work of the Mendicity Society (in which her son, George John Spencer, the second earl, was an important and early member) and ultimately in the Charity Organization Society. 
Lady Spencer was a meticulous keeper of files; she remarked of herself that 'method was [her] passion'. In her correspondences, as well as in the published subscription lists, we can see how much time and effort she devoted to charitable activities. One of the most remarkable parts of her papers is a file that she described as her 'charity letters', which she kept as 'a Cordial -- to remind me of my Lord's [her husband's] never failing Generosity and Humanity and of the earnestness with which I executed and sometimes endeavored to imitate his benevolence' (Althorp MS F130). These words were probably written shortly after her husband's untimely death in 1783 and were a modest, though not entirely accurate, reflection of the couple's charitable practices. For even if the initial impulse were her husband's, Lady Spencer served as his agent many years before his demise. Among her friends and acquaintances, she was renowned for her philanthropy. Elizabeth Montague noted: 'The history of La Fee Bienfaisante is not half so delightful as seeing the manner in which Lady Spencer spends her day. Every moment of it is employed in some act of benevolence and charity' (Doran, 332-3). Lady Spencer also corresponded with and advised a number of philanthropists and charitable institutions. Jonas Hanway, perhaps the eighteenth century's most active founder of charities, was one such correspondent. She also took great interest in, and gave minute advice to, those charitable organizations to which she donated. She sent, for example, the secretary of the Asylum for Orphaned Girls a detailed letter of instruction about how mealtimes should be conducted at the asylum. A committed, and perhaps somewhat overbearing, philanthropic involvement permeated many of her activities. She felt she knew what was best for people, and was prepared to put her money and her efforts behind her plans for them. Her condescension was to mankind in general; only her husband and son were never criticized. Despite this attitude of knowing best, she was without obvious class prejudice, and her Christian piety, which flirted with but never succumbed to Methodism, best expressed itself in her hard work and interest in the needy and deserving. She died at St Albans on 18 March 1814, and was buried on 30 March at Brington, Northamptonshire. After her death the 'Gentleman's Magazine' said of her: 'No one was ever better formed by nature, not only to become, but to shed a grace and ornament upon the high station in which she was placed... and to exert the noblest prerogative which rank, and wealth confer, by giving a high example of virtue and piety, united with a proper display of splendour... which naturally belonged to her situation... Her words and her actions bore, in their general and unfailing benevolence, the stamp of the characteristic virtue of her religion, and shewed how intimately Christian charity was blended with her manners, her feelings and her opinions.... Amidst the pleasures and occupations of the world, she never had forgotten the offices of benevolence and piety. ('GM', 309)' In addition to her three surviving children, Lady Spencer had two who died in childhood. Her eldest daughter, Georgiana Cavendish, duchess of Devonshire, was perhaps the most famous aristocratic woman of her day, a noted trendsetter, gambler, and leader of the female wing of the whig party. Her sister, Harriet, Lady Bessborough ['see 'Ponsonby, Henrietta Frances], was less flamboyant but also involved in both the beau monde and in aristocratic politics. Their brother, the second Earl Spencer, was as prominent as his sisters, serving as first lord of the Admiralty during the Napoleonic wars; he, however, was a sober-living, religious Pittite. Lady Spencer wrote voluminously to her children (as to everyone else) and much of this correspondence has been published. She wrote just as frequently, if not as warmly, to her daughter-in-law Lavinia, whom she disliked despite the latter's piety and charity. Throughout her long life she engaged in various activities of disciplined usefulness, and helped usher in an era of 'personal nobility' in which she was the 'exemplar of aristocratic female virtue' (Langford, 571). 


@@@@@


doc= 39572


Margaret Sidney Davies (1884-1963), who was born on 14 December 1884, she was educated at home and at Highfield School, Hendon. Gwen became a talented amateur violinist, while Daisy studied painting at the Slade School of Fine Art, London, and in Paris. After their mother's death, in 1888, their father married her sister, a dominating person with strict Methodist convictions. The sisters grew up shy and ill at ease in company, and neither married. 


@@@@@


doc= 39573


Davies, Gwendoline Elizabeth (1882-1951), philanthropist and patron of the arts, was born on 11 February 1882 at Plas Dinam, Llandinam, Montgomeryshire, the second of the three children of Edward Davies (1852-1898) and his wife, Mary (died 1888), daughter of the Calvinistic Methodist minister the Revd Evan Jones. Gwen Davies's paternal grandfather was the Liberal MP David Davies (1818-1890), who had made his fortune through railways, coal, and dock-building. Together with her younger sister, 
The Davies sisters' lives remained somewhat circumscribed until the outbreak of the First World War. Having in 1914 assisted Belgian refugee poets and artists to settle in Wales, in 1916 they opened a canteen in Troyes for French troops. Their ideas about establishing a Welsh centre to further art and design began to take shape early in 1919, when the Davies family were contemplating selling Gregynog, a country house included in an estate near Newtown purchased by their brother, David Davies, later first Baron Davies of Llandinam (1880-1944). On his second marriage, in 1922, the sisters unwillingly left Plas Dinam and moved into Gregynog, whose name soon became synonymous with fine printing, music-making, and art. Under Gwen Davies's supervision the gardens, with their walks and landscaped grounds, provided a fitting setting. 
The appointment in 1921 of the artist Robert Ashwin Maynard (1888-1966) as controller marked the beginning of the Gregynog Press, which published forty-two volumes, eight of them in Welsh, in limited editions between 1923 and 1942. It quickly established high standards in design, printing, illustration, and binding and provided training and employment for local people. However, there were constant tensions, not least because the artists employed found life at Methodist, teetotal Gregynog constricting, and Daisy's heart was not in the venture, for her interests were narrower than Gwen's. The sisters relied heavily for advice on the civil servant Thomas Jones (1870-1955) and were assisted by a friend from the Troyes canteen, Dora Herbert Jones, a singer and collector of Welsh folk-songs. Music was central to Gregynog and owed much to the sisters' connections with Sir (Henry) Walford Davies, professor of music at Aberystwyth, where University College benefited from their financial support. At Gregynog a music room was built and a choir established, composed of servants as well as family, friends, and neighbours; rumour had it that a good singing voice was the best qualification for any job on the estate. From 1933 to 1938 a major festival of music and poetry was held each summer, featuring musicians such as Sir Adrian Boult, Ralph Vaughan Williams, and Gustav Holst. The house also became the meeting place of the National Council of Music. 
Visual art was another lifelong passion for both Gwen and Daisy Davies. Although Daisy was herself a competent artist in oils the sisters' lasting contribution is as collectors, especially in French art, their interest in which can be traced back to their travels in France before the First World War. From 1908 until the early 1920s they bought regularly, with the assistance of Hugh Blaker, brother of their former governess turned companion. They acquired a remarkable collection of oils, watercolours, etchings, engravings, and bronzes, including old masters, contemporary British works, and, most notably, French impressionists, among them works by Corot, Renoir, Cezanne, and Monet. After Gwen Davies's death, in 1951, her sister resumed buying, selling some of the older works in order to invest in those of living artists. The sisters bequeathed the main collection to the National Museum in Cardiff. 
The sisters' commitment to the arts was paralleled by their determination to direct some of their considerable financial resources to relieving living conditions for the poor, especially during the years of the depression, when the plight of industrial south Wales, the source of the family fortune, caused them great distress. As early as 1911 they had helped their brother to set up the King Edward VII Welsh National Memorial Association to establish sanatoria throughout Wales and thereby curb the national scourge of tuberculosis; Daisy Davies later left a large bequest to the Welsh National School of Medicine at Cardiff. Youth and social service organizations were regularly invited to Gregynog, as were staff of clubs and settlements for the unemployed. The sisters' Methodist beliefs strengthened their conviction that wealth brought great responsibility, and the constant demands for charitable donations from all directions became a burden to them. 
In 1937 Gwen Davies was made a Companion of Honour. The Second World War brought an end to the sisters' book publishing and large-scale music-making ventures at Gregynog, which became a Red Cross convalescent home. When peace came Gwen Davies's deteriorating health prevented a return to the former activities. She died of leukaemia on 3 July 1951 at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford. Daisy Davies, who was made an honorary LLD in 1949, conveyed Gregynog, after much thought, to the University of Wales, living quietly as tenant there until her death, on 13 March 1963, at the Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth in London. Both sisters were cremated (Gwen in Oxford) and their ashes buried in Llandinam churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 39574


McConnell, Primrose (1856-1931), farmer and writer, was born on 11 April 1856 at Lessnessock, Ochiltree, Ayrshire, the son of Archibald McConnell (1821-1898) and his wife, Agnes Milroy (1830-1897). At this time his father held the tenancy of Lessnessock Farm, Ochiltree, but in 1862 he took the tenancy of Castle Mains Farm, New Cumnock, a few miles to the east, and there McConnell spent his boyhood. He was sent to Ayr Academy, and from there he took up an engineering apprenticeship in Glasgow, which he did not complete. Instead he went to the University of Edinburgh to read agriculture, and in 1878 he obtained the diploma of the Highland and Agricultural Society. In 1889, when the university instituted the degree in agriculture, he returned to take the examinations and was the second student to be awarded the BSc. 
By the 1880s the reduction in land and sea transport costs, resulting from the expansion of the American railway network and the introduction of steamships on the north Atlantic, had had the effect of reducing cereal prices in those European countries which adopted free trade practices. The then prevalent farming systems on the Essex clays were ill-equipped to cope with falling prices. McConnell was one of the first of many who had been brought up on small Scottish dairy farms to see the potential other use of such land, relatively close to large urban markets. In 1883 he took the tenancy of Ongar Park Hall farm near Epping, converted it to milk production, and farmed there, initially in partnership with his father, until 1905. As soon as he was established in farming, McConnell married on 10 January 1884 Katherine Anderson (1857-1930), daughter of the Free Church minister at New Cumnock, whom he had known since childhood. They had a daughter and two sons. In 1905, following a dispute over farming methods with his landlord, he gave up his tenancy and bought the 500 acre North Wycke Farm at Southminster, near the coast between the Crouch and Blackwater estuaries. There he remained for the rest of his life, dairy farming -- he built up a much visited herd of 100 cows, an enormous number in that period -- and writing. 
Farming, and writing about farming, formed the core of McConnell's life. As a profit maximizing adopter of science based farming techniques, he was a pioneer of twentieth-century farming methods. In addition to making careful evaluations of new devices, such as milking machines, he also developed his own: principal among these was the hay sweep, which he claimed to have introduced from the United States of America and adapted to English conditions. He also lectured, at various times, at the universities of Glasgow and Oxford. But he was most widely known as a writer. He began with journalism, writing to the farming papers at the age of eighteen. Indeed, he later claimed that some articles he had written for the Scottish agricultural press in 1883 formed one of the motivating forces in the influx of Scottish farmers to Essex. His first and best-known book, 'The Agricultural Notebook', was published in 1883, the year he took on his first farm. It went through eleven editions and sold 45,000 copies in his lifetime, and it remained in print in its nineteenth edition in 1996 as an agricultural textbook written by a team of authors. McConnell also wrote 'Elements of Agriculture' (1896), 'The Complete Farmer' (1908, 2nd edn 1910), a more detailed agricultural textbook, and many other contributions to textbooks and journals. 'The Elements of Agricultural Geology' (1902) brought together his professional concerns with agriculture and his serious amateur interest in geology (he became a fellow of the Geological Society in 1900), in an account of the relationship between the underlying rocks and associated farming systems. 
From 1905 McConnell edited his own journal, 'Farm Life'. Some of the pieces he wrote for this were later reprinted as 'The Diary of a Working Farmer' (1906), his only non-technical book. It contains some of his most engaging writing and the only surviving published photographs in which he can be definitely identified; they show him at about the age of fifty, a full-bearded man of middling height and build, with a piercing gaze. His personality, too, appears through the pages of the diary: he was a teetotaller and dissenting churchman with immense energy, fond of the physical work of the farm, surrounded, in his later years at least, by piles of manuscripts and proofs, but always able to find time to play with his grandchildren; he was irascible and tolerant in turn, insatiably curious, and unwilling to take himself too seriously. 
McConnell died on 7 July 1931, at North Wycke, and was buried four days later in the nonconformist burial-ground at Southminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 39575


McMahon, Sir John, first baronet (c.1754-1817), politician, was born in Ireland, the only son of John McMahon (died 1789), butler to Robert Clements, first earl of Leitrim, and his first wife, who was a fellow servant. His father became comptroller of the port of Limerick and married in 1771 his second wife, Mary Stackpole, who was the daughter of James Stackpole, a merchant in Cork. They had two sons, William and Thomas, who both eventually became baronets thanks to their half-brother. McMahon's education was elementary: after three years in a Dublin school, he was allegedly a kitchen boy in Dublin at nine. As ensign in the 44th foot he went to North America in 1775, becoming barrack-master at Charles Town until 1782, then captain in the 48th foot. His military patron was Francis Rawdon, later second earl of Moira. On his return he married, about 1782, Elizabeth Ramsay (died 1815) of Bath. Scandalmongers alleged that the duke of Clarence had admired her, but had been diverted by McMahon to Dorothy Jordan. 
Outwardly unprepossessing, small, and pock-marked, McMahon made up for his appearance by obliging manners. Retiring on half pay in 1786, he joined the Whig Club and remained a member until 1792. In 1794 he served in Flanders, as lieutenant-colonel of the 87th foot, but returned home ill. Rather than serve in Ireland he left the army in 1796. Known as 'Colonel McMahon' or 'Mac', he was useful to Moira as a political go-between with Fox in 1797, but he soon found a more significant role as public relations officer to the prince of Wales, who had deserted his wife. The prince made him his vice-treasurer in 1800, and a member of the duchy of Cornwall council in 1802. The duke of Northumberland bought him a seat in parliament, for which Moira provided his property qualification: he thus sat for Aldeburgh from 1802 to 1812. Late in 1803 he became secretary to the prince, keeper of his privy purse and seal, and duchy auditor. In the Commons he voted with the prince's friends, and when the whigs took office in 1806 became principal storekeeper of the ordnance for a year. Despite the prince's political neutrality he found no other office until February 1811, when he became unsalaried private secretary to the prince as regent. 
In August the regent induced the premier to appoint McMahon paymaster of army widows' pensions, a sinecure ripe for abolition. Opposition motions against this were defeated on 9 January and 22 February 1812, when McMahon defended himself, but nevertheless he was voted out, on 23 February. In 1812 the regent provided for him in making him private secretary and keeper of the privy purse, with a privy councillorship granted on 20 March. He vacated Aldeburgh with hopes of another seat. The regent, however, resisted McMahon's attempts to reconcile him with the whigs. McMahon, overwhelmed by the task of countering adverse publicity for the regent, longed for retirement. His health was worsening and on 2 August 1815 his wife died, leaving him a considerable fortune in jewels. He had been receiver-general of the duchy for a year when, a disconsolate widower resorting to alcohol and opium, he resigned, obtaining a baronetcy on 7 August 1817. The regent avoided bidding him farewell in person but, through Sir William Knighton, McMahon's executor, secured McMahon's papers. Denied a British peerage, McMahon planned retirement to Falmouth, but died at Bath 'en route', on 12 September 1817. At his death he was worth $90,000, and as he had no children his baronetcy passed to his younger half-brother, Colonel Thomas McMahon. 


@@@@@


doc= 39576


Howard, Henry, twelfth earl of Suffolk and fifth earl of Berkshire (1739-1779), politician, was born on 10 or 16 May 1739, the eldest son of William Howard, styled Viscount Andover ('bap'. 1714, died 1756), politician, and his wife, Mary (1717-1803), the second daughter of Heneage Finch, second earl of Aylesford, and his second wife, Mary Fisher. He was educated at Eton College from 1748 and entered Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1757; he graduated MA in 1759 and DCL in 1761. Styled Viscount Andover after his father's death on 15 July 1756, he succeeded his grandfather as earl of Suffolk and Berkshire on 21 March 1757, when he inherited the main family estate of Charlton, Wiltshire, as well as others in Staffordshire and Westmorland. On 25 May 1764 he married Maria Trevor (1744-1767), the eldest daughter of Robert Hampden-Trevor, first Viscount Hampden, and his wife, Constantia de Huybert. She died in childbirth on 8 February 1767, and more than ten years later, on 14 August 1777, he married his cousin Charlotte (1754-1828), the eldest daughter of his uncle Heneage Finch, third earl of Aylesford, and his wife, Charlotte Seymour. Their two sons both died in infancy. 
From 1760 Suffolk, a year younger than George III himself, was much in favour at the royal court. He was bearer of the sword at the coronation and was invited to a very select ball at court in November 1761. It is not clear why in 1762 he allowed himself to be put forward for the chancellorship of Oxford University against the government candidate Lord Lichfield, being the candidate of the supposed whig interest in that traditionally tory stronghold; his youth was an obvious objection, and a widespread view was that his candidature came twenty years too soon. He did not stand a poll. Suffolk's inclination in national politics was to support government. His maiden speech in the Lords, on 9 December 1762, was in favour of the terms of what would be the treaty of Paris. In 1763 he was given the court post of deputy earl marshal. He seconded the Lords address on 24 November 1763 and spoke often in support of George Grenville's ministry. His political loyalty was transferred to Grenville, and on that minister's dismissal in July 1765 Suffolk decided to resign his court post; however, he was persuaded to remain in office under Lord Rockingham. He nevertheless, so he told Grenville, informed the king of 'the total impossibility of my supporting any measures contrary to those which had been adopted by my friends and connections' ('Additional Grenville Papers', 303). On 29 October he was replaced by a Rockinghamite peer. American policy was what Suffolk had in mind, and he was always to be a hardliner on that issue. In the parliamentary session of 1765-6 he took a leading role in criticizing the policy that led to repeal of the 'Stamp Act'. On 17 December 1765 he proposed a Lords denunciation of colonial resistance, and on 14 January 1766 he was one of only two peers to criticize the rather ambiguous address. It was Suffolk who on 29 January drew up a list of opposition resolutions for the Lords, and who on 4 February actually carried one, by sixty-three votes to sixty, 'requiring' compensation to be paid by colonial rioters. In the Lords debate of 11 March on the repeal of the 'Stamp Act' he replied to the argument that the Lords should agree with the Commons by haughtily declaring that the house constituted 'the hereditary Council of this Kingdom, not subject to the caprice of interested electors' (Thomas, 'British Politics', 244-5). 
Suffolk was never at ease in opposition, and in 1766 he vainly asked Grenville not to oppose the new Chatham ministry. But by March 1767 he was urging Grenville to construct an opposition alliance to oppose what he deemed to be the weak ministerial policy on America, and he spoke in several debates as part of such an alliance. His health was already deteriorating, and he was often absent from Westminster during the later 1760s, when there is little evidence of his parliamentary or other political activity. This semi-retirement paradoxically ended on Grenville's death in November 1770. His rank and parliamentary prominence led Suffolk to stand forth as his successor, and it was with the earl that the prime minister, Lord North, negotiated the accession of Grenvillites to the administration. In January 1771 Suffolk was offered the northern secretaryship, though 'a young man of thirty-two, totally unpractised in business, pompous, ignorant, and of no parts', as Horace Walpole scathingly wrote. 'The young Earl answered with modesty, that as he could not speak French, he was incapable of treating with foreign ministers, nor was he conversant in business: he wished for some high office, but not that of Secretary' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 4.173). He was appointed lord privy seal, but few Grenvillites followed his leadership. Four months later, in June, he succeeded the deceased Lord Halifax as northern secretary. 
Suffolk, who entirely lacked diplomatic and administrative experience and was dogged by ill health, owed his cabinet post to Lord North's desire to strengthen his ministry in parliament. Walpole noted in 1771 that, 'though young, he is all over gout' ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 8.1). Yet contrary to contemporary expectation, and belying his historical reputation, he pulled his weight in the ministry. In parliament he was a frequent speaker, especially on America as the colonial crisis deteriorated into war. He was prominent also in cabinet. It was Suffolk who suggested the 1774 general election, to pre-empt any colonial influence. He early pressed for the recall of the soft-line General Gage from America, he advocated the arrest of Benjamin Franklin before he left Britain, he ordered the prosecution of radical John Horne Tooke for a seditious libel about Lexington, and he temporarily took charge of the American department in 1775 when the American secretary, Dartmouth, proved unwilling to conduct the war. But while Suffolk never relaxed his opinion on America, northern Europe was his departmental concern, and here he performed his duties with pragmatic competence, ever on the lookout for allies. His personal preference was for a renewal of the Austrian alliance that had ended in 1756. But the logic of the first partition of Poland in 1772, described by an indifferent Suffolk as 'this curious transaction' (Scott, 179), was that a reconciliation with France seemed the only viable option. In 1773 Suffolk finally abandoned the decade-long search for a Russian alliance. But he always disapproved of a rapprochement with France, and on the outbreak of the American War of Independence in 1775 conceived the idea of hiring 20,000 Russian soldiers, commenting to his under-secretary William Eden that they would be 'charming visitors at New York, and [would] civilize that part of America wonderfully' (ibid., 218). Catherine II refused, angry at Russia's being treated on a par with Hesse, whence Suffolk obtained the soldiers in 1776. In the wider diplomatic sphere Suffolk, anxious to avoid a European war until the American rebellion was crushed, now pragmatically sought to appease France and Spain, contrary to the view of the southern secretary, Weymouth. Supported by George III and Lord North, Suffolk overruled Weymouth in a successful attempt to keep Spain and France apart. When France alone entered the war in 1778, Suffolk sought to construct a diversionary war front in Europe and approached the other three great powers, Austria, Prussia, and Russia, even suggesting in April 1778 a Prussian alliance that would reconstruct the successful scenario of the Seven Years' War. But he was knocking on closed doors: no one wanted Britain as an ally or to fight France. 
By now Suffolk's health had given way. In 1777 Walpole wrote of his new second wife, 'she cannot complain of being made a nurse, for he could have no other reason for marrying her, she is so plain' ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 10.92). On 7 April 1778, the same day that Chatham collapsed in the Lords, Suffolk spoke 'with every symptom of debility, repeated his own phrases, could not recollect his own ideas' (ibid., 10.214). By January 1779 he was unable to perform his official duties, and his death on 7 March at Bath merely prevented his long-rumoured resignation. He was not yet forty. He was buried at Charlton, Wiltshire, on 20 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 39577


Harris, Sir Charles Joseph William (1901-1986), civil servant, was born on 10 June 1901 at his parents' home, 249 Upper Street, Islington, London. His father, William Harris, was a stud groom and came from Thornaugh, near Wansford in Northamptonshire; his mother, Edith Elizabeth Goldsmith, was a lady's maid and came from Ramsgate in Kent. Because his parents were in domestic service in London he was brought up by his grandmother and his aunt Anne Goldsmith in Ramsgate. He was educated at Christ Church School there, but he left at fourteen and worked in a greengrocer's shop. As a boy scout at the beginning of the war he helped out at the naval base in Ramsgate and there attracted the attention of Lieutenant-Commander Dudley Ward MP, a former and a subsequent Liberal whip. In October 1917 Ward arranged for Harris to be considered for a clerical job in the whips' office at 12 Downing Street. He was accepted and stayed there for forty-four years, starting as office boy to Freddie Guest, the National Liberal chief whip (during the coalition there were joint chief whips). He soon became involved in the setting up of the Coalition Liberal organization for the 1918 election and the allocation of 'coupons' to trustworthy Lloyd George candidates. 
In 1919 Harris started to work for Lord Edmund Talbot (later Viscount Fitzalan), the Conservative chief whip, at $100 per annum; he became active in the organization of parliamentary business, with a desk in the whips' office in the Commons. When Leslie Wilson became chief whip in the 1922 Bonar Law government, he formally appointed Harris as his private secretary at $400 per annum. Harris married, on 7 June 1924, Emily Kyle Thompson ('b'. 1902/3), to whom he was introduced by her uncle George Thompson, who was Freddie Guest's agent. She was the daughter of John Drysdale Thompson, a cabinet-maker. They had one son and two daughters. 
In 1924 and again in 1929, when the Conservatives went into opposition, Harris continued to work as private secretary to their chief whip. It was only in 1939 that, with the agreement of the leader of the opposition, he became a fully established civil servant, as 'assistant to the parliamentary secretary to the treasury' with a salary of $850 per annum. Clement Attlee wrote 'Mr Harris would be an admirable man for the post' (Attlee to Sir James Rae, 14 Feb 1939, priv. coll.). In 1945, when Labour came to power, the new chief whip, William Whiteley, took it for granted that Charles Harris would continue in the job. He found the transition from Conservative employee to civil servant entirely easy, although he felt that some looked askance at the move. When Harris retired in July 1961, Hugh Gaitskell observed that the post-war Labour government 'had no more faithful servant than Sir Charles Harris' (Butler). 
When Harris started in the whips' office there were no records. Harris later wrote, 'I can modestly claim to have endeavoured to secure method, planning and arrangement to the business of the House... The new 'age' was taking hold. The easy-going gentlemanly methods were giving place to more exact planning' (priv. coll.). He was responsible for helping the chief whip in his task of organizing the legislative programme for the session, assessing what could reasonably be achieved. He knew that all governments were 'too ambitious', and that they put into the queen's speech their 'impossible hopes -- legislation which they will have no hope of passing or intention of implementing'. 
R. H. S. Crossman wrote that 'Sir Charles Harris was for years and years an absolutely key figure... a little round ball-bearing linking Government and Opposition Offices... [running] the Speaker and also, to some extent, the Opposition'. He was 'hugely influential'; his exact memory led him to be described as 'a flesh-and-blood storehouse of Parliament's own case-law' (Crossman, 2.23). Crossman commented: 'The Chief Whip and the Leader don't spend much time on the Parliamentary time-table. This is completely in the hands of the Chief Whip's Secretary. Partly this is inevitable and healthy because the goodwill of the Opposition is required and this is most easily attained when they spend their time talking to a non-partisan, non-political civil servant. (ibid., 366-7)' Few papers are preserved by the whips' office and fewer are ever released. There are hardly any events in which the role played by Sir Charles Harris is explicitly recorded; anecdotes are hard to come by but there is no doubt that his competence and discretion established the post of secretary to the chief whip as an essential, if unknown, part of the government of the country. The orderly arrangement of parliamentary business is conducted through 'the usual channels'. It was Sir Charles Harris's genius to see that affairs almost always flowed smoothly through those channels. When inter-party communications broke down during the general strike and at the time of Suez, he continued to provide a discreet link. He and his successors have developed a role that has become central to Westminster politics. Peter Hennessy notes: 'Occasionally Harris surfaces in the more sensitive documents at the Public Record Office. For example, in the file dealing with the royal prerogative and the dissolution of Parliament during the run-up to the October 1959 General Election, Freddie Bishop, the Prime Minister's Principal Private Secretary, minuted Harold Macmillan that 'I have consulted Sir Charles Harris about the precedents'. Harris was quite simply 'the' collective memory by that stage of his career and the first person called upon when, as it were, the written precedents ran out or were contradictory. (Hennessy, letter in priv. coll.)' Charles Harris was appointed CBE in 1927 (at the age of twenty-six). One letter of congratulation (from a civil servant, Douglas Veale) ran 'The way you carry out your intricate and harassing work without any friction whatever has always been a marvel' (3 June 1927, priv. coll.). Another from a junior clerk ran, 'You are undoubtedly the most popular person in the House with MPs, Press and staff, all grades' (priv. coll.). He certainly managed his complex task with immense amiability. He was a handsome man, 6 foot tall and dark-haired, modest but with a sure confidence in his own ability, his prodigious memory, and his feel for politics and politicians. He was the most discreet and sure-footed of political operators. Harris was knighted in 1952 and raised to KBE in 1961. He died at Bushey and District Hospital, Hertfordshire, on 14 January 1986. A granddaughter (Julia Drown) became a Labour MP in 1997. 


@@@@@


doc= 39578


Delafaye, Charles (1677-1762), public servant, was born on 25 July 1677 in Paris, probably the eldest of the three children of Lewis and Mary Delafaye. His father, whose family originated in Dijon, abjured the Roman Catholic faith, moved to England, and entered the service of the duke of Ormond; he later became the French translator of the 'London Gazette'. Nothing is known of Charles's early education. In 1692 he matriculated at All Souls College, Oxford, and in 1696 received the degree of BA. A year later he was appointed secretary to Sir Joseph Williamson, ambassador to the United Provinces. Shortly after Williamson's return to England in March 1699 Delafaye secured employment as a clerk in the secretary of state's office through the influence of his father. He served in the southern department successively under the earl of Jersey, James Vernon, and the earl of Nottingham. On 30 April 1700, at Aske's Hospital, Hoxton, Middlesex, he married Elizabeth Coulbourne 
(or Coleborne; died 1742)
, possibly the third daughter of the Edward Colbourne of Cambridge included in the herald's visitation of Cambridgeshire in 1684. 
In 1702 Delafaye was given the additional post of writer of the 'London Gazette'. In this capacity he was summoned before the House of Lords in 1704 to explain how a notice reflecting on the instructions of the lord high admiral had come to be inserted in the 'Gazette'. Despite this apparent setback Delafaye's career did not suffer. On the removal of the earl of Nottingham in April 1704 he passed first into the service of Sir Charles Hedges and then into that of the earl of Sunderland, who appointed him chief clerk, a position of special trust. He continued in this office under the next secretary of state, Lord Dartmouth. 
In August 1713 Delafaye was selected by the duke of Shrewsbury, lord lieutenant of Ireland, to be his second or Ulster secretary. In accepting this office Delafaye abandoned the relative security and obscurity of a clerk for the greater prominence and responsibility of a secretary, whose fortunes were closely bound up with those of his political masters. He accompanied Shrewsbury to Dublin for the meeting of the Irish parliament and was rewarded with the post of gentleman sewer in the royal household. Following the death of Queen Anne in August 1714 Shrewsbury was replaced as lord lieutenant by Delafaye's former master Sunderland, who continued him in his post. When in August 1715 the Irish administration was placed in the hands of the duke of Grafton and the earl of Galway, Delafaye was made one of their joint secretaries, and he continued as such under their successor, Viscount Townshend. In order to strengthen the official representation in the Irish House of Commons Delafaye was found a seat as one of the members for Belturbet, co. Cavan, which he held until 1727. 
In April 1717, when Sunderland became once more secretary of state, Delafaye was appointed one of his under-secretaries. Thereupon he left Ireland to begin the final phase of his official life. At first he served in the northern department under Sunderland, Viscount Stanhope, and Townshend. Delafaye appears to have left the bulk of foreign business to his colleague as under-secretary and to have concentrated on home affairs. In particular he was employed in the delicate and confidential business of managing the press on behalf of the government. In April 1724 he was transferred to the southern department to become one of the under-secretaries to the newly appointed duke of Newcastle. In addition to his strictly departmental duties he developed an interest in colonial affairs, and acted as agent for the colony of Jamaica between 1728 and 1734. Between 1719 and 1727 Delafaye was called upon to act as secretary to the lords justices of England during the absence of the king in Hanover. In 1728 he obtained the sinecure office of one of the clerks of the signet, which he held until his death. In 1725 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. He was an active freemason. 
Delafaye suffered a serious illness in 1733 and resigned as under-secretary in July of the following year, being then aged fifty-seven. His career was remarkable in a number of respects. His introduction to government service was due to family influence and he was sustained throughout his career by powerful patrons. At no point did he enjoy permanent status in a formal sense. Nevertheless his abilities were such that he remained continuously in the service of the government for nearly forty years. Aided by a good education and linguistic proficiency, he was able to work his way up from the clerical to the secretarial level of government service. His responsibilities in Ireland provided him with invaluable experience and led directly to his appointment as an under-secretary. In this office he was able to place his skills at the disposal of four secretaries of state for a period of seventeen years, providing continuity at the intermediate level which made an essential contribution to the orderly processes of administration. 
Delafaye retired to the village of Whitsbury in Wiltshire, where he died on 11 December 1762 at the advanced age of eighty-five. None of his children survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 39581


Marjorie Bruce (c.1296-1316), in marriage, a union which brings out the extent to which, along with James, lord of Douglas, Thomas Randolph, earl of Moray, and John of Menteith (a younger son of Walter Stewart, earl of Menteith ['see above']), Walter Stewart had become one of the closest counsellors and most highly trusted and favoured supporters of Robert I. He took a leading part in the Scots' recovery of Berwick upon Tweed (1318) and in a successful defence of the town against the determined onslaught of Edward II's forces in 1319. In December 1318 Walter was present in parliament when the succession to the throne was entailed upon his son Robert (born probably on 2 March 1316), failing male heirs of Robert I's body. His name appears immediately after those of the earls at the head of the famous letter addressed to Pope John XXII in April 1320 by the nobles of Scotland (the declaration of Arbroath). When Robert I's son, David II, having reigned for over half a century and been married twice, died childless in 1371, Robert Stewart duly succeeded, as King Robert II. Walter Stewart died at Bathgate Castle, Linlithgowshire, on 9 April 1327. 


@@@@@


doc= 39585


Fraser, Sir Simon (c.1270-1306), rebel, was the son of Sir Simon Fraser of Oliver Castle, by Tweedsmuir, and his wife, Mary. The elder Simon, who had been keeper of the forests of Traquair and Selkirk, died in 1291, by when his son was of age. The younger Simon swore fealty to Edward I in 1291 and attested King John's homage to the English king at the end of 1292. Having fought against Edward at Dunbar, Fraser swore fealty to him again in October 1296, and in 1297, to gain release from English prison, he agreed to campaign with Edward in Flanders. He was rewarded with the return of his lands. He impressed the king while he was abroad and returned to Scotland in 1298 almost certainly as keeper of Selkirk Forest. In the aftermath of the battle of Falkirk he was involved in fighting with the Scots in that forest, and at the end of the year he was ordered to join an expedition for the relief of Stirling Castle. In 1299, however, doubts were again expressed about his loyalty. Edward's sheriff asserted that, when the Scots launched an expedition in the south-east, Fraser met them on the best of terms. There is a strong suggestion that the Scots were able to use Selkirk Forest precisely because Fraser was Edward's warden there. Yet in August 1299 the guardians appointed Sir Robert Keith to be their warden of the forest, and Fraser spent the period from 4 September 1299 to 12 June 1300 in a Scottish prison. This served to convince Edward of his loyalty, and on his release Fraser returned to English service and to his forest wardenship. 
In March 1301 Fraser received his fee and robes in person at Lincoln, but by September he had changed sides. This volte-face was probably caused by his having been replaced as warden of Selkirk Forest by Sir Hugh Audley, as well as by a disillusionment over the scarcity of wage payments. He then employed his undoubted energy in trying to expel the English from south-east Scotland, leading a force against the garrison at Roxburgh early in 1303, moving on to the new peel at Selkirk, which he captured, attacking Linlithgow, which he failed to take, and finally defeating Sir John Seagrave's force at Roslin on 24 February. By June, Fraser and Sir Edmund Comyn were raiding south of the border. Nevertheless, most Scots submitted to Edward I early in 1304. As one who had personally betrayed the king, Fraser could submit only by agreeing to undergo three years' exile from Edward's lands in both England and France. He declined the offer and was outlawed, together with William Wallace, at the parliament of March 1304. At the same time the pair were 'discomfited' at Hopperew, on Fraser's own lands. Fraser probably submitted soon afterwards, since on 25 July he and others were ordered to prove their loyalty by capturing Wallace. Although he was allowed to buy back his lands, his exile had been increased to four years, subject to recall. He was still in Scotland in April, when he was given leave to go to Berwick to discuss 'the state of Scotland' ('CDS', 5, no. 492, xvii), but he soon joined Robert Bruce in his rebellion and was captured shortly after the battle of Methven. Fraser was taken to London and there hanged, drawn, and beheaded on 7 September 1306; his head was stuck on a pole beside that of Wallace. He and his wife, Mary, had two daughters, possibly called Margaret and Joanna. Sir Simon's death brought to an end the Tweeddale line of the family after which the Fraser descent continued through the Stirling Touch-Frasers ['see 'Fraser family (per. c.1300-c.1500)]. 


@@@@@


doc= 39586


Hine, Reginald Leslie (1883-1949), lawyer and author, was born on 25 September 1883 at Newnham Hall, Newnham, near Baldock, Hertfordshire, the second son of Joseph Neville Hine (1849-1931), a farmer, and his wife, Eliza (1843-1892). He was educated at Grove House, Baldock, was tutored by the Revd George Todd of Baldock, and attended Kent College, Canterbury, and the Leys School, Cambridge. Slender of frame, he stood 6 feet 1 inch tall, and was a keen amateur in tennis and cricket. He enjoyed walking and cycling, but was an unwilling motorist. In 1901 he was articled pupil to W. O. Times, solicitor with Hawkins & Co., of Portmill Lane, Hitchin, where he remained until 1936. The quaint old-worldliness of the venerable firm rubbed off onto its willing pupil. 
Those who availed themselves of Hine's professional skills were startled by the visual richness of his office, with its roaring fire in winter, illuminating the spines of his substantial book collection, and the Bukhara prayer mat which adorned the floor. Those who corresponded with him were enraged by his execrable handwriting, which Hine valued for the ambiguities which might arise from its interpretation. The fruits of his study, his old-world courtesy, and his shrewd perception endeared him to Hitchin at large, where he gave many talks and lectures to local societies, on topics such as nonconformity in Hitchin, the highways and byways of Hitchin, and Celtic poetry, as well as on the history of Hitchin. Many of these lectures were expanded and subsequently published -- at his own expense and always at a loss, he wryly commented -- in bindings of more than average quality, including 'The History of Hitchin' (1927, 1929), 'Hitchin Worthies' (1932), and 'The Natural History of the Hitchin Region' (1934). A further collection was published posthumously by his friend Richenda Scott as 'Relics of an Un-common Attorney' (1951). 
On 11 April 1912, at New College chapel, Hampstead, Hine married Florence Lee Pyman ('b'. 1888/9), the daughter of a shipowner, and their daughter, Felicity, the only offspring of the marriage, was born in 1915. Repeatedly deemed unfit for military service, Hine moved to Hitchin in 1917, and lived twelve years in 52 Wymondley Road, a house built by the local architect Geoffrey Lucas. In 1929 the family moved to Old Hall, Willian; that year Hine was elected FSA, and the following year a fellow of the Royal Historical Society. He was a vigorous proponent of the foundation of Hitchin's museum, which houses much historical material collected by him. In 1936 he entered into partnership with Reginald Hartley in Hitchin, from which he retired suddenly on 31 March 1949. On 14 April that year, after an unexceptional conversation with a fellow traveller at Hitchin Station, he threw himself before an arriving Cambridge train. His ashes were scattered at Minsden Chapel on 19 April. His wife survived him. 
Widely read, Hine's aim was to elevate the writing of history from discussion of political minutiae ('de minimis non curat lex') to the resurrection of past souls whose actions, opinions, and feelings were revealed by the documents which outlived them. Attempting to write local history as a 'speculum mundi', he succeeded best in his highly readable two-volume 'History of Hitchin', which was widely praised on publication, although it is now treated warily by some for a want of intellectual rigour and bibliographical accuracy. Blessed with a need for less sleep than most, his study of the documentary records of Hitchin took place from 5.30 a.m. until the beginning of the working day, and from its close until late at night. Much of his eccentric personality is revealed in the pages, and sometimes unwittingly between the lines, of 'Dreams and the Way of Dreams' (1913), a curious compendium of his own recollected dreams and nightmares. 'Confessions of an Un-common Attorney' (1945) reveals Hine's attitudes to clients and life in general: in retrospect it is probably too easy to overemphasize the importance there of the frequent references to suicide and disturbed mental conditions, but it is clear from the inquest that he was subject to periodic fits of depression. 


@@@@@


doc= 39589


Dunn, John Robert (1833-1895), chief in the Zulu kingdom, was born, it is believed, at Port Alfred, Cape Colony, the son of Robert Newton Dunn, a Scottish emigrant, and his second wife, Ann Biggar. The family moved to Natal, where the young John Dunn lived on the borders of the colonial frontier, making use of his shooting and riding skills to trade and hunt. He traded in the neighbouring Zulu kingdom, and became known to the heir to the Zulu throne, Cetshwayo, the son of King Mpande kaSenzangakhona. In 1858 he moved to the Zulu kingdom to act as the prince's secretary and adviser. In recognition of this, Dunn was awarded territory in the south-east of the kingdom along the coast between the Thugela and Mhlatuze Rivers, where he set himself up as a Zulu chief. He also traded, hunted, supplied African labour to Natal, and ran guns into Zululand with the assistance of Natal merchant houses. He exploited his transitional status within colonial and African society with ruthless skill. Using the wealth he accumulated to build up his chieftainship within Zululand, he acquired large herds of cattle, built a number of homesteads, and took, to the lasting scandalized fascination of observers, forty-eight wives from the families of his Zulu neighbours. These wives were in addition to Catherine Pierce, the daughter of Robert Dunn's assistant, Frank Pierce, and a Cape Malay woman, whom John Dunn had taken with him to Zululand. 
Dunn fled the Zulu kingdom when it was invaded by the British in 1879, and became an intelligence officer in the British forces. After the defeat of the Zulu army and the exile of King Cetshwayo, Dunn was awarded a huge territory in the south of the kingdom. This he attempted to rule with energy and efficiency, thereby incurring the wrath of his erstwhile benefactor and his former Zulu supporters, who saw him as a traitor. His rule there was described by W. R. Ludlow in his 'Zululand and Cetewayo' (1882); Lord Kimberley, the colonial secretary, commented after reading it: 'Dunn has feathered his nest but the stories put about by the Cetewayo party against him are... mostly untrue' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 10.316-17). However, in 1883 the British withdrew Dunn's appointment as the dominant chief in the south of the country. Dunn's protests achieved little, and he died an embittered man on 5 August 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 39590


Cetshwayo ka Mpande (c.1826-1884), king of the Zulu, the eldest son of King Mpande (died 1872) and Ngqumbazi, daughter of the Zungu chief Mbondi, was born at his father's Mlambongwenya homestead near Eshowe. 
As a young man Cetshwayo secured the succession to the Zulu kingdom (founded by his uncle Shaka) after the fratricidal battle at Ndondakusuka in 1856 in which he defeated and killed six of his brothers, including his chief rival, Mbuyazi. Thousands of Mbuyazi's followers were killed or fled southwards to Natal. In 1861, in an attempt to bolster his authority against possible usurpers from the south, Cetshwayo invited Natal's secretary for native affairs, Theophilus Shepstone, to recognize his future succession, and the colony became increasingly involved in Zulu affairs. From then Cetshwayo increasingly took control of the kingdom, although he only became king formally in 1872 when his father died. Cetshwayo had a considerable number of wives, many of whom he married to forge diplomatic ties. His chief wife was the daughter of Seketwayo, chief of the Mdlalose; but it was another spouse, Novimbi Msweli, a commoner, who gave birth in 1868 to the son who was to succeed him, Dinizulu (sometimes spelt Dinuzulu). 
At the time of Cetshwayo's accession, Zululand was still a comparatively self-sufficient, independent state, although it was beginning to feel pressures from traders and missionaries, and especially from Transvaal Afrikaners encroaching on the river valleys of the north-west in search of grazing. Hoping to secure Natal's support against the Transvaal and to stave off usurpers Cetshwayo invited Theophilus Shepstone to preside over his formal installation in 1873. Shepstone took the opportunity to impose unilateral 'guidelines' on the king; these provided the justification for the Anglo-Zulu War of 1879, when the British high commissioner, Sir Bartle Frere, who saw the kingdom as an obstacle to the confederation of southern Africa and believed Cetshwayo to be instigating a pan-African conspiracy to overthrow white rule, presented Cetshwayo with an ultimatum demanding 'inter alia' the disbanding of his army within thirty days, and the implementation of these coronation laws. Compliance would have spelt the destruction of the kingdom and on 11 January 1879 British troops invaded Zululand. 
After a series of early British defeats, the most spectacular being that at Isandlwana, the Zulu were finally defeated on 4 July at the first battle of Ulundi, and Cetshwayo was captured and exiled to the Cape. Largely as a result of his brilliant diplomacy and the influence of carefully cultivated supporters, as well as the sympathy his imposing presence aroused when he appeared before Queen Victoria in mid-1882, at the beginning of 1883 the king was returned to a Zululand torn by civil war between his supporters and the chiefs the British had appointed in his stead. 
Restored to a portion of his former kingdom, and confronted by a large number of powerful enemies, Cetshwayo was unable to re-establish peace. On 20 July 1883 his followers were defeated at the second battle of Ulundi and most of his senior councillors killed. Cetshwayo again fled but when British troops entered the country, he surrendered himself to the protection of the British resident commissioner. He died in captivity at Eshowe on 8 February 1884 -- of heart disease, according to the military doctor; his followers believed he had been poisoned. He was buried in a sacred grove in the Nkandhla forests, southern Zululand. 
Cetshwayo was much maligned in his lifetime, but later historians have generally seen him as a highly intelligent and dignified man, who ruled his people well. After his death continued turbulence led to the British annexation of Zululand in 1887 and its incorporation into Natal ten years later. 


@@@@@


doc= 39593


Clare, Margaret de, countess of Gloucester (1291/2?-1342), noblewoman and heiress, was the second daughter of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester and of Hertford (1243-1295), and his wife, Joan of Acre (1272-1307), daughter of Edward I. She was reportedly twenty-two years old at the time of the death at Bannockburn (1314) of her brother Gilbert. She was married first to Piers Gaveston, earl of Cornwall (d. 1312), on 1 November 1307 at Berkhamsted. Edward II probably arranged this alliance between his favourite and a royal niece, and attended the wedding, adding a personal touch to the proceedings by providing $7 10's'. 6died in pennies, which were thrown over the heads of the bride and groom as they were about to enter the church. Margaret and Gaveston had one daughter, Joan, born in York on 12 January 1312, and Margaret was churched in the Franciscan house in York on 20 February. Joan was raised at the convent of Amesbury along with the king's niece, Eleanor of Hereford, with whom she received a joint allowance of 100 marks per annum. A marriage to John, son of Thomas of Multon, lord of Egremont, was arranged, but never concluded because Joan died of illness on 13 January 1325. Gaveston was executed by his political enemies in June 1312, and in September the king endowed the widowed Margaret de Clare with lands valued at 2000 marks per annum. This arrangement was modified in December 1316, but the new settlement provided her with the same annual revenues. 
On 28 April 1317 she married at Windsor; her second husband was another royal favourite, Hugh Audley the younger (c.1291-1347). Edward II reconfirmed his earlier grant to Margaret alone to both Margaret and Hugh and the heirs of their bodies with reversion to the king. In September 1318 Audley and Margaret unsuccessfully petitioned the York parliament for possession of the earldom of Cornwall. This claim was released in December 1318 in return for a settlement in which the king once again confirmed their tenure of the properties already assigned and valued at 2000 marks per annum. In the event of Margaret's predeceasing Audley, he was to continue in seisin of lands valued at 1200 marks, with the remainder reverting to the king. Audley and Margaret did less well with regard to the Clare inheritance, the division of which was finalized in 1317. Hugh Despenser the younger (d. 1326), the husband of Margaret's eldest sister, Eleanor (died 1337), took the lordships of Glamorgan and Tewkesbury, and a number of manors in southern England; Roger Damory (d. 1322), third husband of the youngest sister, Elizabeth de Clare (lady of Clare) (d. 1360), took the lordship of Usk, the honour of Clare itself, and a number of Dorset manors and boroughs. Audley therefore received the lordship of Gwynllwg, the castle of Tonbridge and associated manors in Kent, and a few other properties in southern England. The younger Despenser soon forced the exchange of properties to his own advantage with Audley, acquiring the lordship of Gwynllwg, which included the town and castle of Newport. Although Audley was in the opposition to the Despensers in 1322, he was spared following the royal victory at Boroughbridge through Margaret's intercession. 
Margaret predeceased her husband, dying on Tuesday 9 April 1342. At the time of her death she still held several manors in Devon and Newport in Essex as dower lands from her marriage to Gaveston. Her heir was her daughter Margaret, wife of Ralph Stafford, first earl of Stafford, said at the time of her mother's death to be aged, variously, eighteen or twenty years and more. There is no evidence that Amie Gaveston was the daughter of Piers Gaveston and Margaret de Clare, although there is circumstantial evidence to indicate that Margaret de Clare did take an interest in the young woman, who may have been her first husband's natural daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 39597


Hamel, Gustav Wilhelm (1889-1914), aviator, was born on 25 June 1889, the only son in a family of four children of Dr Gustav Hugo Hamel (1861-1922) and his wife, Caroline Magdalena Elisa (1864/5-1960), a German-speaking Dane from Schleswig-Holstein. His father had been born in Hamburg and educated in Sweden and Switzerland, where he took his medical degree; he moved to London and built up a wide medical practice. One of his patients was Edward VII, and Dr Hamel was appointed MVO for medical services rendered to the king on the occasion of his visit to Hamburg in 1901. Edward VII was a regular visitor to the doctor's Grosvenor Square home, often after his daily ride, but Mrs Hamel, who retained her strong German accent all her life, would refuse to allow him to bring his terrier Caesar upstairs to the family drawing room. She died aged ninety-five at Robert Adam Street, London, in February 1960. 
Hamel was educated at Westminster School from 1901 to 1907. Although his parents hoped he would take up medicine, Gustav was attracted to motor racing and enthusiastically followed the sport across Europe for two years. He made his first ascent in a balloon in the summer of 1909, flying from London to Peterborough. Attracted to the pioneering flights of the French aviators, by autumn 1910 he had become a pupil at the Bleriot flying ground at Issy-les-Molineaux, France; he moved to Pau when the aviators went south for the winter in search of more favourable weather conditions. On his first flight, he was observed by M. Bleriot, who remarked that he had never seen so apt a pupil. 
Hamel obtained his brevet de l'Aero Club de France on 3 February 1911, certificate no. 358, flying a Morane monoplane. On 14 February, following his test flight on a Bleriot monoplane, Hamel acquired his Royal Aero Club 'ticket', no. 64. He subsequently transported his own 50 hp Gnome Bleriot from France to Britain and in March won first prize in a cross-country race from Hendon to Brooklands. He made his first flight to Brighton in April 1911, and landed on the lawns beside the seafront at Hove. From then until his untimely death, his flights were extensively reported in the national press. At Hendon on 11 May 1911 he was invited to demonstrate the military potential of aircraft in time of war before the parliamentary committee concerned with aerial defence. He flew to Farnborough and back carrying military dispatches, performing far faster than any cavalryman and out of reach of gunfire from the ground by arriving back over Hendon at 4000 feet. 
Following the coronation of George V, and on the suggestion of Sir Walter Windham, permission was given by the postmaster-general for the first British aerial postal service. Hamel piloted a Bleriot on the inaugural flight from Hendon to Windsor Castle on 9 September 1911, in adverse weather conditions. Mail flights continued for ten days and raised funds to endow the 'coronation aerial post bed' at the King Edward Hospital, Windsor. 
Hamel made his first cross-channel flight from Boulogne to Wembley Park on 12 October 1911, ferrying a Bleriot from the Hardelot factory. On 2 April 1912 he flew from London to Paris in a two-seater Bleriot monoplane with Miss Trehawke Davies, the first female passenger to be carried by air across the channel. They were entertained to lunch by Bleriot and then flew on to Paris. She was to make a total of eight channel crossings with Hamel; he made twenty-one. By Good Friday he was back at Hendon, having achieved a new height record of 6000 feet. On 8 June 1912 he competed in the first aerial Derby, an 81 mile anticlockwise circuit of London, again with Miss Davies as passenger. His friend Thomas Sopwith finished ahead of him, but was disqualified for flying within one of the turning points, and the race was awarded to Hamel. On 12 June he flew to Ranelagh and, watched by the king and queen, gave exhibition flights over the polo grounds before landing and being received at the royal pavilion. 
Many and varied were Hamel's exhibition locations, from demonstrations at local flower shows to meetings held on racecourses. Enormous crowds flocked to the venues, and in his Bleriot, Hamel was able to land and take off from almost any open space. At each site local photographers produced sets of postcards depicting Hamel with his aircraft surrounded by the crowds, and the card sales proved extremely profitable. 
Early in 1913 Miss Davies purchased her own two-seater Bleriot and engaged Hamel as one of her aerial chauffeurs. He was extremely good-looking and debonair, and he possessed an engaging personality. To him flocked not only society's young ladies, but many of their mothers also. There was great competition to be photographed in his company and to obtain passenger flights at $5 for a few minutes in the air. So many flew with him that he was called 'the society flyer' and he was especially popular with people in the theatre, who discovered it was good publicity to be photographed in his company. 
In April 1913 Hamel flew Frank Dupree, staff journalist on 'The Standard', to Cologne in four hours and fifteen minutes, and they were very well received by German officers. The departure from Dover had been kept secret from the rest of the press so that the flight preparations and take-off could be filmed. The flight was sponsored by 'The Standard' and the imperial air fleet committee, with the intention of bringing to public notice Britain's need of a great imperial air fleet. The organizing committee felt that the Royal Navy's dreadnought programme overshadowed the country's lack of aircraft capable of military service in time of war. When Hamel arrived back at Charing Cross Station he was loudly cheered and carried shoulder high from the train to a motor car. The film was shown at the Scala Theatre. Hamel won the second aerial Derby in September 1913, coping in flight with a faulty petrol tap that vibrated loose and threw fuel over his face while he struggled to keep his finger over the leak for more than 30 miles. 
By January 1914 a great new aviation stunt, 'looping the loop', had been brought to Britain by Adolphe Pegoud from France, and immediately it caught the public's attention. On 2 January Gladys Cooper (1888-1971) was already strapped into Hamel's two-seater at Hendon and was about to be taken up for her first loop when Miss Davies, having learned that Hamel was to loop, rose from her sick-bed against doctor's orders, arrived at the aerodrome, and requested Miss Cooper to let her fly instead. Reluctantly she agreed, but was most disappointed on returning to London to see the evening papers proclaiming Miss Davies as the first woman to loop the loop. A special 'upside-down dinner', when all the courses were reversed, was held at the Royal Automobile Club to honour Hamel and the other looping exponent, B. C. Hucks. At the dinner Charles Coburn entertained guests by singing a verse of 'Two lovely black eyes' while standing on his head. In early February 1914 Hamel was twice invited to lunch at Windsor Castle, and on the second occasion he performed fourteen loops. At the end of the month he flew to Worcester, being invited to join the countess of Dudley's house party at Witley Court, which included Lady Diana Manners. Hamel flew Lady Dudley over Worcester racecourse, performing a sequence of five loops. At Hendon on 12 March Hamel joined with Hucks in a display of looping and upside-down flying. Hamel's monoplane was painted jet black with large white circles on the tops of the wings, so that it could be clearly observed when the plane was inverted. 
About this time Hamel took Marconi for several flights, during which they experimented with transmitting wireless messages on behalf of the naval and military authorities. Hamel's book, 'Flying: some Practical Experiences', co-written with the journalist and pilot C. C. Turner, was published in 1914. In May the same year Winston Churchill, first lord of the Admiralty, invited Hamel to be his guest on the Admiralty yacht 'Enchantress', off Sheerness. Churchill had been learning to fly with naval pilots since early in 1912, and acknowledged that Hamel was further ahead in the art of flying than any of the naval officers: 'If ever there was a man born to fly, three parts a bird and the rest genius, it was Hamel' (Churchill, 184). As well as demonstration flights for naval personnel, Hamel also took Churchill up in his plane. 
Very early on the morning of Saturday 23 May 1914 Hamel set off from Villacoublay aerodrome near Paris to deliver a new racing Morane-Saulnier monoplane direct to Hendon, where he was to take part in the third aerial derby that afternoon. When he reached Hardelot weather conditions were still not favourable for the channel crossing. He set off for Hendon just after noon, but his plane crashed and he was drowned mid-channel. The race was abandoned because of bad weather and the shocking news that Hamel was missing in the channel. Extensive searches were made by the Royal Navy, but these were finally called off and the Admiralty issued its own special tribute to him. The manner of his death caused great distress, and the family received many condolences, including one from Buckingham Palace. Duff Cooper penned a poem 'In Memoriam' and sent it to Lady Diana Manners; a slightly altered version was published in 'The Times' on 29 May. Further poems and tributes appeared widely in the national press and in aeronautical and motor journals. A memorial service was held at the Grosvenor Chapel, London. French aviators paid tribute to him as 'le Garros anglais'. Hamel was unmarried at the time of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 39598


Lacey, James Harry (1917-1989), air force officer, was born at Fairfield Villas, Wetherby, Yorkshire, on 1 February 1917, the son of Charles Lacey, a cattle dealer, and his wife, Mary Brown Smith. The later nickname Ginger came from his shock of carroty hair. He was educated from 1927 to 1933 at King James's Grammar School, Knaresborough, where he enjoyed sport and left with a school certificate. His father died in 1933 and Lacey, lacking interest in a farming career, trained as a pharmacist, passing intermediate exams in 1936. However, his heart was set on flying, so he joined the newly formed RAF volunteer reserve. He trained as a sergeant-pilot at Scone in Scotland, being the first on the course to fly solo, and passed out 'above average'; he then flew on training sessions each weekend at Brough. With increasing experience on biplanes, from Tiger Moths to Hawker Harts, he was accepted in 1938 as an instructor with Yorkshire Airways Ltd. In January 1939 he was attached briefly to 1 squadron at Tangmere, where his keen eyesight and marksmanship were noted. When the squadron re-equipped with Hurricanes he soon flew one; he had then put in 250 hours of service flying. 
Lacey was called up in September 1939 and joined 501 County of Gloucester auxiliary squadron at Filton as a sergeant-pilot. Their main action began on 10 May 1940 when they joined the air component of the British expeditionary force in France as the French campaign opened. The squadron was quickly under pressure from greater Luftwaffe numbers. Lacey made his mark on 13 May by shooting down a Messerschmitt Bf 109, a Heinkel He 111, and a Messerschmitt Bf 110 before breakfast, a feat rewarded with the French Croix de Guerre. By 18 June, when the squadron returned to England, he had scored five victories and had a narrow escape from a crash-landing. 
During the battle of Britain, Lacey shot down a Bf 109 over the channel on 20 July. Then, flying from Gravesend, he was in regular action, flying up to six sorties daily and suffering their attendant stress. On 8 August he destroyed a Junkers Ju 87 Stuka and claimed two 'possibles'. Four days later he accounted for two aircraft, and then another on the 24th. He was awarded the DFM on 23 August. On 30 August, while attacking Heinkel He 111s head-on, his aeroplane was hit and oil sprayed into the cockpit, yet he managed skilfully to coax his Hurricane back to Gravesend. By 5 September he had accounted for five further aircraft and was already a respected ace during the period of greatest pressure on Fighter Command, especially on 11 group. 
On 13 September 1940 Lacey shot down a Heinkel He 111 which had earlier bombed Buckingham Palace. In the action his radiator was damaged and he baled out, suffering minor burns. In his log book he wrote a reminder to leave bombers alone: 'they are shooting me down much too often' (Bickers, 95). On the 15th he destroyed three enemy aircraft, but two days later he was himself shot down again and had to parachute to safety. By the end of October he claimed four more Bf 109s, and on 26 November he received a bar to his DFM. 
During the battle Lacey achieved the RAF's top score, with eighteen aircraft destroyed. It was no coincidence that thirteen were Bf 109s, considered by Luftwaffe pilots to be comprehensively superior to the Hurricane. His boyish looks belying his years and experience, Lacey had scored with superb airmanship resulting from many hours of pre-war training. Sharp eyesight, gritty determination, and skilful shooting brought him success -- and a charmed life. 
Although he was always content as a sergeant-pilot, in January 1941 Lacey was awarded a commission. He then flew on sorties over France, destroying four further aircraft, three of them Bf 109s. After 300 hours on active operations he was posted away to be an instructor with 57 operational training unit. In March 1942 he re-entered action with 602 squadron, then, after flying with them from Kenley, he moved on to 81 group as tactics officer. Later he experimented with rocket armament at Boscombe Down before going on to Northumberland and instructing in low-level attack. 
An overseas posting arrived in March 1943 when Lacey sailed to India; later he took command of 17 squadron in Assam. Towards the end of the Burma campaign he led offensive operations against the Japanese, and he gained his final success in February 1945 by shooting down a Nakajima 'Oscar', bringing his total to twenty-eight. After the war he took his squadron to a base near Hiroshima in Japan, and was the first pilot to fly a Spitfire over that country. 
During his voyage to India, Lacey had met (Maureen) Sheila Latchford on board ship. They married on 8 July 1945 at the Sacred Heart Church, Kodaikanal, and later had three daughters -- Diana, Wendy, and Susan. 
Back in Britain, Lacey was awarded a permanent commission and stayed in the RAF. He served variously as a fighter controller in Hong Kong, the Isle of Man, and Burma, flew early jets, and worked as an instructor at home and abroad. In March 1967 he retired, as a squadron leader. Later he ran a small air-freight business and taught budding pilots to fly in Yorkshire; they could have had no better tutor. 
Lacey died from cancer at Castle Hill Hospital, Nottingham, on 30 May 1989, and his funeral service was held in the priory church, Bridlington. A modest, yet independent and straightforward man, he was the finest exemplar of the many sergeant-pilots of the volunteer reserve who so ably served their country during the battle of Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 39599


Lee, Arthur Stanley Gould (1894-1975), air force officer, was born on 31 August 1894 in the King's Head inn, Emery Lane, Boston, Lincolnshire, the only son of Arthur Lee, a licensed victualler who later became a building contractor, and his wife, Clara Emily, 'nee' Gould. Nothing is known of his childhood or schooling. As with many young men of his generation, Lee's imagination was caught by the idea of flight, but there was no money to spare for flying lessons. 
At the outbreak of war in 1914 Lee saw his chance to learn to fly and attempted to enlist in the Royal Flying Corps (RFC), but only qualified pilots (those who held a privately obtained Royal Aero Club brevet) were being considered. Lacking the technical qualifications necessary for training by the RFC as a mechanic, he joined the infantry, the 13th Sherwood Foresters, and was commissioned in February 1915. After two unsuccessful attempts to gain a transfer to the RFC, an opportunity arose when, in May 1916, as a result of the RFC's heavy losses, commanding officers were instructed not to obstruct volunteers. A further application led to secondment on temporary attachment to the RFC. Shortly afterwards Lee married, on 28 July 1916, Gwynneth, the daughter of Robert Lewis, a stationer; they had one daughter. 
After flying training, Lee was posted to France to serve with 46 squadron, arriving at the squadron on 22 May 1917. Based at La Gorgue, on the Ypres front, the squadron was equipped with the Sopwith Pup, a small, highly manoeuvrable single-seater fighter, but with the disadvantages of being slower than its German counterparts and having only one machine-gun -- a Vickers, firing through the propeller arc -- against the twin Spandaus carried by the German fighters. He flew with 46 squadron until 6 January 1918, when he was posted to home establishment. He had been promoted captain and flight commander on 21 November 1917, and had been shot down by ground fire three times during the battle of Cambrai. He had flown 118 patrols, been in combat fifty-six times, was credited with seven victories, and had flown 250 hours on active service. He was awarded a Military Cross for his work in France, and was gazetted on 4 February 1918. After the war he was posted to south-eastern area flying instructors' school. Passing out as a first-class instructor, he was then posted to 54 training squadron at Fairlop, Essex. 
In October 1919 Lee was granted a short service commission in the Royal Air Force, and in March 1924, after several varied postings, was granted a permanent commission as a flight lieutenant in the general duties branch, RAF. His lectures to RAF recruits were published in 1923 as 'The Spirit of Air Force Discipline'. On 4 November 1925 he was posted to Iraq to serve with no. 5 armoured car company, 'driving clapped out Rolls-Royce armoured cars' (Lee, 'Fly Past', 53). With eight RAF squadrons, these had been used to police the Turkish and Kurd insurgents, but the Turkish threat had been quashed before Lee's arrival, and only minor revolts were still breaking out in south-eastern Kurdistan. He was next posted to the staff of general headquarters in Baghdad. Promoted squadron leader in July 1927, he was posted back to England in August and entered the RAF Staff College at Andover, after which he was posted to 10 squadron, a night-bomber squadron flying Handley Page Hyderabads. 
Lee's tour of duty with 10 squadron ended in February 1931, and he was posted to the Air Ministry. The growing threat of war in the mid-1930s led to the expansion of the RAF. Now a wing commander (July 1934), Lee was involved in the planning, working with civil servants until 1935, when he attended a course at the Imperial Defence College. In December 1935 he was posted to the command of the RAF station, Hornchurch, Essex, a key station in the air defence of London, but which was in some disarray, with low morale. By 1937, under Lee's leadership, the station was regarded as one of top status in every aspect -- from defence operations and exercises to flying exhibitions and sport. An unwelcome posting back to Iraq followed, from which Lee was released by secondment to the Turkish air force as an instructor in October 1937. On 1 November 1938 he was promoted group captain. When war was declared in September 1939 he was still in Turkey, and only after delicate negotiations with the Turkish authorities was he able finally to leave the country, on 11 March 1941, posted as senior administration officer to headquarters, RAF Middle East, in Athens. 
During the chaotic and mismanaged evacuation from Greece of the 58,000 men of the British army and RAF which began on 23 April 1941, Lee eventually took command of all the remaining RAF personnel in the Peloponnese once the other senior officers had left Greece by air. Over the next few days he succeeded in evacuating by sea and air more than a thousand men, in large and small groups, to the island of Kythera and hence to Crete, where Lee and his rearguard finally arrived on 30 April. Lee's party was the last official RAF contingent to leave Greece and Lee the last RAF officer; he departed from Crete for Cairo in a Sunderland flying boat. For his services he was awarded the royal order of George I of Greece (with swords). 
From Cairo, Lee was posted to Middle East headquarters, RAF, where he served during the Iraq revolt of April 1941 and was responsible for sending reinforcements to the RAF cantonment at Dhuban. Posted back to England as senior air staff officer at 12 group, Fighter Command, in September 1941, he was mentioned in dispatches on 1 December 1942 for his service with 12 group. In 1944 he was posted to the Balkans as second in command of the armistice control commission in Romania and became friendly with King Michael and his family. As Romania became progressively under the rule of the Communist Party, Lee decided that little more could be done and asked to be transferred. In February 1945 he was given command of the British mission in Yugoslavia. Lee commanded the RAF mission and no. 37 military mission, with advanced headquarters in Belgrade, and was the link between Field Marshal Alexander and Marshal Tito, whom he saw at least once a week. On his official visits to the former partisan leader, Lee, who had been promoted air vice-marshal on 13 June 1945, found him initially friendly, but considered that he returned from a visit to Moscow, a 'different man' (Lee, 'Fly Past', 195), very pro-Soviet and critical of Britain and the USA. The position of the British and American missions became untenable; with Tito's agreement they decided to withdraw. Tito was nevertheless grateful for the help he had received from the British mission and the RAF during the war and sought to award decorations to some fifty people, of all ranks, in recognition of this, but the British government delayed granting permission for twenty-five years, until the breach with Yugoslavia was healed and Tito was finally allowed to confer his wartime awards. Lee was awarded Yugoslavia's highest war decoration, the partisan star with golden wreath. 
Lee retired from the RAF in 1946 and took up a new career as a writer. He published four autobiographical works, all of high quality: 'Special Duties' (1946), an account of his service in the Balkans, Turkey, and the Middle East; 'No Parachute' (1968), his letters written in 1917; 'Open Cockpit' (1969), on his First World War service in the RFC; and 'Fly Past' (1974), reminiscences of his flying career. He also wrote an account of the royal house of Greece (1948), biographies of King Michael of Romania (1950), Helen, queen mother of Romania (1956), Robert Dudley, earl of Essex (1964), and Samuel Franklin Cody (1965), and, under the name Arthur Lee Gould, a novel, 'An Airplane in the Arabian Nights' (1947). 
Lee's first wife, Gwynneth, died in 1951, and on 15 January 1953 he married Winifrid Hilda (Fay) Atkinson, the widow of Squadron Leader M. R. Atkinson, who had been killed in air operations in 1942, and the daughter of Frederic William Molteni, an accountant. In 1972 Lee accepted the presidency of Cross and Cockade International, the society of First World War aero historians. He was a stockily built man of medium height, invariably cheerful and affable, and always ready to discuss aspects of the First World War in the air and his own experiences as a young fighter pilot in that war. He died on 21 May 1975 in King Edward VII's Hospital for Officers, Marylebone, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 39603


Willows, Ernest Thompson (1886-1926), airship designer, was born on 11 July 1886 at 11 Newport Road, St John's, Cardiff, to Joseph Thompson Willows, dental surgeon, and his wife, Evaline Louise ('nee' Garrett). He had two younger sisters, Daisy ('b'. 1888) and Doris May ('b'. 1895). He was educated at Clifton preparatory school and then began studies as a dentist, as a pupil of his father and at Merchant Venturers Technical College in Bristol. At the age of nineteen, despite having received no formal engineering training, he designed the first practical British airship, 'Willows I'. His first flight, at the beginning of June 1905, was followed by another in July with 'Willows Ia', which had a lengthened framework. In May 1908 he married Irene Rose Davies. 'Willows II' appeared in November 1909 and on 4 June 1910 he flew from his workshop at East Moors, Cardiff, which lay adjacent to the later airport industrial site, and landed by way of demonstration in the city centre at 6.52 a.m., departing thirty minutes later. The triumph was clouded by the death of his infant daughter, Evelyn May, six weeks before. 
Willows's most spectacular flight was that carried out on 6 August 1910, which took him to Crystal Palace, 150 miles from East Moors, guided 'en route' by the lights of his father's car. He reached his destination at 5.40 a.m. Other successful flights included one to Paris, departing from Wormwood Scrubs on 4 November 1910 with Frank Gooden as passenger. This was conducted in 'Willows III', later known as the 'City of Cardiff', and commenced at 3.25 p.m.; they crossed the English coast near Bexhill and 3 hours and 10 minutes later arrived at Douai, landing near the Breguet factory. This achievement attracted much attention; in 1911 Willows was the only civilian to receive a pilot's certificate among the four awarded by the Royal Aero Club. 
In all, Willows was responsible for the design of six non-rigid airships; the fifth was intended for training and was a product of Willows's collaboration with Gilbert Dennison of Birmingham, although, as previously, much financial support came from his father, who was by then living at Penarth and was south Wales representative of the Royal Automobile Club. All the Willows vessels between 1905 and 1909 were designed so close to their lifting limits that coal gas as a lifting agent was unsuitable. Willows was unable to purchase bottled, compressed hydrogen and was obliged to manufacture the gas himself, using his own, inevitably crude, facilities to dissolve zinc in dilute sulphuric acid. 
With the outbreak of the First World War, Willows embarked on the training of officers in airship management from his own flying ground at Hendon, before being commissioned into the Royal Flying Corps as an equipment officer; he was later attached to the balloon wing at Chingford. However, perhaps his most significant contribution to the war took the form of his SS2 dirigible, constructed to Admiralty order by the Holt Thomas Airship Company Ltd. This craft was the forerunner of such anti-submarine patrol airships as the SS (Sea Scout) type, his original 'Willows IV', built partly in France and Spain, having been earlier purchased by the Royal Navy and designated Naval Airship No. 2, although later its envelope was transferred to the SS1 airship. 
After the armistice of 1918, Willows designed no more airships and became a free balloon exhibition pilot, a new career which cost him his life on Tuesday 3 August 1926. At 3.30 p.m. balloon 'Marana', with several passengers aboard, was descending after a demonstration at Kempston's flower festival in Hoo Park, Bedford, when a gust of wind caught the aerostat in such a way that the trailing rope became entangled in a tree. Upwards of one hundred male spectators ran to assist in answer to Willows's instructions to 'pull it down, work hand-over-hand', but being unskilled in balloon handling, their efforts broke the trapped rope, although that to the winch held. The result was that the net containing the envelope tore, allowing gas to escape, so that the basket crashed to the ground, killing both Willows and a Mr Harbage, one of the passengers, almost immediately. The balloon envelope was later discovered at Lidlington, 6 miles away. Willows was survived by his wife and three of his four children, Clifford Reginald ('b'. 1910), Dorothy Phyllis ('b'. 1912), and Ernest Joseph Denman ('b'. 1914). He was buried at Cathays cemetery, Cardiff. 


@@@@@


doc= 39604


Adams, Maurice (1850-1935), socialist and moral philosopher, was the youngest child of John Botroele Adams, a general agent who specialized in building and insurance work. His elder sister Mary had been born nine years earlier in Birmingham. After leaving school, Adams qualified as a chartered insurance broker and joined his father's firm, which became John B. Adams & Son, Incorporated Insurance Brokers, of Moorgate, London. He remained in business as an insurance broker until retirement. On 10 June 1880 he was married in the parish church of Lambeth to Ada Clementina Barnett, four years his junior, and the daughter of John Barnett, a microscope maker. He and his wife spent the rest of their lives near Croydon, Surrey, first at Norbury Cottage, Beulah Road, Thornton Heath, and then, from about 1900, at Fairdeen Cottage, 52 Downs Road, Coulsdon. They had one son, John, born in 1881, who later joined the family firm. Some time in the 1880s Adams's sister Mary, a spinster, moved in with them. 
In the late 1870s Adams became profoundly dissatisfied with the religion of his family, and began to seek an alternative. He met William Jupp, a Congregationalist minister who was having problems accepting the discipline of church membership, and who later founded a free religious movement in the Croydon area. The two men became lifelong friends, both of them living for a while in Beulah Road. They went on long walks together, during which Adams pursued his amateur interest in botany. When Thomas Davidson, a peripatetic philosopher, returned briefly to England from 1882 to 1884, Adams and Jupp were part of the small group which collected around him to discuss religion, ethics, and social reform. A difference of opinion within the group led to those who emphasized the importance of economic and social reform departing to form the Fabian Society, while those who remained continued as the Fellowship of the New Life, emphasizing the importance of reforming the spiritual and moral basis of society. Adams joined both organizations, but his main concerns and activities were those of the fellowship. He resigned from the Fabian Society together with Ramsay MacDonald, Mrs Pankhurst, and Henry Salt on 20 April 1900 in protest at the society's failure to adopt a clear stance in opposition to the South African War. 
Adams edited the newspaper of the fellowship, the 'Sower' (renamed 'Seedtime' after the first issue), from its inception in July 1889 until the final issue of February 1898. He also wrote articles on subjects such as 'Equality', 'Labour in America', and 'Domestic servitude'. He edited, with an introduction, Thomas More's 'Utopia' (1890), and he wrote short works on 'The Ethics of Social Reform' (1887) and 'Giordano Bruno' (1905). All of his writing reflected the socialism of the fellowship; a socialism which owed more to Emerson and Wordsworth than to Marx, more to the utopian visions of Thomas More and Giordano Bruno than the schemes for municipalization taking shape with the Fabian Society. The members set out to promote the spiritual ethic they believed would inspire people to transform their own lives, and thereby rid society of abuses such as sweated labour. Although the fellowship had little direct impact on British politics, it was the fountainhead for much of the peculiarly ethical socialism which spread throughout the country at the turn of the century. This was something Adams foresaw when he wrote, in the last issue of 'Seedtime', upon the disbanding of the fellowship, 'it is not to its meetings that the Fellowship must look for the spread of its teaching, but to the lives of those who have received the Fellowship ideal'. 
Adams himself carried the fellowship ideal into several other groups. He lectured on topics such as 'The self and the moral life' to organizations such as the Christo-Theosophical Society. He was a member of the Humanitarian Society, which published his lecture on 'The sweating system' as a tract in December 1896. From 1902 to 1922 he was a member of the Rainbow Circle, a progressive discussion group, speaking on 'The basis of ethics' in October 1908, and again on 'William James' in December 1911. Most importantly, when the fellowship disbanded, he led some of the members into the Croydon Ethical and Religious Fellowship as part of the British Ethical Movement. In April 1898 he was one of the ethical thinkers Stanton Coit brought together in the Society of Ethical Propagandists, a group of men who could not take holy orders because their consciences kept them out of the churches but who were to act as quasi-religious teachers. All this time his fundamental concern remained the same: to use evolutionary theory to buttress a science of ethics highlighting the growth of co-operation, and inspiring a higher individualism centred on self-realization through the good of others. Adams died at his home in Coulsdon, Surrey, on 3 December 1935; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 39606


Alden, Sir Percy (1865-1944), social worker and politician, was born at Walton Street, in St Thomas's parish, Oxford, on 6 June 1865, the third of six sons (there was also a daughter) of Isaac Alden ('b'. 1834), a master butcher, and his wife, Harriett Elizabeth, 'nee' Kemp. It is not known where he received his schooling, though by 1881 he was a pupil teacher in Oxford. At fifteen, while acting as a messenger for the Oxford local examinations delegacy, he met the philosopher T. H. Green, who encouraged him to pursue his studies at Balliol College, Oxford. He was admitted there in October 1884 as one of the talented local boys whom Benjamin Jowett brought into the college during his later years as master. After graduating with thirds in classical moderations (1886) and 'literae humaniores' (1888), he embarked on a course at Mansfield College, the Congregationalist theological college which had recently been founded at Oxford, with the aim of becoming a Baptist minister. His studies were interrupted when, through the influence of A. M. Fairbairn, Mansfield's first principal, he was appointed in 1891 the first warden of the Mansfield House settlement. Inspired by the ideas of T. H. Green and Arnold Toynbee, Mansfield House had been established at Canning Town in West Ham, to the east of London, to enable university men to undertake social work and live among the inhabitants in one of the most deprived areas serving the capital. Its objective was 'to provide the conditions for a good life, economically, socially, aesthetically, intellectually, and spiritually for all groups in society' (Kaye, 134). 
Alden, who remained at Canning Town for ten years, was recognized as a pioneer of the settlement movement, adept at generating enthusiasm for the venture both among helpers and local people. His distinctive contribution was to involve the settlement in the municipal politics of West Ham, believing that such political activity was essential to improve social conditions. He set out his views on the role of settlements in local government in a contribution to 'University and Social Settlements' (1898) edited by his friend the Christian socialist Will Reason. Mansfield House backed candidates for the school board and board of guardians; as a member of the school board, Alden developed provision for children with special educational needs. He was also elected a member of West Ham borough council (1892-1901), of which he was deputy mayor in 1898. In 1895 he organized a census of unemployment in the borough, which led the council to petition parliament that it was the duty of the state to provide employment for able-bodied persons who were out of work. Although not a member of the Independent Labour Party (ILP), Alden supported the Labour group in West Ham, which in 1898 became the first in Britain to run a local council. An exponent of co-operation between middle-class and working-class radicalism, he was labelled a 'kid-gloved sort of socialist' by one critic (Fink, 297). 
Alden married on 14 September 1899 Margaret Elizabeth Pearse (1867-1958), a doctor of medicine, the daughter of Joseph Pearse, a missionary. They had four daughters. Margaret Alden, who had been educated at Walthamstow Hall, the school for the daughters of nonconformist missionaries, studied medicine at Edinburgh, Bern, and Geneva. She was senior resident physician of the Canning Town Medical Mission Hospital, part of the Canning Town Women's Settlement, a sister organization to Mansfield House. The author of 'Child Life and Labour' (1908), she became in the 1920s a medical officer at infant welfare centres. 
Alden's political activities grew out of his strong commitment to the Christian inspiration of the Mansfield settlement. 'I regard the Labour movement as a religious movement', he wrote, 'and can honestly say that I have found more unselfishness among working men than among any other class' (Kaye, 145). During the 1890s he became involved in a number of Christian socialist organizations, including the Christian Socialist League and Christian Social Brotherhood. He was concerned, however, at the alienation of working people from organized religion. This he described in his contribution to R. Mudie-Smith's 'The Religious Life of London' (1904), based on the 'Daily News' survey of attendance at public worship in London during 1902-3. He viewed the institutional church movement, whose success he had witnessed on travels in the USA, as the most promising way to bring Christian influences to bear upon working-class life. Non-sectarian churches would function as centres of social and educational as well as religious activity for their communities. 
Alden stepped down as warden of Mansfield House in 1901, though he retained links as honorary warden and vice-president. He became a Quaker and organized social work for the Society of Friends. During 1901-2 he edited the Liberal daily paper 'The Echo', whose writers included Ramsay MacDonald. Alden was a member of the Fabian Society, and in 1903 joined the progressive Liberal discussion group in London the Rainbow Circle, which promoted collectivist causes. The topics of the papers which he read to the circle included property redistribution and peasant proprietorship, local-government reform and rural housing. In 1904, with other members of the Rainbow Circle, he helped to found the British Institute of Social Service, whose object was principally to gather and distribute data relevant to social service projects, but which in practice became a co-ordinating agency for social reformers. 
Alden's own most influential contribution to social policy making was on unemployment. He became secretary of the National Unemployed Committee, created after a meeting in December 1902 sponsored by the ILP and attended by both Labour and radical Liberal figures, to put forward a programme for government action. Alden's book 'The Unemployed: a National Question' (1905) drew both upon his experience in Canning Town and upon travels in Germany, the Netherlands, and Belgium to investigate continental approaches to the problem. He insisted that the state had a responsibility towards the unemployed. His prescriptions included the creation of a minister of commerce and industry, the provision of labour colonies to deal with vagrancy, state subsidies to insurance schemes run by trade unions, and public works to provide employment for those made jobless during trade depressions. His account of the German network of labour exchanges contributed to the development of William Beveridge's ideas on the subject. To Alden, the problem of unemployment exposed the inefficiency and damaging effects of the free market, which needed to be addressed by an ethical reorganization of industry. 
Alden was one of the progressive politicians with an appeal to Labour voters for whom Herbert Gladstone, the Liberal whip, found a constituency and provided finance following the electoral pact with MacDonald, on behalf of the Labour Representation Committee, in 1903. He won the Tottenham division of Middlesex from the Conservatives at the general election of 1906 and held it until 1918. Before 1914 he was a leading exponent of the 'new Liberalism', and was among the critics of the failure of John Burns, president of the Local Government Board, to produce radical initiatives to deal with unemployment. Among the many radical causes which he advocated in parliament, he was notable as a defender of the land rights of the indigenous peoples of South Africa. During the First World War he undertook relief work for the Belgian Relief Committee in London, with which his wife was also involved, and was a government commissioner for the relief of Belgian refugees in the Netherlands, for which he was later decorated by the king of Belgium. 
A breach between Alden and the Liberal leadership opened up when he opposed military conscription in a parliamentary debate on 6 January 1916. He remained within the party, however, and contributed the chapter on housing to the manifesto 'Liberal Policy' (1918) put forward by the Asquith Liberals at the general election of 1918. On standing for Tottenham North he was defeated by a coalition Conservative at that election. His sympathy towards ethical socialism and his advanced views on public ownership, set out in an article in the 'Contemporary Review' in April 1919, led him into the Labour Party. After unsuccessfully contesting Luton as a Labour candidate in 1922 he was elected for Tottenham South in 1923, but lost the seat in the general election of 1924. Disappointed with the performance of Ramsay MacDonald's first Labour government, and attracted by the innovative proposals for tackling unemployment developed by the Liberal industrial inquiry, he resumed his affiliation to the Liberal Party late in 1927. 
Apart from his brief interval in parliament, Alden's principal post-war activity was as a charity administrator. He became chairman of the Save the Children Fund, taking part in refugee relief work in the Balkans, for which he received Hungarian and Bulgarian honours. He was bursar of the trust founded by his friend Sir Richard Stapley (1842-1920), a businessman, philanthropist, supporter of the Liberal Party, and stalwart of the Rainbow Circle, to help those who were too poor to pursue studies at university or at other institutions of higher education. He also chaired the Christian Social Research Trust founded in 1924 by Sir Halley Stewart, his own Halley Stewart lectures for 1936 being published as 'Aspects of a Changing Social Structure' (1937). Their theme, 'the growing interest of the State in social and industrial problems', had been Alden's lifelong concern. In 1933 he was knighted on the recommendation of Ramsay MacDonald. He was killed during an air raid by a German flying bomb in Tottenham Court Road, London, on 30 June 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 39607


Burrows, Herbert (1845-1922), socialist organizer, was born on 12 June 1845 in Redgrave, Suffolk, the son of Amos Burrows, tailor and Chartist leader, and his wife, Ann, formerly Thompson, a dressmaker. He educated himself using Cassell's shilling handbooks, and became a pupil teacher at the age of thirteen. He then became an excise officer in the Inland Revenue, serving in Norwich, Barnet, Blackburn, and Chatham. In 1869 he married Mary Hannah (1845-1889), daughter of Charles Musk, engineer; they had a daughter and a son. In 1872 he entered Cambridge University as a non-collegiate student but did not take a degree. He continued in the Inland Revenue service until 1907, when he resigned to concentrate on voluntary activities. 
Burrows moved to London in 1877, and by the early 1880s was active in the National Secular Society and the Social and Political Education League, for which he lectured regularly to radical and working men's clubs. He became vice-president of the Manhood Suffrage League, the most important of these clubs. In 1881 he joined H. M. Hyndman in forming the Democratic Federation, which in 1884 became the Social Democratic Federation, the first important socialist organization in Britain. He was appointed its treasurer in 1883, supported its overt commitment to socialism in 1884, and was one of its best-known propagandists. He wrote articles for its newspaper, 'Justice', often using the pseudonym C. V. He helped the federation to organize demonstrations against unemployment throughout the mid-1880s, and, when these climaxed in clashes with police during the riots of 1887, he represented it on the executive of the Law and Liberty League, formed to promote popular control of the police. There were moments of light relief. In December 1887 he wrote a sermon which socialists wanted the bishop of London to preach; as the sermon was reprinted in the labour and national press of America, so its origin was lost, and the impression given that the bishop really had resigned to commit himself to socialism. Burrows played a particularly important role within the federation because of his links with radicals and secularists, its main recruiting grounds. These links were especially notable in Tower Hamlets, where he stood unsuccessfully as a candidate in the 1885 election to the London school board. 
Throughout the 1880s Burrows complained about wage levels and working conditions for unskilled women. In July 1888 he and Annie Besant organized a successful strike of match girls at Bryant and May, which attracted much publicity and widespread sympathy. The strike led to the formation of the Union of Women Matchmakers, with Burrows as its treasurer. The union, with 800 members, was the largest women's trade union in England at the time. Furthermore, the success of the strike, and the emergence of the union, helped to inspire the new unionism of the 1890s. Here too Burrows was not idle; he promoted unionization among chain makers, mat makers, omnibusmen, silk weavers, and others. He remained active in the Women's Trade Union League and the Women's Industrial Council until 1917. 
Within the federation Burrows stood out for the peculiarly ethical nature of his socialism. He came from a nonconformist family, and helped found a Unitarian church in Cambridge, before drifting towards secularism. His socialism incorporated aspects of his search for a spiritual and moral basis to life. He thought the weakness of most socialism lay in its crude materialism and consequent overemphasis on social conditions. He wanted to temper this crude materialism with an ethical revolt against individualism: a revolt to inspire a genuine, social democracy characterized by the abolition of class interests, and the recognition of the duties of individuals to the social whole. He pursued his spiritual and ethical concerns as an Appointed Lecturer for the South Place Ethical Society; as a member of the Rainbow Circle, a discussion group of social reformers concerned with the ethical basis of progressivism; and, from 1889 onwards, as an active member of the Theosophical Society, and later treasurer of its European section. 
Burrows was a fairly tall man, who sported a moustache but was otherwise closely shaven. He usually dressed in a flannel shirt and a tweed suit. Most reports record him being gentle and sympathetic with a naturally graceful manner but a noticeably pessimistic streak. He was a teetotaller, non-smoker, vegetarian, and committed pacifist -- a member of the committee of the International Arbitration and Peace Association and the International Arbitration League. He enjoyed travelling, and visited, among other places, France in 1879, America in 1893, south-eastern Europe in 1899, and Bosnia in 1901. Usually he was accompanied by William Clarke, radical journalist and Fabian socialist, a friend from his Cambridge days. Widowed in 1889, he married an American woman whose health was poor, and who died in April 1899. His son and daughter survived him. 
The federation was committed to electoral participation. In 1908, and again in 1910, Burrows contested the parliamentary seat of Haggerston, Shoreditch, but he was unsuccessful, polling respectively 986 and 701 votes, behind both the Conservative and Liberal candidates. In 1911 he resigned from the federation (by then the Social Democratic Party) in protest at its adopting resolutions supporting the maintenance of a navy and citizens' army. Besides, his experiences as a parliamentary candidate had convinced him the federation was becoming politically irrelevant because it refused to affiliate to the Labour Party. He intended to spend his last years writing a history of the federation but could not do so because he was stricken with paralysis in April 1917. He died at his home, 90 Sotheby Road, Highbury Park, London, on 14 December 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 39608


Perris, (George) Herbert (1866-1920), journalist and peace campaigner, was born on 29 January 1866 at 15 Tooke Street, Everton, Liverpool, the eldest of five children of the Revd Henry Woods Perris (1839-1926), a Unitarian minister, and his wife, Ellen Partington Perris (1839-1924), both of Liverpool. At sixteen, after elementary schooling at King Edward VI Commercial School in Norwich, Perris was apprenticed to a pharmaceutical chemist, but two years later joined the 'Hull Express', becoming its editor at nineteen. In 1888 he moved to London and was for ten years on 'The Speaker'. On 24 July 1891 he married Mary Annie Robinson (1861-1929) of Hull; they had two daughters and a son, who was killed in the First World War. 
A founding member of the Society of Friends of Russian Freedom (1890) and a regular contributor to its journal 'Free Russia', Perris visited Russia for the first time in 1896 and, increasingly interested in the ideas and beliefs of Tolstoy, wrote 'Leo Tolstoy: the Grand Mujik' (1898), a study in personal evolution. However, after a visit to Tolstoy in 1904, he dissociated himself from the principle of absolute non-resistance. He became foreign editor of the Liberal newspaper 'The Tribune' from its foundation in 1906, and provided space for repeated criticism of the tsar's regime, much to its annoyance. As joint secretary to the Memorial to the Duma Committee (1906), he visited St Petersburg to discuss the memorial and to help found the Anglo-Russian Friendship Society, and became caught up in events following the Duma's dissolution. 
Perris is principally remembered for his contribution to the cause of international peace. However he was not a pacifist in the strict sense. As a strong internationalist the prevention of war was his highest political priority, but he did not exclude the use of force in the last resort. On the one hand he campaigned for the creation and strengthening of institutions to serve peace, such as arrangements for international arbitration and the spread of democratic government, and on the other against imperialism and the international arms trade. He summarized his views in 'A Short History of War and Peace' (1911), and 'The War Traders' (1914). In 1896 he formed the Increased Armaments Protest Committee; in 1898 he was chairman of the press committee of W. T. Stead's Peace Crusade; he attended the first Hague peace conference (1899) and published an account of it. Thereafter, he was a regular participant at national and international peace conferences. From 1906 Perris was a prominent critic of the Liberal government's foreign policy and rearmament plans; and in 1908 he left the party to join the Labour Party over the issue of the Anglo-Russian convention. He maintained regular contacts with peace leaders in Europe and the USA (where he went three times on speaking tours), and was active in promoting international understanding; for example, in 1905 he took a leading role in fostering friendship with Germany through the Anglo-German Friendship Society, of which he was joint secretary, at a time when relations between the two countries were strained. He was editor of 'Concord', journal of the International Arbitration and Peace Association, from 1898 to 1906 and briefly again in 1914; and a member of the executive committee of the National Peace Council from its establishment in 1904. He was also active in related fields, such as the Cobden Club (secretary, 1903-5), the Ethical Movement, and the Rainbow Circle. 
After the collapse of 'The Tribune' Perris became foreign editor of the 'Daily News' (1908), and in 1910 assistant editor of the 'Home University Library', which he originated. This series provided specially commissioned, cheap, authoritative introductions to academic subjects for general readers, and in its first two and a half years sold over one million copies of eighty titles. In 1899 he had founded the Literary Agency of London, which was in existence until 1916; its clients included Edward Thomas, Stephen Crane, A. T. Mahon, Jean de Bloch, and Aylmer Maude. 
On the outbreak of war in 1914 Perris joined the 'Daily Chronicle' as its correspondent with the French armies. With some of his radical friends he became a reluctant supporter of a war he believed to have been caused by unprovoked and ferocious German aggression on Belgium and France. Accordingly, defeat of the Germans was a prerequisite to a new world order, and he particularly singled out the Kaiser and the Prussian governing class as having 'gone mad'. 
Perris was appointed chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1918 and made a CBE in 1919. Worn out by years of overwork he died in London at 5 Ashburn Place, Kensington, on 23 December 1920, from influenza that turned to pneumonia, contracted while he was attending a conference of the League of Nations at Geneva, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium six days later. He was a characteristic figure of his time, tireless in pursuit of what he thought right, writing, lecturing, and attending meetings, often after a day earning his living. He was a prolific writer: on his fortieth birthday he recorded having written at least 200,000 words each year since the age of twenty on matters of peace and war. His simple and clear prose style had a vigorous, memorable quality when he was moved to indignation. He loved poetry and had a gift for friendship. He was a slightly built figure, 5 feet 9 inches tall, with brown hair and hazel eyes. One of his brothers, Harry Shaw Perris (1870-1933), was also a campaigner for peace, making important contributions to pacifist and radical writings, and the first full-time secretary (1908) to the National Peace Council; another brother, Ernest Alfred Perris (1874-1961), was a journalist, chiefly remembered as the last editor (1918-1930) of the 'Daily Chronicle'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39612


Cave, Sydney (1883-1953), Congregational minister, missionary, and theologian, was born at 2 Park Place, Regent's Park, London, on 18 November 1883, the second of the five sons of William Cave (1843-1910), a trunk maker, and his wife, Sarah (1851-1939), who also had two daughters. He was a nephew of Dr Alfred Cave. Growing up in Fulham he was educated at St Mark's School, Chelsea, and the City of London School (1899-1902), at both of which he won several prizes. In 1902 he entered Hackney College, a school of divinity of the University of London, to study under P. T. Forsyth who, according to a memoir, 'helped him find the cross in the centre of his thinking' (Jones, 454). He proved to be an outstanding student, gaining firsts in his BA and BD (honours) degrees, being awarded college scholarships, and becoming a Dr Williams's scholar. After four months' study in Germany he was ordained at Dawes Road Congregational Church, Fulham, on 8 October 1908. 
Having offered for service with the London Missionary Society, Cave was appointed to India and stationed at Nagercoil, Travancore, where he served as acting principal of Scott Christian College (1909-11 and 1916), and principal of Duthie Divinity College (1911-15) training the local ministry. 
Cave's fiancee, Elizabeth Jane Baxter (1880-1950), originally from Aberdeen, arrived in Madras in November 1909 and they were married there on 25 November. A daughter and son were born in India, and a second son in Bristol. Following their recurrent illnesses, doctors decided that the children could not live in India. They returned to England with Mrs Cave in 1914, but Sydney was not allowed to follow until his furlough, which was due in 1916. On 16 April 1918, having been inducted as minister of Henleaze Congregational Church, Bristol, he resigned from the society. 
Although Cave's years in India were to influence all his subsequent work, his studies of Hindu thought found early expression in his thesis 'Redemption: Hindu and Christian' for which in March 1917 he was awarded the DD degree (London). 
In 1920 his scholarship and experience led to his appointment as president of Cheshunt College, Cambridge. Recognizing his academic ability, Cambridge University awarded him in 1925 an honorary MA, and he became a member of Emmanuel College. In 1949 he was select preacher before the university. The Cheshunt governors' report for 1922 records that the president 'has quickly proved his competence, being eagerly welcomed by the churches, commanding the complete confidence of the Governors and having gained the trust and affection of the students'. Under his presidency the educational standard was raised, the curriculum widened, and many of his books were written. 
In 1933 Cave became principal of New College, London, which had been formed in 1924 from the union of New and Hackney colleges. He held this position for the rest of his life, and it was here, in the building where he had once been a student, that full recognition came: the award by the University of Glasgow of an honorary DD (1934); professor of theology in the University of London (1936-49) and emeritus professor until his death; chairman of the board of studies in theology (1938-44); dean of the faculty (1944-8); and member of the collegiate council (1937-53). 
In both Cambridge and London, Sydney Cave concentrated on his college work, serving the denomination in ways for which his position and experience peculiarly fitted him: director of the London Missionary Society from 1920, serving on the India and candidates' committees; member of the council of the Congregational Union of England and Wales, serving on the ministerial committee (sometimes as chairman) and the 'special' committee (concerned with the recognition of ministers and churches); but consistently declining nomination as chairman of the union lest it interfere with his college work. 
Cave's writings were on the doctrines of the Christian faith -- his last book, 'The Christian Way' (1949), being an exploration of current ethical issues -- or on other religions and their relation to Christianity. His concern that all his students should be acquainted with the tenets of other faiths was then somewhat unusual but far sighted. His sensitive understanding of other religions also found expression in his Carew lectures at Hartford (1929) and Haskell lectures at Oberlin, Ohio (1939), the latter being published as 'Hinduism or Christianity?'. Elsewhere, in works such as 'The Doctrines of the Christian Faith' (1931), he demonstrated that although he regarded strict Calvinism as a 'hollow doctrine' he also believed in the 'inadequacy' of theological liberalism (Jones, 454). He took the part of Nathaniel Micklem in the 'Blackheath controversy' of 1933, after being provoked by accusations of having taught his students the rationalized Christianity promoted by the Blackheath group (Grant, 329). In March 1939 he put his name to the manifesto drafted by Micklem and Bernard Manning, calling for a revival of faithfulness to the word of the gospel (Jones, 455). 
Sydney Cave was concerned to provide the church with well-educated, competent ministers. He sought no glory for himself, but his influence upon generations of students was of lasting importance. Colleagues sometimes found this shy man remote, but students found him approachable and sympathetic. In the post-war New College there were few rules, for he depended upon the Christian commitment of all. His slight stutter led him to adopt a steady tone when preaching, but his sense of the holiness and grace of God was inescapable. 
After never having to miss giving a lecture, Cave was struck down by leukaemia in 1953, and died on 8 September at the Middlesex Hospital, London. He was cremated at Golders Green three days later. His wife had predeceased him, on 7 December 1950. The way he faced his last days confirmed his teaching. 


@@@@@


doc= 39613


Cocks, (Harry Francis) Lovell (1894-1983), United Reformed minister and theologian, was born on 28 February 1894 at 4 Wesley Villas, New Windsor Street, Uxbridge, the son of Henry Edwin Cocks (1866?-1950), manager of a rope factory, and his wife, Ada Emma Bryant (1866?-1935), music teacher. He was educated at Uxbridge county school (1899-1912). Under the guidance of F. L. Riches Lowe, minister of Providence Chapel, Uxbridge, from 1903 to 1933, he proceeded to Hackney (Congregational) college, London (1912-17), where his teachers included P. T. Forsyth and A. E. Garvie. Impressed by both, it was to the former, he said, that 'I owe my theological soul and my footing in the Gospel' ('New College', Lovell Cocks MSS, 12). Following his college course he gained first-class honours in both the London BD (1920) and BA (1923) and took his MA in metaphysics in 1926. He was awarded the DD of London University in 1943 for a dissertation published in abbreviated form under the title 'By Faith Alone' (1943). 
Meanwhile Cocks had been ordained at Winchester Congregational Church in 1917, where he quickly impressed the discerning as being 'a man with a message', and earned the loyalty and affection of many. On 9 November the following year he married Lottie Violet Mary (Dot) Bollen (1890-1966). They had three children: Doris Evelyn, Peter Stuart, and Michael Francis Lovell Cocks, Lord Cocks of Hartcliffe (1929-2001). On leaving Winchester, Cocks was minister at Hove, Sussex (1922-7), and Headingley Hill, Leeds (1927-32). He held the chair of systematic theology and Christian social philosophy at Yorkshire United Independent College, Bradford (1932-7), and in the latter year became principal of the Scottish Congregational college, Edinburgh, where he also lectured in the postgraduate school of theology of the university. In 1941 he moved to Bristol where, in succession to R. S. Franks, he served as principal of Western (Congregational) College until his retirement in 1960. 
Cocks was chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales (1950-51); he addressed the united service of tribute to George VI in the Central Hall, Bristol, on 15 February 1952, and the seventh International Congregational Council at St Andrews in 1953. His Drew lecture on immortality was published as 'The Hope of Glory' (1955), and in 1961 he preached the founder's day sermon at Bristol University. For two years (1958-60) he was a member of the commission which produced the Congregational church's 'Declaration of Faith' (1967), and in 1962, the tercentenary year of the Great Ejection, he was moderator of the Free Church Federal Council. In this significant year for English and Welsh nonconformity Cocks's moderatorial address was entitled '1662-1962: Free Church Witness -- Then -- and Now?' On 5 April 1966 he broadcast an Easter talk in which, following a reference to the death of his wife a few weeks before, he went on to proclaim the Christian hope. In 1968 he returned to Bristol to deliver the sermon at the closing of Western College, which united with its sister institution in Manchester; and on 5 September of the same year he married Edith Ethel Mutlow, 'nee' Turner (1897-1981). Prior to the formation of the United Reformed church in 1972 he delivered the sermon at the last meeting of the council of the Congregational church in England and Wales. 
In his major work, 'By Faith Alone', Cocks argued that since the psychological and epistemological starting points of Schleiermacher and Kant respectively have been shown to lead to a theological humanism roundly denounced by Karl Barth, we must construe saving faith as presupposing natural faith, but as discontinuous with it. It is God's gift to human beings through his word, Jesus Christ. In 'The Faith of a Protestant Christian' (1931) he sketched what became for him familiar themes: salvation by grace through faith, the necessity of the church, and the importance of its social witness. In the midst of war he published his incisive tract 'The Nonconformist Conscience' (1943), in which he declared that 'The Nonconformist Conscience is the mark of a spiritual aristocracy, a counterblast to coronets and mitres' (p. 17); and in 'The Religious Life of Oliver Cromwell' (1960) he argued that the lord protector owed much to Independency's principle of the gathered church. While finding much to admire in Cromwell, he lamented his blindness to the fact that 'not the sword but the Cross is the guarantee of final victory' (p. 79). That the atonement is the work of the triune God is the theme of 'The Wondrous Cross' (1957), and, as he urged in 'The Church in the Atomic Age' (1948), from the victory of the cross believers derive their confidence that 'Whatever happens now -- whether it be the worst we fear or the best we hope for -- God will wrest it to His saving purpose and overrule it for our eternal good' (p. 11). 
Cocks died on 15 January 1983 at his home, 32 Highland Road, Amersham, Buckinghamshire. Over 200 people attended the funeral service at Amersham, where he was buried on 24 January, and John Huxtable, at whose own service of induction as secretary of the Congregational Union of England and Wales Cocks had preached, delivered a memorial sermon in Redland Park church, Bristol. Lovell Cocks valued Congregationalism's gathered church polity, which he construed as catholic, and his sympathies were ecumenical. He was a scholarly, modest man, who endeared himself to his students, and who was as adept at communicating with children and with the 'plain man' -- not least through broadcast talks of which eight series were published -- as with his academic peers. He could be counted upon to find the right words on formal occasions, whether solemn or festive, and his integrity and pastoral care were greatly valued by all who knew him. 


@@@@@


doc= 39614


Flew, (Robert) Newton (1886-1962), Methodist minister and theologian, was born on 25 May 1886 in Holsworthy, Devon, the elder son of the Revd Josiah Flew (1859-1925), Wesleyan Methodist minister, and his wife, Florence Jones (1863-1964). The family's home was originally in Portland, Dorset, but Wesleyan ministry took them to Wiltshire and Warwickshire before they settled finally in London suburbs. In 1897 Flew won a scholarship to Christ's Hospital, from where he was awarded a classical postmastership at Merton College, Oxford. Here he had a distinguished academic career, reading both classics and theology and subsequently being awarded several theological prizes. In 1909 he spent a term studying in Bonn and Marburg, where he came under the influence of Wilhelm Herrman and Adolf Julicher. 
During his Oxford course Flew had decided to follow his father into the Wesleyan Methodist ministry. He was invited to act as assistant tutor in theology and classics at Handsworth College, Birmingham, while completing his own training for ministry. In 1913 he began a five-year circuit ministry in Winchmore Hill in north London. During this time he was given leave of absence to use a travelling scholarship to make two extended study visits (despite the war) to Switzerland and Italy, where he made his first ecumenical friendships with Roman Catholics. Before the war ended in 1918 he had volunteered to undertake a naval chaplaincy. The armistice had already been signed when he set sail for Mesopotamia, where he remained for eighteen months. From there he moved to India to teach at the United Theological College in Bangalore for another eighteen months. 
In July 1921, a few weeks after his return home, Flew married Winifred Garrard (1887-1982), a teacher and Wesleyan Methodist. The couple had a son, and Flew spent the following six years in circuit ministry in London. During these years the foundations of his ecumenical commitment were laid, through both friendship and scholarship. In the London Society for the Study of Religion he met the Roman Catholic theologian Baron von Hugel, who encouraged him in the study of spirituality which was to result in 'The Idea of Perfection in Christian Theology' (1934), a work which earned him the Oxford DD in 1930; he was the first nonconformist to gain this degree by examination. 
In 1927 Flew's academic achievements had already led to his being appointed to the Greenhalgh chair of 'New Testament' language and literature at Wesley House, Cambridge, a college founded in 1921. Its new buildings had just been opened in 1926. Cambridge was to be Flew's home for the rest of his life. After ten years as tutor, he was appointed principal of Wesley House, a post he held until his retirement in 1955, exercising a profound influence on a whole generation of students. From the outset Wesley House had accepted Primitive and United Methodists as well as Wesleyan Methodist students, and Flew helped the new united Methodist church after 1932 to deepen its understanding of the church and churchmanship. His book 'Jesus and his Church' (1938) was based on the Fernley-Hartley lecture delivered to the Methodist conference in 1938, and went through several editions. He was a respected and influential member of the Cambridge faculty of divinity. 
Flew's influence spread far beyond Cambridge. He was elected moderator of the Free Church Federal Council for the year 1945-6, and president of the Methodist conference in the year immediately following. While firmly rooted in Wesleyan Methodism, he grew to love and appreciate other Christian traditions and to long for a deeper unity with them, and the main focus of his scholarly work moved from spirituality to the doctrine of the church. He was a member of the Friends of Reunion and a firm supporter of the proposed Church of South India. He was one of the group of nonconformists appointed to respond to Archbishop Fisher's Cambridge sermon of November 1946 calling for new moves towards unity. He chaired the group which produced 'The Catholicity of Protestantism' (edited jointly by Flew and Rupert Davies, 1950) in response to an Anglo-Catholic work entitled 'Catholicity'; both were intended to aid ecumenical conversations. 
At the same time Flew was active on the international ecumenical stage. In 1934 he was appointed as a Methodist member of the World Faith and Order Continuation Committee set up at the Lausanne conference in 1927; this led to his being appointed as a delegate to both the life and work conference in Oxford and the faith and order conference in Edinburgh in 1937 (both forerunners of the World Council of Churches). After the war he was appointed vice-chairman of the provisional committee of the World Council of Churches, and he was recognized as a leading figure at the inauguration of the council in Amsterdam in 1948. As chairman of the faith and order commission on the church, he edited a volume entitled 'The Nature of the Church' in preparation for the second meeting of the World Council of Churches at Lund in 1952. During all these years he maintained his lifelong interest in sport, especially cricket. 
Flew remained in Cambridge in retirement, editing the 'London Quarterly and Holborn Review' and preparing his book 'Jesus and his Way', published posthumously in 1963. One of his last public acts was to support the inauguration of Anglican-Methodist conversations at the Methodist conference in 1955. He died in Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, after a fall, on 10 September 1962, his mother's ninety-ninth birthday. 


@@@@@


doc= 39615


Huxtable, (William) John Fairchild (1912-1990), Congregational minister and college head, was born on 25 July 1912 at Ladysmith Villa, Plumpton Green, near Lewes, Sussex, where his father, Percy John Fairchild Huxtable (1883-1922), lately of West Moors Congregational Church, Devon, was minister. His mother, Florence Watts (1885-1968), who had been apprenticed in the bakery and confectionery trade, married Percy in the Baptist church, Barnstaple, in March 1911. Following a pastorate at Blenheim Road Mission, Crouch End (1913-19), and service with the YMCA (1919-21), the family moved to Leghorn, Italy, where Percy had taken a post with the British and Foreign Sailors' Society, and where, within two months of arriving, he died on 13 July. His widow, with John and his sister Kathleen, returned to Devon and associated themselves with the Congregational church in Barnstaple, whose minister, George Herbert King Chick (1892-1973), greatly influenced the young Huxtable. 
A pupil at Barnstaple grammar school until 1930, from there John went to Western College, Bristol, under the distinguished scholar Robert Sleightholme Franks, where he graduated BA (Bristol) in English and philosophy, and then began his theological studies. The latter were completed during two years at Mansfield College, Oxford (1935-7), where his teachers included Nathaniel Micklem, H. Wheeler Robinson, T. W. Manson, and A. M. Hunter. Deeply appreciative of the catholic roots of the faith, and valuing Congregationalism's reformed heritage, he joined the Church Order Group, whose leaders included Micklem, John Whale, and Bernard, Lord Manning. 
On 2 September 1937 Huxtable was ordained at Newton Abbot Congregational Church, Micklem delivering the charge to the minister, and Chick that to the church. Here he met Joan Lorimer Snow ('b'. 1912), whom he married on 6 September 1939. They had a son, Peter, and two daughters, Janet and Felicity. With the approach of war Huxtable came to review the pacifism which had led to his becoming a member of the Peace Pledge Union, and found that 'With much hesitation I had become and remain a very reluctant non-pacifist' (Huxtable, 23). 
In September 1942 Huxtable was inducted to the pastorate at Palmers Green, London, a large suburban church which gave him many families to care for, a pulpit of some significance, and opportunities to serve the denomination, but fewer civic duties than he had enjoyed in Barnstaple. In 1948 he was a delegate to the first assembly of the World Council of Churches, and from 1948 to 1974 he served on the translation committee of the 'New English Bible'. 
After twelve happy years at Palmers Green, Huxtable was called to the principalship of New College, London, in succession to Sydney Cave (1883-1953). Here Congregational ministers were trained within the orbit of London University, and here Huxtable's colleagues included the church historian Geoffrey F. Nuttall, whom he had known at Mansfield College, but not intimately. The two came to have a high regard for one another, notwithstanding their differing emphases on matters historical, liturgical, and ecumenical. 
Under the leadership of Howard Stanley, its general secretary, the Congregational Union of England and Wales (CUEW) inaugurated ten commissions to review the denomination's life and witness. Huxtable chaired that on the nature of the church -- a 'hot potato', given the reluctance of some to conceive of a denomination as a churchly body, and the fears of some conservative evangelicals that the authority of scripture was in danger of being compromised. In the midst of these excitements Huxtable chaired the CUEW (1962-3). In 1964 he left New College to follow Stanley as general secretary of the CUEW, and two years later he became the first minister-secretary of the newly covenanted Congregational church in England and Wales. Meanwhile his ecumenical activities had been increasing. He was a vice-president of the British Council of Churches, and served the International Congregational Council and, after that body's union in 1970 with the World Presbyterian Alliance, the World Alliance of Reformed Churches. He also served on the central committee of the World Council of Churches, and was intimately involved in conversations between the Congregationalists and the Presbyterian Church of England. The last bore fruit in the union in 1972 of the latter church with the majority of English and English-speaking Welsh Congregationalists to form the United Reformed church, of whose general assembly Huxtable became the first moderator. With his Presbyterian opposite number, Arthur Macarthur, he became joint secretary of the new church. In the same year he became the first free church minister to be honoured by the then archbishop of Canterbury (A. M. Ramsay) with the Lambeth DD, a similar honour being bestowed a few months later by Aberdeen University. He was moderator of the Free Church Federal Council in 1976-7. 
Meanwhile in 1974 Huxtable had become the executive officer of the Churches' Unity Commission. He worked tirelessly for a cause dear to his heart, and convened the first meeting of the Churches' Council for Covenanting, which met on 24 November 1978. He then retired to Devon, fearful that the covenanting scheme would founder, as it did. 
Huxtable was a faithful minister, a gifted expository preacher, a lover of liturgical decency and order, and a trusted ecumenist. His publications reflect these interests. Thus his first book, 'The Ministry' (1943), which he later regarded as his 'young man's book', was nevertheless a manifesto expressive of convictions concerning the ministry of Word, sacrament, and pastoral care in the context of the gathered church which remained with him throughout his life; and these were reinforced by his study of John Owen, whose 'The True Nature of a Gospel Church' (1689) he abridged and edited (1949). He shared with John Marsh, E. R. Micklem, and J. M. Todd in the preparation of 'A Book of Public Worship' (1949), a reformed yet catholic volume in which the relation of Word with sacrament was clearly displayed; and his published sets of broadcast talks testify to his ability to communicate with a wide audience. In 1962, expressing his indebtedness to P. T. Forsyth and John Oman (though perhaps borrowing his title from the evangelist Billy Graham's constantly reiterated phrase), he published 'The Bible Says'. He here adjusted himself to traditional Roman Catholic and protestant attitudes to the 'Bible', and, over against fundamentalism and the views of J. I. Packer, he presented his view of the authority of scripture and the place of the 'Bible' in the worship and life of the church. There followed 'The Preacher's Integrity' (1966) and two books of ecumenical interest: 'Christian Unity, some of the Issues' (1966) and 'A New Hope for Christian Unity' (1977). In the wake of the failure of the ten propositions for covenanting -- itself a successor to the failed Anglican-Methodist unity proposals -- Huxtable came to the rueful conclusion that because of its (then) attitude towards the ordination of women and its sectarianism concerning non-episcopal ordinations the Church of England was destined to be 'the bridge Church over which no traffic ever flows' (Huxtable, 71). Huxtable died on 16 November 1990 at Torbay Hospital, Torquay, and was cremated on 23 November at Torquay. 


@@@@@


doc= 39617


Mackintosh, Robert (1858-1933), Congregational minister and theologian, was born on 23 May 1858 at Dunoon, Argyll, one of seven children of the evangelical Calvinist Charles Calder Mackintosh (1806-1868) and his wife, Annie, second daughter of Robert Brown of Fairlie, Ayrshire. His father was Free Church of Scotland minister at Dunoon. Following her husband's death his mother moved with the family to Glasgow, where they came under the influence of Alexander Whyte, then assistant minister of Free St John's, and later of Free St George's, Edinburgh, with which church the Mackintoshes subsequently became associated. 
Mackintosh won a scholarship to Oxford, but his mother persuaded him not to take it up. Instead he went to Glasgow University (1872-7), where he graduated with first-class honours in philosophy and second-class honours in classics. Of all his teachers Edward Caird impressed him most, though he subsequently found cause first to repudiate and later to modify his teacher's idealism. Theological studies at New College, Edinburgh, followed, and the family moved to Edinburgh. Whyte was very supportive of Mackintosh, who was already reading Erskine of Linlathen and struggling with such doctrinal issues as the eternity of punishment, which assailed his conscience but was affirmed in his church's Westminster confession. Of his theological teachers A. B. Davidson was the most inspiring, while he later dismissed James MacGregor, professor of doctrine, as an arch-Calvinist. 
On graduating BD, Mackintosh pursued further studies in Jena and Marburg and then, during a missionary assistantship to Dr Walter Smith at Edinburgh, he contracted scarlet fever. A recuperative trip to New Zealand followed, during which Mackintosh worked on his first book, 'Christ and the Jewish Law' (1886). He visited the south of France and Palestine, all the while 'fighting for life as a Christian, and for liberty as a preacher from the fetters of a seventeenth-century creed' ('Christianity and Sin', 1917, 107). He supported Robert Rainy's campaign for a declaratory act, designed to clarify the free church's relation to the Westminster confession of faith; but this alone did not suffice to ease his distaste for the confession. On the other hand he drew small comfort from the emotional revivalism which was becoming popular at the time (though he later said that he owed his conversion to Dwight Lyman Moody and Ira David Sankey). Hence his provocatively entitled pamphlets, 'The Obsoleteness of the Westminster Confession of Faith' and 'The Insufficiency of Revivalism as a Religious System'. These were bound with his 'Essays towards a New Theology' (1889), his other themes being 'The atonement morally viewed', 'The biblical doctrines of judgment and immortality', 'Internal evidence for the truth of holy scripture', and 'The Calvinist conception of grace'. Far from being mere academic exercises, here was Mackintosh struggling to come to terms with topics which had tormented him for years. In the year in which this book appeared, Mackintosh was awarded the degree of DD by Glasgow University. 
In the same year Mackintosh went to Withington Presbyterian Church, Manchester, as assistant to Benjamin Bell. His sojourn was brief, for on 11 December 1890 he was ordained and inducted to the pastorate of Dumfries Congregational Church. Mackintosh later said that he came to Congregationalism as a refugee from narrow Calvinistic confessionalism. While at Dumfries, on 22 May 1894 he married Mary Wilson Robb (1871-1924), daughter of James Henderson Robb, a trader of that town. They had four daughters and two sons. One of the latter was stillborn; the other, to his father's bewilderment, became a priest of the Church of England. 
In 1894 Mackintosh was called to be professor at Lancashire Independent college, Manchester, and thus began the family's long association with Withington Congregational Church. Mackintosh served under four principals: Caleb Scott, W. F. Adeney, W. H. Bennett -- for whom he had a particular affection -- and A. J. Grieve, the last of whom delivered Mackintosh's funeral oration; in it he expressed his great respect for his colleague's saintliness and scholarship, while noting that where teaching was concerned, 'his gifts were not of the 'popular' order' -- though there is evidence that Mackintosh's children's addresses in church were well received. 
Mackintosh's teaching duties were at first weighted towards philosophy and sociology, and later towards theology, and this is borne out by the progression of his books: 'From Comte to Benjamin Kidd' (1899), 'A First Primer of Apologetics' (1900; 2nd edn, 1904), 'Hegel and Hegelianism' (1903), 'Christian Ethics' (1909), 'Christianity and Sin' (1913), 'Albrecht Ritschl and his School' (1915), 'Historic Theories of Atonement' (1920), 'Values' (1928), and, after his retirement, 'Some Central Things' (1932). Away from his main academic lines were a biography, 'Principal Rainy' (1907), and a commentary, 'Thessalonians and Corinthians' (1909) in the 'Westminster New Testament' series. He also contributed biblical papers to 'The Expositor', and 'Galatians' to A. S. Peake's 'A Commentary on the Bible' (1919). He wrote substantial articles -- 'Apologetics', 'Theism', and 'Theology' among them -- for the eleventh edition of 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and a shorter piece on apologetics for its successor edition. He contributed articles and reviews to a number of other journals. 
A lecturer in the faculty of theology of the University of Manchester from its inception in 1904, Mackintosh owed his appointment, as he thought, to the professor of philosophy, Samuel Alexander. In 1908 Mackintosh presented a 'masterly' paper at the International Congregational Council (ICC) meeting in Edinburgh which 'paralyzed, overpowered' some of the able representatives ('Proceedings of the International Congregational Council', 1908, 124). In 1918 he chaired the Lancashire Congregational Union and in 1920, in the absence through ill health of P. T. Forsyth, he presented the report 'The contribution of British Congregationalism to religious thought' at the ICC assembly in Boston, USA. In 1924 he attended the Conference on Politics, Economics and Citizenship in Birmingham. Mackintosh retired in June 1930 and moved to Whaley Bridge. In 1933 he suffered a heart attack and died on 12 February at 22 York Place, Chorlton upon Medlock, Manchester. The funeral service was held three days later at Lancashire Independent college, followed by interment at Taxal churchyard. 
Mackintosh was a man of utter integrity. Regarded by some as austere, even aloof, he was capable of great kindness and, for all his scholarship, had a childlike simplicity. He loved music, enjoyed singing, loathed gardening. With his pointed humour expressed in memorable sentences he could slay intellectual giants, but he had every sympathy with those who faced the trial of faith as he had done. His own words constitute his most appropriate epitaph: 'For one's own part, one would thankfully spend one's whole life till one was spent out, for the privilege of removing a single obstacle from the path of hearts that are seeking God' ('Albrecht Ritschl and his School', 4). 


@@@@@


doc= 39618


Peel, Albert (1887-1949), Congregational minister and historian, was born on 20 March 1887 at Craven Lane, Gomersal, near Dewsbury, Yorkshire, the eldest of three children of Rawson Peel, a joiner journeyman, and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Garnett. He attended Heckmondwike grammar school and, after working as a pupil teacher at Birstall, went in 1906 to the Yorkshire United Independent College, Bradford, to train for the Congregational ministry. Customarily Yorkshire College students took their degrees from Edinburgh University but Peel elected to take a BA from Leeds University, gaining first-class honours in history in 1909. He then spent two years at Oxford, acquiring a BLitt and concurrently a Leeds MA and an intermediate BD from London University. He also attended lectures at Mansfield College, Oxford, in 1910-11, as the equivalent of his first theological year in Yorkshire. These exertions severely taxed his health. In 1915 Peel was awarded the LittD from Leeds, the first to receive this degree from the university. Peel appreciated his mentors, especially Sir Charles Firth, A. J. Grant of Leeds, W. B. Selbie of Mansfield College, and, in London, T. G. Crippen, the Congregational librarian. 
Peel was ordained on 17 September 1913 at Great Harwood Congregational Church, Blackburn, Lancashire. He married in 1913 Ethel Constance Harrop (1888-1971), daughter of William Harrop, minister of Furthergate Congregational Church, Blackburn, and they had a daughter, Margaret. In 1922 Peel became minister of Clapton Park Congregational Church, London, where he proved both conscientious and innovative. He regularly worked between twelve and fourteen hours a day, including Sundays, writing, reading two books daily, and visiting, showing particular sympathy for the disadvantaged. In 1934 he resigned his pastorate but continued to preach his fluent, natural sermons on most Sundays. 
In 1915 Peel's researches resulted in his editing the two volumes of 'The Seconde Parte of a Register', a calendar of sixteenth-century separatist manuscripts, to which Firth contributed the preface. In 1920 Peel published two important pamphlets, 'The Brownists in Norwich and Norfolk about 1580' and 'The first Congregational churches: new light on separatist congregations in London, 1567-1581'. In the latter he outlined his hope to write a detailed study of Elizabethan puritanism and separatism, a hope often renewed but sadly unrealized. Yet Peel became the English historian of sixteenth-century separatism. 
In 1923 Peel founded the 'Congregational Quarterly', a serious theological journal, which he edited until 1945. In 1924 he was appointed editor of the 'Transactions of the Congregational Historical Society' (founded 1901), a position he held at his death. Peel also became a director of the Independent Press at its founding in 1924 by the Congregational Union of England and Wales, and from 1929 he took charge of the Congregational Library. With so much activity historical research, although never abandoned, was given a low priority. In London, together with several minor publications, Peel produced a history of the Congregational Union, 'These Hundred Years' (1931), and a significant study of the Elizabethan separatists in 'Essays Congregational and Catholic' (1931), which he edited. In 1937 he wrote with Sir John Marriott the biography 'Robert Forman Horton'. He was a fellow of the Royal Historical Society, publishing for it 'The Note-Book of John Penry, 1593' (1944), and was transcribing a manuscript in the library of St John's College, Cambridge, which, after Peel's death, was prepared by Norman Sykes for publication as 'Tracts Ascribed to Richard Bancroft' (1953). He often visited the United States of America, being awarded honorary doctorates from Carlton, Minnesota, and Rockford, Illinois. 
In the late 1940s Peel developed a project to provide definitive editions of the Elizabethan puritan and separatist writings, persuading his fellow trustees of the Sir Halley Stewart Trust to finance the scheme. When Peel died the first volume was in page proof and Leland H. Carlson agreed to continue this series. 'Cartwrightiana' (1951) and 'The Writings of Robert Harrison and Robert Browne' (1953) appeared under their joint editorship, while subsequent volumes were edited by Carlson alone. Peel's failure to write the history of Elizabethan puritanism and separatism marked a loss to scholarship and to his own fulfilment. He served as chairman of the Congregational Union in 1940-41. Increasingly isolated in later years, the uncompromising Peel continued to stress theological freedom when ministerial students were taught to value dogma, creeds, and written liturgies, especially by Nathaniel Micklem, then principal of Mansfield College. 
Peel enjoyed cricket and was of medium height and build. Although outspoken and with few social graces, he was affable and clubbable. Relations with his wife in time became less easy. From 1926 to 1949 he lived at 97 Russell Road, Buckhurst Hill, Essex, although sometimes he stayed overnight at his office at Memorial Hall, Farringdon Street, London. Peel died from heart failure on 3 November 1949 at the McAlpin Nursing Home in Glasgow and was cremated in Glasgow. His ashes were taken to Bolton-le-Sands, Lancashire. 


@@@@@


doc= 39619


Robinson, William Gordon (1903-1977), Congregational minister and college head, was born on 19 May 1903 at Garston, Liverpool, the son of Frederick Robinson (1874-1944), chief reporter and assistant editor of the 'Widnes Weekly News', and Helena Mary Tatlock (1877-1951), schoolteacher. He and his twin brother, John Leslie, were baptized at Ormskirk Street Congregational Church, St Helens, on 28 June 1903. Robinson graduated in philosophy from Liverpool University (1924), winning the Edward Rathbone philosophy prize, and in theology from Manchester University (1927). Armed with the theology graduate prize, a research scholarship, and a Dr Williams Trust scholarship he proceeded to Mansfield College, Oxford, again graduating in theology in 1929. His PhD (Manchester) was awarded in 1951. 
Gordon Robinson was ordained minister at Gatley Congregational Church in 1929, and while there he served as tutor at Lancashire Independent College. His pastorate at Gatley was notable for his ability to reach all age groups, for his leadership of the 150th anniversary celebrations of the building of the first chapel in Gatley, and for the decision taken by the church in 1930 to join the Congregational Union of England and Wales (CUEW). Robinson removed to the Union Street, Oldham, church in 1932, and on 14 December 1932 he married Phyllis King (1906-1984), a schoolteacher. A year later they had twins, Ann Helena and David Gordon. He was then principal of Lancashire Independent College (1943-58) in succession to A. J. Grieve, and of its successor, Northern Congregational College (1958-68). During his principalship he faced numerous challenges: the maintenance of college life during the war; the integration of returning servicemen with younger school leavers after the war; the constant struggle for adequate funding in what was an independent, not a denominationally owned, institution; and the negotiations leading to the 1958 union in Manchester of Lancashire Independent College with Yorkshire United Independent College, Bradford. Students, books, and academic staff crossed the Pennines from Yorkshire, and Robinson found himself working with an associate principal in the person of Hubert Cunliffe-Jones. 
In addition to his college teaching and administrative duties Robinson served Manchester University in a variety of ways; he lectured in 'New Testament' (1943-51) and in ecclesiastical history (1951-70), and from 1948 to 1958 he was secretary to the faculty of theology. A welcome visiting preacher, he was twice chairman of the Lancashire Congregational Union (1946, 1956), and was chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales (CUEW) (1955-6). 
Gordon Robinson was a hard worker who put in a long day. Letters were answered as soon as they arrived, he was a capable administrator, his preparation for the pulpit and for college prayers was precise and well timed, his lectures were lucid and orderly, and he kept to publishing deadlines. He had a lively wit; he could be generous -- slipping his preaching fee to the wife of the manse in which he had stayed the weekend, for example. But he could also be peeved by those who attended prayers in carpet slippers, or who failed to attend at all -- such huffs being accompanied by vigorous puffs on his pipe and by equally vigorous attacks on his fire with the poker. Orderliness and etiquette meant a lot to him; failure in these matters was regarded as not only ill-mannered but as a poor witness. He had little patience with the pretensions of the pompous -- least of all if the pompous also happened to be ecclesiastical dignitaries. The clerical collar was anathema to Robinson, though it is said that on one occasion he was caught wearing one -- 'strictly for ecumenical purposes'. For recreation he resorted to the Maine Road ground of Manchester City Football Club. 
In his writings Robinson was as versatile as in his teaching, and whether for a specialist or for a wider audience his publications were always based on careful scholarship. There appeared studies of the books of 'Samuel' and 'Kings'; 'An Introduction to the New Testament' (1949); 'New Testament Treasure' (1954), consisting of articles reprinted from the 'Christian World'; and 'The Gospel and the Church in a Pagan World: a Study in I Corinthians' (1958). Other popular works included 'Catchwords, Character and the Calendar' (1957) -- articles reprinted from the 'Daily Dispatch'. Historical contributions include 'William Roby (1766-1830) and the Revival of Independency in the North' (1954), 'A History of the Lancashire Congregational Union, 1806-1956' (1957), and short biographies of Benjamin Waugh and Jonathan Scott. Robinson's elevation of the Christian ministry of every church member is reflected in his address from the chair of the CUEW, published as 'Let us Give Ourselves to our Ministry' (1955); and in 'Our Heritage of Free Prayer' (1950) he gave guidance on an art and craft which he himself practised in an exemplary manner. In 'Congregationalism and the historic faith' ('Congregational Quarterly', 29/3, 1951) he reviewed Congregational affirmations of faith, remarked upon the general disinclination of Congregationalists to utilize such products, and declared: '[A] genuine trust in the operation of the Holy Spirit, held humbly, prayerfully and expectantly by ministers and people in their private devotion and in their gathering at worship and in the Church Meeting is not only our ultimate safeguard in matters of faith... It is of the essence of our existence. (Robinson, 213)' On retirement the Robinsons moved to Grange-over-Sands. Gordon Robinson died on 1 February 1977 at Victoria Hospital, Morecambe, from heart disease. He was cremated at the City of Lancaster crematorium, Morecambe, on 7 February 1977. 


@@@@@


doc= 39627


Malory, Sir Robert (d. 1439/40), prior of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem in England, came from a Warwickshire family: he was the brother or first or second cousin of John Malory of Newbold Revel, father of Sir Thomas Malory the author. 
He may be the Robert Malory, 'clericus', who was rector of Withybrook in Warwickshire in 1407-8, a benefice he would have resigned before going to Rhodes for his noviciate, then of five years. He is first certainly recorded on 11 March 1415, as preceptor of Balsall and Grafton in Warwickshire, and by 18 July 1432 was acting as prior of England, although it was not until 4 May 1433 that the grand master in Rhodes formally appointed him to his priory (Clerkenwell) and its five preceptories, and gave him authority over the hospitaller priory of Ireland and the bailiwick of Scotland. 
Malory took his seat in the upper house of the parliament of 1433, by virtue of his position as prior, and afterwards sat on two commissions for Middlesex, one to assess tax rebates, the other to administer an oath not to maintain peace-breakers. He spent 1434 settling into his priory. In addition to routine business, he reorganized its procedures so that the office of the dead should be properly said for deceased members and benefactors of the priory. He also made preparations to lead a contingent, including knights from Scotland, to Rhodes, where an attack from Egypt was expected. 
Malory's passport was issued on 25 January 1435, but, although he was supposed to be in Rhodes by March, he was still in England in October. He was in Rhodes by 22 March 1436 and remained there until December 1437, but the danger from Egypt subsided, and his only known duties were more administrative than military. A long-established regulation allowed that once or twice every decade a deserving member of the order residing at headquarters should be granted an extra preceptory, and Malory was given one in Derbyshire, which he then exchanged for one in Yorkshire. He also persuaded the order to grant him his priory for life: it had originally been granted only for ten years. When about to leave he was chosen as one of a commission of three to inform the pope, who was in Florence, of the death of the grand master and the election of a successor. Malory took the opportunity while there to obtain papal confirmation of the life grant of his office. 
Malory was back in England by June 1438, and was soon caught up again in the order's business and the king's, carrying out the numerous transactions over the holding of land and ecclesiastical office that went with his position, arranging a safe conduct to get the Scottish members of his party home, acting as trier of petitions for the Lords in the parliament of 1439-40, and attending the great council. He successfully promoted a private bill in parliament to pursue his priory's interest in property destroyed in the peasants' revolt of 1381. He also saw to his own state and comfort by arranging the duty-free release of a cargo that his party had brought back from Rhodes, including not only armour, but also wine, silk, 'chamlet', and Turkey carpets. His last recorded act was a quittance for rent to one of his tenants, issued on 16 December 1439. He was dead by 10 May 1440, when Henry VI wrote to ask the grand master to confirm the election of Malory's successor. 
After Malory's death a number of his kinsmen were working for the priory. That, like the Turkey carpets, suggests that his sense of vocation was not severely ascetic. He looks like a man at ease with himself, able to combine the ecclesiastical and the secular, to work capably with people of every rank, and to give everyone, living or dead, his due. If he ever gave anyone more, there is no record of it. When in Rhodes he sued the king in his own court of chancery by proxy for 8died, and won. 


@@@@@


doc= 39631


Orange, James (bap. 1800, d. 1878), author and philanthropist, was baptized on 13 April 1800 in the church of St Mary and All Saints, Chesterfield, the son of William Orange, joiner, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Maw, who married at Chesterfield on 9 July 1792. He had a sister, Maria, baptized on 17 August 1794, an older brother, William, baptized on 28 May 1797, and a twin brother baptized on the same day as he was. Little is known of Orange's early life before his marriage, on 6 August 1823, to Hannah Flint (1793/4-1854) of Fairfield, Derbyshire. The first of their five children, George Flint, was baptized at the Independent chapel, Heanor, Derbyshire, in August 1825; the other four -- Mary Anne Flint ('bap'. May 1829), William Burgess Flint, ('bap'. Dec 1831), Charles James, ('bap'. Aug 1832), and James Edward Dakin ('bap'. Feb 1837) -- were baptized at Salem Independent Chapel, Barker Gate, Nottingham, where Orange and his family had settled about 1829. 
By the early 1830s Orange was a leading figure at Salem Chapel, helping to establish the adjacent charity school for the poor. When the pastor, a Mr Butcher, became incapacitated he bequeathed his pastorate jointly to Orange and Charles Jones of Highgate. However, the chapel was saddled with a $900 debt, which appears to have prevented the new pastors designate from taking office. It is unclear whether Orange was ever ordained or actually practised as a minister (his name does not appear in lists of Independent ministers) but henceforth he used the title Reverend. In 1839 the creditors sold the chapel and school, forcing both to close. Orange described this as 'the heaviest affliction of our lives, to many of us' (Orange, 947-8). Yet the late 1830s and early 1840s were the most active and productive of Orange's life. He published three books in a single year, emerged as a significant force in the civic life of Nottingham, and almost single-handed began the allotment movement in the east midlands, while building up his business interests and family relationships. 
The 'History of Nottingham' was issued serially in 1838-40 and in book form in 1840. According to Orange every copy was subscribed for prior to printing but it was less well received by later historians of Nottingham, partly no doubt because of its moral and political didacticism. W. H. Wylie criticized its strictly chronological plan, while J. T. Godfrey dismissed it as 'worthy of little notice' (Godfrey, 3) and Potter Briscoe was equally scathing. Also published in 1840 was Orange's narrative of George Vason (1772-1838), one of the first missionaries sent by the London Missionary Society to the Pacific islands, and governor of Nottingham gaol. 
The third of Orange's publications to appear in 1840 was 'A Plea on Behalf of the Poor'. This heralded a shift in emphasis towards social activism. Nottingham in 1840 was suffering from overcrowding and from unemployment and low wages in the handloom weaving and lace industries. Orange's solution was allotment provision, which would supplement incomes, improve health, and alleviate unemployment. He obtained the support of local worthies, including a former mayor and leading industrialists, established the Northern and Midland Counties Artisan's and Labourer's Friend Society, and was instrumental in the eventual provision of allotments in Chilwell and at Forest Grove. Meanwhile he formed local allotment societies in villages and towns throughout the east midlands, lecturing to rapt audiences. Sometimes he lectured several times a week, often revisiting places months later to urge on the local poor in their quest for land. This was done without remuneration: although Orange applied to become the salaried agent of the Labourer's Friend Society (LFS), the main organization dedicated to allotment promotion nationally, the LFS turned him down, possibly on religious grounds, awarding him in lieu a grant of $20 for his expenses. Despite this setback Orange achieved remarkable results: by the late 1840s allotments, rare in the east midlands before he began his work, were probably more common than anywhere else in England. 
At the same time Orange developed a remarkable variety of business interests. In trade directories of the time he is variously described as lacemaker, publisher, land surveyor, land agent, and iron- and brass-founder. In the early 1840s he operated four power looms from a factory on Leenside, Nottingham, also employing smiths to make steam engines. By 1851 he had become managing partner in the Rutland Iron Foundry, Granby Street, employing thirty-three people. Some time between 1854 and 1861 he sold his interest in this concern, giving the proceeds to his two eldest sons, and moved to London, where he taught Hebrew, and was also recorded as being a dissenting minister. He published 'Synoptica Hebraea: Anglo-Hebrew Bible Expositor: a Manual of Self-Instruction' in 1858. He continued to take part in civic affairs through the Tower Hamlets vestry, attending, voting, and sitting on committees until 1873. While living in London he married his second wife, Emily ('b'. 1815/16), who survived him. He died at his home, 471 Mile End Road, London, on 6 January 1878 and was buried on 11 January in Nottingham general cemetery. 
Orange was a man of tremendous energy and enthusiasm. His interests were bewilderingly diverse, yet he never wavered in his Independent faith, his dedication to improving the lives of the poor, or his desire to instruct others. His impetuous prolixity made him ill suited for scholarship, and his purportedly academic work has not stood the test of time. But his humanity, durable enthusiasm, and imperturbable assurance were exactly the qualities required to activate the allotment movement, and it is for this and for his activities as a philanthropist and social reformer before and afterwards that Orange deserves to be remembered. 


@@@@@


doc= 39632


Lea, John Wheeley (bap. 1791, d. 1874), sauce manufacturer, was baptized in May 1791 at Feckenham, near Redditch, Worcestershire, one of the three sons (there were also four daughters) of Thomas and Susanna Lea, a family of yeoman farmers. His family may have been connected on his mother's side with a John Wheeley of Worcester who is mentioned in Valentine Green's 'History of Worcester' (1796) as a member of the town's common council in 1794; it seems likely that John Wheeley Lea was named after John Wheeley. Little is known about Lea's childhood or schooling, but in 1812 he joined the chemist's business of George Guise at 68 Broad Street, Worcester, and in due course obtained his freedom to trade as a chemist and druggist there. In 1820 Lea became sole proprietor of Guise's shop and advertised for a partner. The successful applicant was William Henry Perrins, who joined Lea on 1 January 1823. Two years later Lea and Perrins opened their first branch shop in Vicar Street, Kidderminster, under the name Lea, Perrins, and Court, Court being its manager. 
On 5 June 1817 Lea had married Elizabeth Mason (1798/9-1833) of Leominster; a son and daughter were born in the early 1820s, followed by a second son, Charles, in 1827 and two more boys thereafter. In September 1833 Elizabeth died at the family home, The Hermitage, Powick, near Worcester, and John was faced with the task of raising his five children. His third son, George, died on 7 December 1833, aged three years and three months. Lea's memorial plaque to both may still be seen in the nave of St Peter's Church, Powick, where Elizabeth had been buried in a vault at the entrance to the chancel. 
Lea's response to family tragedy was to become increasingly active in his business. In 1834 a second branch shop was opened at Cheltenham under the name Lea and Perrins and Osborne, the last named again the manager. During the late 1830s Lea and Perrins turned their attention to producing a distinctive condiment to accompany meat and fish dishes. The precise origin of their trademark Worcestershire sauce remains unclear, but it was being produced commercially by 1837 and quickly proved successful with placements on British shipping lines and exports to the United States by the early 1840s. 
In addition to his business life, Lea also became increasingly involved in civic activities in this period. In 1834 he joined a sub-committee at Worcester Royal Infirmary set up to control expenditure. Already an alderman, in October of the following year Lea was elected mayor of Worcester, but served only a three-month term of office. In 1840 he was appointed inspector of drugs at the Royal Infirmary and, in that year, moved to 13 Lansdowne Crescent, Claines, near Worcester, in the house next to that of William Perrins. In 1849 the partners opened a third branch shop in Malvern as Lea and Perrins and Burrows. Lea was again elected mayor in this year, serving a full term, and in 1854 he was appointed president of the city and county library. Three years later his son Charles (died 1898) joined the business as a partner. In 1860 Lea became a magistrate and in 1862 joined William Perrins in presenting $500 to the infirmary. Two years later he endowed a terrace of almshouses in Infirmary Walk for six elderly women. 
John Wheeley Lea died of acute dyspepsia on 23 March 1874 at Stanfield House, Upper Wick, Worcestershire, and was buried in the family tomb at St Peter's, Powick. Charles succeeded his father, but his retirement in 1892 ended the Lea family's involvement with the company and its sauces which continue to bear his name. William Perrins's descendants retained their association and continued to sit on the board after Lea and Perrins was sold to HP Foods in 1930. 


@@@@@


doc= 39633


Perrins, William Henry (1793-1867), sauce manufacturer, was born into a farming family at Chaddesley Corbett, Worcestershire, and baptized at St Cassian's Church there, one of three sons (there were also four daughters). Information is scant about Perrins's childhood, education, and first venture into business. He is known to have studied to be a chemist and, aged about twenty-eight, formed a partnership with his younger brother, James, as chemists and druggists. The partnership, based in Evesham, lasted until December 1822, when it was amicably dissolved and William continued alone. James then moved to Cheltenham to become a surgeon. Meanwhile, William replied to an advertisement for a partner in another chemist's shop, and joined John Wheeley Lea in his business at 68 Broad Street, Worcester, on 1 January 1823. Three weeks later William travelled to Birkby, Yorkshire, where on 22 January he married Sarah Dyson, the daughter of Thomas Dyson of Huddersfield. In 1825 the partners opened their first branch shop in Vicar Street, Kidderminster, under the name of Lea, Perrins, and Court, the latter being its manager. Two further shops followed in Cheltenham (Lea and Perrins and Osborne, 1834) and Malvern (Lea and Perrins and Burrows, 1849). 
By the late 1830s Perrins was well established in Worcester and had moved with his wife and five sons and one daughter to 11 Lansdowne Crescent, Claines. From their Worcester shop, the partners sold groceries, medicines, and cosmetics, and before 1840 Lea and Perrins turned their attention to producing a distinctive sauce to accompany meat and fish dishes. Labels on modern bottles of Lea and Perrins Worcestershire sauce show malt vinegar, spirit vinegar, molasses, sugar, salt, anchovies, garlic, spices, and flavouring to be among the ingredients. However, the origin of the partners' initial recipe remains uncertain. Labels on the first bottles, dating from the early 1840s, describe the sauce as 'Prepared from the Recipe of a Nobleman in the County, and used with Cold Meats, Beef Steaks, Veal Cutlets, Chops, Curries, Fish, Games, and Soup'. Mention of the nobleman soon sparked a colourful, if unsubstantiated, account explaining the exotic origin of the sauce. This told how one Sir Marcus Sandys, a former governor of Bengal, had returned to England in 1835 and asked the partners to make up a sauce from a recipe he had obtained while abroad. This they did, at the same time preparing a few gallons for themselves as a possible commercial line. On tasting their product they found it quite unpalatable and consigned it to the cellar. But, on opening the jars some months later, they found the now matured sauce delicious. While the story remains problematic, and no person named Sandys has been traced, by 1837 the partners are known to have been producing a sauce for retail. Within two years the sauce, which had already been marketed within British shipping lines, was also being imported by a New York distributor. 
Away from business Perrins led a modest and civic-minded life. In 1862 he joined Lea in donating $500 to the Worcester Royal Infirmary; two years later he gifted the chancel window to St Cassian's Church, Chaddesley Corbett, and in 1865 presented three stained-glass windows to St Nicholas's Church, Worcester, where his own children had been baptized. The church was later deconsecrated, but the windows remain. Perrins died from dropsy on 6 January 1867 at his home and was buried in the family tomb in the churchyard of St John the Baptist, Claines. 
Perrins's son James Dyson joined the firm in 1857, soon after his marriage to his cousin, Frances Sarah Perrins, on 26 February 1856. He died on 26 February 1887 aged sixty-three, and his son, (Charles William) Dyson Perrins, was taken into the partnership in 1894, and later achieved note as a book and porcelain collector. The Lea family's association with the company had ended two years before, but Perrinses and Dysons continued to sit on the board of directors of Lea and Perrins, even after it was sold to HP Foods in 1930. 


@@@@@


doc= 39634


Parnell, Katharine (1845-1921), political intermediary and wife of Charles Stewart Parnell, was born on 30 January 1845 at Glazenwood, Essex. She was the thirteenth child of Sir John Page Wood (1796-1866) ['see under 'Wood, Sir Matthew], formerly chaplain and secretary to Queen Caroline, a 'thoroughgoing Whig', who was latterly vicar of Cressing in Essex and rector of St Peter's, Cornhill. Her mother was Emma Caroline, 'nee' Michell (1802-1879), a watercolourist, book illustrator, and romantic novelist (a pursuit which another of her daughters, Anna, came to share). Her uncle William Page Wood (later Baron Hatherley) was lord chancellor in Gladstone's first administration and Sir Evelyn Wood, soldier and colonial administrator, was her brother. She passed her youth at Rivenhall Place, the family home, where a cultured society, including Anthony Trollope, compensated for the lack of a formal education. At Belhus, the country seat of her brother-in-law Sir Thomas Barrett-Lennard, she met 
The O'Sheas passed their first year of marriage in Madrid, where William had taken a partnership in his uncle's bank. He next tried his hand at breeding racehorses. Losses, combined with gambling debts, led to bankruptcy. While his affairs were subsequently settled, Katharine's prodigiously wealthy aunt Mrs Benjamin Wood ('Aunt Ben') took a house for her at Brighton, where Katharine gave birth to a son, Gerard. Residing together in Beaufort Gardens in London, the O'Sheas briefly cut a dash as a married couple. There their second child, Norah, who was to be Katharine's chief support in her declining years, was born. Katharine bore O'Shea a further daughter, Carmen. 
The O'Sheas drifted steadily and respectably apart. Katharine became from the middle of the decade the companion of her aunt, whose seclusion at the Lodge, Eltham, was punctuated by the weekly visits of George Meredith, who received a stipend of $300 per annum to read to her from works other than his own, which she did not esteem. Mrs Wood purchased Wonersh Lodge, just across the park, for Katherine. William was at the time spending some eighteen months in Spain on a mining venture, of which Katharine resignedly commented 'he always drew up an excellent prospectus'. 
In the wake of commercial failure, statesmanship urgently beckoned. O'Shea was returned for County Clare at the 1880 election under a home-rule flag of convenience. The exigencies of his political career resuscitated the marriage to some degree, at least in its public aspect, as he sought to further his prospects with a series of political dinners. Determined to procure the attendance of Charles Stewart Parnell (1846-1891), the 'uncrowned king of Ireland', Katharine drove to Westminster with her sister Anna to seek him out. Her memoirs describe the 'coup de foudre' in Palace Yard: 'He looked straight at me smiling, and his curiously burning eyes looked into mine with wonderful intentness... In leaning forward in the cab to say good-bye a rose I was wearing in my bodice fell out on my skirt. He picked it up, and touching it lightly with his lips, placed it in his buttonhole. (O'Shea, 1.135-6)' Parnell was then thirty-four, she eighteen months older. By October he was writing to her as 'my own love'. 
Parnell was incarcerated in Kilmainham gaol, Dublin, from 13 October 1881 to 2 May 1882. Thence he continued to correspond with Katharine, perfecting a system of interlineating letters in invisible ink. On 16 February 1882 Katharine gave birth to a daughter, the short-lived Claude Sophie. That the child was Parnell's has never seriously been disputed, although Captain O'Shea may well have believed it to be his own. Parnell, on temporary release from Kilmainham, was at Eltham when Claude Sophie died on 22 April, as was the captain. Katharine bore Parnell two more daughters in each of the ensuing years: Clare (1883-1909), who bore a haunting resemblance to him, and Katharine (1884-1947). 
The extent of the deception practised upon O'Shea by his wife and Parnell has long been a vexed question. As early as 1881, O'Shea had, according to Katharine, irately dispatched Parnell's portmanteau from Eltham to Charing Cross Station, and challenged Parnell to a duel (which did not proceed). While O'Shea appears to have been given assurances as to his wife's relations with Parnell, it is difficult to resist the conclusion that their principal value to him was in permitting him to maintain a sedulously cultivated posture of wounded innocence. His character was a curious combination of vanity, calculation, and naivety. There was also very possibly an element of willed self-deception at work. Until the end of 1886 he seems to have retained a degree of tenderness towards Katharine, reciprocated by a measure of exasperated fondness that lingers even in her memoirs. Yet the rhythm of his estrangement can be graphed against the seepage into political currency of rumours of his wife's relations with Parnell. 
W. H. O'Shea was for Parnell a rapidly escalating political liability. His appetite for 'haute politique' was insatiable, his aptitude negligible. In the negotiations which led to the 'Kilmainham treaty', which permitted Parnell's release, and in the aftermath of the Phoenix Park murders which swiftly followed, O'Shea disported himself with a uniquely provoking combination of arrogance and ineptitude. Parnell thereafter sought to bypass O'Shea in his dealings with Gladstone. Mrs O'Shea displaced her husband as a conduit of Parnell's thinking. Her role developed from that of a confidential amanuensis to Parnell into that of an intermediary, acting at Parnell's close direction, in correspondence and to a very limited extent in person. Gladstone found her businesslike to deal with, and her role as go-between was a convenience both to the prime minister and to the Irish leader. She was important in 1886 in extracting from Parnell and sending to Gladstone the former's 'proposed Constitution for Ireland', on receipt of which in November the latter shortly after drafted a home rule bill. In her memoirs she underscored the role she had played, for the purpose of levelling against the late Liberal leader the crude if understandable charge of hypocrisy in his repudiation of Parnell in the divorce crisis. 
In a reckless but astonishingly concentrated display of authority, Parnell imposed O'Shea as the member for Galway in February 1886. The political enmity between Parnell and O'Shea became manifest on the defeat of the 'Home Rule Bill' (on which O'Shea abstained), and the secession of Joseph Chamberlain, whom O'Shea had enlisted as a mentor, from Gladstone's Liberal Party. O'Shea testified against Parnell before the special commission set up in 1887 to inquire 'inter alia' into the authenticity of the letters published by 'The Times' implicating Parnell in the Phoenix Park murders. Parnell obdurately believed that O'Shea lay behind the forgeries, prompting Henry Labouchere's observation that Parnell went to his grave the only man who did not believe that Richard Pigott had forged 'The Times'' letters. 
The death of Mrs Benjamin Wood (who might have disinherited Mrs O'Shea, had she been touched by scandal) cleared the way for the institution by Captain O'Shea of divorce proceedings on 24 December 1889. She and Parnell pursued an uncertain course, which involved both the levelling of counter-allegations (including one of adultery with Katharine's sister Anna Steele) and the contemplated pursuit of a settlement. The fact that Mrs Wood's will in favour of her had been challenged meant that they were unable to fund the settlement which they, probably too sanguinely, believed could have been achieved. The fixed point in their strategy was Parnell's insistence that once the issue had been engaged there should be a divorce. On 17 November 1890, after two days of damaging and uncontested evidence, W. H. O'Shea obtained a decree nisi of divorce against his wife. 
A sordid competition in moralistic fervour underpinned the political argument of the 'Parnell split'. Parnell's nationalist opponents in Ireland, marshalled by T. M. Healy, were determined not to be outdone in their denunciations of Parnell by either the dour plangencies of the 'non-conformist conscience' or tory derision. Parnell charged that the anti-Parnellites had been overborne by 'dictation'. Healy retorted that Parnell had succumbed to the embraces of Katharine O'Shea, the 'Brighton banshee', to whose sinister influence he attributed Parnell's furious quest to reassert his lost supremacy. He lithely parodied Parnell's stance: '
She says I must fight for my station, 

Or forfeit her high admiration, 

To obey her will be 

Quite a pleasure for me, 

So sweet is her English dictation. 

' Assailed in Ireland as 'Kitty O'Shea', Katharine was in some degree shielded by the fact that it was not a name to which she had ever answered: Parnell's familiar names for her were 'Katie', 'Wifie', or 'Queenie'. On the death of Mrs Wood the couple moved in to 10 Walsingham Terrace, Brighton, a corner residence which the 'Brighton Gazette' described as 'away from the bustle of the town at a distance from the resorts of men, exposed to south-westerly gales and immediately overlooking the sea'. On the other side the landscape fell away in cornfields towards Shoreham. In the split Parnell spent the weekends campaigning in Ireland and repaired to Brighton during the week. Once the divorce decree was made absolute, they married at the register office at Steyning on 25 June 1891, two days short of Parnell's forty-fifth birthday. The rigours of the split had taken their toll of what had always been a fragile constitution. His wife was by his side when he died at Walsingham Terrace on the night of 6 October 1891. 
Katharine survived her second husband's death by thirty years, in remorselessly deteriorating circumstances. While the proceedings in relation to her aunt's estate had been settled, not altogether advantageously, in 1892, the proceeds were later embezzled by a solicitor. Though prey to bouts of what might mildly be termed eccentricity, she retained unbroken the imperiousness of temperament she shared with Parnell. Her fortunes were partially restored by the appearance in 1914 of her 'Charles Stewart Parnell: his Love Story and Political Life', published under the name of Katharine O'Shea -- which carried the requisite 'frisson' of notoriety -- with 'Mrs Charles Stewart Parnell' in parentheses and diminutive type. While, evidently at the direction of Gerard, Captain O'Shea was characterized as a wronged husband wholly unaware of her infidelity, the account she gave of her relations with Parnell rendered this inherently improbable. The influence of her son and publishers notwithstanding, her memoirs carry the ring of conviction and her dates when compared with Gladstone's detailed records are usually correct. Certainly the veracity of her account was doubted by none of Parnell's surviving lieutenants (then in late middle age), whose transfixed reading of the text plunged them traumatically back a quarter-century in time and produced (as well as varying degrees of disgust) a startled recall of Parnell's mesmeric power. Her two volumes reinstated -- and perhaps even invented -- the private Parnell. She insisted that, rather than the profession of love for his colleagues and the Irish people ascribed to him in public myth, his last words were the more impressive 'Kiss me, sweet Wifie, and I will try to sleep a little.' 
Katharine O'Shea died at 39 East Ham Road, Littlehampton, on 5 February 1921, less than a year before the country she had never visited (but on whose history she had made such an ineffaceable impact) gained its independence. W. H. O'Shea predeceased her on 22 April 1905, at Hove. 


@@@@@


doc= 39635


Parnell, (Catherine Maria) Anna Mercer (1852-1910), Irish nationalist and artist, was born on 13 May 1852 at home at Avondale, co. Wicklow, the tenth of eleven children and fifth daughter of John Henry Parnell (1811-1859) and Delia Tudor, 'nee' Stewart (1816-1896). Her older brothers were John Henry Parnell MP and Charles Stewart Parnell MP, leader of the Irish nationalists. Her older sister Fanny Parnell (1848-1882) also was involved in Irish politics. The Parnells were part of the protestant ascendancy, a number having established 'patriot' reputations, while Delia Stewart came from a line of distinguished Americans. 
Following her father's death in 1859, Anna Parnell and her mother had to abandon the family home, Avondale, and resided first in a number of locations in the southern suburbs of Dublin, then in Dublin and, from the mid-1860s, in Paris. Her formal education was erratic, being mainly in the hands of English governesses who equipped her with an ascendancy accent, but her upbringing allowed her more independence than was customary for young women at the time. At the age of eighteen she returned to Dublin, where she studied art at the Royal Dublin Academy of Art; in the spring of 1875 she moved to London to attend the Heatherley School of Art. Two of her paintings were accepted in exhibitions by the Royal Society of British Arts in 1874 and a third was displayed the following year. 
During the mid- and late 1870s Anna Parnell followed the career of her older brother Charles closely, and was in the Ladies' Gallery of the House of Commons during his efforts to 'obstruct' parliamentary business in 1877. Subsequently, in 1880, she published a three-part article describing the scenes. Her mother settled in 1874 in Bordentown, New Jersey, where, after the conclusion of the 1877 parliamentary session, Anna Parnell joined her. Her own political interest was sharpened by the agrarian crisis and Land League agitation in Ireland at the close of the 1870s. Her brother became president of the Irish National Land League in October 1879 and toured North America between January and early March 1880 to solicit funds. She helped to organize the Irish Land League Famine Relief Fund which was set up in New York. After March, when he began the United States Land League, she was soon immersed in its work as well. During this period she became acquainted with Michael Davitt, the founder of the Irish Land League. In late summer 1880 Anna Parnell returned to Ireland and she was the leading force in the Ladies' Land League when it was founded on 31 January 1881, serving as an honorary secretary. She addressed numerous Irish audiences on behalf of the movement, and sometimes faced considerable hostility. Both she and the Ladies' League became increasingly prominent during autumn 1881, especially following the suppression of the Land League in October. During the next few months, while her brother was in Kilmainham gaol, Anna Parnell emerged as a major figure in nationalist circles. Disliking aspects of Land League policy, she opposed Gladstone's 'Land Act' of 1881 and viewed with disdain the 'Kilmainham treaty' between the Liberal ministry and her brother. Soon after his release, in August 1882, Charles extinguished the Ladies' Land League. From this time Anna Parnell was utterly estranged from her brother and never spoke to him again. 
By the mid-1880s Anna Parnell was living and painting in Cornwall. In 1885 she re-emerged in politics briefly when she attended a rally in London for the political activist Helen Taylor. During the O'Shea divorce crisis of 1890-91 she was sympathetic to her brother's plight as co-respondent, but took no part in his last campaign. By the turn of the century she was living in straitened circumstances in north Devon. Though largely detached from politics, she sent the Irish nationalist Maud Gonne a contribution for the Patriotic Children's Treat organized as a protest against Queen Victoria's visit to Dublin in 1900. Publication of Michael Davitt's 'The Fall of Feudalism in Ireland' in 1904 kindled her interest in Irish affairs once more. She was enraged by Davitt's treatment of the Ladies' Land League and sought to correct the record. During 1907 she set down her own counter-version of events entitled 'The Tale of a Great Sham', which, however, remained unpublished until 1986. At the beginning of 1908 she campaigned in Ireland on behalf of Sinn Fein's first and unsuccessful parliamentary candidate in the North Leitrim by-election. This was her last public involvement. Anna Parnell, who was living under an assumed name, accidentally drowned at Ilfracombe, north Devon, on 20 September 1910 and was buried in Holy Trinity cemetery, Ilfracombe, on 23 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 39636


Campbell, Gertrude Elizabeth (1857-1911), art critic and journalist, was the second daughter and third of the four children of Edmond Maghlin Blood (1815-1891) of Brickhill, co. Clare, and his wife, Mary Anne (1814/15-1899), daughter of Thomas Fergusson of Leixlip, co. Kildare. She spent most of her childhood in Italy, which provided the setting for her popular children's book, 'Topo', published in 1878 under the name G. E. Brunefille, with illustrations by Kate Greenaway; her first published work was a travel article in 'Cassell's Family Magazine', 'My real Turkish bath: a lady's experience in Egypt' (1, 1874-5, 82-3). 
While visiting friends in Scotland in September 1880, she met Lord Colin Campbell (1853-1895) ['see under 'Campbell, George Douglas, eighth duke of Argyll], the youngest son of George Douglas Campbell, eighth duke of Argyll. Two days later he proposed marriage and was accepted. The marriage was delayed by the disapproval of his family and by his ill health, but took place on 21 July 1881 at the Chapel Royal in London. The marriage rapidly failed, and in August 1883 Lady Colin sued for a judicial separation on grounds of cruelty, which was granted the following March. Two years later, the Campbells engaged in one of the most sensational divorce cases of the century: Lady Colin offered her husband's infidelity and cruelty (she alleged that he knowingly infected her with syphilis) as grounds; Lord Colin's counter-petition alleged that Lady Colin had committed adultery with at least four named men: Lord Blandford, Eyre Massey Shaw (the head of the London Fire Brigade), Tom Bird (a surgeon), and (General) Sir William Butler. The jury decided that no adultery had been committed on either side and no divorce was obtained; but Lady Colin's reputation had been destroyed: one newspaper described her as having 'the unbridled lust of a Messalina and the indelicate readiness of a common harlot' (Fleming, 1-2). Even Lady Colin's apparently virtuous activities in helping in an East End soup kitchen, performing at charity concerts, and teaching factory girls in evening classes had been made to bear an unsavoury interpretation. 
It is difficult to resist the temptation to view Lady Colin's entire career through the prism of this divorce case, the perspective of the only modern account of her life. And yet she was much more than a sexually compromised and socially disgraced woman. Indeed, the extent to which she lived beyond the prescribed roles of woman and wife was used against her in the trial, but it is for these transgressions, not sexual ones, that she should be remembered. 
Lady Colin's precocious literary talents were to be turned to good account all her life. In October 1883 she submitted her first article to the editor of the 'Saturday Review', and thereafter became one of their staff writers, producing up to three articles a week on a wide range on topics, from science and literature to political economy; she frequently reviewed books written in Italian, French, German, and Spanish. In 1886 she published a series of her 'Saturday Review' essays as 'A Book of the Running Brook and of Still Waters', in part natural history and in part tract promoting the development of commercial inland fisheries to provide 'an immense increase in the supply of cheap and wholesome food for the nation' (p. 129). Her only novel, 'Darrell Blake' (1889), which enjoyed considerable vogue (not merely because of the notoriety of its author), drew on her personal knowledge of journalism in its setting, while its plot -- the destruction of the happiness of the newspaper editor principally through his seduction by the scheming aristocrat Lady Alma Vereker -- demonstrated that Lady Colin (like Harriet Vane) would not be cowed by public notoriety into a show of 'proper feeling'. 
She wrote for a number of periodicals, including the 'Pall Mall Gazette', especially on art, music, literature, and travel, and in 1889 became art editor of 'The World', the first woman editor on a London paper not exclusively aimed at a female readership. She retained this connection until 1903. As 'Q.E.D.' she wrote a weekly column 'In the picture galleries' for 'The World', and as Vera Tsaritsyn a series of travel articles, which were subsequently published as 'A Woman's Walks: Studies in Colour Abroad and at Home' (1903). In 1894 she founded a weekly review, 'The Realm', but it folded in December 1895. She became the editor of the 'Ladies' Field' in 1901, remaining with that paper for two years. 
Much of Lady Colin's journalistic career was based on her connections with the Victorian art world, and it seems likely (in the absence of detailed research as yet) that it is here that her importance lies; it has been suggested that she 'perform[ed] for the visual arts what her colleague George Bernard Shaw was doing for music' (Fleming, 243). She exhibited her own works a number of times at the Society of Women Artists, and in November 1886, at the height of the divorce case, her small landscape, 'Thalassa', was exhibited at the Society of British Artists' show in Suffolk Street, an exhibition which also included her portrait by the society's president, J. M. Whistler, 'Harmony in White and Ivory' (now lost). She also turned her hand to drama, writing a one-act play, 'Bud and Blossom', performed at Terry's Theatre in the West End, and co-writing with Clothilde Graves a full-length melodrama, 'St Martin's Summer', which was played in London by William and Madge Kendal. Her circle included Oscar Wilde, Arthur Sullivan, Elizabeth Thompson (Lady Butler, in whose studio she regularly worked), and Paolo Tosti, who was her singing teacher (Lady Colin had a rich contralto voice, and frequently appeared at charity concerts). Her place in such circles after the trial has yet to be established, but the range of her interests gave her an enviable measure of authority in her chosen fields. 
In 1893 appeared 'Etiquette and Good Society', edited and revised by Lady Colin Campbell. The work was immensely successful, 92,000 copies having been issued by 1911. Such success was intensely ironic, as by the time of its appearance the author had been excluded from 'good society' for thirteen years. Broadly conventional in the advice she offered, Lady Colin took the opportunity to pour scorn on the idea that labour was demeaning to a lady; she told an interviewer in 1902 that 'Work is the justification of living at all, the rent we are bound to pay to Nature for the actual space we occupy in the world' (Bertouche, 561). Lady Colin took her own injunctions to heart, until forced into retirement by the onset of rheumatoid arthritis in 1903. By 1906 she was wheelchair-bound and increasingly reclusive. She died at her home, 67 Carlisle Mansions, Carlisle Place, London, on 1 November 1911 from the effects of her disease, and was cremated at Golders Green. At her request, her portrait painted by Giovanni Boldini about 1897 was given to the National Portrait Gallery. 
Lady Colin Campbell defined a lady as one who would 'never try, by any means, to appear other than she really is' ('Etiquette', 1893, 18); the social ostracism engendered by her notoriety gave Lady Colin the freedom to be who she 'really was'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39638


Solomons, Isaac (c.1785-1850), receiver of stolen goods, was born in London, probably in Houndsditch, one of three known children of Henry Solomons, an immigrant in his youth from Wurzburg, Bavaria. Always known as Ikey Solomons, he became a notorious East End Jewish fence, and was reputedly the model for Fagin in Charles Dickens's novel 'Oliver Twist' (1838). Arthur Morrison described him as 'the prince of fences' in 'A Child of the Jago' (1896). The family were living at 24 Gravel Lane in 1827; and in that year, at the age of about sixty-nine, Henry Solomons was imprisoned for six months, convicted of receiving stolen goods from his son. Solomons senior seems to have trained as a glass-engraver, but earned his living as a dealer in his younger days, possibly acting as a merchant buying on commission for the Goldsmidt banking brothers. 
Ikey Solomons married Ann (Hannah), daughter of Moses Julian, a coachmaster of Aldgate, at the Ashkenazi Great Synagogue in Duke's Place, Houndsditch, on 7 January 1807; four sons and two daughters were born between 1807 and 1826. Ann was described in the prison records as being 5 feet 1 inch tall, 'stoutish', with black hair and hazel eyes. Ikey, at 5 feet 9 inches tall, was 'slender' and 'dark', with brown hair and hazel eyes. A police portrait sketch certainly depicts a man with a prominent aquiline nose, but Ikey appears to have had none of the supposedly stereotypical Jewish features, 'sallow complexion', or 'sharp hooked nose' ascribed to him in some of the more colourful contemporary accounts of his adventures. Indeed, Ikey was able to pass under the gentile names of Jones or Slowman while on the run. 
As a child Solomons served an apprenticeship in crime as a pickpocket in a neighbourhood famous for its rogues and gangs of thieves. His first known conviction was for stealing a pocket-book from a gentleman at Westminster Hall on 17 April 1810. However, as an adult he became a receiver of stolen goods, operating out of his house in Bell Lane, Spitalfields. By the mid-1820s he was well known to the police as perhaps the largest dealer in stolen bank notes in London, possibly exploiting a connection with Jewish dealers in the Netherlands for the purpose. He was arrested, gaoled at Newgate, and tried at the Old Bailey in well-publicized cases three times over, in 1810, in 1827, and 1830. On the first occasion Solomons was sentenced to transportation for life, the maximum sentence for pickpocketing. However, owing to the shortage of shipping during the Napoleonic wars, he served his sentence between July 1810 and June 1816 on rusting hulks moored in the Medway near Sheerness. He was then released in error due to a case of mistaken identity, but apparently gave himself up voluntarily and was briefly returned to ship. As a reward he was granted a free pardon on 26 October 1816. 
In contrast, on the occasion of his second imprisonment in 1827, Solomons effected a spectacular escape from police custody and went into hiding. He surfaced in Rio de Janeiro in July 1828 and arrived in Hobart Town, Van Diemen's Land, on 6 October of that year. Meanwhile his wife Ann had also been arrested, tried, and convicted of possession of stolen goods and counterfeit money. She was transported in a convict ship to Van Diemen's Land with her four younger children and the whole family were subsequently reunited in the southern hemisphere. However, amid controversy, Ikey Solomons was recaptured and returned to England for his third and final trial. This resulted in his own transportation back to Van Diemen's Land in 1831, where he was employed as a lowly convict official. He never served as forced labour in a penal settlement, possibly reflecting the fact that he could read and write. In 1838 he was allowed to settle in Hobart Town, where he opened a shop and was finally declared a free man in 1844. 
Solomons's wife, Ann, with whom he had made such strenuous efforts to be reunited, became unfaithful, and the quarrelsome family apparently disintegrated. Ikey Solomons was buried on 3 September 1850 in Hobart Town. Rumours that he had made a fortune in Van Diemen's Land proved unfounded: letters of administration revealed an estate of under $70. 


@@@@@


doc= 39639


Mairet, Ethel Mary (1872-1952), hand-weaving revivalist and author, was born on 17 February 1872 at High Street, Barnstaple, north Devon, the first of three children of James Partridge (died 1914), dispensing chemist of Barnstaple, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Hunt (died 1927). She was brought up in Barnstaple and educated in north London, then briefly at the Municipal Science and Arts Schools, Barnstaple. In 1899 she was awarded the teachers' diploma in pianoforte (LRAM) from the Royal Academy of Music, London; she then found employment as a governess in London and Bonn. Returning to Devon in 1902 she met the young Ananda Kentish Coomaraswamy (1877-1947), a brilliant, rich, Anglo-Ceylonese geologist, who later became an art historian. They married on 19 June the same year and from 1903 to 1906 travelled in Ceylon, where Coomaraswamy carried out an official mineralogical survey, and Ethel attempted to revive native embroidery; the pair simultaneously studied and collected the indigenous arts and crafts. Their resulting definitive book, containing reports, drawings, and numerous photographs (mostly taken by Ethel Coomaraswamy), was published on their return to England in 1907. 
In 1907 and 1910 the Coomaraswamys visited India together, adding to their art and textile collections. Their home and workplace in these years was, however, Norman Chapel near Chipping Campden in the Cotswolds, where C. R. Ashbee, architect and designer, had established his Guild of Handicraft. (Fred Partridge, Ethel Mary's brother, was a jeweller at the guild.) Ashbee restored and converted the imposing chapel, which rapidly became the centre for an artistic circle, leading Janet Ashbee to recall the striking, dark-haired Ethel Coomaraswamy 'by night coming out like a brilliant moth in eastern plum, cherry and orange colours'. At this time Ethel made her first experiments in hand-weaving. 
By 1912 the marriage had broken down and, aged forty, Ethel Coomaraswamy built an isolated bungalow, Broadlys, on the coast near Barnstaple. It contained rooms for weaving and dyeing, where she worked alone; a Samoyed dog and occasional visitors her only company. She secured a divorce and on 28 May 1913 married Philippe (later Philip) Auguste Mairet (1886-1975), a former draughtsman of Ashbee's and secretary of Coomaraswamy's, and fifteen years her junior. They set up workshop and home at the Thatched House, Shottery, near Stratford upon Avon; here Mairet wrote her influential treatise 'A Book on Vegetable Dyes' (1916), published by Hilary Pepler, and participated in London craft exhibitions such as the 'Englishwoman'. 
A visit to Hilary Pepler and Eric Gill in 1916, who were at the centre of the community of artists forming the Guild of Sts Joseph and Dominic on Ditchling Common, precipitated Mairet's move to the Sussex village. Here she built Gospels, in Beacon Road, the home with weaving workshop and dye house she occupied for thirty-two years, and in which she trained over 130 people: work girls, apprentices, and, in the 1940s, student teachers. 
In the 1920s, cloth produced at Gospels was at its simplest: plain weaves in strong, vegetable-dyed colours contrasted with undyed, natural colours using hand-spun British wools and imported cotton and silk yarns. Yardage was made into garments or furnishings, rugs and blankets were woven, and accessories such as stoles, scarves, and ties were sold. Mairet exhibited throughout the country, and orders were regular. 
In 1931 Ethel and Philip Mairet separated, following the collapse of their venture running the New Handworkers' Gallery, in London. This changed Ethel Mairet's previously sociable and gentle character, making her austere. 
During the mid-1930s an influx of European assistants brought more textured weave patterns to the cloth, through greater technical ability and an interest in combining high quality, hand-spun fibres with industrially produced yarns. These themes persisted until wartime shortages confined Mairet to undyed cotton or chemically dyed Welsh woollen yarns. The war curtailed her travelling which, in the 1930s, had embraced many European countries, especially Denmark, while researching her book 'Handweaving Today, Traditions and Changes' (1939). That year she was created an RDI (royal designer for industry), the first woman so honoured by the Royal Society of Arts. 
In the 1940s, reduced staff, advancing age, and an interest in craft education caused Mairet to create and hire out 'textile portfolios', with informative booklets, to schools and colleges. They drew on her own weavings as well as her extensive collection of world textiles which, hanging in the barn-like weaving-room, had so impressed visitors to Gospels. Ethel Mairet died in her sleep at Gospels on 18 November 1952 and was buried at Dyke Road cemetery, Brighton; she was an inspiration to the crafts movement; one who was called, by the Japanese master potter Shoji Hamada, 'the mother of English hand-weaving'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39642


Garratt, Geoffrey Theodore (1888-1942), administrator in India and author, was born on 7 November 1888 at The Grange, Little Tew, Oxfordshire, the sixth and youngest son of Charles Foster Garratt, who was vicar of Little Tew from 1858 to 1880, and his wife, Agnes Mary Percival, who came from a banking family. He was educated at Rugby School, and won a scholarship worth $100 and tenable for five years at Hertford College, Oxford, where he obtained a first class in mathematical moderations (1908) and a second in modern history (1911). He succeeded in the Indian Civil Service examination in 1912, and arrived in India in 1913, serving in Bombay as assistant collector and magistrate. His work involved close contact with rural society, and he was impressed by the abject poverty of Indian cultivators. During the First World War he joined the Indian army reserve of officers, and fought in the Mesopotamia campaign from 1916 to 1919. On 3 April 1920 he married Annie Beryl (1895/6-1949), daughter of Charles Francis Benthall, an Anglican clergyman, of Benthall Hall, Shropshire. 
Garratt tendered his resignation from the Indian Civil Service in 1921, protesting against the squandering of money on building unnecessary amenities, including a costly fountain at Government House, while the Indian people lacked basic necessities. The resignation took formal effect in August 1922. During 1921-2 he was Berlin correspondent of the 'Westminster Gazette'. He joined the Labour Party and in 1924 stood unsuccessfully as Labour parliamentary candidate for Cambridgeshire. He bought a farm at Barrington, Cambridgeshire, and was a member of the county council from 1925 to 1931. In November 1927 he sailed for India, and he stayed there until February 1928. After returning home, he published 'An Indian Commentary' (1928), on which Edward John Thompson, another writer and Indian specialist, wrote a review. Garratt and Thompson became close friends and collaborators. Philip Rattray, the protagonist in 'So a Poor Ghost' (1933), a novel written by Thompson, was modelled on Garratt. He supported the cause of Indian nationalism, but was not wholeheartedly sympathetic to the leadership of the Indian National Congress. At the general election of 1929 he again failed to win the Cambridgeshire seat. 
In 1930, as reporter for 'The Nation', Garratt covered the first round-table conference in London, where representatives of the government and various strands of Indian political opinion discussed possible constitutional advance for India. He then planned to go to India to organize welfare work for jute mills of Bird & Co., Calcutta, of which his brother-in-law Edward Charles Benthall was partner. On hearing this, Edward Taylor Scott, the editor of the 'Manchester Guardian', approached Garratt and arranged that he should contribute articles to the paper from India. Garratt arrived in India in March 1931, met Gandhi, by now chief spokesman of Indian nationalism, and Irwin, the viceroy, in Delhi, and attended the Congress session in Karachi. He observed that an early resolution of political conflict between the Congress and the British raj, giving elected Indian ministers real responsibility in a new constitutional arrangement, was urgently needed. By October he had returned to Britain (being defeated for a third time as candidate for Cambridgeshire) and attended the second round-table conference as adviser to the Labour Party group. In December he returned to India, as he was invited by the diwan of Baroda, a princely state, to become 'naib diwan' -- secretary to the prime minister -- of that state. However, the appointment was not realized, owing to the objection of the government of India. After working out the welfare scheme for Bird & Co., he went back to Britain in April 1932. 
Garratt settled in Bishopsteignton House, near Teignmouth in south Devon, and contributed a number of reviews and articles to journals. In 1932 he published 'The Mugwumps and the Labour Party', in which he discussed the uneasy relationship within the Labour Party between socialist intellectuals and trade union leaders. In 1934 Garratt and Thompson published 'The Rise and Fulfilment of British Rule in India', which came to be regarded as the first British attempt to understand the Indian nationalist movement on its own terms. In the general election of 1935 he unsuccessfully stood for Wrekin, Shropshire. Meanwhile, preparing a biography of Lord Brougham, published in 1935 and followed in 1936 by another historical study, 'The Two Mr Gladstones', he contemplated an academic career, but developments in international relations drew him back into journalism and politics. In 1936 he went to Ethiopia as correspondent for the 'Manchester Guardian' to cover the war. He saw the raising of sanctions against Italy by Britain as 'a lunacy', as Italy's real aims in Ethiopia were 'only too blatant' (Garratt to Thompson, 22 June 1936, Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. C 5289/125). 
Garratt's keen sense of public duty and radical sympathies were displayed during the Spanish Civil War. He became a leading member of the National Joint Committee for Spanish Relief. He spent most of 1937 in Spain and organized transport to and from the besieged Madrid, bringing food in and evacuating children. In May he was temporarily back in Britain, as he was persuaded to fight a by-election as a Labour candidate at the Plymouth Drake constituency, but was defeated by his Conservative opponent. During the campaign he attacked 'Eden and his foul and fascist foreign office' (Garratt to Thompson, 9 May 1937, Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. C 5289/133), and afterwards was 'ticked off' by the Labour Party for having said too much about Spain (Garratt to Thompson, 10 Sept 1937, Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. C 5289/137). His despair with the party was deep. In 1938 he joined the co-ordinating committee for refugees and became temporary secretary for the organization. On the basis of his first-hand experiences in Ethiopia and the Spanish Civil War, he wrote 'Mussolini's Roman Empire' (1938), in which he tried to convince readers that Mussolini was more dangerous than most Englishmen believed, and alleged that British foreign policy was dictated by pro-fascists in high places. 
When the Second World War broke out Garratt was keen to enlist, but was not called up immediately. In January 1940 he went to Finland as correspondent for the 'Manchester Guardian' to cover the Russo-Finnish War. After a long wait, in July 1940 he joined the Pioneer Corps. By February 1941 he was appointed captain and second in command of a company of German volunteers removing the debris of buildings hit by German bombs in London. By September they moved to Pembroke Dock, where they built defences as well as doing anti-invasion exercises. Garratt felt irritated by the reluctance of the British government to use people like himself or Thompson in the critical situation in India. In April 1942 he sought to make contact with Sir Stafford Cripps, who was leading a cabinet mission to India in an attempt (vain as it turned out) to enlist Congress co-operation in the war in return for radical political change in peacetime. 
Garratt died at the Defensible Barracks at Pembroke Dock on 28 April 1942 'from multiple injuries accidentally sustained through the explosion of a beach mine during a military lecture' (d. cert.). A fortnight before his death he was appointed MBE. He was an individual of ability, energy, and public spirit. A tall man (about 6 foot), he was known for his modesty and the charm of his character; according to his wife, he had a peculiarly peaceful expression even in times of stress. Garratt and his wife adopted two sons in 1938. 


@@@@@


doc= 39643


Brookes, John Henry (1891-1975), educational administrator and craftsman, was born in Oliver Street, Kingsley Park, Kingsthorpe, Northampton, on 31 January 1891, the only son of Robert Henry Brookes ('b'. 'c'.1866) and his wife, Annie Watts, 'nee' Dykes ('b'. 'c'.1869). His father worked in the local shoe trade as a foreman boot clicker but later became a technical instructor in Northamptonshire and Leicestershire. Brookes went to Northampton grammar school in 1902 and moved to the Wyggeston Grammar School in Leicester in 1905 when his father took up employment in the area. He attended Leicester School of Art and Crafts between 1909 and 1914, qualifying as an art teacher. Between 1913 and 1916 he attended summer schools of the Guild of Handicrafts at Chipping Campden, learning the art of silversmithing under George Hart, who had a farm nearby. As a conscientious objector during the First World War Brookes had to undertake farmwork and may have done this at Hart's farm. After a spell teaching at the Leicester School of Art and Crafts, Brookes taught at Penistone grammar school in the West Riding of Yorkshire and undertook extramural work for Sheffield University. 
On 7 October 1919 Brookes married Helena Victoria Mary, the daughter of Charles Henry Tyack, an innkeeper and market gardener in Harvington, Worcestershire, and returned to the Cotswolds, which he always found a source of artistic inspiration. He worked as a sculptor with Alec Miller in the Guild Workshops at Chipping Campden until 1924, supplementing his income by teaching, and he first went to Oxford about 1922 to teach local stonemasons to carve. Brookes's art training and craft workshop experience encouraged him in 1928 to apply for and secure the post of headmaster of Oxford School of Art. The school shared cramped premises with the city technical school in Church Street, St Ebbe's, but he threw himself into the job, teaching up to three classes an evening and launching a school of architecture in 1929 in a 'borrowed' studio. With the co-operation of Oxford University Press he began day release classes for employees in the printing trade. From the first he tried to bridge the artificial division between art and technical education and, although he claimed that he only applied for the job because he knew the place better than anyone else, he was a natural appointment as principal of the newly merged Schools of Technology, Arts and Commerce in 1934. He managed a difficult merger very astutely, paying tribute to the 'loyalty, goodwill and unselfishness' of his new team (Brookes collection, first annual report of the Combined Schools of Technology, Arts and Commerce, 1934-5), and he put his ideas into practice by establishing, in the face of some opposition, a combined department of architecture and building. The University of Oxford recognized his early achievements with an honorary MA in 1935. 
The removal of the Oxford municipal secondary school to the new Southfield School in 1935 provided space in Church Street for day release classes and the Junior Technical School. Student enrolments rose from 966 in 1930 to 2334 by 1941-2 and Brookes became a master of improvisation, utilizing no fewer than nineteen buildings scattered around Oxford in 1944. He campaigned ceaselessly for new buildings and the city council compulsorily purchased a site for a new college opposite the former workhouse in Cowley Road in 1936. Accusations of extravagance delayed development and the outbreak of the Second World War put paid to the scheme just as work was about to begin. Emergency engineering workshops were built by 1941 and temporary huts gradually filled the rest of the 21/2 acre site. With a predicted student population of 8000 from the city and its surroundings, the inadequacy of the pre-war scheme was evident by 1943 and the city council entered into negotiations for all or part of the Cowley Road Hospital site. Frustrated there in 1947, the city went on to purchase 33 acres of land on Headington Hill from the Morrell estate by 1949. 
Oxford city council's subsequent rejection of the scheme for a new technical college on the site in September 1950 was a bitter blow for Brookes but he vowed to fight on and revised plans were at last approved in July 1952. Lord Nuffield laid the foundation stone of the new College of Technology, Art and Commerce in April 1954 and the first students moved into the completed school of engineering in September 1955. Brookes retired the following summer, before all the buildings were finished, but if he regretted the fact he expressed only joy that 'those of us who had survived the lean years... were now allowed to set foot inside the promised land' (Henry, 20). The Junior Technical School from St Ebbe's was resited next door to the college as Cheney School in 1954 and the rest of Brookes's scattered empire moved to the Headington campus by 1961. The demand for elementary courses then led to the formation of a separate college, the nucleus of the Oxford College of Further Education, in the old Cowley Road buildings. Brookes had helped to make all these developments possible and he was a worthy recipient of the OBE in 1953. 
Brookes admitted that a career in administration had forced him to neglect his artistic talents but he was an accomplished silversmith, wood carver, and expert in lettering, and a fine photographer who was president of the Oxford Photographic Society for many years until 1962. Stone carvings that he undertook for Coventry Cathedral while working with Alec Miller were destroyed in the Second World War but a carving above St Alban's Church door in Oxford recalls his skill as a sculptor. He was a master of pen-and-ink drawing, publishing many examples in the 'Oxford Times' and in books such as 'Country Corners' (1969) and 'Mid-Oxfordshire Churches' (1970); these sketches he described not as art but as 'reports of things which I love' ('Oxford Mail', 11 Oct 1992). His creative skills were seen in work as varied as title headings and drawings for the wartime newsletter 'Oxford Siren', and in the design for nurses' badges at Littlemore Hospital in 1958. 
Small of stature, Brookes was recalled by a colleague, Anthony Hawksley, for 'his bright sparkling face... and his dapper, impeccably-dressed figure' (Addison, 54). Sir Basil Blackwell delighted in his 'simple and cheery sincerity' (ibid., 71). Others remarked on the unassuming, almost self-effacing manner which disguised his tenacious sense of purpose and an ability to be as firm as a rock when the occasion demanded. When controversial meetings loomed he identified his supporters and worked effectively behind the scenes to prepare the ground. In 1941 he was described as 'an ideal chairman', tactful, helpful, and with a gift for summarizing discussions in a precise and well-structured way ('Oxford Siren'). These talents and his commitment to public service led to his election as chairman of many local societies and he was a leading Rotarian. He was appointed a magistrate in 1946, serving as chairman of the Oxford bench between 1960 and 1963. Always the teacher, he ran a flourishing art class for prisoners in Oxford prison while he was JP. 
Rising at 5.30 a.m. and blessed with good health until late in life, Brookes still found time for home and family. His married life with Helena had begun in a condemned rented cottage but the couple were later able to afford a more comfortable Cotswold house. Moving to Oxford with their two children, Joan and Peter, they acquired a newly built detached house in The Slade, Headington, in 1930 and this property, known as the Gate House, remained their home until 1975. Brookes looked after the sizeable garden himself and it was apparently the pride of the neighbourhood. 
After a short illness Brookes died in the Churchill Hospital, Headington, Oxford, on 29 September 1975 and was cremated at Oxford crematorium on 3 October. In a commemorative volume published in 1979 Stuart Addison remarked that Brookes's achievement was the enriched lives of thousands of young people. His legacy also lay in the college that went on to become Oxford Polytechnic and then a university in 1992. A competition was held to suggest a fitting name for the new institution, and Olive Gibbs described the eventual choice of Brookes as 'little short of inspirational' ('Oxford Mail', 6 Oct 1992). The name Oxford Brookes University keeps alive the memory of a remarkable man. 


@@@@@


doc= 39644


Glover, Richard (1837-1919), Baptist minister, was born on 6 January 1837 in South Shields, one of ten children (and the youngest of eight sons) of Terrot Glover (1802-1885), a prosperous Scottish businessman, active Liberal, and respected civic leader, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Reaveley (1798-1858). The family had links with the sea: Terrot Glover had money in ships and two of his sons were shipowners (one son, John, becoming chairman of Lloyds), and in his youth Richard voyaged widely. They were also Presbyterian, Terrot Glover serving for nearly sixty years as elder of the English Presbyterian church. 
In 1846 Richard Glover became one of the first pupils at a sessional day school linked to St John's Presbyterian Church, South Shields. From 1853 to 1855 he studied arts at Edinburgh University, without taking a degree. From 1855 to 1856 he took evening classes at King's College, London, in the 'Old' and 'New' testaments, English language and composition, history, and geography. In 1856 he began training for the ministry at the Presbyterian college, London, completing his course in 1860. While training, however, Glover became convinced of the case for believer's baptism and self-governing local churches. Encouraged by a friend, and with a letter of introduction from his tutor, he visited William Landels, minister of the Regent's Park Baptist Chapel. Soon after, Landels baptized him, recommending him to the small Blackfriars Street Church in Glasgow's east end. On preaching there, Glover was at once invited to the pastorate, starting in January 1861. During eight years' ministry he became known as a thought-provoking preacher, at ease with all kinds of people, notable especially for his Sunday evening lectures for young men on subjects such as science and religion. He spoke often at meetings of the Baptist Association of Scotland and helped initiate a new Baptist Union in Scotland. He also began a lifelong campaign to promote worldwide evangelism, making his mark with an inspirational sermon, preached at Landels's suggestion at the May meetings of the Baptist Missionary Society (BMS) in 1867. He married Anne Finlay (1838-1924) of Glasgow on 26 March 1866. Of their three children, Dorothy was the first woman to chair the BMS, while Terrot Reaveley Glover became a distinguished Cambridge classicist and leading Baptist layman, perhaps best known for his influential 'The Jesus of History' (1917). 
Glover's main ministry was at Bristol, however, where in April 1869 he became the first minister of Tyndale Baptist Church, newly formed to serve the fast-growing and wealthy suburbs of Clifton and Redland. Glover remained at Tyndale until his retirement in 1911, assisted from 1908 by Herbert Burdett. The first twenty years saw Tyndale's membership multiply tenfold, a lecture hall and classrooms added, and a mission church founded. As secretary to the Bristol Baptist college from 1873 to 1919, Glover befriended and influenced generations of ministerial students. Patriarchal in appearance, with a mane of white hair and well-trimmed beard, he became well known in the city. He was a governor of the city's infirmary and an honorary secretary of the convalescent home, founded at his suggestion to mark Queen Victoria's diamond jubilee. In this last, as in other projects, he could count on the backing of wealthy and influential church members: in its first twenty-five years the church was said to have raised some $40,000 for good causes, excluding buildings. 
Within the wider Baptist denomination Glover was active, influential, well liked and respected, and known for his geniality, deep personal faith, wide interests, and freshness of approach. He championed the closer integration of home and overseas mission work, and as Baptist Union president in 1884 urged the need for evangelism. When the down-grade controversy shook the union, Glover managed to stay on good terms with all the protagonists. He himself was progressive in theology. Repelled by Calvinism's judgemental aspects, he was open to modern scientific teaching and Biblical criticism, confident that they could not threaten Christianity. 
Glover took part in the ecumenical discussions at Grindelwald in 1891 and spoke at the second Free Church congress in 1894. His great passion, however, was overseas mission. In 1879, to much relief at Tyndale, he declined to become the BMS Indian secretary, but from 1873 until his death he was an influential member (and from 1907 an honorary member) of the society's committee, chairing the China subcommittee from 1884 to 1912. Resisting firmly any suggestion that finance should dictate missionary work, Glover raised funds effectively for the BMS and sister societies. His own church gave significantly, both in money and workers. Glover stressed the need for missionaries to understand the culture and respect the beliefs of the people among whom they worked. He travelled widely for the BMS, most notably to China with Thomas Morris of Ipswich in 1890. This visit, the first ever 'home deputation' to the China mission field, was described by Morris in 'A Winter in North China' (1892), for which Glover wrote the introduction. Shortly after his return from China, in 1891, Glover received an honorary DD from Edinburgh University. This was followed, in 1912, by an LLD from Bristol University. 
Glover's published works included teacher's commentaries on the gospel of 'St Mark' (1884) and the gospel of 'St Matthew' (1889); lectures on the Lord's prayer (1881), the 'Beatitudes' (1888), and the fourteenth chapter of the gospel of 'St John' (1908); a biography, 'Herbert Stanley Jenkins, Medical Missionary, Shensi, China' (1914); and -- reflecting his love of children -- several sets of 'Notes for teachers' in the 'Sunday School Chronicle'. Glover died on 26 March 1919 at 15 Westfield Park, Clifton, Bristol, after some years of failing health. He was buried in Bristol's Canford cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 39645


Nuttall, William (1835-1905), promoter of the co-operative movement, was born in Manchester in December 1835, the son of Charles Nuttall, who was a cotton weaver, and Mary, 'nee' Ratcliffe. He was baptized on 27 March 1836, and grew up in Manchester, Saddleworth, and Oldham. He married Ann Newton on 25 September 1862 in Prestwich; they had six children. 
Apprenticed as a shoemaker, Nuttall worked in that trade at Greenacres Hill, Oldham. In the early 1860s, however, he became interested in the co-operative movement, becoming secretary of the Greenacres Hill Co-operative Society in 1862. From 1863 to 1865 he was the first paid permanent secretary of the Oldham Equitable Co-operative Society. He then became an accountant for the North of England Co-operative Wholesale Society (later the CWS). He was a member of the latter's general committee on two occasions (1865-6 and 1876-7) and its cashier for two years (1868-70). When the Central Co-operative Board was organized in 1870, Nuttall became its secretary. Nuttall was a friend and supporter of George Jacob Holyoake (1817-1906), who was one of the chief propagandists for secularism and the co-operative movement. In 1871 Holyoake's publication, 'The Reasoner', promoting his interest in secularism, was being issued on an irregular basis. Nuttall headed a publishing committee that attempted to support and publish 'The Reasoner' on a regular monthly schedule. 
Nuttall travelled throughout Britain in the 1870s, in both an official and a private capacity to promote the co-operative movement speaking at many local and regional meetings. He attended and actively participated in all the co-operative congresses down to 1883. Nuttall founded the Co-operative Printing Society and was also one of the founders of the 'Co-operative News' and an early editor and contributor to its columns. He edited the CWS 'Annual' for 1883 and prepared the 1884 edition. 
Nuttall became one of the principal figures in the formation of limited liability cotton-spinning companies in the Oldham district, the so-called 'working-class limiteds' ('DLB'); and by 1875 he was involved with at least twelve such businesses. Down to 1883 he was also promoting similar companies in coalmining, iron production, and paper manufacturing. Yet Nuttall invested much of his own money in such ventures, primarily in the Manchester area, and he lost heavily. This was undoubtedly one of the reasons why he decided to leave England. Before he left he was presented with testimonials by activists in Manchester, London, and Newcastle, reflecting his contribution to the co-operative movement. 
In December 1883 Nuttall emigrated with his wife and five of his children to Australia, settling in Melbourne, where he worked as cashier and secretary for the Equitable Co-operative Society. He was not particularly successful in promoting co-operation in the Melbourne region, and he and his wife returned to Manchester about 1900. However, he was unable to regain his former prominent position in the movement. He attended meetings, including the co-operative congresses of 1901-4, and visited friends and fellow co-operators but was no longer a major influence. He died of heart disease at his home, 21 Brookfield Road, Crumpsall, Manchester, on 26 October 1905; he was survived by his wife. His funeral at Manchester southern cemetery on 30 October was attended by only a few members of the movement. 
According to contemporaries, Nuttall had a forceful, independent personality, and he was often blunt and opinionated. One observer noted that his 'restlessness' kept him moving to new challenges and jobs ('Oldham Co-operative Record' 4, 1898, 110). According to Holyoake he had 'the genius of figures' (p. 85) and he made important contributions to the early development of the co-operative movement in Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 39646


Watson, John Boles (1748-1813), theatre manager, was born on 9 November 1748 at Silver Fort, Cashel, co. Tipperary, Ireland, the second of the six children of Solomon Watson, possibly a farmer, and his wife, Susannah. The family belonged to the Society of Friends. After his twenty-first birthday Watson moved to England and became friendly with the actor John Philip Kemble. Forsaking earlier Quaker principles, he gained a footing in the company managed by Roger Kemble, John's father. Here he played under the assumed name of Carleton. However, ill health prevented him taking up the itinerant life of an actor; instead, in 1779 he opted for management, although he also appeared sporadically on the stage. At Roger Kemble's retirement Watson purchased a number of his theatres, while others were assigned to Henry Masterman. 
Cheltenham became the headquarters of Watson's activities, and his performers were nominated the 'Cheltenham Company of Comedians'. A converted malthouse off Pittville Street served as their theatre (the location is featured by Dinah Maria Muloch in chapter 6 of 'John Halifax, Gentleman', 1856). The second of Watson's Cheltenham theatres, opened in 1782, was situated in York Passage, near the High Street, a building visited by George III and the royal family when they took the waters in 1788. This was enough for Watson to dispense with the requirement of a patent in terming the playhouse the 'Theatre Royal'. The minor remains of the building are now marked by a blue plaque. On the king's birthday, 4 June 1805, Watson's last Cheltenham theatre -- situated in Bath Street in the Cambray area of the town -- was opened. 
Watson created a circuit of more than forty theatres: from Bristol in the south-west it reached northwards to Holywell in Flintshire, and from Leicester it stretched across the midlands and Wales to Carmarthen. In addition to Cheltenham, the principal locations of activity were Gloucester, Cirencester, Stroud, Hereford, Leominster, Monmouth, Swansea, Oswestry, Evesham, Stourbridge, Wolverhampton, Coventry, Birmingham, Daventry, Walsall, and Tamworth. 
Allowing for the difficulties under which a Georgian manager worked, Watson's company was proficient rather than distinguished. William Field, a contemporary Warwick historian, judged it to be averagely provincial. Visiting performers from London could take a harsher line: Dorothy Jordan wrote that at Worcester the supporting performers put her in a foul temper with their 'ignorance and stupidity' (Aspinall, 187). Nevertheless, Watson possessed the foresight to choose a band of players who would acquit themselves creditably for much of the time: Mrs Carleton, later to manage a company in Wales, was a leading lady praised for her tragic portraits, and was ably supported by her husband, an upstanding uniformed figure; William Buckle combined the heavy roles of tragedy and sentiment with the additional work of prompter and stage manager; Chamberlain, the company treasurer, specialized in comedy; Richards, a dancer, singer, and comedian, also engaged in ageing tragic nobles; Field was suited by youth and temperament to light romantic roles; George Shuter, the son of Edward Shuter of the London patent theatres, was a favourite over many years; and Samuel Seward gained more than a local name as a harlequin and also opened in Cheltenham his own theatre, the Sadler's Wells or English Fantoccini. The scenic artists were Samuel (?) Whitmore, later at Covent Garden, and Seward. 
Some members of Watson's family worked in the theatre, and it is convenient to consider them and the non-theatricals together. According to the 'Thespian Dictionary' Watson's first marriage was to a Miss Wilkinson. After her early death he married his second wife, Henrietta Withington, a widow, at Cheltenham by special licence on 18 October 1785. The couple had two children, Louisa and John Boles Watson II. Louisa married in 1802 John Richer, the rope-walker of Sadler's Wells Theatre. Having abandoned the Wells, Richer played a lively part in Watson's company, taking on such roles as Don Juan in the play of that name and the dumb Francesco in 'The Tale of Mystery' (1802) by Thomas Holcroft, as well as continuing with his acrobatic feats. Louisa died 'of a decline' ('GM', 696) in Cheltenham on 17 July 1804; she had played no part on the stage, possibly deterred by ill health. John Boles Watson II performed throughout his life on the stages of the Watson circuit. He eventually married Frances Margaret, but his children -- two sons and three daughters -- were the outcome of passing liaisons. In spite of an inability to cope with the finances, Watson II attempted to organize the circuit after his father's gradual relinquishing of responsibility around 1811. About 1826 the rapidly diminishing circuit passed to Watson II's eldest son, yet another actor, John Boles Watson III. 
In addition to the regular company, visitors from the London and Bristol stages appeared for brief periods, and the calibre of the stars aids a just evaluation of the standard of the company. Sarah Siddons played at Cirencester and Cheltenham in the early days of Watson's management. Her brother John Philip Kemble played Hamlet at Cheltenham and Gloucester. Elizabeth Richards, a Gloucestershire woman who joined the prestigious Bath company, arrived both before and after her marriage to John Edwin, sometimes playing only for a night at proximate Cotswold theatres. William Henry West Betty, the 'Young Roscius', was a child actor whose appeal lasted longer in the provinces than on the London stage; he played on the circuit at the height of his popularity in 1804 and later in 1807. Alexander Pope, the Cork actor who progressed to the London patent houses, arrived with his powerful voice to assume the role of Macbeth in 1811. Thus, while Watson could afford to hire players of worth to act on the circuit for a few nights, these engagements were limited, and for the most part the locally known actors had to sustain the interest of the season's audiences. 
On 19 September 1811 an ailing Watson made his will, bequeathing his circuit of theatres to his son, John Boles Watson II. During the former's working life elaborate mortgages, sharings, and leasings of the theatres make their value difficult to calculate. Watson died at his home in High Street, Cheltenham, 'affected with gout, which terminated his existence by an attack on the vitals' ('Gloucester Journal', 22 March 1813), on 18 March 1813. He was buried in the graveyard of the parish church of St Mary, Cheltenham, on 22 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 39647


Westmacott, Charles Molloy (1787/8-1868), journalist and blackmailer, was apparently the illegitimate second son of Richard (Dick) Westmacott ('bap'. 1746, died 1808), sculptor, whose name he took, and of Susannah Molloy, a 'pretty widow' and innkeeper, though his enemies alleged he was the son of Charles Molloy, a master chimney sweep of Covent Garden. He was brought up as Westmacott's own son, went to St Paul's School, where he was admitted as a scholar on 5 May 1800 aged twelve, where his father was described as Richard Molloy, merchant, of Lambeth Marsh. He was said to have trained at the Royal Academy of Arts (though his name does not appear in the index of pupils). On the death of his father, Charles's half-brother, Sir Richard Westmacott (1775-1856), later professor of sculpture, sent him away penniless, but by his own ability he rose to become proprietor and editor of a scandalous tory journal, the 'Age', with which his name was principally associated. 
Westmacott soon acquired a reputation for publishing pseudo-satirical gossip with a view to extortion. Guilty or innocent, the persons he accused would pay either to be kept out of his paper or to have their names cleared. Thus he allegedly extorted $5000 from Sir Herbert Taylor, acting for the royal family, in a single scandalous court intrigue that concerned the parentage of Captain Thomas Garth, son of Princess Sophia, between 1828 and 1830. His notebooks, offered for sale in the catalogue of Thomas Arthur (December 1868), are described as having contained intimate details relating to George IV, Princess Caroline, Beau Brummell, and members of the nobility. By 1834 Westmacott was prosperous and possessed a pretty cottage between Barnes and Richmond, its grounds adorned with sculptures. In 1841 he was resident at Kingston Lodge, Kingston upon Thames, with an Anne Westmacott -- who may have been the Anne Durham in whose name the proprietorship of the 'Age' had been registered, and who had been described in a court case as 'Mr Molloy Westmacott's 'poppett'' ('The Times', 29 July 1829) -- and a twelve-year-old boy, Charles Westmacott. 
Westmacott began his career by publishing the first thirteen numbers of the 'Gazette of Fashion' (1822). A regular feature on gambling dens, entitled 'Peep into the pandemonium', exemplifies his blackmailing methods, declaring the existence of 'a list of more than 200 names' to be exposed to 'merited chastisement' and protesting that the aim was 'neither to 'extort hush-money', [n]or point out 'individuals' to public execration' (9 February). In June 1827 he purchased the 'Age' from Richard Downing Richards on the latter's insolvency. Westmacott boosted its weekly sales to about 10,000 by publishing sensational news and heaping abuse on well-known political opponents. 'Fraser's Magazine' (1834), in its comment on his portrait, mentions as 'the most characteristic touch..., the knowing horsewhip in his hat'. Westmacott's vicious criticism made him feared and hated. One insult that was avenged was his denigration of Fanny Kemble's 'decidedly bad' figure and diction ('a guttural thickness, tainted with very strong provincialisms'): when he attended a performance at Covent Garden in October 1830 her father, Charles Kemble, so 'The News' reported, 'administered a discipline with a horsewhip', leaving Westmacott to 'roll about the floor and roar'. Edward Bulwer-Lytton also threatened a flogging for an offensive remark. Westmacott's retaliation came in a letter published in 1833 and is referred to in 'Fraser's Magazine' as the 'crushing without mercy... [of Bulwer's] volumes... beneath his foot'. He sold the 'Age' in 1838, and in 1839 began the 'Argus'. 
Westmacott's training as an artist shows in two of his publications. 'British Galleries of Painting and Sculpture' (1824) is a serious work which claims to describe all the 'Palaces, Mansions, and Galleries... in the Kingdom' (p. vii) and to offer a comprehensive catalogue of all the works of art they contain. 'A Descriptive and Critical Catalogue to the Exhibition of the Royal Academy... with a[n]... Account of the Rise and Progress of the Arts of Painting and Sculpture in England' (1823) includes in its preface a threatening attack on 'the Academicians', who had wasted $4000 on 'a splendid banquet'. He also wrote 'Points of Misery, or, Fables for Mankind' (1823), with illustrations by Robert Cruikshank, as well as 'a musical farce in two acts', 'Nettlewig Hall, or, Ten to One' (1829), in fact a conventional prose play in which an elderly guardian is fooled by his clever nephew. 
Whether the following works, published under the pseudonym Bernard Blackmantle, were written wholly by Westmacott (as claimed in biographical accounts shortly after his death) cannot be decided with certainty. 'The English spy... satirical and humorous, comprising scenes and sketches in every rank of society' (2 vols., 1825-6; new edn, 1907), with illustrations by Robert Cruikshank, is a gossipy miscellany in the tradition of Egan's 'Life in London', whose author claims that 'from obscurity of birth... he [has risen] into notice by the... exertion of his talents' but, unlike Westmacott, he was educated at Eton and Oxford (1.14-16). The work was continued as the 'St James' Royal Magazine, and Monthly Gazette of Fashion' (1826). 'Fitzalleyne of Berkeley: a Romance of the Present Times' (2 vols., 1825) deals with the Berkeley peerage scandal and with illegitimacy, issues which would have attracted Westmacott, in whose 'Gazette of Fashion' 'Fitz-Allan' features as an anonymous correspondent signing the 'Pandemonium' columns. 'The Punster's Pocket-Book, or, The Art of Punning Enlarged' (1826), illustrated by Cruikshank, refers back to 'The Art of Punning [1719]... ascribed to Dr. Swift... [but] written by Dr. Sheridan' (p. 68). It reprints verbatim, in two parts (pp. 84-5 and 94-6) a fake letter to the editor of the 'Gazette of Fashion', 'On the vice of punning' (9 February 1822). 
Wrongly attributed to Westmacott was the Shakespeare burlesque 'Othello, the Moor of Fleet Street', now recognized as the work of Charles Mathews. There is also no evidence that under the pseudonym Abel Funnefello he wrote 'The Blue-Coat Boy' (1837). 
In the introduction to 'Nettlewig Hall', Westmacott is described as 'a little round man, with a dumpling figure and physiognomy; smart and lively as his farce' (Westmacott, A3). According to 'Fraser's Magazine', he was 'a pluck[y] little fellow' who had 'pushed his way actively in the world' and had 'fought... the battle of the Tories as open-mouthedly and as freely as he could'. Notorious and wealthy, he boasted of his talents and his intimacy with the nobility, but never got into society. Eventually he was lost sight of in the press and the London salons and slunk away to Paris, where he died on 24 June 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 39648


Hudson, Edward Burgess (1854-1936), magazine printer and publisher, was born in November 1854, the son of John Francis Daniel Hudson, printer. The family was descended from modest landowners in Cumberland, but Hudson's grandfather had moved to London, made money as a merchant, and then established the family printing business of Hudson and Kearns, with premises in Southwark Street. At the time of Hudson's birth his father was head of the firm and had recently purchased a 'gloomy mansion' (Maude, 58) near Hyde Park. Together with his several brothers and sisters, Edward grew up in this house surrounded by his father's collections of antiques, and although he appears to have been largely uneducated his 'instinctive appreciation of beauty' (Hussey, 96) was surely fostered in the family home. Indeed, long after his parents' death Hudson continued to live there with his sickly brother, Henry, and his two unmarried sisters. It was not until he reached middle age that he eventually moved, to 15 Queen Anne's Gate. There, in an early eighteenth-century house which he is said to have coveted throughout his youth, he began to indulge his own lifelong love of collecting art and furniture, making every room 'like a picture' (Strong, 18). 
Little is known about Hudson's early life, except that his passion for open-air pursuits such as walking and cycling began in childhood. Capable and ambitious, he had been articled to a solicitor at the age of fifteen and within two years had become chief conveyancing clerk. However, he evidently disliked the profession and by the age of twenty-one, after a stint as a 'printer's traveller' (Edwards, 334), he persuaded his father to let him take over the family business. There he quickly emerged as a shrewd businessman and under his direction Hudson and Kearns went from strength to strength. In the 1870s they had simply been a busy company printing a diverse range of books, mostly for other publishers. By the early 1890s Hudson's interest in recent advances in the technology of blockmaking and half-tone printing had led the firm to expand into the booming field of illustrated magazine publishing. 
This entrepreneurial scheme came about after Hudson's first contact with Lord Riddell (1865-1934), chairman of the 'News of the World', and Sir George Newnes (1851-1910), the publishing magnate who had made his fortune with the enormously popular magazine 'Tit Bits', launched in the early 1880s. Hudson's first magazines, produced from his London offices at 10-11 Southampton Street in partnership with the firm of George Newnes Ltd, were 'Famous Cricketers', the 'Navy and Army Illustrated', and 'Racing Illustrated'. On 8 January 1897 the company merged the ailing 'Racing Illustrated' with a new magazine, 'Country Life Illustrated', which focused on sport, country pursuits, and the social side of land ownership. Importantly, this first number also included an article on Baddesley Clinton in Warwickshire, 'Country Life''s first weekly portrait of a country house. The magazine prospered financially from the beginning, thanks in part to its success in attracting advertising from estate agents in a rapidly growing country-house market. By 1902 the business had so expanded that Hudson commissioned the young and charismatic architect Edwin Lutyens to design suitably imposing offices in London's Covent Garden, and by 1905 he had bought out George Newnes and established Country Life Ltd. 
Although he did not write for the magazine and was never its editor, Hudson always exerted his authority over 'Country Life''s contents, style, and policy. Its distinctive appearance and regular features evolved over the next few years as a combined result of his fiercely critical eye and his remarkable success in assembling a band of expert advisers and contributors. Despite his early investment in 'the finest pictorial printing machinery obtainable' (Strong, 19), when 'Country Life' was first launched there was no specialist photographer on the staff and many of the images were bought in from elsewhere. In 1898 Hudson met Charles Latham (died 1909), one of Britain's finest architectural photographers, who helped to define the magazine's unique style with his perfectly balanced pictures of country house interiors -- combining a romantic feeling for atmosphere with documentary clarity. 
In 1899 Hudson met Gertrude Jekyll (1843-1932), an established figure in the gardening world, who edited a gardening magazine for him in 1900-01 and contributed a 'Garden notes' column to 'Country Life' for the next thirty years. It was she who had introduced him to Lutyens, who, though he 'ragged Hudson unmercifully' (Edwards, 333), quickly became a dear friend whom Hudson loved like a son. Hudson took great pains to promote Lutyens's career in the pages of 'Country Life'. In 1931, when he accompanied him to India for the inauguration of New Delhi, Hudson was said to have been 'on the verge of tears... from emotion and pride' (Maude, 59). It was through Lutyens that Hudson's own artistic tastes found expression in his succession of country homes: first at a new house, the 'arts and crafts' Deanery Garden (1899) in Sonning, Berkshire; then in the romantic restoration of the ruined sixteenth-century Lindisfarne Castle (1902) on Holy Island; and lastly at the timber-framed Sussex manor of Plumpton Place (1927-8), which Lutyens turned into an 'enchanted place' (Pevsner), complete with moat and lake. 
Lutyens benefited from -- and may have influenced -- the increasing professionalism of the magazine's architectural journalism, which became a central part of its identity under the guidance of its architectural editor H. Avray Tipping, whose articles on historic houses first appeared in 1906, and Sir Lawrence Weaver, who concentrated on new buildings. Hudson attracted equally distinguished writers, including Percy Macquoid and Margaret Jourdain, for articles on furniture and other antiques. These contributors also helped to author books published by 'Country Life', in a venture originally set up by Hudson to recycle photographs commissioned for the magazine; among its most ambitious productions were the three-volume 'Dictionary of Furniture' (1924-7), by Macquoid and Ralph Edwards, and Tipping's nine-volume 'English Homes' (1920-37). 
Described by several contemporaries as gruff, difficult, boring, and tongue-tied, Hudson had a fondness for Lutyens and his young family -- he was a devoted godfather to Lutyens's daughter Ursula -- which revealed a more affectionate and tender side to his character. Although he was always nervous and reticent in company, he hosted regular Monday luncheons at Queen Anne's Gate, where contributors to 'Country Life' were entertained alongside such guests as Lytton Strachey or Guilhermina Suggia, the renowned Italian cellist by whom Hudson was 'starstruck' (Edwards, 335). His reputation received its greatest social recognition when he was visited at Lindisfarne Castle by the prince and princess of Wales in 1908. Although he must have been somewhat lonely, he took great solace in his love of music, collecting fine objects, driving in the countryside, playing golf, and spending time with his few intimate friends. On 2 May 1929, at the age of seventy-four, he married Ellen Gertrude Woolrich ('b'. 1876/7), who edited the magazine 'Homes and Gardens', another of Hudson's creations. On 17 September 1936 Hudson died at his London home in Queen Anne's Gate, and his funeral took place nearby on 28 September at Christ Church, Lancaster Gate. It is likely that following his death his wife disposed of his personal papers, since none has come to light. 

'Country Life' was Hudson's finest creation and the greatest love of his life. He continued to supervise its publication until he retired, a few years before his death, confident in the knowledge that the magazine would outlive him. It succeeded with both readers and advertisers thanks to the immense and enduring popular appeal of his personal ideal of the civilized life: an architecturally distinguished house in unspoilt countryside, furnished with choice collections of paintings and furniture, and set in a beautiful garden. 


@@@@@


doc= 39653


Steele, Robert (1791-1879), shipbuilder, was the son of 
In 1796 the family moved to Greenock, where Robert went into partnership with John Carswell, who had an established shipyard in the town. The move may have been prompted by the recent start of the Napoleonic wars, which created a strong demand for all types of shipping and maintained ocean freight rates at a high level for an extended period. Steele and Carswell's first vessel was the brig 'Clyde' (145 tons), launched in April 1797. 
The firm's yard was located west of the town, on the shores of the Bay of Quick; but it had several drawbacks. The gently shelving coast there made it necessary to have exceptionally long launching ways. It also meant that the fitting-out dock had to be built well out into the Clyde, resulting in regular storm damage. Nevertheless the firm prospered. About thirty-five vessels were launched from the site during the twenty-year duration of the partnership, including the 'Bengal', the first East Indiaman built at Greenock. 
The partnership between Steele and Carswell was dissolved in 1815 and a new company was formed -- Robert Steele & Co. -- a partnership between the elder Robert and his two sons, James and Robert. Robert Steele & Co. seems to have built its first steamship in 1821. So quickly did it become involved in this new field of endeavour that in 1826 it launched the 'United Kingdom', so far the largest wooden paddle-steamship in the world. Robert Steele retired soon after, and he died in 1830 in Greenock, where he was buried. During his time at Greenock he had supervised the construction of more than fifty vessels, including six steamers, one of them the world's biggest. 
Born on 4 December 1791 and baptized at Ardrossan, Ayrshire, the younger Robert Steele now took charge of the firm (his brother James, the other partner, having died in 1826). Steele had married in 1818 Margaret Eliza Reed (1791-1855) and they had at least four children. Unlike his father, Robert Steele took a close interest in public affairs in Greenock. He was a town councillor, a magistrate, and a justice of the peace, as well as a leading churchman and freemason. He had a strong interest in harbour and dock improvement, and was the promoter of a scheme to build Victoria harbour. However, these outside interests do not seem to have hindered his shipbuilding activities, as he was able to maintain the high standards set by his father. 
During the 1840s the firm became known for producing high-quality, wooden-hulled paddle steamers. One of these vessels, the 650 ton 'Unicorn', was bought by Samuel Cunard and became the first ship to make the Atlantic crossing under his flag. Steele's connection with Cunard was further strengthened by an order to build the hull of the 'Columbia', one of four steamers built to fulfil a lucrative government mail contract awarded to Cunard in 1839. The work on the 'Columbia' must have been satisfactory, as the firm then worked on all but four of the first thirteen Cunard steamers -- vessels that established the reputation for reliability and safety that was to be the foundation of Cunard's subsequent success. 
The rapid pace of change in ship design meant, however, that Steele's prominence in the first generation of steamship construction was short-lived. Within a few years of being launched, wooden-hulled paddle steamships were made redundant by faster and more durable iron-hulled vessels. These new ships were in turn soon replaced by vessels using screw propellers rather than paddle wheels. Yet even when Steele's steamers were superseded, their construction was such that they continued to give many years of useful service, sometimes serving purely as sailing ships on the long Far Eastern routes. 
Robert Steele proved equal to the challenge posed by the new technology, and in 1854 he opened a larger yard at Cartsdyke West, Greenock to produce iron-hulled screw steamers. Orders were slow at first, and for a time the yard had to rely on fitting-out and maintenance work, but the firm persisted in seeking larger orders and was rewarded with a new era of prosperity. In 1857 it was commissioned to build a 1500 ton passenger liner for the Glasgow firm of Handyside and Henderson, followed two years later by the contract for a 2000 ton screw steamer called the 'Canadian', for the Allan Line of Glasgow and Montreal. 
A large part of the firm's success throughout its history seems to have been a steadfast commitment to quality in design, materials, and workmanship. Clyde-built vessels generally, and Steele-built ones in particular, were made to last. The success of the firm also owed something to a network of contacts built up by Robert Steele and maintained by his sons with the owners and managers of shipping lines and other larger shipbuilders, to whom the company sometimes acted as sub-contractor; but rapid change in steamship design continued to take place, making it increasingly difficult for established yards to keep up with each new wave of advances. When steel replaced iron in hull construction, technological change had once again overtaken the company. 
Fortunately, Steeles had continued to accept orders for commercial sailing ships, yachts, and barges. Between 1864 and 1869, for instance, the firm built forty-five sailing ships, but not one steam-powered vessel. What allowed this return to sail was the expansion of the long Australian and Far East trade routes, where wind power could still compete with steam. 
Among Steele's finest achievements during these years were about twenty clippers made for the tea trade with China; the first was the 'Kate Carne', launched in 1855. Built like racing yachts, many of these beautiful vessels, such as the 'Serica', the 'Falcon', the 'Ariel', the 'Taeping', and the 'Sir Lancelot', became famous when they won the China Tea race year after year. No expense was spared to help land the first tea of the season at London, and the superior design and construction of the Steele-built tea clippers saw them become the standard by which others were judged. 
However, the design and building of steamships continued to the point where such vessels could compete with sailing ships on these routes also. Steeles continued to build wind-powered ships, notably large passenger vessels for the Australian run, and many immigrants first saw the shores of their new homeland from the deck of a Steele-built vessel. 
Steeles, and the town of Greenock generally, had cause to regret the coming of steam. The town's prominence owed much to its location near the mouth of the Clyde, the funnel through which most of industrial Scotland's trade flowed. But, with the introduction of steam power and extensive harbour and river improvements along the upper Clyde during the nineteenth century, Greenock lost much of this advantage. Large steamers could now continue much further upriver by themselves, thus removing the need to call at Greenock. 
Steeles soon became a casualty of these changing times and circumstances. Robert Steele died at 11 Margaret Street, Greenock, on 4 July 1879, and, though his son Robert (1821-1890) took charge of the firm, a downturn in the general economic climate in the early 1880s, combined with some unsuccessful investments by Robert Steele in other areas, helped to bring about the firm's closure in 1883. In November of that year the yard was sold to Scott & Co. of Greenock for $40,000. 
During its existence Robert Steele & Co. built thirty-four vessels at the Bay of Quick and 273 at the Cartsburn yard (formerly called Cartsdyke West). Among these were nearly one hundred steamers, including eleven for Cunard and ten for the Allan Line. Between 1816 and 1882 total output was about 197,000 tons. 


@@@@@


doc= 39655


Park, William, junior (1864-1925), golfer and golf course architect, was born at 52 High Street, Musselburgh, on 4 February 1864, the second son of William (Willie) Park senior (1833-1903), golf professional and maker of golf balls and clubs, and his wife, Susannah Law (1837-1922), who had a family of five sons and five daughters. The Park family of Musselburgh was one of several eminent Scottish golfing families of the nineteenth century. Willie Park senior won the first ever open championship, at Prestwick in 1860, and subsequently won three further open titles, all at Prestwick, in 1863, 1866, and 1875. His brother Mungo Park (1836-1904) also won an open championship, at Musselburgh in 1874. From as early as his seventh year Willie junior learned both the game of golf and the art of making golf clubs from his father and elder brother, and honed his putting skills playing for marbles with anyone who would agree to play with him. When not at school he would surreptitiously creep into his father's workshop and borrow the tools of one of the workers to practise making club heads. 
Park played in the open championship for the first time in 1880, at the age of sixteen: he won the title twice, at Prestwick in 1887 and at Musselburgh in 1889, and finished second to Harry Vardon at Prestwick in 1898. His last appearance in the championship was in 1910. During this period, with few recognized competitions, professional golfers frequently played challenge matches against other professionals for substantial money stakes: Park had a standing challenge, as did his father before him, to play anyone in the world for a wager of $100. The normal practice was to play such matches over two nominated courses, home and away, and several notable golfers picked up the gauntlet, including Willie Fernie, Ben Sayers, and John Henry Taylor, all of whom Park defeated. In 1894, however, he lost to Douglas Rolland at Sandwich over thirty-six holes, and five years later was heavily beaten by Harry Vardon in a celebrated 72-hole challenge match sparked by Park's near miss in the open the previous year. A crowd of 10,000 watched Park hold Vardon to a lead of two holes over North Berwick, but on his home course at Ganton the Englishman pulled away to win by eleven up with ten to play. 
Through his experience as a professional golfer and the knowledge he had gained at his father's workshop Park became an excellent designer and maker of golf clubs. Among a number of patented designs was a 'bulger' made with a convex face to reduce the spin on the ball as a result of a mishit. He also brought out a 'lofter', of which over 17,000 were sold at 7's'. 6died each, and, in 1891, a patented wry-necked putter. Park himself was generally recognized as the best putter of his day, and would practise this aspect of his game for many hours at a time. His celebrated dictum, that 'a man who can putt is a match for anyone', reflected the confidence of a golfer seldom known to miss from within 6 feet. In the early days of golf-ball design, the patterns on gutta-percha ('gutty') balls were many and varied, and Park experimented first with a diamond-mesh pattern in 1890 and then, in 1894, a hexagonal pattern entitled The Royal, designed to slow down the roll of the ball on the putting greens. 
None the less, Park's most lasting fame has been his reputation as a golf-course designer. He first laid out courses with his father and uncle, before branching out on his own. His personal tally is at least 160 different course designs worldwide, including over forty in the USA (Park himself claimed seventy, many of which have not survived), around twenty in Canada, over ninety in Great Britain and Ireland, and three on the continent of Europe. Royal Antwerp in Belgium and Royal Quebec, Royal Montreal, and Mount Bruno in Canada were among his major designs overseas, and in Britain his major work was at Carnoustie, Huntercombe, the Nottinghamshire club at Hollinwell, and (perhaps most famously of all) at Sunningdale in Berkshire. While working at Sunningdale in 1900 Park formed Chiltern Estates Ltd to buy the land and develop the property for the Huntercombe course, near Henley-on-Thames. He invested $5000 of the $25,000 authorized capital, of which $11,200 was issued. It was one of the first golf courses planned to include a housing development, now standard practice worldwide. Park was appointed managing director of the company, as well as the promoter, but the housing scheme never came to fruition, and the project almost ruined him financially. 
In 1896 Park wrote 'The Game of Golf', the first golfing book written by a professional golfer, and he followed this in 1920 with 'The Art of Putting', part of which is autobiographical. He also wrote occasionally for 'Golf Illustrated' and 'Golf Monthly', and judged the entries at the golf exhibition of 1910. 
On 18 November 1886 Park married Mary Taylor Syme but his wife died in 1887, after the birth of a daughter, Rebecca. He subsequently married Margaret Sinclair Inglis (died 1943) on 15 October 1895; she was the daughter of John Inglis, spirit merchant. They had one son, who died at eight years of age of diphtheria, and four daughters, one of whom, Meta, died of peritonitis aged seven. Park himself was taken fatally ill while working in Canada in December 1924 and was taken home to Musselburgh. He died at Craighouse, Edinburgh, on 22 May 1925. Warmly praised by contemporaries for his courage, temperance, hard work, and devotion to his family, Park gained a brilliant reputation as a course designer which remains intact. Sir Guy Campbell thought him the doyen of all golf course designers, and believed that Park set the standard for all who followed him. 


@@@@@


doc= 39657


Callender, William Romaine (1825-1876), cotton spinner and politician, was born on 2 June 1825 at 7 Nelson Street, Chorlton Row, Manchester, the elder son of William Romaine Callender (1794-1872), merchant and calico printer, and his first wife, Hannah, the daughter of Samuel Pope from Exeter, probably a solicitor. 
The Callenders were an ancient Scottish family, while the Romaines were of Huguenot origin, William Romaine (1714-1795), Callender's great-uncle, having been a noted Calvinistic Anglican divine. Callender's father, after apprenticeship to a Birmingham draper, was by 1825 a partner in the expanding Manchester firm of Kershaw, Leese and Callender. He left this firm in 1836 and, after several more partnerships, set up Callender & Sons, merchants and manufacturers, with his sons William Romaine Callender (from 1847) and Samuel Pope Callender as partners. This became one of Manchester's leading cotton spinners and merchants, acquiring in 1862 the mills of Thomas Bazley in Water Street, Manchester, and the Dean mills, Halliwell, Bolton. 
The latter village community provided an ideal setting for Callender to put into practice his paternalist beliefs, as he attempted to revive its mutual improvement society and regularly addressed his workers on the values of literacy and self-help. Callender also invested, with Thomas Hughes among others, in the co-operative Cobden memorial mills in 1866, and in the late 1860s the family firm had purchased and modernized the Jackson Street Spinning Company of the philanthropic tory Robert Barnes. In 1849 Callender married Hannah, the only daughter of John Mayson JP of Manchester. Of their three sons and two daughters, the eldest son, Arthur William, Wykehamist, cotton spinner and insurance agent, was the father of the naval historian Sir Geoffrey Callender. 
Callender's early death was to leave his business ventures in a parlous state, but his originality lay in his articulate rejection, in several influential pamphlets, of the creed of the cotton masters which his father, a stalwart Liberal nonconformist supporter of the Anti-Corn Law League, typified. For already by 1850 Callender, identifying himself with Manchester's strong tory-Anglican elite, was a critic of Cobdenite panaceas, doubting the ability of free trade to create new markets abroad for British goods, and urging the importance of home demand. He also discounted the ethical optimism of the league, emphasizing, in the manner of earlier evangelicals, the dependence of prosperity on morality in commerce. 
Callender became a leading Manchester churchman and sought to rebuild local Conservatism on the pillars of church defence and working-class welfare. Unlike many employers, he defended, even lauded, trade unions and shorter hours. He was also a stalwart advocate of popular education, ready to insist that it should be compulsory and free, and of temperance, for, with his fellow Manchester tory Hugh Birley, he was one of the few tory supporters of the United Kingdom Alliance (led by his cousin Samuel Pope). Callender became the linchpin for the organizational rebuilding of the Conservative Party in south-east Lancashire in the 1850s, and sought a full place within it for the working classes. 
Callender's anti-Liberalism took him in some strange directions (including financial succour to the former Chartist, Ernest Jones), but he became the most influential of the Lancashire employers, who in the late 1860s not only ensured the revitalization of the tory party locally, but also gave it a growing voice within the national party. Callender acted as Benjamin Disraeli's host on his famous Manchester visit of 1872 and influenced significantly the social legislation of the Conservative government, having become MP for Manchester in 1874. A leading and original exemplar of grassroots tory democracy, he would have been rewarded for his important contribution to the Disraelian Conservative Party with a baronetcy but for his unexpected death. 
Balding, but heavily sideburned, Callender was a familiar, kindly, energetic, and popular figure in Manchester, occupying the usual array of positions for a provincial notable, JP for Salford, JP and deputy lieutenant for Lancashire, a director of the Manchester chamber of commerce, a captain in the volunteers, a member of the Union of the Institutes of Lancashire and Cheshire, a member of the Manchester school board from 1870 to 1873, and, succeeding J. A. Nicholls, honorary secretary of the Manchester Athenaeum. He was also prominent in the freemasons locally and nationally. His personal interests may be gleaned from his fellowship of the Society of Arts, travel in Palestine and Spain, and his collection of fine porcelain. 
Callender, suffering from rheumatic neuralgia, and nervous prostration, died at 27 Eversfield Place, St Leonards, Sussex, on 22 January 1876, and was buried on 29 January at St John's, Heaton Mersey, his coffin accompanied by a mile-long cortege from his home, Mauldeth Hall, Burnage, Manchester (until 1872, the episcopal palace of Bishop James Fraser). He was survived by his wife. His untimely death belied his career and beliefs, for following the deaths of his father and brother in 1872 it was claimed that Callender had retained in the firm large sums due to the latter's heirs. This precipitated a complicated family legal dispute (resolved only in 1889), as a result of which the mills were closed in August 1877, the workforce was dispersed, and Barrow Bridge, the erstwhile model community, was soon known as Lancashire's 'deserted village'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39661


Jocelyn, Robert, third earl of Roden (1788-1870), politician and religious leader, was born at Brockley Park, Queen's county, Ireland, on 27 October 1788, the eldest son of Robert Jocelyn, second earl of Roden (died 1820), and his wife, Frances Theodosia, eldest daughter of Robert Bligh, dean of Elphin. He was educated at Harrow School between 1801 and 1805. In 1806 he was returned as MP for co. Louth. He was still a minor, however, and in the event the seat was taken over by his uncle until 1810, at which date Viscount Jocelyn, as he was styled during his father's lifetime, took the seat in the Commons and served there until his father's death in 1820 elevated him to the peerage as third earl of Roden. He showed strong tory views, and regularly voted against Roman Catholic relief. 
Jocelyn married on 9 January 1813 Maria Frances Catherine Stapleton (1794-1861), second daughter of Thomas Stapleton, Lord le Despencer; they were to have three sons and three daughters. Both he and his wife became staunch adherents of the evangelical movement in the Church of Ireland, and their home at Tollymore Park, co. Down, was run on strongly spiritual lines, with the earl himself regularly leading services in his private chapel and teaching in Sunday schools on his estates. Tollymore became something of a haven for Roden's co-religionists, while its owner took a prominent role in the network of societies which promoted the 'second Reformation' in Ireland. He saw his devotional and religious life as the mainspring of his political endeavours. His faith was also reflected in his conscientiousness as a landlord, which inspired affection among his Roman Catholic as well as his protestant tenants. He was a vigorous critic of absentee Irish proprietors. 
In the meantime Roden held several appointments in the royal household, as treasurer in 1812, vice-chamberlain from 1812 to 1821, and a lord of the bedchamber from 1828 to 1831. Despite his piety, he got on well with George IV, who at his coronation in 1821 created him Baron Clanbrassill in the peerage of the United Kingdom, thereby giving him an automatic seat in the House of Lords. Roden was auditor-general of the exchequer in Ireland from 1820 to 1822, when the office was abolished, leaving him with a handsome pension for life. He was 'custos rotulorum' for co. Louth from 1820 to 1849, and a member of both the English and Irish privy councils. 
In the Lords, Roden became a leader of the Irish tory peers, a position which was confirmed by his election in 1831 as president of the Irish Protestant Conservative Society. During the 1830s he played a central role in mobilizing protestant opinion on both sides of the Irish Sea to defend the Church of Ireland, notably through great public meetings in 1834 and 1837, and was instrumental in the Conservative leadership's maintenance of a robustly anti-Catholic stance. In 1834 Peel offered him the post of lord steward of the household, but he turned it down in order to preserve his independence of action. 
After their accession to power in 1841 Peel and Wellington found it less necessary to cultivate the Irish protestant lobby, and Roden's influence waned. In 1849 he was accused of partiality in dealing with an Orange procession at Dolly's Brae in co. Down, which led to an affray with Roman Catholics and consequent fatalities. Roden firmly defended the integrity of his conduct, but the whig government nevertheless dismissed him from the commission of the peace. Despite this indignity, Roden's commitment to the protestant cause remained intense. He took a strong interest in the conditions of protestants on the continent, having visited Piedmont in 1844. He led a delegation to Florence in 1852 to urge the release of Francesco and Rosa Madiai, imprisoned by the Tuscan government for holding a protestant religious meeting in their home. In Ireland he was grand master of the Orange order, and was a steadfast opponent of the disestablishment of the Church of Ireland. 
Lady Roden died in 1861, and on 16 August 1862 Roden married Clementine Janet (died 1903), daughter of Thomas Andrewes of Greenknowes, Dumfriesshire, and widow of Captain Robert Lushington Reilly of Scarvagh, co. Down; there were no children from this marriage. Roden became very infirm at the end of his life, died in Edinburgh on 20 March 1870, and was interred on 29 March in the family vault at Bryansford, co. Down. 
Roden was well over 6 feet tall, and in his prime had a commanding and energetic presence with a fluent oratorical style. He was especially effective in addressing Irish protestant audiences, for he well knew 'how to call to his aid every feeling and recollection dear to their inmost souls' ('Random Recollections of Exeter Hall', 31-6). Although by the time of his death the political and religious creed he espoused could be dismissed as 'somewhat narrow and antiquated' ('The Times'), he was nevertheless an effective ambassador for his beliefs, with a fearless consistency which commanded respect even from his opponents. 


@@@@@


doc= 39662


Bulloch, James Dunwoody (1823-1901), naval officer and merchant, was born near Savannah, Georgia, USA, on 25 June 1823, the son of Major James Stephens Bulloch (1793-1849), a member of the company which owned the pioneer steamship 'Savannah', and his wife, Hester Amarintha (1797-1831), daughter of Senator John Elliott. His half-sister Martha married Theodore Roosevelt sen. 
James Bulloch joined the US navy as midshipman in 1839 and served in several ships, including the battleship 'Delaware', before attending the Navy School at Philadelphia from 1844 to 1845. The navy provided a few lieutenants to serve in the east coast-California mail steamers as a means of expanding the pool of steam expertise, and Bulloch was given command of the 'Georgia'. In 1853 he retired from the navy and went into the merchant service, first in the California mails, later sailing between New York and the southern ports. On 19 November 1851 he married Elizabeth Euphemia Caskie (1831-1854) and in January 1857 he married Mrs Harriott Cross Foster (1829-1897), daughter of brevet Brigadier-General Osborn Cross of Maryland. He had five children. 
When the American Civil War broke out in 1861 Bulloch resigned, and was commissioned into the Confederate navy and dispatched to England as chief agent. His task was to procure warships, to supplement the hopelessly inadequate fleet -- and building capacity -- of the South. He naturally based himself in Liverpool, where there were shipyards, good communications with major weapons manufacturers, banking facilities provided by Charles Prioleau, and many Confederate sympathizers in the local business community. By far his most spectacular success was the purchase of the commerce raider 'Alabama' (commissioned 1862), which at one stage he had expected to command, but his superiors rightly placed a higher priority on his procurement activities. Under the command of Captain Raphael Semmes 'Alabama' was so successful as to affect the overall pattern of the war, and was the focus of American outrage, leading to an arbitration arranged by Gladstone's government of 1868-74. 
Bulloch negotiated the construction or purchase of eleven further warships in Britain and France, though Union agents succeeded in having seven of these seized by the British and French governments as breaches of neutrality. Three were ironclad ram steamers with turret guns, of such speed and power that they could conceivably have changed the outcome of the war. 
Bulloch did not fall within the terms of the amnesty proclamations, which is perhaps unsurprising as he had probably done more harm to the Union war effort than any other one man. Bulloch was unable to return to the USA but his Liverpool friends remained loyal to him, and he set up in business trading as Bulloch and Robertson, commission merchants, reputedly specializing in cotton. He continued to mix in the upper echelons of local society, and lived in the (then) prestigious Upper Parliament Street. In retirement he moved to a smaller house, at the edge of Sefton Park. His daughter Jessie married Maxwell Hyslop-Maxwell jun., a member of a long-established and highly respected family of North American merchants. 
In 1883 Bulloch published a remarkable book entitled 'The Secret Service of the Confederate States in Europe', which extends to over 900 pages, and describes in minute detail the complex technical, financial, legal, and moral issues involved, along with the espionage, and counter-espionage practised by both sides. 
Little is known of Bulloch's personal life or qualities. In Liverpool he remained reticent about his past and was said to have 'a distinguished personality, magnetic courtly manners, and was courteous and kind' ('DAB', 3.258). Theodore Roosevelt jun. visited him three times in Liverpool, and left some descriptions of 'Uncle Jimmy', including the statement that he was 'utterly unable to 'get on' in the worldly sense of that phrase' (Roosevelt, 15). 
Bulloch died at Maxwell Hyslop-Maxwell's home, 76 Canning Street, Liverpool, on 7 January 1901. He was buried in Smithdown Road cemetery, Liverpool, where his grave is still occasionally visited by historians of the Confederacy. 


@@@@@


doc= 39663


Simeon Simpson (1878-1932). Born in London and apprenticed as a tailor, he is said to have opened a workshop in the East End of London in 1894. A highly skilled cutter and designer, a good organizer with the ability to retain a loyal workforce, he enjoyed increasing success and after expanding out of several East End workshops, opened his first purpose-built factory at 109 Middlesex Street, London E1, in 1917, largely in response to the demand for uniforms in the First World War. He married Sarah (1880-1959); they had at least two sons and a daughter. 
In the difficult post-war years Simpson concentrated on good quality ready-to-wear suits as well as providing provincial tailors and outfitters with a swift, reliable, mail-order wholesale bespoke service, with the suits fitted by the retailer but made in the factory. With prices about two-thirds lower than those of completely custom-made garments, demand outgrew supply and in 1929 he built a new factory at 92-100 Stoke Newington Road, London, promoted as the largest and most modern clothing factory in the world. Despite active participation in the management of the factory and travels to Europe and the USA for style ideas and manufacturing techniques, Simeon Simpson was active in Jewish communal and local municipal affairs. He was elected as Municipal Reform candidate for Hackney borough council in 1925, and in 1931, after the family had moved to 88 Fitzjohn's Avenue, Hampstead, to Hampstead borough council. 
Simpson died on 12 July 1932, from a perforated ulcer, at Hallam House, Hallam Street, London. He was mourned, with a sincerity which appears to be justified, as 'a good man, a good son, a good husband, a good father, a good friend and a model employer' ('Hackney Gazette and North London Advertiser', 22 July 1932). After a legacy to his married daughter Rebecca Woolf, whose City solicitor husband Arthur was later to become a director of the firm, his estate was left equally between his wife, remembered as a warm-hearted and positive partner in the family and the business, and his sons, Alexander and Samuel Leonard. 
It was his younger son, 


@@@@@


doc= 39669


Calvert, Giles (bap. 1615, d. 1663), bookseller, was baptized on 25 June 1615 at St Mary's and All Saints', Meare, Somerset, the second but only surviving son of that name of George Calvert (died 1628), vicar there since 1601. Soon after his preferment George Calvert was charged in an ecclesiastical court with not observing the order of service prescribed in the 'Book of Common Prayer' and with preaching over-long sermons. On 30 June 1628 Giles Calvert was bound apprentice to William Lugger (died 1658), citizen and stationer of London, for the term of nine years. For some unknown reason Calvert's indentures were cancelled and on 11 January 1632 he was apprenticed for the term of seven years to Joseph Hunscott (died 1660), who was also the master of his younger brother, George Calvert (1620-1691). On 25 January 1639 Giles was made free of the Stationers' Company. 
Shortly after gaining his freedom Calvert married Elizabeth Calvert (d. 1675?), whose maiden name is unknown but who may have been a descendant of the London printer Henry Ballard (died 1609). The couple settled in the parish of St Nicholas Cole Abbey, London, where their first child, Elizabeth (died 1646), was baptized on 15 March 1640; their other children were Nathaniel (1643-1664), John (died 1648), a stillborn (1651), and Giles ('b'. 1653, died in or after 1674). On 4 March 1641 'Calvert a book binder' was questioned by a committee of the House of Lords concerning the publication of Richard Overton's unlicensed pamphlet 'A Dreame, or, Nevves from Hell', issued that year. Although he refused to identify the man who supplied him with the copy, no further action seems to have been taken against Calvert. Thereafter Calvert entered several publications into the Stationers' register. In 1642 he published 'Napiers narration, or, An Epitome of his booke on the Revelation' and William Carter's 'Israels Peace with God, Beniamines Overthrow'. The following year he published two works by Joseph Caryl (one in partnership with John Rothwell), 'The Souldiers Pocket Bible' and 'The Pathway to Peace'. 
In 1644 Calvert signed the Stationers' Company petition to the House of Commons protesting at the 'monopolies' held by royal patent to print English bibles and 'sundry Bookes of generall use' ('Stationers' Company', Stationers' Hall, London, liber A: letter-book of the Stationers' Company, fol. 149'r'). That year he published one tract by Joseph Caryl and sold two titles by John Saltmarsh. He also took on Gregory Moule, an apprentice who had been turned over to him by Joseph Hunscott. By late May 1644 Calvert was occupying a tenement at the sign of the Black-Spread-Eagle at the west end of St Paul's Cathedral in the parish of St Gregory by Paul's. Situated on the busy street leading from Ludgate Hill to the cathedral, Calvert's premises consisted of a cellar, a shop with a street frontage, four rooms above the shop, and a little yard behind the property where the privy and the stairs leading up into the house were located. This well-known address was to become a lodging, meeting-place, postal address, and distribution point for radicals and their printed literature. Indeed 'Lame' Giles Calvert was to gain a reputation as a purveyor of 'soul-poysons', for example in Thomas Hall's 'Vindicae literarum' (quoted in R. Baxter, 'The Worcester-Shire Petition to the Parliament for the Ministry of England Defended', 1653, 39), his shop branded 'That forge of the Devill, from whence so many blasphemous, lying, scandalous Pamphlets... have spread over the Land, to the great dishonour of the Nation' (T. Hall, 'Vindicae literarum', 1654, 215). 
On 27 March 1646 'One 'Calvert' a Sectary' (T. Edwards, 'Gangraena', 1646, 2.9) was examined before the lord mayor of London concerning the publication of Richard Overton's anti-monarchical 'The last warning to all the inhabitants of London'. Calvert was subsequently brought before the bar of the House of Lords, but, unlike the printer and bookseller William Larner and his two servants, escaped imprisonment. Thereafter Calvert's publishing activities continued unabated. In 1646 he issued or sold thirty-seven known new titles, including two numbers (20-27 October and 27 October-12 November) of the newsbook 'The Military Actions of Europe', as well as works by Robert Bacon, Henry Burton, Thomas Collier, Benjamin Coxe, William Dell, Henry Lawrence, Hugh Peters, and William Walwyn. A similar picture emerges for 1647. That year Calvert issued or sold thirty-one known new titles, including works by Mary Cary, Nicholas Cowling, William Erbury, Francis Freeman, Paul Hobson, and Joseph Salmon. 
On 12 April 1647 Calvert, having paid $20, was admitted into the livery of the Stationers' Company. On 17 December he was nominated for the lowest and most undesirable ward office, that of scavenger. In March 1648 Calvert and Adam Haughton, a London merchant, purchased a parcel of former bishops' lands in the manor of Thorfield, Gloucestershire, for $410 15's'. 10died At the same time Calvert continued to publish, issuing or selling thirty-two known new titles in 1648, including works by John Lewin, Isaac Penington, Henry Pinnell, William Sedgwick, Joshua Sprigge, John Warr, Valentin Weigel, Robert Wilkinson, and Gerrard Winstanley. 
By January 1649 Calvert's widespread network of contacts included a group called 'My one flesh'. Abiezer Coppe appeared 'in a most dreadful manner' before members of 'My one flesh' and it was to this conventicle that Calvert directed the itinerant preacher Lawrence Clarkson. Calvert was also prolific in 1649, issuing or selling sixty-one known new titles including one number of the newsbook the 'Irish Monthly Mercury' (ending 21 December), as well as works by Thomas Banaster, Jacob Bohme, Ellis Bradshaw, Thomas Butler, Peter Chamberlen, John Cooke, Abiezer Coppe, Richard Coppin, Henry Danvers, J[ohn] F[ile?], Joseph Heming, John Lilburne, Richard Mercer, Henrick Niclaes, M[ary] P[ordage?], Robert Purnell, William Rabisha, and William Sheppard. Significantly Calvert also published in partnership with John Partridge, Rapha Harford, and George Whittington 'A petition from his excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax and the general councel of officers of the army... concerning the draught of An agreement of the people' (20 January 1649). Calvert, moreover, issued a parliamentary act (23 February 1649), suggesting that he may have had friends both in the army and parliament. 
In 1650 Calvert issued or sold twenty-five known new titles, including works by Samuel Eaton, John Fry, Henry Halhead, John Horn, Samuel Loveday, William Potter, Nicholas Rust, and Theaurau John Tany. Calvert was also believed to have printed Lawrence Clarkson's 'impious and blasphemous' book 'A single eye all light, no darkness' ('JHC', 6.474). While Clarkson was questioned by a parliamentary committee and subsequently sentenced by the House of Commons 'to be kept to Labour for one Month; and from that Time to be banished out of this Commonwealth' (ibid., 6.475), no action seems to have been taken against Calvert. In 1651 he issued or sold twenty-seven known new titles; these included works by Noah Biggs, Abraham Boune, William Bray, Christopher Cob, Charles Hotham, Edward Hyde, John Jackson, Joseph Mede, and Thomas Tillam. Again, in 1652 Calvert issued or sold twenty-five known new titles, including works by James Cranford, John Graunt, Henry Haggar, Simon Henden, Thomas Larkham, and Roger Williams. 
On 2 June 1652 Giles Calvert and George Poole, clockmaker, came upon bail before the sessions held for the Newgate gaol delivery, and were committed. Although the reasons for Calvert's confinement are unknown he does not appear to have remained long in Newgate, for on 11 October 1652 he freed his apprentice Richard Moone (died 1663). In May 1653 Calvert, his former apprentice Thomas Brewster (died 1664), and Henry Hills (died 1689) were appointed printers to the new council of state that had been established on 29 April 1653. Calvert appears to have held this position until early August 1653. Afterwards Hills continued in the post alone. 
In 1653 Calvert began publishing Quaker writings including works by Christopher Atkinson, Samuel Buttivant, Richard Farnworth, George Fox, and James Nayler. Of the fifty-two known new titles issued or sold by Calvert that year, fourteen were by Quaker authors. In 1654 Calvert issued or sold thirty-eight known new titles. Of these, thirty were by Quaker authors, representing 47 per cent of all known Quaker publications that year. By the end of 1654 several Quakers had also entrusted Calvert with forwarding their letters. This trust was reciprocated with the loans that Calvert gave to Quakers newly arrived in London. In January 1655 a group of over two hundred Quakers, including James Nayler and George Fox, gathered for a 'General Meeting' at Swannington, Leicestershire. Also present were 'many Ranters' including Jacob Bothumley, as well as 'other professors' and Baptists ('Journal of George Fox', ed. J. Nickalls, 1986, 182). It was said that the Quakers had 'a printer with them', later identified as 'Giles Calvert of London, who stay'd with them eight or nine dayes, and is now gone up to London with two or three queere of paper written to be putt into print' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 3.116). 
Calvert issued or sold seventy-five known new titles in 1655. Of the fifty-seven new texts by Quaker authors, perhaps fifteen or more derived from manuscripts he had collected at Swannington. Some of this new stock was seized on Oliver Cromwell's orders in February 1655 and taken to Westminster for examination. 
On 4 July that year Calvert came to a London Quaker meeting with George Fox. Afterwards Alexander Parker and James Nayler 'passed downe' to Calvert's, where they found him 'exceeding tender and loving towards us' (I. Ross, 'Margaret Fell, Mother of Quakerism', 1949, 116). Calvert remained a 'Loving frend' (RS Friends, Lond., Swarthmore MS 3.30) of the Quakers throughout 1655 and for some time afterwards, as he continued to publish their writings, forward their letters, and supply them with credit and printed books. On 19 April 1656 Stephen Bowtell, a deputy of the commission for regulating of printing, presented information against Calvert for selling Edward Burrough's 'A Trumpet of the Lord Sounded out of Sion' (1656), a work thought to be 'scandalous and prejudiciall to the Comonwealth' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 4.717). For issuing this and some other books 'reflexive upon the present Government' Calvert was ordered to appear before the council of state on 6 May 1656 ('CSP dom.', '1655-6', 308). In December 1656 Calvert was one of eighty-seven signatories to a petition for remitting the remaining part of James Nayler's punishment. One of Nayler's followers was Calvert's sister, Martha Simmonds (bap. 1624, d. 1665), and by the end of 1658 her husband, Thomas Simmonds, had replaced Calvert as the leading Quaker publisher. 
In 1660 Calvert served as second renter warden of the Stationers' Company. The following year he chose to pay a $24 fine on demand rather than serve again. About November 1660 Calvert published in partnership with Thomas Brewster and Livewell Chapman a seditious book, 'The Speeches and Prayers of some of the Late King's Judges'. On 29 June 1661 Calvert was examined before the secretary of state, Sir Edward Nicholas, concerning the publication of 'A Phoenix, or, The Solemn League and Covenant'. Calvert was committed prisoner to the Gatehouse, Westminster, by order of Secretary Nicholas. During Calvert's confinement his wife, Elizabeth, carried on his business, completing the publication of ''ENIAYTOS TEPASTIOS' mirabilis annus, or, The year of prodigies and wonders'. 
Giles Calvert was released with the adjournment of parliament on 30 July 1661 and by October had gone into hiding outside London, apparently fearing arrest for debt. On 21 December a warrant was issued to release Elizabeth Calvert on her bond of $500. By March 1662 Giles appears to have returned to London. On 8 May 1662 he entered into two bonds with John Harris of Carmarthen and Walter Lloyd. Thereafter he was imprisoned for distributing seditious books. On 27 November 1662 he was released on his bond of $500. His freedom was to be short-lived. On 16 December 1662, four days after a warrant for imprisoning him in the Tower had not been executed, Calvert was committed to Newgate for dangerous and seditious practices by order of the secretary of state, Sir Henry Bennet. The same day Elizabeth Calvert entered into an obligation to surrender herself to one of the king's messengers. Giles was probably released at some time in January 1663, whereupon he appears to have continued selling 'many sedicious books' (N. Penney, ed., 'Extracts from State Papers Relating to Friends, 1654 to 1672', 1913, 168). On 29 June 1663 Elizabeth Calvert was again committed to the Gatehouse for delivering unlawful books. Following the intercession of the earl of Carlisle and a bond of $600 for her good behaviour she was released on 24 July 1663. On 11 August that year Giles Calvert drew up his will. No doubt debilitated by his periods of imprisonment he died before 28 August. He had issued or sold (either individually or in partnership) more than 475 known different publications, or an estimated 813 titles in all, of which about 200 were by Quaker authors. This represents almost nine per cent of the published output of London booksellers between 1641 and 1642. 


@@@@@


doc= 39670


Calvert, Elizabeth (d. 1675?), bookseller, was the wife of Giles Calvert (bap. 1615, d. 1663) and sister-in-law of the Quaker Martha Simmonds; details of Elizabeth's origins are unknown, though she may have been a descendant of the London printer Henry Ballard (died 1609). The Calverts' shop at the Black Spread Eagle at the west end of St Paul's Churchyard, London, was a major source of radical and Quaker publications during the periods of the civil war and Commonwealth. After the Restoration Elizabeth Calvert carried on the trade in republican, nonconformist, and oppositional literature. Of the Calverts' four children, Elizabeth ('bap'. 1640, died 1646), John (died 1648), Nathaniel (1643-1664), and Giles ('b'. 1653, died in or after 1674), the two latter sons were also booksellers. 
After the Restoration, when Giles and other male stationers were under constant pressure from the government for oppositional publications, Elizabeth Calvert took a central role in arranging the printing and distribution of radical pamphlets. In 1661 while her husband was imprisoned she 'went on with the Prodigies' (that is, the 'signs and wonders' pamphlet, ''Eniautos terastios' mirabilis annus'), the very text which had led to Giles's incarceration (L'Estrange, 'Truth and Loyalty', 57). After the 'Confederate knot' of male stationers had been broken up by deaths and imprisonments, she and other book-trade wives and widows (Hannah Allen, Joan Dover (later Darby), and Ann(a) Brewster) carried on the surreptitious trade in anti-monarchy texts (L'Estrange, 'Considerations', 6). Elizabeth was arrested twice (in 1661 and 1663) before Giles's death in August 1663. In October of that year their son Nathaniel was freed as a stationer by his uncle, the bookseller George Calvert, and presumably joined his mother in the business. Several warrants for the arrest of Elizabeth, her maid Elizabeth Evans, her apprentice Mathias Stephenson, and her son Nathaniel were issued during 1662-3 in connection with the printer John Twyn's trial for treason, and Elizabeth was questioned about the printing of 'Mene tekel, or, A Treatise of the Execution of Justice' and the 'Speeches and Prayers' of the regicides. Committed to prison on 2 February 1664, she petitioned for her discharge to nurse Nathaniel, who after his own release from prison had become 'dangerously sick' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/95/98). Her request was refused, and a second petition shows that her release on 8 April came too late: Nathaniel was 'ever since fryday morning dead and is yett unburied' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/96/64). 
Despite repeated imprisonments, deaths, consequent debts, and the destruction of her shop in the great fire of 1666, Calvert persisted in her trade, continuing to publish both openly and surreptitiously. She was apparently unmolested for her publication of works by nonconformists, Independents, and Quakers such as Richard Steele, John Owen, Benjamin Agas, Francis Howgill, and Thomas Wilson. Other publications, however, attracted harassment from the Stationers' Company and, more frequently, from Roger L'Estrange, the surveyor of the press, who was well aware that her distribution network stretched far beyond London. Both Richard Moone, a former apprentice of Giles's who had moved to Bristol, and Moone's wife, Susannah, were caught in possession of books sent by Elizabeth Calvert, and her pamphlets reached at least as far north as Flintshire and Carlisle. Although her name appears in only twenty-seven imprints she is known to have been responsible for many more 'seditious' works, including tracts about the great fire such as Benjamin Keach's 'A Trumpet Blown in Sion' (1666), 'A True and Faithfull Account' (1667), John Wilson's 'Nehushtan' (1668), and Andrew Marvell's 'Directions to a Painter' (1668). After the destruction by fire of her shop she moved to Duck Lane, returning to St Paul's Churchyard in 1669. Her secret press in Southwark had been discovered and broken up the previous year, but she continued her illegal trade. Early in 1670 she supplied the printer Samuel Simmons with the copy of Dyer's 'Christ's Famous Titles', which was interrupted and seized while at the press, and in December she was indicted for her publication in 1668 of 'Directions to a Painter'. After her trial in March 1671 she absconded and pursuit of her fine seems to have been dropped. Circumstantial evidence suggests that she may have been protected by the earl of Carlisle, whose secretary was Andrew Marvell. 
After the trial Calvert's trade seems to have been largely in old stock which had survived the great fire, in reprints, and a few new works of inoffensive character. One of her few secular works, William Rabisha's 'The Whole Body of Cookery', appeared in 1673. But assumptions that she turned to more innocuous publishing in her last years are belied by the survival of a warrant for her arrest in January 1674. Her offence is not stated, but it may have been in connection with the publication of the pamphlet 'Verbum sapienti'. In February 1674 she bound the last of her four apprentices, on 19 October she made her will, and she died probably in early 1675, her will being proved on 5 February 1675. The 1675 edition of Rabisha's cookery book has, uniquely, the imprint 'for E. C. And are to be sold by Francis SMITH, at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill', presumably a posthumous title-page. The residue of her estate, after debts, was left to her only surviving son, Giles. Although he is described as 'bookseller' of the City of London, there is no evidence that he was active in the trade or that he carried on the business at the Black Spread Eagle. 
Although Giles and Elizabeth had earlier been sympathetic to Quakers, there seems to have been a rift after the James Nayler incident of 1656, in which Giles's sister Martha had played a central part. After 1656 the Calverts published few Quaker works, and Elizabeth seems to have been regarded by Quakers as an enemy. In a letter of 1671 Ellis Hookes, clerk to London Friends, associates 'Jesebell; Giles Calverts wife' with a group of apostates and 'Ranters' including Robert Rich, John Pennyman, and Mary Boreman (Ellis Hookes to Margaret Fell Fox, 21 Oct 1671, Swarthmore MS, I.57). The best indication of her religious beliefs, however, is that in her will Elizabeth asked to be 'decently buryed amongst the Baptists' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/347, sig. 12). 


