@@@@@


doc= 39671


Sowle, Andrew (1628-1695), printer, was the son of Francis Sowle, yeoman of the parish of St Sepulchre, London. From 1646 to 1653 he was apprenticed to Ruth Raworth, a widow who was known for printing radical and reforming works. Some time before 1655 he married a woman named Jane ['see below'], whose maiden name is not known. The couple had at least ten children, but only three daughters are known to have lived to adulthood; all three of these daughters became Quaker printers in their own right. Jane, the eldest daughter ('bap'. 6 August 1655), married Jonas Hinde of Shoreditch in 1679. After Hinde died she married John Bradford, a family apprentice, and set up as a printer, managing the business after Bradford's death. Elizabeth Sowle married another family apprentice, William Bradford, in 1685, and emigrated with him to Pennsylvania, where they became the first Quaker printers in the American colonies. Tace Sowle, born on 29 March 1666, succeeded her father as head of the Sowle press in 1691. 
While Andrew Sowle began printing for the Quakers some time before the Restoration, the details of his early activities are not known. Early Quaker publications were perceived as posing a serious threat to the social order, and printers rarely showed their name in imprints. Sowle's name does not appear in imprints before 1680. From that year until 1690 imprints show that he retailed works at his home in Shoreditch 'at the sign of the Crooked Billet' and also at 'Devonshire New Buildings' near Bishopsgate Street, the site of the first public Quaker meetings in London. In 1687 he added a third outlet in Gracechurch Street, near the main Quaker meeting-house. The papers of Quaker leader William Penn, however, reveal that Sowle was printing for the Society of Friends on a regular basis by 1672, and in 1674 minutes of the Quaker morning meeting name him as one of their official printers. Sowle managed to hide his press from government authorities until 1678. His name is conspicuously absent from a government list ('List of the severall printing houses taken the 24 of July 1668', TNA: PRO, SP 29/243/126) and, seven years later, 'Andrew Sole a Quaker' is recorded in 'A list of the several printing-houses taken the 29th of March 1675' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/369/97) but the location of his press is not recorded. In 1678 the warden of the Stationers' Company, Thomas Vere, searched Sowle's residence in Shoreditch and discovered there 'a Private Printing Press... in two upper Rooms to which there was no passage but through Trapp-doores to it' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/403/59, 19 April 1678). Sowle was charged with illegal printing at the Middlesex sessions, but on 9 December a jury declared him not guilty. 
As a printer of nonconformist literature Sowle suffered severe treatment and losses at the hands of government agents. In a testimony of 1701 concerning Sowle in 'Piety Promoted, in a Collection of the Dying Sayings of many of the People called Quakers', William Penn records how his friend 'freely gave himself up to the service' of the Quaker movement: 'even in times of the hottest persecution, believing it his duty so to do, though therein he should hazard not only his life but also that outward substance God had blessed him with: being for several years together in continual danger upon that account. (Tomkins, 121)' Early in his career, in 1664, Sowle was arrested under the 'Conventicle Act'. Upon learning that Sowle was a printer Alderman Sir Richard Browne is reputed to have threatened to send him to the same fate as 'his brother Twyn', the printer John Twyn executed that year for treason (Hetet, 143). 
In 1691 Tace Sowle succeeded her father, and from this date on her name replaces his in imprints. On 26 December 1695 Andrew Sowle died at his home in Holloway Lane, Shoreditch, from consumption, attended by William Penn. He was buried at Checker Alley, London. His will leaves small sums to his daughters Jane Bradford and Elizabeth Bradford and their children, and designates his unmarried daughter, Tace, and wife, Jane, joint executors and residuary legatees of his modest estate. 
The Sowle press was the primary channel through which early Quaker works were published, and Andrew Sowle printed works by nearly all of the founders of Quakerism, including authors such as George Fox, Robert Barclay, George Whitehead, Isaac Penington, and William Penn. (Sowle is estimated, for instance, to have printed more than 90 per cent of Penn's works.) During the eleven years that his name appears in imprints Sowle published well over eighty works for the Friends. The Quakers also relied on the Sowles to organize the distribution of their publications; in this regard, the Sowle press is an important exception to the rule in this period that printing houses generally did not retail their own products. From its beginnings some time near the Restoration until 1829 when it can no longer be traced under any variation of name, this unique publishing operation flourished not only in London but also, through the Bradford connection, in America. 




@@@@@


doc= 39672


Smith, Francis (d. 1691), bookseller and General Baptist minister, was the son of Francis Smith, a Yorkshire farrier from Bradford. No further information has as yet been discovered about his family background or his birth details. On 3 May 1647 he was apprenticed to Thomas Hazard, a stationer; he was made free of the Stationers' Company on 5 May 1654. By this time Smith was living at or near the Sugar Loaf in Queen's Head Alley, London, whence his first imprint, a Baptist treatise, appeared in 1653. In 1654, with the aid of several General Baptist leaders, he opened business at Flying Horse Court in Fleet Street, engaging primarily in the distribution of Baptist pamphlets. By 1659, however, he had begun to publish politically radical and republican tracts (including Captain William Bray's 'A Plea for the Peoples Good Old Cause') and his premises were being regularly searched. In this year he opened premises near Temple Bar under the sign of the Elephant and Castle; he subsequently became known as Elephant Smith on account of this trademark sign. 
The Restoration government regarded Smith as a threat. In 1660 he was imprisoned three times for his involvement, along with Livewell Chapman, in publishing Henry Jessey's 'The Lord's Loud Call', a republican catalogue of providential signs. Simultaneously, however, Smith was preoccupied with pastoral issues. In March he had been a signatory to the General Baptists' seminal 'Brief Confession... of Faith', which he also published. Shortly afterwards he published his own devotional work, 'Symptomes of Growth and Decay to Godlinesse'. By this time Smith was married. The background of his wife, Eleanor (died in or after 1696), is unknown. From the time of their marriage, however, she played a key role in her husband's business; she continued his trade during Smith's periods of imprisonment and exile, and emerged as a bookseller in her own right after his death. The couple had at least four children, two of whom, Francis junior and Eleanor junior, also joined their parents' business. 
Early in 1661 Smith was accused of involvement in Venner's Fifth Monarchist uprising and consequently endured searches, assaults, and the confiscation of his property. He co-published a Baptist plea for toleration; in August, however, he was convicted of treason and imprisoned with others for collaborating in another collection of providential signs. Held in close confinement until the following spring, Smith petitioned persistently against his illegal treatment; he was also penalized by heavy prison fines and loss of trade. He was arrested on at least two further occasions over the next five years. In 1665 he moved his family for the duration of the plague to Dorking, Surrey, where he was again arrested; he was saved from imprisonment in Windsor Castle by the intercession of Sir Thomas Foster, JP for Middlesex and Surrey and son of Lord Chief Justice Sir Robert Foster. 
While he produced relatively little throughout the 1660s, Smith nevertheless emerged during this period as the principal publisher of the works of John Bunyan, who, like Smith, endured persecution and imprisonment for refusing to compromise his convictions. Between 1661 and 1676 Smith published the majority of Bunyan's writings with the significant exception of the author's major work of 1666, 'Grace Abounding'. By 1679 -- when Smith incidentally published the third edition of 'Grace Abounding' -- his increasing political activity and attendant prosecutions appear to have led Bunyan to entrust his work to more reliable booksellers. 
Upon his return to London after the plague Smith's premises were investigated regularly by Roger L'Estrange, surveyor of the presses, and his finances were compromised by further litigation. In 1670 he was questioned about a printed critique of the 'Conventicle Act'. He subsequently preached to a congregation in Goswell Street and was finally arrested for violating the act. He was arrested regularly throughout 1671, eventually relinquishing his trade for six months. However, with the publication of the declaration of indulgence Smith was granted a licence to preach to two General Baptist groups in Cornhill, London, and Croydon, Surrey. 
In 1673 Smith relocated -- with his trade sign -- to premises near the Royal Exchange, Cornhill, operating briefly from this and his old Temple Bar addresses. The following year he fell victim to profiteering by an unscrupulous warden of the Stationers' Company, Samuel Mearne, who confiscated a Baptist treatise from Smith's premises and (in a by no means uncommon piece of corruption) subsequently published it himself in a pirated imprint. The earl of Shaftesbury intervened on Smith's behalf, and the king ultimately ordered compensation; Smith testified against Mearne before the House of Lords in 1677. He continued to be hounded, at great cost to his business, by both Mearne and L'Estrange. 
The Popish Plot and exclusion crisis marked a period of intensive political and professional activity for Smith, who associated closely with Shaftesbury and Titus Oates. In 1679 he published Popish Plot narratives, extracts from parliamentary journals, and seditious tracts. Arrested and examined on numerous occasions, he was frequently acquitted by sympathetic whig juries. In October, however, he was imprisoned and fined for selling a stinging expose of the trial of George Wakeman, the queen's Catholic physician, who had been accused by Oates of plotting to kill the king and whose acquittal of treason after a summing-up by the judge, Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, allegedly loaded in his favour, fuelled allegations that the judge had accepted bribes. Smith was imprisoned again in December for promoting petitions for a parliamentary sitting. Throughout 1680 he distributed numerous opposition tracts and was a key whig campaigner in the shrieval elections. In September he was indicted for publishing a protest against the extravagances of municipal leaders. Despite a sympathetic jury he was detained on Judge Jeffreys's order before being released by proclamation. He testified against Jeffreys before a Commons committee in October; Jeffreys resigned as recorder the following month. Subsequently indicted for publishing Shaftesbury's 'Speech Lately Made by a Noble Peer', which explicitly questioned the integrity of the king, Smith was acquitted by a packed whig jury in January 1681. 
Smith's career peaked dangerously in this year. His publications attacked papists and arbitrary power and objected to the dissolution of parliament. 'Smith's Protestant Intelligence', an organ of whig propaganda, appeared on 1 February. A key figure in the whig campaigns, Smith accompanied the party to Oxford in March; he distributed an outspoken anti-government tract, 'Vox populi', gratis to each member of the Oxford parliament. Returning to London upon the parliament's dissolution, he was arrested for treason in mid-April. His 'Protestant Intelligence' was terminated, and he was held in Newgate prison until his release -- for lack of evidence -- in June. 
As the tories re-appropriated power, Smith's fortunes declined. L'Estrange headed a viciously successful press campaign which satirized and discredited his 'Anabaptist' 'bete noire'. The tory propaganda effort identified Smith with the most fanatical republicanism, or 'Franksmithism' (Crist, 204), and lampooned him in a broadside ballad, 'The Leacherous Anabaptist'. Increasingly isolated, Smith nevertheless continued to distribute opposition newsletters and was active in the mayoral elections that September. About this time he co-published Stephen College's libellous ballad, 'A Ra-Ree Show'. Upon its author's execution Smith fled the country; he remained in exile, apparently in the Netherlands, for more than two years. His wife and his children, Francis and Eleanor, continued the business in his absence, and were themselves frequently prosecuted. 
On returning to England in March 1684 Smith was immediately arrested; he was tried by Jeffreys in June for his hand in 'A Ra-Ree Show'. Pilloried and fined $500, Smith was unable to raise either money or security for his release; he remained in prison until January 1688, when he was pardoned by James II. In that year, he moved to Pope's Head Alley, establishing his business once again under the sign of the Elephant and Castle. He published very little, and early in 1689 sought financial aid from a local Baptist church. He petitioned King William for a position in the port of London, and was finally employed as a watchman in October that year. He died two years later, on 22 December 1691, and was buried in Bunhill Fields. Despite his ostensible financial ruin he left to his wife a 6 acre property in Surrey and a collection of books. 
Described by his detractors as a 'pestilent' and 'Pernicious' dissenter ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 358; Smith, 'Injurious Proceedings', 2), Elephant Smith was as much feared as reviled by the state officials who hounded and prosecuted him. As an opposition bookseller and whig activist he stands alone in the tenacity and openness of the uncompromising principles for which he was arrested, imprisoned on innumerable occasions, and financially ruined. Smith's political engagement was rooted in the religious convictions which he held deeply and exercised regularly. Cataloguing the relentless physical and material costs of his prosecutions and imprisonments, his autobiographical writings constantly reproached the authorities who persecuted him, and represented their author -- with some measure of truth -- as a martyr to his cause. 


@@@@@


doc= 39673


Griffith, George (1618?-1699x1702), Independent minister, was born a younger son in Montgomeryshire. The Griffiths enjoyed good relations with Sir Robert and Lady Brilliana Harley. On 2 November 1638 Griffith, aged nineteen, matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, where he was a servitor to Sir Robert's son, Edward. When Griffith tired of service and desired to study divinity Sir Robert approved. Griffith graduated BA on 14 June 1642, and three years later proceeded MA from Emmanuel College, Cambridge. By parliamentary order of 13 February 1646 he became a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. 
On 6 June 1648 Griffith accepted an appointment as preacher at the Charterhouse, London, where his wife, Elizabeth, joined him by special indulgence in 1651 (the first woman permitted to live there). Recognizing his preaching ability, the Haberdashers' Company named him John Downham's successor as William Jones lecturer at St Bartholomew's Exchange in 1650, and two years later it appointed him to examine candidates for ecclesiastical preferments in the company's control. With John Owen, William Greenhill, and seven other ministers Griffith assisted a House of Commons committee in drafting a condemnation of the Socinians' Racovian catechism in February 1652, and the same year he and eleven other Independent clergy urged parliament to support missions to Native Americans; their letter was published in Henry Whitfield's 'Strengthe out of Weaknesse' (1652). As the Rump Parliament debated doctrinal articles in 1653, Griffith and ten other clergymen drafted a statement in February insisting that no one be permitted to preach or publish anything opposed to Christian principles (of which they identified sixteen) plainly affirmed in the 'Bible' and deemed essential for salvation. In April, as John Durie prepared to leave for Sweden, he recommended Griffith, a young man 'zealous for the aime of Peace [and] no wayes engaged in any Party' (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.95), to assist Richard Baxter's efforts to promote ecumenical unity, but Griffith, whom Baxter came to respect as godly and orthodox, was of little help. 
Griffith was appointed to the commission for ejecting scandalous ministers on 28 August 1654 and the commission for the approbation of public preachers five days later. In the latter capacity he took special interest in seeing that qualified ministers were dispatched to his native Wales. When protestants in Piedmont suffered persecution, the council of state on 4 January 1656 appointed Griffith, Richard Cromwell, and others to a committee to provide aid, and two months later the council named him to the committee to draft statutes for Durham College. One of London's most prominent preachers, Griffith preached a fast sermon to the House of Commons on 30 October 1656. Two months later parliament appointed him to the committee to counsel the Quaker James Nayler following his sentencing. The council turned to Griffith again in July 1657, this time to mediate a dispute between two Scottish clerical factions, the resolutioners and remonstrants, and in October it appointed him to the commission for ejecting scandalous ministers in Middlesex. He again preached to the Commons on 27 January 1658, defending Cromwell's toleration policy and calling for increased financial support for ministers, especially in Wales and the north. He was also interested in protestantism's progress in Ireland, praising Henry Cromwell for supporting this endeavour. Presumably for his loyalty to the government, on 3 March 1658 he was appointed lecturer to the Independent congregation meeting in Westminster Abbey. In December, Richard Shute, as patron, recommended Griffith to the Triers for appointment as rector of St Mary's, Barnes, Surrey. In the meantime, following a meeting of elders of Independent churches in the London area in June 1658, Griffith invited congregational churches to send delegates to a conference at the Savoy Palace in September. At the conference, which produced a declaration of faith, he served as scribe. He was one of the few Independents who participated in Matthew Poole's efforts to support presbyterian and congregational students in the universities. During the political turmoil following Cromwell's death, Griffith conferred with Owen, Charles Fleetwood, and others, and he almost certainly joined Owen in supporting the Rump's recall in the spring of 1659. While Philip Nye and Thomas Brooks backed Desborough's attempt to preserve republican government by force, Griffith and Joseph Caryl opted to trust Monck and the convention. 
Accepting the Restoration gracefully, Griffith joined other Independents in signing an address of loyalty to Charles in May 1660. Following Thomas Venner's uprising in January 1661 Griffith signed 'A Renuntiation and Declaration' denouncing it. By the autumn he had lost his position at the Charterhouse, though an informer's allegation in December that he had spoken treasonably against the king was almost certainly baseless. Unable for reasons of conscience to take the oaths prescribed by the 'Act of Uniformity', Griffith resigned the Jones lectureship on 27 September 1662. Yet he refused to be silent, holding services with John Owen, George Cokayne, Thomas Goodwin, and Matthew Barker in a house near the Guildhall. A man of wealth, Griffith sent money to needy Independent and Baptist clergy in Wales during the 1660s. From 1666 to 1694 he ministered to a congregation that met first in Plasterers' Hall and subsequently in Girdlers' Hall. Following the fire of London, Baxter reported that more citizens attended the services of ministers such as Griffith and Owen than those in the parish churches. In 1669 Griffith shared a lectureship at Hackney with fellow congregationalists Owen, Nye, Brooks, and Peter Sterry, and the presbyterians Thomas Watson and William Bates. As congregationalist leaders Griffith and Owen counselled the Independent church at Hitchin, Hertfordshire, and John Bunyan's Bedford congregation identified Griffith's church as an appropriate place for its members to transfer to if they moved to London. When magistrates and ministers in Boston, Massachusetts, needed advice on a new president for Harvard, student recruitment, and financial assistance, they wrote to Griffith and eighteen others in August 1671; the latter responded in February. Under the declaration of indulgence's terms, on 22 April 1672 Griffith was licensed to preach at his house in Addle Street. Nearly a month earlier, Griffith, Owen, and Anthony Palmer had personally thanked Charles for the declaration. 
Periodically Griffith was the subject of suspicion. The minister George Vernon depicted him as part of a congregational spy ring led by Owen. More serious was a government warrant in June 1671 to search his house for Richard Cromwell, weapons, and suspicious documents. He was under suspicion again in the summer and autumn of 1682, when he was zealously preaching against Catholicism and arbitrary government. Such views and his close friendship with Lord Wharton suggest that he held whig principles. By the spring of 1683 he was dangerously close to members of Monmouth's cabal as it planned an insurrection. Griffith, Owen, and Matthew Meade allegedly discussed such plans with William Carstares, and Monmouth himself exaggeratedly claimed that the three men and 'all the considerable Nonconformist Ministers knew of the Conspiracy' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/434/98). For preaching illegally he was fined $20 in March 1684, and in October he was arrested as a dangerous person. Imprisonment, if any, was brief, for shortly thereafter he moved his congregation from Plasterers' Hall to Girdlers' Hall. 
As crisis engulfed England in 1688 Griffith, William Bates, and John Howe supported the archbishop of Canterbury and six bishops when they protested against James's declaration of indulgence. In October the three men were part of a delegation that rebuffed James's request for support, though they pledged their prayers and obedience. Throughout the crisis Griffith, Bates, Howe, and Baxter worked to maintain nonconformist unity. By January 1690 tensions surfaced between Baxter and Daniel Williams on one side and Griffith, Cokayne, and others over the latter group's commendatory epistle to the Antinomian Tobias Crisp's 'Christ Alone Exalted' (1689). Yet congregationalists and presbyterians established the Common Fund, with Griffith as one of fourteen managers, in 1690 to assist clergymen and educate ministerial students. He was also a founder of the Congregational Fund Board in December 1695. Four years later Griffith, Meade, Stephen Lobb, Richard Taylor, and John Nesbitt wrote 'A Declaration of the Congregational Ministers' condemning the disruption caused by the Antinomian controversy. After making his will on 15 June 1698, in his eighty-first year, Griffith added a codicil on 29 June 1699. He died, presumably in London, between that date and 17 April 1702, when the will was proved. His will reflects his wealth: his eldest son, Richard, and his daughter Elizabeth had already received their portions, and thus had bequests of only $20 and $200 respectively, but Griffith gave his younger son, Henry, $800 (reduced to $320 in the codicil), and his other daughter, Anne, $1000. Calamy described Griffith as 'very conversible, and much the gentleman' ('Nonconformist's Memorial', 1.107). Historically Griffith's importance rests on the continuity of leadership he provided for the congregationalists from the late 1640s to the end of the century. 


@@@@@


doc= 39674


West, Robert (b. 1649, d. in or after 1712), lawyer and conspirator, was born in December 1649 and baptized on 30 December in Banbury, Oxfordshire, the eldest surviving son of James West ('bap'. 1614, died 1684), mercer and rising townsman of Banbury, and his wife, Bridget Bentley ('bap'. 1616, died 1696). On 1 December 1665, aged fifteen, he matriculated from Magdalen College, Oxford, where he was a demy until 1668. On 27 October that year he was admitted to Gray's Inn; he was called to the bar in 1674. At an unknown date he married Sarah, daughter of Thomas Cox. 
The native of a proverbially puritan town West became keenly active in radical and dissenting politics. According to Bishop Gilbert Burnet he was 'a witty and active man, full of talk, and believed to be a determined atheist' (Burnet, 2.357). A member of the Green Ribbon Club he was probably the Robert West who signed the May 1679 whig petition presented to London's court of aldermen calling for a parliament and a redress of the nation's grievances. In March 1681, amid fears of popish plotting, he was questioned by the authorities for allegedly spreading the rumour that Holborn would be burned and that the streets would run with blood. On 15 June West transferred to the Middle Temple and in August he and fellow whig lawyer Aaron Smith were employed by the earl of Shaftesbury as counsel for the infamous 'Protestant Joiner', Stephen College, during his trial for treason at Oxford. In Oxford West lodged with John Locke at the home of the mathematician John Wallis. In November 1682, like so many radicals, West armed himself by having a sword made by a sword-cutler in Fleet Street. 
West's political radicalism brought him into contact with many discontented protestant dissenters. In 1682, when East New Jersey was put up for auction, West along with eleven other men, headed by William Penn, purchased it for $3400. West was the only non-Quaker. On 14 March 1683 the duke of York confirmed the sale of the province of East New Jersey to twenty-four proprietors. Unlike the original twelve, the twenty-four proprietors were an extremely mixed group. They included the Stuart loyalist and future Catholic convert James Drummond, earl of Perth, his brother John Drummond of Lundie and many other Scots, some of whom were Quakers, and some not. Most of the proprietors were artisans and traders. West was the only lawyer. Each proprietor originally received 10,000 acres. In July 1683, while under arrest for treason, West conveyed his property to Thomas Cox, who remained a close associate of West's and was sometimes designated 'trustee for West' (Pomfret, 249). Although West never visited the plantations in East New Jersey, his American connections along with his knowledge of proprietary affairs remained an important source of income for the rest of his life. 
In 1682 and 1683 West was deeply involved in the radical whig underground that was planning a general insurrection to overthrow the Stuart monarchy. He was part of a lower cabal of conspirators that included John Ayloffe, Nathaniel Wade, Colonel John Rumsey, Edward Norton, and Richard Goodenough among others. After the original ringleader of the discussions, Anthony Ashley Cooper, first earl of Shaftesbury, absconded to Holland in November 1682, West and Ayloffe told Nathaniel Wade that they felt abused by the great men for 'bringing us into discourses on things that should rather be done than talked of'. At that point several members of the lower circle of plotters resolved to go to West's plantation in America, only to find the 'grant to Mr West and his partners not so large as we were informed'; consequently 'we broke off from that design' (Wigfield, 153). In June 1683, shortly before the Rye House plot was exposed, West met Wade, Norton, Rumsey, Richard Walcot, James Holloway, and Richard Goodenough and his brother, Francis, at the Young Devils tavern within Temple Bar to plan an insurrection. They divided London and Westminster into twenty parts and calculated that they would need at least 4000 men. ['see also 'Rye House plotters]. He was arrested shortly after Josiah Keeling revealed the plot to authorities on 12 June. He readily gave evidence against his former friends, writing to the earl of Rochester on 22 June that he was resolved to 'unburden my soul to you or the Secretary or Council as I shall be required and to be ingenuous' ('CSP dom.', '1683', 334). The duke of Ormond described 'West the lawyer' to the earl of Arran as 'a man of quick wit and fluent tongue' ('Ormonde MSS', 65). Along with Colonel John Rumsey, West turned king's evidence. During interrogations between 23 and 27 June he told a story of how London whigs had contrived two plans to prevent the accession of the Catholic duke of York and what they believed would be the consequent introduction of popery and arbitrary government. One plan was to raise a general insurrection throughout England and another was to assassinate the king and duke of York in their coaches at Rye House mill as they returned from Newmarket. West claimed that he told the others that since he was 'incapable of serving in their design', presumably as an assassin or soldier, he would 'undertake to buy some arms...on pretence of sending the same into America' ('State trials', 9.391). West was also aware of whig efforts to engage Scottish dissidents gathered around the ninth earl of Argyll. West's main connections were with Robert Ferguson, John Wildman, Richard Goodenough, Richard Rumbold, Nathaniel Wade, Richard Nelthorp, and above all, Colonel Rumsey, who was the godfather of West's son. He claimed little contact with the so-called 'Protestant Lords' concerned in the plotting, who, he understood from Ferguson, were the duke of Monmouth, William, Lord Russell, Lord Grey of Wark, and Lord Howard of Escrick. Burnet believed that Rumsey and West, who were 'perpetually together', forged the story of the Rye House assassination plan and that when they started contradicting each other Rumsey charged West 'with concealing some things'. Thus West was 'laid in irons and was threatened with being hanged. For three days he would eat nothing, and seemed resolved to starve himself, but nature overcame his resolutions and then told all he knew and perhaps more than he knew' ('State trials', 9.498, 503). It is true that Rumsey accused West of not revealing all that he knew and gave the authorities a list of questions to be put to West. But West confessed few new details, and his story remained similar to others told amid the interrogations and trials. His testimony, along with the testimony of Rumsey and Lord Howard, was later used to convict Captain Thomas Walcott, an associate of the earl of Shaftesbury, on 12 July, and Algernon Sidney, on 21 November, of treason for their participation in the plot. Both were executed. West was pardoned of all treasonable activity on 5 December 1684. He did not participate in either the Monmouth rebellion in 1685 or the revolution of 1688-9. In 1692 he received a grant from the proprietors of East New Jersey for 960 acres 'out of a grateful sense of ye good services done to the concerns of ye said Province', particularly for aiding the proprietors in their defence of the right of government against the encroachments of the monarchy (Whitehead, 176). West remained in contact with Thomas Cox and William Penn in the 1690s and early 1700s. He is briefly mentioned in a letter of 10 December 1700 from William Penn to his London agent, Charlwood Lawton. In May 1712 his name appears as one of the witnesses of William Penn's will along with that of Sarah West, who may have been West's wife. Penn's will, written in haste, seems to have been botched, probably because both Penn and West had suffered from recent strokes. 


@@@@@


doc= 39675


Anger, Jane (fl. 1588), writer on women, was the author of 'Jane Anger her protection for women, to defend them against the scandalous reportes of a late surfeiting lover, and all other like venerians that complaine so to bee overcloyed with womens kindnesse' (1589). Virtually nothing is known about Anger. Her title-page calls her a gentlewoman, but the text provides no fact beyond a reference to the year of composition, 1588. Anger is a genuine English surname, though, and in Renaissance England the allusion to the author's 'cholloricke' vein (in the opening letter, 'To the Gentlewomen of England') would suggest play on a real name, not a pseudonym. Presumably the Jo. Anger, whose poem on the author appears at the end of the volume, was a relative or spouse. 
Anger's aim is to answer 'Boke his Surfeit', a now lost work entered in the Stationers' register in 1588; it evidently joined in the ancient semi-serious game of denigrating women. Men who see women only as objects of desire, Anger argues, first satisfy that desire and then, satiated, project their own failings onto women. Latin tags, citations of authors from Plato to Tibullus, and examples from Portia to Jezebel, indicate some education on her part, while the balanced sentences, occasional alliteration, analogies based on natural history, and some phrases recall, and may be designed to undercut, the fashionable euphuism introduced by John Lyly. Yet Anger can be briskly colloquial ('when the Fox preacheth, let the geese take heede, it is before an execution'; Anger, sig. C4'v'). 
The short book has European precedents (for example, the French invectives of Helisenne de Crenne, 1539), but Anger's is the first full-dress defence of women by an Englishwoman, its tone ranging from psychologically astute sarcasm to irritated pathos: 'we languish when they laugh, we lie sighing when they sit singing, and sit sobbing when they lie slugging and sleeping' (Anger, sig. B3'r'). The text has been reproduced in S. G. O'Malley's 'The Early Modern Englishwoman: a Facsimile Library of Essential Works', pt 1, vol. 4 (1996). 


@@@@@


doc= 39678


Aglionby, William (1641-1705), diplomat and writer on art, was born in the summer of 1641, the second son of George Aglionby (died 1643), who died shortly after being appointed dean of Canterbury by Charles I, and his wife, Sibilla Smith. George had previously been employed by the Cavendish family, earls of Devonshire, and after his death his widow and surviving son were supported by the third earl of Devonshire, who seems to have paid for William's education, which was largely conducted abroad. He studied medicine at the University of Bordeaux, and also civil law, perhaps at the University of Leiden, and in the process became fluent in several languages. Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1667, he published translations from French (1668) and Italian (1669), but his first recorded employment, between 1669 and 1671, was as a 'bear-leader', or travelling tutor, for well-born young men sent to the continent to acquire linguistic skills and social polish. This did not satisfy his ambitions, and when he reviewed his prospects, in a summary (in French) drawn up in 1671, shortly before his thirtieth birthday, he decided that he would have to choose between medicine, law, and diplomacy if he was to make his fortune, and that the practice of medicine in Paris offered his best chance of worldly success. 
If Aglionby did go to live in Paris, he had probably returned by 1678, when the first duke of Ormond wrote in support of his application for the degree of doctor of physic at Oxford, to enable him to practise medicine in England. The application does not seem to have succeeded, for in the same year he was appointed secretary to Sir William Temple, the English ambassador to the United Provinces, and later became 'language-secretary' in the Post Office. In the 1680s, however, Aglionby lived in London as a practising physician, qualified by reason of his having become a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, and twice served as a member of the Royal Society's council, in 1683-4 and 1686-7. But from 1688 onwards he increasingly earned his living as a diplomat. Some of his activities in that role were associated with the Post Office. In 1691 he was sent to Spain in an effort to persuade the government there to send foreign correspondence to England for distribution, rather than to France, and in 1697 he went to Calais to negotiate a restoration of cross-channel postal services previously disrupted by war. His other missions -- to Savoy (1693-4), to Spain again (1700-01), and to the Swiss Cantons (1702-5) -- were directed towards maintaining English interests in more conventional ways, albeit with varying degrees of success -- his mission to Savoy appears to have been an unqualified disaster, since he was shipwrecked 'en route', and then kept so short of funds that his correspondence with the government came to consist largely of appeals for his own recall. But he was well enough regarded by his employers to be briefly appointed under-secretary of state to the second earl of Nottingham in 1702, before he was sent to Zurich. 
In 1669 Aglionby had published 'The Present State of the United Provinces of the Low Countries', in which he noted how widespread the appreciation of paintings was in Dutch society: 'Pictures are very common here, there being scarce an ordinary Tradesman, whose House is not adorned with them' (Aglionby, 'The Present State', 224-5). The point was repeated in the preface to 'Painting Illustrated in Three Diallogues' (1685), a pioneering exercise in the promotion of the understanding of pictorial art in England, which was dedicated to the fourth earl of Devonshire. Portraiture, Aglionby noted, was the only form of painting appreciated by his fellow countrymen, and there was no skill in, or encouragement for, 'history painting', which was conventionally acclaimed as the highest form of art, representing as it did notable people involved in momentous events, often markedly idealized in form, and overtly intended to inspire edification or emulation, or both. 
Taking inspiration from the writings of Charles-Alphonse Du Fresnoy and Giovan Pietro Bellori, Aglionby aimed to remedy this by explaining such art technically and historically, and so to create an awareness of and regard for history painting among the English nobility and gentry, for whom it would constitute an alternative pursuit to the gluttony and drunkenness to which they were regrettably prone, an alternative, moreover, that was pleasurable as well as improving. For this he looked above all to the example of Italy (not Holland, none of whose seventeenth-century artists he mentioned), as represented both by the ancient world and by the succession of great artists who had revived and built upon the achievements of antiquity. Painting, he declared, should aim to copy nature, and also to improve upon it, and after providing an explication of the art of painting, including a glossary of technical terms, and then a history of it, 'both Antient and Modern', he concluded with the third dialogue, 'How to know good pictures', in which he repeated his assertion that 'till the gentry of this Nation are better Judges of the Art, 'tis impossible we should ever have an Historical Painter of our own, nor that any excellent Forreigner should stay amongst us' (Aglionby, 'Painting Illustrated', 98-9). Aglionby's hope was that once an informed understanding was attained among the upper classes, enabling them to become patrons and collectors of history painting, then a change in national taste and aesthetic achievement would follow. 
William Aglionby seems to have had a wide acquaintanceship. His friends and correspondents included the physician Hans Sloane, the diplomat Charles Berkeley, Lord Dursley, and the poet Matthew Prior, who succeeded Aglionby as Berkeley's secretary at The Hague in 1690. Sir William Trumbull, a prominent diplomat and government minister, to whom he bequeathed $10 in his will, was also a friend. The spy John Macky, who may have known Aglionby through their common employment in the Post Office, and who wrote a short account of him about 1703, acknowledged that he 'hath abundance of Wit, and understands most of the modern Languages well; knows how to tell a Story to the best Advantage', but added that he had 'an affected manner of Conversation', while in appearance he was 'thin, splenatick and tawny Complexioned' (Macky, 153-4). To this Jonathan Swift added that Aglionby 'had been a Papist' (Swift, 261). Nothing about Aglionby's beliefs can be deduced from his will, drawn up on 24 November 1705, which is almost devoid of religious content. Three years earlier he had married Katherine Hildyard, spinster, with whom he had a son, William, and who was pregnant with a short-lived daughter at her husband's death. Aglionby probably died at Chelsea (where he drew up his will), on 28 November 1705, and was buried in the east cloister of Westminster Abbey. The inscription on his grave-slab commemorated his endeavours as a diplomat, but posterity remembers him principally for his efforts to shape English attitudes towards, and appreciation of, the art of painting. 


@@@@@


doc= 39679


Brereton, William, third Baron Brereton of Leighlin (bap. 1631, d. 1680), politician and natural philosopher, was baptized on 4 May 1631 at Brereton, Cheshire, the eldest son of William Brereton, second Baron Brereton (1611-1664), and his wife, Lady Elizabeth (died 1687), daughter of George Goring, first earl of Norwich. The barony was a Jacobean Irish creation, referring to Leighlin, co. Carlow, bestowed on Brereton's grandfather in 1624. The family was quietly royalist during the civil war but Brereton and his parents were taken prisoner when the parliamentary forces in Staffordshire captured Biddulph Hall in 1644. Lord Goring sent Brereton in 1646 to the Low Countries to study under the mathematician John Pell, a friend of Lord Brereton, at the Breda Academy, from where he returned in 1652, a competent mathematician and algebraist. On 11 November 1657 he married, apparently against his father's wishes, Frances (died 1680), daughter of Francis Willoughby, fifth Baron Willoughby. Three sons were born: only the eldest, John (1659-1718), and the youngest, Francis (died 1722), survived to adulthood. 
Brereton was a close friend of Samuel Hartlib and his circle (Hartlib's son Clodius was his physician) and a patron of many literary and scientific undertakings. While abroad he had been in the company of Thomas Hobbes and Sir Charles Cavendish. He frequented the scientific gatherings at Gresham College in 1658 that preceded the formation of the Royal Society, of which he was a founder member and active participant. His interests encompassed the reproduction of language, chemistry, and many aspects of agriculture. He was fascinated by London's new Turkish coffee house, whose exotic drink was for the first time available in Britain. At the Royal Society he sat on the georgics (agriculture) and mechanics committees. After Hartlib's death in penury in 1662 Brereton purchased the two trunks containing his papers and transported them to Cheshire, where John Worthington arranged them into some kind of order. 
Elected to represent Newton, Lancashire, in Richard Cromwell's parliament in 1659, and in 1660 the seat of Bossiney, Brereton voted with the Presbyterian opposition. He made no speeches in parliament but was elected to the chair of the public accounts commission (1667-70), and was a gentleman of the privy chamber from 1673 until his death. Financial hardship dogged Brereton for much of his life: he was obliged to alienate the barony of Malpas to compensate for his family's support of the royalist cause, his wife brought little or no portion, and even after inheriting the title in 1664 he was in very straitened circumstances. His father-in-law drowned in Barbados in 1666, and his wife's inheritance was not paid out until 1674. 
His acquaintances held Brereton in high regard. John Aubrey, who had known him since his return from Breda, could not 'mention this Noble Lord but with a great deale of Passion, for a more virtuous person (besides his great learning) I never knew' ('Brief Lives', 232). To Hartlib he was 'really a noble gentlemen, & of a much enlarged spirit to the good of mankind' ('Diary and Correspondence of Dr John Worthington', 1.188). Samuel Pepys, having met him at Lady Carteret's dining table, judged him to be 'a very sober and serious, able man'; after dinner Brereton went to the organ and 'played a verse very handsomely' (Pepys, 8.10-11). He was an excellent musician and a good composer. In 1666 John Worthington sent him a polyphon (a kind of harpsichord) together with a book of lessons. 
Brereton died in Westminster on 17 March 1680, and was buried on 19 March at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. His wife died in September the same year, and was also buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields. The title passed to his son John, who married but died childless, then to Francis, who died unmarried in 1722, whereupon it became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 39680


Bridgeman, William (1645/6-1699), government official, was born in Amsterdam as the only son of Richard Bridgeman ('b'. 1621) of Combs Hall, Suffolk, himself the eighth son of John Bridgeman, bishop of Chester ('bap'. 1577, 'd. '1652). At the time of William's birth his father was a merchant and agent for the East India Company in Amsterdam. His mother was Catherine, daughter of William Watson, a fellow merchant of Amsterdam. The foreign-born Bridgeman was naturalized in 1657. Bridgeman was educated at Westminster School in 1656 and on 17 December 1662, aged sixteen, he matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford. In 1674 Bridgeman married Diana Vernatti (1653-1707) who was of Italian origin and whose father, Peter Vernatti, was to be briefly caught up in the Popish Plot in 1678. According to John Evelyn, who knew the couple intimately, among her other talents Diana had an 'extraordinary skill and dexterity' at the guitar (Evelyn, 4.360). William and Diana had three children: Orlando (1680-1731), MP for Ipswich in 1713, who as the only male heir of William Bridgeman inherited his property at Combs in Suffolk in 1699; William ('b'. 1684), who died in infancy; and Catherine (died 1742). 
Bridgeman's official life as an administrator in the later Stuart government began in 1667 when he entered the office of the secretary of state, Lord Arlington. His post as personal secretary to Arlington, in succession to William Godolphin, appears to have been the result of the patronage of his uncle Sir Orlando Bridgeman (1609-1674), then lord keeper. In office William proved an able and capable subordinate, although noted on occasion as being rather too keen to stand upon his dignity. His friend John Evelyn claimed that Bridgeman was a 'very industrious and usefull man' and 'a very ingenious person' (Evelyn, 5.325; 4.197). In 1674 Bridgeman transferred his services to Sir Joseph Williamson and in 1679 he became under-secretary to Robert Spencer, second earl of Sunderland. 
In the popular mind at least, Bridgeman was most closely associated with Sunderland. It was the rise of Sunderland which confirmed Bridgeman in the role of a professional civil servant of some note. Sunderland, as had Arlington, disliked routine administration and was content to leave this to Bridgeman, who was described in the 1690s as an 'indefatigable secretary-to-all-turns' ('A French conquest', 10.490). Although the term under-secretary was not in much use at that time, it aptly describes Bridgeman's functions and he appears to have learned much from his service in the expanding and increasingly professional secretariat. As a result of his close association with Sunderland, Bridgeman's career suffered in 1680 when he was removed from office during the Exclusion crisis with the fall of his patron. Sunderland's return to power in 1683 saw Bridgeman once again reappointed as under-secretary in January 1683, seeming to confirm his status as Sunderland's client. 
In the reign of James II Bridgeman proved more active on the public scene. A clerk-extraordinary of the privy council in 1676-85, he was appointed a clerk of the privy council from 1685 to December 1688 (and again in 1693 until his death). He had in any case been busily acquiring social and business positions in the usual outlets for a person of his social rank. He was a justice of the peace for Middlesex (1677-89), for Westminster (1678-89), and for both counties from 1689 to his death. He acquired his residences in Pall Mall and at Combs Hall in Suffolk and he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 18 December 1680. He was master of the Clothworkers' Company in 1686-7. He was also to become chairman of the Charitable Adventure in 1699. Politically, Bridgeman was active for the court as a member of parliament for Bramber in 1685 in the only parliament of James's reign. In 1688 he assisted Sunderland by preparing the lists of court candidates for the abortive second parliament of that year. On 17 November 1688 he was called upon to witness the will of James II, and from November to December 1688 he briefly served Charles, second earl of Middleton, again as under-secretary. 
After the revolution of 1688 Bridgeman was singled out for questioning about his activities for the former regime, including his part in various 'quo warranto' proceedings, as well as about the ecclesiastical commission on which he served as registrar from 1687 to October 1688. His interrogation by the Commons on 4 December 1689 illustrates an excellent civil servant's ability to equivocate, as well as his selective memory: he apparently saw nothing, knew nothing, and did nothing in equal measure -- he even 'forgot' that Sunderland had been a member of the commission and claimed 'I was indisposed in my health, and remember no more' (Grey, 9.339-41; 'JHL', 14.388). 
As a man useful to all turns, however, Bridgeman's past was no worse than many others' at that time and it in turn was soon forgotten. Ailesbury tells the tale in his 'Memoirs' of Bridgeman's worth as an under-secretary to the earl of Shrewsbury in 1689-90, when the latter told him that 'Mr William Bridgeman... read all the letters and reported to him the material contents on which he drew what moves were requisite, and then [Shrewsbury only] set his name to them' ('Memoirs of... Ailesbury', 1.247-8). However, although this story was true of Bridgeman's attitude to his masters in general, in that he was remarkably efficient, the appointment is not supported by any other evidence. Bridgeman was appointed as an under-secretary to Henry Sydney in December 1690. Secretary Trenchard kept him in office from March 1693 until July 1694 and because of the secretary of state's illness it seems Bridgeman did most of the work. 
In August 1694 having spent over a quarter of a century in the secretariat in one form or another Bridgeman was appointed secretary to the Admiralty in order to deal with the crisis there. Bridgeman immediately brought the organizational abilities he had acquired in the secretariat to bear on a confused and somewhat dated naval administration. As the senior administrative official in the Admiralty his gift for restructuring the business of the office enabled him to supervise what one naval historian of the period has called the greatest advance in naval administration since Pepys's work there in the 1680s (Ehrman, 559). The new classification of office business and records was the result of Bridgeman's efforts and William III 'believing him very fitt for the employment' gave him his favour, doubtless appreciating Bridgeman's efficiency in the face of an increasingly difficult war (BL, Add. MS 37992, fol. 56). Using administrative methods carried over from the secretary of state's office the work of the office was divided and subdivided, records were regularly kept, staffing was reorganized, and a system of administration established. 
While Bridgeman had administrative ability, in reality he had little knowledge of naval matters. Despite his innovations the actual burden of office proved too heavy for one man. The 'continuall round of Business', as well as the claims of Admiral Russell for his particular client, Josiah Burchett, brought in Burchett to hold the office of secretary jointly with Bridgeman from September 1694 (BL, Lansdowne MS 1152B (II), fol. 266). For some time Bridgeman remained the senior man in the partnership and it was not until the autumn of 1695 that Burchett began to take his share of the work there. Thereafter Bridgeman's increasing ill health in the last two years of the war and his frequent absences from the office began to shift the balance of power and after the treaty of Ryswick in 1697 he virtually ceased to act as secretary. He left the post in June 1698 and in the following year he died on 10 May. 
Bridgeman's exceptional capacity for hard work within the later Stuart administration marks him out as a notable figure in the administrative revolution of the later seventeenth century. He became one of the first of the professional 'civil servants', establishing routines and administrative precedents, particularly in the Admiralty, which were to last well into the eighteenth century and even beyond. 


@@@@@


doc= 39681


Conway, Edward, earl of Conway (c.1623-1683), politician, was the first surviving son and heir of Edward Conway, second Viscount Conway and second Viscount Killultagh (bap. 1594, d. 1655), politician and bibliophile, and his wife, Frances (1596/7-1671), daughter of Sir Francis Popham. Apparently not enjoying any formal education the young Conway spent time in Paris, however, where he had some instruction in military arts in 1640. In 1649 his father signed over to him his justly famous library in consideration of debts for which Edward had stood surety. 
On 11 February 1651 Conway married Anne (1631-1679) ['see 'Conway, Anne], daughter of Sir Heneage Finch, recorder of London, and half-sister of Heneage Finch, first earl of Nottingham. Four years later, in 1655, he succeeded to his father's titles. The third viscount's stance towards the public authorities of the Commonwealth era is uncertain. However, in 1656 his wife's uncle wrote to the lord protector's councillors imploring their assistance in the liberation of the viscount who had been kidnapped, robbed, and imprisoned by Ostenders 'en route' for France. Conway had 'no hope of release but through you, by reason of his bearing arms for and his known affection to the present Government' ('CSP dom.', '1656-7', 16.59-60). Within a short space of time the viscount was ransomed. In 1657 he was certainly appointed to the Warwickshire assessment committee as part of the policy of healing and settling in local government. In 1660 Conway was at the head of the local gentry coup in Warwickshire, repeated across the country and vital to the momentum of Restoration, which saw the return of the reins of power, and principally the command of the local militia, into the hands of social elites. 
At the outset of his public career, after Charles II assumed his English throne, Conway's principal sphere of influence was in Ireland. In 1660 he was a member of the Irish privy council. A confidant of the duke of Ormond and closely associated with the increasingly beleaguered court interest of Lord Chancellor Clarendon, in November 1666 he counselled the lord lieutenant that 10,000 Irish troops be sent into England as a defence against invasion or rebellion, amid growing signs of the imminent collapse of the Clarendon regime -- a suggestion with a startlingly Straffordian ring, which seems to have sparked rumours of an intention to impose arbitrary government. Conway was subsequently named in the lord chancellor's compromise proposal for a commission to examine the royal finances, offered to deflect demands in parliament for the establishment of a committee of accounts. Conway's support for the court and the prerogative were strengthened further by his personal interest in the defeat of the Irish 'Cattle Bill', under which he stood to lose a considerable source of income from the rearing of Irish cows for English markets. By mid-January 1667 the Cavalier Parliament had reached crisis point. Looking on, Conway wrote that 'either the kingdom will be reduced to a commonwealth or the king must dissolve this present [parliament] and govern by some other medium' (Seaward, 289). When Clarendon fell Conway lamented the sorry state to which government descended. Writing to his brother-in-law, Sir John Finch, in February 1668 shortly before the latter's return from Italy, he told him that 'you will have the advantage of coming into a Court where there is not one man of ability' ('CSP dom.', '1667-8', 258). However, he managed the transition reasonably well, successfully ingratiating himself with Arlington. 
Conway was much occupied with the administration of Ireland, where he spent a considerable portion of his time, having a fine estate at Lisburn, co. Antrim. He was made governor of Charlemont Fort in 1671, and extended his authority over the counties of Armagh, Tyrone, Monaghan, and part of Down from 1672. He was joint commissioner of the Irish customs, 1673-5, and held a commission as lieutenant-general of horse in the Irish army from 1674. Tory in his politics, Conway was enlisted by Danby in 1675 to persuade members of the English House of Lords resident in Ireland to attend and support the court. Later Danby and his wife would urgently solicit Conway's personal assistance in repelling the bill of attainder brought in against the first minister in the spring of 1679. It is unclear whether or not Conway made any effort to assist, but whatever he did it did not impede his appointment as master of the ordnance in Ireland early in summer that year. His wife, whose religious convictions he had on occasion indulged by securing the release of Quakers from prison, died on 23 February 1679, and her body was preserved in a glass case until her husband could return from Ireland to attend her funeral which did not take place for over two months. Despite suffering chronic ill health during the 1660s Lady Conway had enjoyed the company of a prominent intellectual circle centred on Henry More and other Cambridge Platonists. Her husband, who had been elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 2 January 1668, was the chief patron of Jeremy Taylor, future bishop of Down and Connor, whom he invited to Ireland in 1658 to take up a lectureship, as well as a benefactor of Taylor's fellow churchman George Rust, the philosophers More and Ralph Cudworth, and of his own wife, whose philosophical interests he also encouraged. After Lady Conway's death her manuscript treatise was published in 1690 as 'Principia philosophiae' within a collection entitled 'Opuscula philosophica', once incorrectly attributed to Conway himself. 
On 3 December 1679 the third viscount was created first earl of Conway and was introduced to the House of Lords by his new title on 21 October 1680. It was rumoured that he paid $10,000 to the duchess of Portsmouth for the honour. Conway steadfastly opposed exclusion. On 2 February 1681 he joined the English privy council at Whitehall and was also appointed lord lieutenant of Warwickshire during the minority of the earl of Northampton. He acted as secretary of state for the northern department from then until January 1683, when he resigned amid allegations that he was complicit in 'crimes and misdemeanours... either in relation to the King's person or his public negotiations or transactions with foreign ambassadors, or in not rightly pursuing the King's instructions to ambassadors abroad' ('CSP dom.', 'Jan-June 1687', 32). He retired, with a generous pension, to Ragley Hall, his family's Warwickshire seat, where he set about disarming dissenters and rooting out all local evidence of subversion and disaffection to the crown. His second wife, Elizabeth (died 1681), daughter of George Booth, first Baron Delamere, whom he married at an unknown date, brought him a dowry of $13,000. She died in July 1681, and by 30 August following Conway had married Ursula (died 1697), daughter of George Stawell of Cothelstone, Somerset, this time netting himself $30,000. In July 1683 he was advised that his return to court would be very welcome, and that he might expect a warm enough reception there. However, he died on 11 August following and was buried on 25 August at Arrow, Warwickshire. Advantageous as his matches had been, he left no heir, and all his honours became extinct at his death. His wife survived him and married John Sheffield, later duke of Buckingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 39687


Bernard, Sir Robert, fifth baronet (1740-1789), politician, was born early in 1740 at Brampton Park, Huntingdonshire, the only son and second child of Sir John Bernard, fourth baronet (1685-1766), of Brampton, a gentleman farmer, and Mary, daughter and coheir of Sir Francis St John, first baronet, of Longthorpe, Northamptonshire. The Bernard family had lived in Huntingdonshire for decades and acquired the family estate at Brampton Park in 1666. The first baronet, Sir Robert Bernard (died 1666), was recorder of Huntingdon and served the borough in the House of Commons. Despite their support for the parliamentary cause in the civil war, the Bernards apparently remained faithful Anglicans. Robert Bernard was educated at Westminster School, and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 10 May 1758. 
Bernard continued the family's interest in politics when he stood successfully for a county parliamentary seat in 1765 made available by the retirement of Lord Charles Greville Montagu. Because the Bernards were historically allied with the Montagu family, Bernard was nominated to the seat by George Montagu, fourth duke and seventh earl of Manchester. He soon affiliated with the parliamentary whig faction led by the marquess of Rockingham. In December 1766 he succeeded his father as fifth baronet. During his term in the House of Commons, he rarely spoke, although he voted for measures advanced by the Rockingham and Chatham ministries. According to the other Huntingdonshire political power, John Montagu, fourth earl of Sandwich, Bernard became attracted to the reform notions of William Petty, second earl of Shelburne, although no correspondence between the two exists in the Shelburne papers. Bernard quarrelled with the duke of Manchester in late 1766, which caused a breach between the two. At the election of 1768 Bernard spent considerable sums campaigning for re-election against two candidates backed by Manchester and Sandwich, but lost by 138 votes. 
Bernard travelled to London in 1769, where he joined supporters of the radical reformer John Wilkes, imprisoned for outlawry and denied a seat in parliament from Middlesex. When the Society of Gentleman Supporters of the Bill of Rights was founded to collect funds for Wilkes, Bernard became a charter member. Later in 1769 Bernard assisted John Calcraft, Chathamite MP, and the Surrey distiller Sir Joseph Mawbey in soliciting funds for the society in Essex. When a vacancy occurred in the parliamentary borough of Westminster in 1770, Wilkes's radical party persuaded Bernard to stand for the seat. Nominated by William Dowdeswell, Rockingham's leader in the Commons, Bernard was elected without opposition. Once again, however, he maintained a low profile, making only one speech attacking stock jobbing in the next parliament. A petition signed by several thousand Westminster constituents concerning Wilkes's Middlesex election dispute was presented to George III by Bernard in November 1770. Reportedly, Bernard refused to kneel in the presence of the king. 
Bernard's close confidant in the Bill of Rights Society, John Horne, precipitated a split with Wilkes over the use of the society's funds. Bernard joined Horne, John Sawbridge, and others by leaving the society to form the Constitutional Society in March 1771. The decision to oppose Wilkes led to Bernard's failure to win nomination for the Westminster seat at the next election in 1774. Meanwhile, Bernard co-operated with Horne and Sawbridge in opposing the powerful borough patron, the duke of Bedford. The reformers hoped their campaign would inspire a general revolt against the electoral influence of powerful patrons such as Bedford. The mayor of Bedford, one Cawne, agreed to admit into the corporation Huntingdonshire and London associates of Bernard's as non-resident freemen. When the duke of Bedford died in 1771, the corporation gave the duke's post of recorder to Bernard, and he retained this post until his death in 1789. At the 1774 elections in Bedford, Bernard's interest captured both seats, including one for his brother-in-law, Robert Sparrow. The administration of Frederick, Lord North, was able to remove Sparrow from the Commons when the election was challenged by Samuel Whitbread. Bernard's faction held the other Bedford seat in the 1780 and 1784 elections, however. 
At the same time that Bernard became heavily involved in Bedford politics, he joined Christopher Wyvill's association movement for parliamentary reform in 1780. As chairman of the Huntingdonshire association, Bernard circulated Wyvill's petition for shorter parliaments and reapportionment of seats based on population shifts. Bernard also helped to organize the petitioning movement in neighbouring Cambridgeshire. Attacks of gout curtailed his activities in the mid-1780s; he died from complications of this ailment on 2 January 1789 at Brampton Park and was buried there on 7 January. Because Bernard never married, his landed property, worth $14,000 (including the Huntingdonshire manors of Brampton Park, Houghton and Grafham), was left to his nephew, Robert Bernard Sparrow, the son of his sister Mary. 
Bernard became part of the early political reform movement, mainly extra-parliamentary, in the 1760s. He demonstrated the ability to bridge the rural and urban environments to produce a national agenda for reform. A moderate by the standards of the time, Bernard agreed with more substantial reformers that the crown's influence should be diminished and that parliamentary reform was necessary to recover the historical integrity of the most important national institution. John Horne was Bernard's principal mentor once he arrived in London, yet Bernard proved capable of managing reform campaigns alone, as he did in Bedford. Typical of most early moderate reformers, Bernard represented a substantial, politically independent gentry family, whose political sensibilities recoiled in the evidence of corruption at the national as well as local levels. 


@@@@@


doc= 39688


Lloyd, Gamaliel (1744-1817), merchant and political reformer, was born on 26 May 1744 at Hulme Hall near Manchester, the second son of four children of George Lloyd ('bap'. 1708, died 1783), merchant and manufacturer, and his second wife, Susannah Horton ('bap'. 1718, died 1783), daughter of Thomas Horton of Chadderton, Lancashire. The Lloyds had been successful merchants even before the family moved from Mattersey, Nottinghamshire, to Lancashire in the late seventeenth century. George Lloyd, who had taken an MB at Cambridge in 1731 and had been elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1737, moved to Barrowby Hall, near Leeds, some time after 1760, though his son John with his first wife, Eleanor, 'nee' Wright (died 1735), continued to reside at Hulme Hall. He became a deputy lieutenant for the West Riding of Yorkshire. Gamaliel and his brother Thomas (1750-1828) were apprenticed in the woollen industry at Leeds, and his other brother, George, became a barrister. His sister, Susannah, married the Revd Henry Wray. 
In 1764 Gamaliel Lloyd formed a partnership in a dyeing enterprise with the Gautier family in Leeds. The business eventually failed, and in 1776 he entered a partnership with an Italian merchant, Horace Cattaneo, to export woollen cloth. Although Lloyd was fined in 1777 for 'reeling false and short yarn', Lloyd, Cattaneo & Co. proved profitable, the firm's gross profits totalling $35,000 in 1782. Indeed, Lloyd was one of the half-dozen wealthiest merchants of Leeds. With his profits he purchased a country estate, Stockton Hall, near York. Lloyd became involved in local politics as his business career prospered. He was elected to the Leeds corporation and the common council in 1771, became alderman in 1775, and served as lord mayor for 1778-9. He married in 1780 Elizabeth, daughter of James Attwood of Bristol. They had three children: two daughters and a son. 
Beginning in March 1780, Lloyd became an active member of Christopher Wyvill's extra-parliamentary Yorkshire Association. Wyvill and the association movement, which was dominated by the merchant gentry, favoured moderate reforms of parliament. Particularly interested in the association's promotion of shorter parliaments and reform of the civil list and sinecures, Lloyd collected signatures on association petitions and solicited support from the sympathetic county MP, Sir George Savile. He wrote to Savile on 15 May 1780 expressing gratitude for Savile's vote in favour of John Sawbridge's unsuccessful Commons motion for triennial parliaments. Lloyd remained optimistic: 'This has very much raised our Spirits... the Whigs united upon truly Whiggish and Constitutional Grounds, will be an over-match for their Opposers' (Wyvill, 1.253). He further expressed support for John Dunning's resolution in the Commons citing the growing 'influence of the Crown' and lamented the 'still greater and more unconstitutional influence of Lords and other great Men by their property in the Boroughs: an influence very dangerous... as it is the greatest support of the influence of the Crown' (ibid., 1.261). Parliamentary reform, he asserted, would ensure a shift in political influence to the 'wise, honest, able and incorruptible' independent merchants and gentry (ibid., 1.260-61). His association colleague William Strickland requested that Lloyd encourage participation from fellow merchants in Manchester, Liverpool, Norwich, Birmingham, and Exeter. The association petition circulated by Lloyd obtained an impressive 318 signatures by December 1782. 
Upon the failure of the association's petitioning campaign and parliamentary reform, Lloyd became less active politically. He moved in 1789 to Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, and also later acquired a residence at Hampstead, near London. Continuing his interest in reform, however, he made the acquaintance of Capel Lofft, a disciple of John Jebb and leader in Jebb's Society for Constitutional Information. Yet he wrote to Wyvill in 1793 or 1794 that he was alarmed at the increasingly radical nature of Lofft's ideas. Thereafter he lived in quiet retirement until his death by natural causes in Great Ormond Street, London, on 31 August 1817. Although the value of Lloyd's real properties must have been large, the exact figure cannot be determined. 


@@@@@


doc= 39693


Newman, Henry (1670-1743), missionary society administrator, was born on 10 November 1670 at Rehoboth, Massachusetts, the eldest of the three sons of Noah Newman ('c'.1646-1678), a Congregational minister, and his wife, Joanna (died 1679), the daughter of Henry Flint, a nonconformist minister of Roxbury, Massachusetts. His grandfather was a puritan divine who emigrated from England to Massachusetts about 1636. After attending free schools in Massachusetts, Newman went to Harvard College in 1683 to prepare for the Congregational ministry, but the college was becoming more liberal in outlook, and the influence of its tutors, who introduced their students to recent Anglican writings, eventually led him into the Church of England. He acquired there also an interest in mathematics and astronomy, which led him to produce two almanacs -- 'Harvard's Ephemeris' (1690) and 'News from the Stars' (1691). 
Newman graduated BA in 1687 and MA in 1690, and remained at Harvard as librarian until 1693. He then had a commercial career, trading with Europe principally in Newfoundland fish until 1703, when he settled in England. He was employed by Charles Seymour, sixth duke of Somerset, until about 1708. 
In 1703 Newman became a corresponding member for Newfoundland of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK), founded by Dr Thomas Bray, and in 1708 was appointed its secretary. He was suited for the post. He knew Latin and French, his American connection was valuable when the society was extending its work across the Atlantic, and his support of the house of Hanover strengthened the position of Bray and his friends, who did not want to see the society involved in the struggle for the succession to the throne in Queen Anne's reign. 
Newman was a modest, retiring man and avoided prominence for himself. He was unmarried and content with his canaries and his cats. He clearly joined in the discussion at the society's meetings, but he never referred in the minutes to any view expressed by himself; and he did not leave London to visit any of the society's members in their homes. His main task was to engage in the correspondence concerned with the society's interests. In his first five years he wrote more than 6000 letters, besides making abstracts of all the letters the society had received. The drafts of his letters have been preserved in the SPCK's archives. They provide nearly all the information about him and a full account of the work of the society during those years. 
Through his correspondence Newman succeeded in putting into effect the society's decisions. He dealt with many subjects as the society's activities steadily widened. While its original purpose, as he explained, was 'to encourage the erection of charity schools and to disperse good books' (Cowie, 22), it was led into other enterprises, which often caused Newman serious problems. Notable was his failure to induce Anglican missionaries to go to India, which caused the society to support German Lutherans there despite high-church criticism. 
In addition, Newman's philanthropic concern led him to support such causes as Thomas Coram's Foundling Hospital and James Oglethorpe's settlement of Georgia. He served also as colonial agent for New Hampshire from 1709 to 1720, representing the colony's interests to the British government, especially in its lengthy boundary dispute with Massachusetts. 
Newman worked for the SPCK until he died of asthma at his home in Bartlett's Buildings, Holborn, on 15 June 1743. He was buried in the churchyard of St Andrew's, Holborn, on 17 June. He was notable for his sincere but modest personal religion, which found expression in a broad-minded attitude towards others and a wish to devote himself to their welfare. 


@@@@@


doc= 39695


Leslie, Sir Harald Robert, Lord Birsay (1905-1982), judge, was born on 8 May 1905 at South Shields, co. Durham, the only son of Robert Leslie, master mariner, and his wife, Margaret Mowat Cochrane. His parents were both natives of Stromness, Orkney, and although he spent most of his life in southern Scotland, Leslie considered himself an Orcadian. His father died of a heart condition while serving in the merchant navy during the First World War, and Leslie professed that his only ambition had been to go to sea, but he was dissuaded from doing so by his widowed mother. His early childhood was spent in the borders, where he attended Berwickshire high school, Duns. He later moved to Glasgow and was educated at Glasgow high school and at Glasgow University, where he took MA (1927) and LLB (1930) degrees. He became a solicitor in 1930 and practised in Glasgow, but he found the life uncongenial and studied briefly for the ministry of the Church of Scotland. In 1937 he was called to the Scottish bar. He had been active in the Officers' Training Corps, and in 1939 he volunteered for active service. When his posting was delayed he briefly served as a stoker on a small steamer running military supplies around Scapa Flow. He was later commissioned into the Royal Scots and served throughout the war. He was mentioned in dispatches and appointed a military MBE; in 1945 he transferred to the reserve with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In the same year he returned to practice at the bar, and on 27 December married Robina Margaret Marwick, the daughter of James George Marwick, a provost of Stromness. She had served as a doctor with the British forces in Germany and was among the first allied medical personnel to enter Belsen concentration camp. They set up home in Edinburgh and adopted a son and a daughter. 
Between 1947 and 1951 Leslie served as an advocate depute under the Labour administration, acting as a prosecutor in the High Court of Justiciary. Despite having few connections in the law, his promotion was rapid and he took silk in 1949. At the bar his outstanding talent was as a jury pleader at a time when civil jury trials in actions for damages for personal injuries took up much of the business of the Court of Session. He was at his best when representing the pursuer, and was frequently successful. Later he defended the mass murderer Peter Manuel until his client, who was subsequently found guilty and hanged, dismissed him and took over his own defence. Although Leslie was not considered to be in the front rank as a lawyer, his powerful presence, coupled with his oratorical gifts and a stalwart independence, placed him among the most prominent advocates of the day. He was able to deploy to great advantage a rich bass voice which he enhanced with a pleasingly modified Orkney intonation. 
While Leslie was admired by many of his brother advocates, in the narrow world of Parliament House the admiration was not universal. His determinedly homely delivery, his readiness to appeal to the emotions of juries (and even of judges), and his lack of enthusiasm for minute legal analysis did not endear him to elements of the legal establishment, and in particular to Lord Clyde, the lord president, whom he warmly disliked, and with whom he had several bitter courtroom confrontations. Nevertheless, in 1956 he was made sheriff of Roxburgh, Berwick, and Selkirk, when such appointments were seen as the route to elevation to the Supreme Court bench. 
In 1959 Leslie stood for election as dean of the Faculty of Advocates (the leader of the Scottish bar), and in the first ballot his popularity enabled him to defeat the powerful establishment candidate I. H. Shearer QC. He was ultimately defeated by the compromise candidate, W. I. R. Fraser QC (later Lord Fraser of Tullybelton, lord of appeal). In 1961 he was translated to the (part-time) sheriffdom of Caithness, Sutherland, Orkney, and Zetland, an appointment which gave him considerable personal satisfaction. In 1965 he was appointed chairman of the Scottish land court, with the rank and tenure of a judge of the Court of Session, and took the title Lord Birsay from a village in Orkney. The land court had been set up in 1912 to adjudicate on disputes between crofting tenants and their landlords following upon the granting of security of tenure in the wake of the suffering caused by the highland clearances. Later it assumed a wider jurisdiction under the 'Agricultural Holdings Acts'. While the court's headquarters were in Edinburgh, its jurisdiction was peripatetic and Leslie regularly sat in remote parts of Scotland, often in village halls and other even less formal surroundings. His genuine interest in the people and their culture, his approachability and his pragmatism fitted him well for this work and his public popularity and reputation increased. 
It was in the wider field of public affairs that Leslie made his greatest mark on Scottish life. In the general election of 1950 he stood as Labour candidate in the Orkney and Shetland constituency, but was defeated by Jo Grimond, who subsequently held the seat for many years for the Liberals. Leslie appeared incapable of refusing any request for help or service in the charitable or public sphere, and accepted a vast range of appointments. Among them were the chairmanships of the Scottish Advisory Council on the Treatment of Offenders, the Committee on General Medical Services in the Highlands and Islands, the National Savings Committee for Scotland, and the Scottish Advisory Committee on the Travelling People. He was also a vice-president of the Boys' Brigade, trustee of the Scottish Architectural Heritage Trust, and president of the Scottish national dictionary. In that capacity he led an appeal for a concise Scots dictionary which, when it was ultimately published after his death, was dedicated to his memory. He was an elder of the Church of Scotland for nearly fifty years and sat on many committees of the general assembly. The culmination of his life of public service was his appointment as lord high commissioner to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1965 and 1966. 
Leslie was in constant demand as a speaker and rarely declined an invitation. He would travel considerable distances at his own expense to address modest local gatherings as readily as he would undertake important after-dinner speeches. His reputation preceded him and his audiences were readily captivated by his homely eloquence, although even his admirers conceded that the content sometimes took second place to the charm of his delivery. Throughout his public life his natural warmth and generosity won him much affection across a wide range of Scottish society. He was appointed CBE in 1963. In 1966 he received LLD degrees from Glasgow and Strathclyde universities and in the same year was made an honorary fellow of the Educational Institute of Scotland in recognition of his services to education. In 1973 he was made a knight of the Order of the Thistle. He died of a coronary thrombosis on 27 November 1982 at his home, 27 Queensferry Road, Edinburgh. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 39696


Buchan, Priscilla Jean Fortescue, Lady Tweedsmuir and Baroness Tweedsmuir of Belhelvie (1915-1978), politician, was born at 13 Rosary Gardens, Kensington, London, on 25 January 1915, the younger daughter of Major Alan Fortescue Thomson (1880-1957) of the Royal Artillery and his wife, Edythe Mary Unwin. She was educated in England, Germany, and France. On 14 May 1934 she married Sir Arthur Lindsay Grant, eleventh baronet (1911-1944), of Monymusk, Aberdeenshire. They had two daughters. Her husband, who served as a major in the Grenadier Guards, was killed in action in Normandy on 18 July 1944. 
Lady Grant began her political career in the general election of 1945, when she stood as the Conservative candidate in Aberdeen North. She was defeated, but in November 1946 she was elected to parliament at a by-election in Aberdeen South. When she entered the House of Commons in 1946 she was a pretty war widow with fair hair and blue eyes, and the mother of two small children. She was also, at the age of thirty-one, the youngest woman in the House of Commons at the time and one of only two Conservative women. Not surprisingly, she quickly attracted the attention of the press, who dubbed her the 'glamour girl'. She held the Aberdeen South seat for twenty years. 
On 27 July 1948 Lady Grant married John Norman Stuart Buchan, second Baron Tweedsmuir (1911-1996), of Elsfield Manor, Oxfordshire, son of the author John Buchan. They had one daughter. Lady Tweedsmuir was a delegate to the consultative assembly of the Council of Europe from 1950 to 1953, and was a member of the Commonwealth parliamentary delegation to the West Indies in 1955. In November 1957 she became the second woman to move the address in reply to the queen's speech at the opening of parliament. She was elected a member of the executive of the 1922 committee of the Conservative Party, only the second woman to have reached this position. During 1960-61 she served as one of the British delegates to the United Nations general assembly. She was joint parliamentary under-secretary of state at the Scottish Office from 1962 until the Labour victory of 1964. 
Lady Tweedsmuir lost her Aberdeen seat in the general election of 1966. Her political career seemed at an end, and she established business connections, becoming, notably, a member of the management team at Cunard from 1966 to 1970. However, in 1970 she was elevated to the House of Lords in her own right, with a life peerage, as Baroness Tweedsmuir of Belhelvie. At this point her career entered a new and even more distinguished phase. She served as minister of state at the Scottish Office from 1970 to 1972. As the Scottish minister in the Lords, she was expected to reside in Scotland and undertake local responsibilities there, while the secretary of state stayed in London. Her success in this position was rewarded in 1972 by a promotion to minister of state at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, the first woman to be appointed to ministerial office in that department. As a Scottish MP she had learned a great deal about the fishing industry, and was well qualified to be chief negotiator during the first so-called 'cod war' with Iceland. In 1974 she was sworn of the privy council, and became a deputy speaker of the Lords. 
Lady Tweedsmuir's greatest achievement, however, was her role as chair, from 1974, of the European Communities select committee of the House of Lords. Although a committed European, she was quite ready to examine the community's actions with a critical eye. She recruited about eighty lords of different backgrounds -- trade unionists, judges, and former diplomats, among others -- to examine in detail all proposed legislation of the European Community. They did so with a thoroughness that put to shame the equivalent House of Commons committee. It was said of the committee: 'Time and again the Lords select committee produced reports based on weeks of close examination and careful analysis that provided cogent evidence of the malfunctioning of the Brussels bureaucracy which gave other European parliamentarians cause to marvel' ('The Times', 13 March 1978). Her achievement was also constitutionally significant, for she managed to establish a politically effective body within the House of Lords. Lady Tweedsmuir resigned from this position in 1977 because of ill health, and died at her home, Potterton House, Balmedie, Aberdeenshire, on 11 March 1978. 


@@@@@


doc= 39699


Fergusson, Sir James, eighth baronet (1904-1973), archivist and scholar, was born on 18 September 1904, the eldest son of Sir Charles Fergusson, seventh baronet (1865-1951), of Kilkerran, Ayrshire, and his wife, Lady Alice Mary Boyle (1877-1958), second daughter of the seventh earl of Glasgow. Bernard Fergusson was a younger brother. He was educated at Eton College and Balliol College, Oxford (1922-5), where he took a fourth-class degree in history in 1925. After working as a bookselling assistant in London and with Blackwood's publishing firm in Edinburgh, he joined the BBC, first in Edinburgh and then in the overseas service. He broadcast on Nazi propaganda and lectured to forces in the Middle East. From 1945 to 1949 he was a leader writer on the 'Glasgow Herald'. 
The war had depleted the staff of Register House, Edinburgh, and when the post of keeper of the records became vacant in 1949 a selection board under the chairmanship of Sir Alexander Gray was initially unable to recommend an appointment. When he learned of Fergusson's candidature at the instigation of Dr Henry Meikle of the National Library, Gray noted, 'This looks quite promising: whatever else he is J. F. is something of a personality'. Fergusson was interviewed at a second sitting of the board and his appointment was confirmed. His twenty years as keeper were a time of considerable expansion for the Scottish Record Office. Fergusson was generous in his assistance to researchers, whose numbers increased dramatically. He played an important part in the deposit of many collections of private papers and built up a qualified staff. Above all he persistently pressed the office's accommodation requirements in the face of increasing accessions of records. Although he would have preferred expansion at Register House itself, the outcome was the conversion of St George's Church, Charlotte Square, into West Register House, opened in 1971. Before his retirement he had already become ill and he received much help from his deputy and successor, John Imrie. 
As keeper, Fergusson was also chairman of the Scottish Records Advisory Council, which gave its support on accommodation, the transfer of Scottish records from the Public Record Office, and the development of local archives. Another duty which he undertook with relish was the supervision of the elections of Scottish representative peers to serve in the House of Lords, held normally in the picture gallery, Holyroodhouse, but held in 1955 in Parliament House. When he wrote 'The Sixteen Peers of Scotland' (1960) he did not know that the procedure would be brought to an end by the 1963 'Peerage Act'. He was also an active chairman of the editorial committee of the 'History of Parliament' project. 
During the week Fergusson stayed at the New Club, Edinburgh, and wrote in the evening. He continued to contribute to the 'Glasgow Herald' on historical subjects. His family background provided material ranging from the eighteenth century to his father's role in 'The Curragh Incident' (1964). Thus his first book was 'Letters of George Dempster to Sir Adam Fergusson' (1934), and chapters entitled 'The Kilkerran improvers' and 'The farmer judge: Lord Hermand' were included in 'Lowland Lairds' (1949). 'The Man behind Macbeth' (1969) included a piece on Thomas Thomson, the son of Dailly manse who became deputy clerk register from 1806 to 1841 and who was commemorated by a new Scottish Record Office building opened in 1995. His knowledge of Argyll was put to use in 'Argyll in the Forty-Five' (1951) and in his study of the Appin murder case, the background to R. L. Stevenson's 'Kidnapped', printed in 'The White Hind' (1963). In retirement he produced a study of 'The Declaration of Arbroath' (1971). 
Fergusson also took part in the radio programme 'Round Britain Quiz' with Jack House, who explained their success by saying 'James is public school and I am public house'. Before 1949 he was a trustee of the National Galleries of Scotland and later he became a member of the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts and a trustee of the National Library of Scotland. A member of the Royal Company of Archers (the queen's bodyguard in Scotland), he became lord lieutenant of Ayrshire on his retirement as keeper. He was loyal to the Church of Scotland both in his parish of Dailly and as a commissioner to the general assembly. Glasgow University awarded him an honorary LLD in 1960 and he was elected FRSE in 1968. 
Fergusson married on 17 July 1930 Louise Frances Balfour Stratford Dugdale (died 1988), daughter of Edgar Trevelyan Stratford Dugdale and related to the Balfours of Whittingehame and the dukes of Argyll. They had two sons and two daughters: Charles, who succeeded to the estate; Adam, MEP for West Strathclyde (1979-84); Alice, who married the Rt Hon. Timothy Renton MP; and Christian, who died in a car accident at the age of fourteen in 1954. 
Sir James Fergusson died on 25 October 1973. A memorial service was held in November at Greyfriars Kirk, whose minister, Dr Stuart Louden, was a friend with affectionate memories from his earlier ministry at Dailly. Sir James was tall and of distinguished appearance with a small moustache. Photographs convey something of his characteristics of tenacity of purpose and directness combined with personal courtesy, composure, and a sense of duty and service. 


@@@@@


doc= 39701


Haynes, Hezekiah (d. 1693), parliamentarian army officer and deputy major-general, was the second son of John Haynes (1594-1654) of Copford Hall in Essex and Mary Thornton, daughter of Robert Thornton of Nottingham. A staunch puritan, John Haynes emigrated to New England in 1633 and was later governor of both Massachusetts and Connecticut. Hezekiah returned from New England in 1637 to supervise the sale of some family property. On the outbreak of the first civil war he joined the parliamentarian forces, serving as a captain in Colonel Holborne's regiment of foot. By early 1645 he had risen to the rank of major in Charles Fleetwood's cavalry regiment. He fought at the battle of Preston in 1648, and commanded Fleetwood's regiment at Dunbar in 1650. He probably fought at Worcester in 1651. During the early 1650s he was stationed with Fleetwood's regiment in Essex. In this period he was appointed a JP for Essex, and married Anne, daughter of Thomas Smithsby, former saddler to Charles I. He also purchased some crown lands in Norfolk and Suffolk, but sold these again before the Restoration, though he may have retained some crown property in Essex. Throughout the 1640s and 1650s he was a close friend of the minister of Earls Colne in Essex, Ralph Josselin, who frequently mentions him and his family in his diary. 
From the early 1650s Haynes began to carry out administrative as well as military duties for the Commonwealth. In 1653 he served on the committee which investigated how the official posts could be better regulated and the same year he was appointed to the committee charged with reducing the various government treasuries into a single fund. In 1654 he was named a treasury commissioner and a commissioner for the ejection of scandalous ministers and schoolmasters in Essex and Norfolk. Following the royalist risings of March 1655 Haynes supervised the government's response in Essex and secured a number of prominent royalists who were considered to be major security risks. He remained active in East Anglia throughout the summer, disarming royalist suspects and supervising the raising of the new county troops of horse militia, and on the appointment of the major-generals in the autumn of 1655 he was chosen to act as Charles Fleetwood's deputy in Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Cambridgeshire, and the Isle of Ely. 
Haynes began work as deputy major-general in early November in Norfolk and over the next few months supervised the taking of security from the royalists of East Anglia and the assessment and imposition of the decimation tax upon them. Among those decimated in Essex was his elder brother, Robert. He also arrested a number of individuals who he believed represented a particular security risk, including the royalist poet John Cleveland, whom he described as 'a most desperate enemy to God and good men' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A 32, fols. 647-50). At the end of 1655 he intervened in the election of the chief municipal officers in Colchester, purging the electorate to ensure the return of individuals who supported the government. In July and August 1656 he did all he could to secure the election to the second protectorate parliament of those supportive of Cromwell's regime, but the voters largely rejected his favoured candidates and returned those whom he considered to be the enemies of the godly cause. His letters to John Thurloe, Cromwell's secretary of state, during this period reveal his deep disappointment at the outcome of the election. 
Haynes was alarmed by the threat posed by the Quakers in East Anglia, who he reported had held 'considerable meetings' and 'greatly molested' his counties. In the summer of 1656 he arrested a large number and imprisoned them at Bury St Edmunds in Suffolk. He informed Thurloe that some of the local clergy believed the Quakers were 'ripe to cutt throates', and added: 'I thinke their principles would let them if they dared' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A 40, fols. 121-4). Haynes sat for Essex in the 1656 parliament. In December, after the house had narrowly rejected a proposal that the Quaker James Nayler should be executed for his blasphemy at Bristol, he suggested that 'his tongue might be slit or bored through, and that he might be stigmatized with the letter B' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 1.153). He is not recorded as having taken part in the debates on the 'Decimation Bill' in December 1656 and January 1657. Later in 1657 his elder brother died and left him the family seat of Copford Hall. 
Following Oliver Cromwell's death Haynes joined with his commanding officer, Charles Fleetwood, in opposing Richard Cromwell and his parliament and in calling for the return of the Rump Parliament. Later in 1659 he backed Fleetwood and Lambert in their struggle with the Rump and supported its forcible closure by the army in October. After the Rump's re-assembly in December he lost his commission and was ordered to return home to Essex. He remained there during the summer months of 1660 but was arrested in November on suspicion of involvement in subversive activities and held in the Tower of London for the next eighteen months. He was released in April 1662 after signing a bond of $5000 for his future good behaviour. Following his release he lived quietly at Copford Hall until 1684, when he made the property over to his son and moved to Coggeshall. He died there on 26 August 1693. 


@@@@@


doc= 39702


Reynoldes, Edward (d. 1623), administrator and politician, was born in Weymouth, Dorset, the second son of Lancelot Reynoldes of Melcombe Regis in that county, who came from a mercantile family which for successive generations had served as collectors of customs. He attended Southampton grammar school, where his schoolfellows included Thomas Lake, who was 'beholding unto me sometymes for his exercises' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/18/32). Reynoldes subsequently went to Oxford, where he graduated BA from All Souls on 4 March 1581, became a fellow the same year, and proceeded MA on 13 October 1584. 
When Sir Amias Paulet was appointed as keeper of Mary, queen of Scots, early in 1585 Reynoldes entered his service, perhaps at the suggestion of Sir Francis Walsingham, whose secretaries included Lake and Francis Mills, a Southampton man and former fellow of All Souls, and to whom Reynoldes had a connection through his kinship with Lady Walsingham's family, the St Barbs. He remained in Paulet's service until after Mary's execution in February 1587. It is possible that during Mary's imprisonment at Chartley, Reynoldes became known to Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, whose estate it was. By mid-1588 he had become Essex's man, acting as junior colleague to the earl's secretary, Thomas Smith. He accompanied Essex on the Portugal expedition in 1589 and during the Rouen campaign of 1591. When Smith became clerk of the privy council in mid 1595 Reynoldes became Essex's 'chief confident [personal] secretary' (BL, Harley MS 286, fol. 258'v'). The appointment of three new secretaries meant that when Essex went on campaign in 1596, 1597, and 1599, Reynoldes remained at Essex House to act as the earl's man of business around the court and the City. However, the prospect of a fourth new appointment to Essex's secretariat (which Reynoldes regarded as a discredit to himself) upset him so greatly that in August 1596 he offered to resign. This additional appointment was abandoned, but he still found himself at odds with one of his new colleagues, Henry Wotton. Reynoldes responded by strengthening his ties with Anthony Bacon, Essex's friend and chief intelligence co-ordinator, himself on poor terms with Wotton. 
Compounding Reynoldes's woes in 1596 was the behaviour of his brother Augustine, who misappropriated money which he had collected at Southampton for Essex's impost on sweet wines. Reynoldes was apparently forced to take over his brother's collectorship for the next few years and repay the debt. He had for some time been pursuing office on his own account. By 1597 his chief target was the reversion of a clerkship of the privy seal; with support from Essex, Bacon, and Sir Robert Cecil this was finally granted on 26 June 1598. Essex's attempts to have Reynoldes elected MP for Stafford in 1593 had failed, but in 1597 he was elected MP for Andover, where Essex was high steward. Over this period, possibly already a widower, he had also been conducting a long-distance courtship of Katherine, widow of one John Mills, who owned property in Southampton. After long delays Reynoldes seems to have married her in 1599. 
Reynoldes remained in Essex's service after the earl's fall from grace in late 1599. In contrast to other servants like Henry Cuffe and Sir Gelly Meyrick, who increasingly saw force as the only way by which Essex could recover his fortunes, Reynoldes argued that Essex could only 'drawe himself out of this bogg' by 'humble & temperat' conduct (TNA: PRO, SP 12/273/38). Several letters from Essex to the queen in 1600 survive in his hand. However, these are copies rather than drafts and provide no evidence that he had a role in their composition. Reynoldes was arrested after Essex's insurrection in London on 8 February 1601, but it is not clear that he took part in the action. He was soon released without being charged or fined. 
Although he won election as MP for Weymouth later that year Reynoldes's prospects were hamstrung by the fall of Essex. He spent much of the next few years living at Salisbury or Whiteparish in Wiltshire and was often sick. His wife also suffered chronic ill health and was dead by June 1605. He sustained himself as a moneylender, which caused him great frustrations and forced him to rely heavily upon his brother Owen, a servant of his old colleague Thomas Smith. After years of failed attempts to buy out Thomas Kerry from his clerkship of the privy seal, Reynoldes finally entered the office in mid-1608. Almost immediately he was plunged into an awkward dispute about fees with the lord privy seal, Henry Howard, earl of Northampton, who had been a friend of Essex and whom Reynoldes regarded as a patron. However, his much delayed entry into the privy seal office also made him a close colleague of his old friend Francis Mills. When Mills died in September 1618 Reynoldes succeeded him as registrar of the court of requests. Following the death of his favourite brother, Owen (who had become keeper of the privy council chest), in April 1610, Reynoldes increasingly invested his hopes of family success in his cousin John Castle, who served as clerk to Levinus Munck, the assistant secretary of state. He ultimately succeeded in establishing Castle as his successor in the privy seal office. Despite his abiding dislike of his brother Augustine, Reynoldes also took a direct interest in Augustine's son Edward Reynolds (1599-1676, the future bishop of Norwich), whom he sent to Merton College, Oxford, where his old friend and fellow Essexian Henry Savile was provost. In his will of June 1623 Reynoldes named his nephew and namesake as one of his executors. Lacking any children of his own, he specified generous bequests to many members of his extended family. He also left $20 for the schoolmaster of Southampton grammar school and $20 to buy divinity books for All Souls. He died either in late November or early December, or on 18 December, 1623 and was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 39703


Standen, Sir Anthony (d. in or after 1615), adventurer and spy, was the eldest of (at least) four sons and four daughters of Edmund Standen, esquire (died 1571), of East Molesey, Surrey, which lies adjacent to the royal palace of Hampton Court. Anthony's younger brother Edmund (died 1603) served as a clerk of the petty bag of chancery for much of the reign of Elizabeth I, having begun his career as a servant to Robert Fleetwood, a clerk of the petty bag in the 1550s. He himself aspired to success at Elizabeth's court, where he attached himself to the countess of Lennox and her son Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley. However, when Darnley became engaged to Mary, queen of Scots, in 1565, Standen followed him to Scotland, taking with him a younger brother who was also named Anthony (died 1611). Standen's position was variously described as first esquire or master of the horse to the new royal consort, while his younger namesake served as cupbearer. Standen later claimed to have saved Queen Mary's life during the murder of David Riccio on 9 March 1566 -- an incident which he described in great and probably exaggerated detail when trying to curry favour after James VI's accession as king of England. He was supposedly later knighted by Darnley at Mary's request, although he was not known as Sir Anthony Standen in England until 1595. Having been given a licence to travel for two years, Standen was in France during 1567-8, when Darnley was murdered and Mary driven from power in Scotland. His younger brother returned to England, but Standen became an exile. By late 1568 he was cultivating the English ambassador in France in the hope of regaining favour with Queen Elizabeth, and reporting on alleged foreign plans for intervention in Scotland. 
Like some other English Catholic exiles during this period, Standen began to promise all things to all sides in the hope of earning money to sustain himself, while capitalizing on the contacts he made as an exile to play a part in international politics which would otherwise have been impossible. After a period in France, he won a pension in Spain in 1571 and subsequently based himself in Flanders. Standen apparently lost this pension and was forced to leave the Low Countries in 1576 after an affair with Barbara von Blomberg, a former mistress of the late Emperor Charles V and the mother of Don John of Austria, who was now the governor of the Netherlands. He subsequently travelled as far as Constantinople before settling in Florence, where he became a servant to the wife of Francesco de' Medici, grand duke of Tuscany, thanks to a recommendation from Mary, queen of Scots. He claimed to be acting as the imprisoned queen's agent in Florence during the 1580s, although he was also in semi-regular correspondence with Sir Francis Walsingham, Elizabeth's chief spymaster and Mary's bitter enemy, from at least 1582. Standen and Walsingham may have met during the latter's period as English ambassador in France in the early 1570s. Walsingham offered Standen cash and the prospect of winning 'reintegration to her Highnes favour' after his 'youthfull forfayte' (LPL, MS 648, fol. 37'v'). 
In 1587, after Mary's execution and then the rapid-fire deaths of the grand duke and duchess of Tuscany, Standen found himself out of favour in Florence. He now made himself one of Walsingham's most important spies for tracking Spanish military preparations during the great Armada crisis of 1587-8. Supplementing his own efforts with news gathered by other agents he had recruited, Standen wrote regular reports to Walsingham under the pseudonym of Pompeio Pellegrini. He twice visited Spain himself, and was even directed by Walsingham to use his contacts with Spanish spymasters to make a last desperate overture for new back-channel peace negotiations. Elizabeth and Walsingham were so pleased with Standen's work that he was granted a pension of $100 per annum in 1588. 
In 1590 Standen's Spanish paymasters sent him to Bordeaux, where he assumed the identity of Andre Sandal. This brought him close to disaster. Arrested as a Spanish spy, he discovered that Walsingham's recent death had left him without either an English protector or access to English money. Standen was destitute in prison when he finally managed to contact Anthony Bacon, who was then convalescing in Bordeaux. Bacon was not only a close relative of Lord Burghley, lord treasurer of England, but had himself sent intelligence reports to Walsingham during his travels, and he now helped to secure Standen's release in 1591 and won him Burghley's patronage. After returning to Spain, Standen (using an alias recorded as Mons. La Faye) co-operated with Anthony Rolston, another English exile who took pay from both sides, to gather intelligence for Bacon and Burghley. However, Bacon fell out with Burghley after his return to England in 1592 and became a fervent partisan of Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, who aspired to replace Burghley as Elizabeth's chief councillor. In 1593 Standen was ordered to Flanders by his Spanish paymaster, but his cover was allegedly blown during a stop at Calais, and Bacon hastily arranged for his friend's reception in England by Essex. Standen subsequently became a focus of tensions between Essex and Burghley and the latter's son, Sir Robert Cecil, whose influence ensured that Standen received little favour from the queen. 
The following years were deeply frustrating for Standen, whose regular attendance at court brought small reward. Like Bacon, he became a devoted 'friend' of Essex. In 1596 and 1597 he accompanied the earl on his naval expeditions to Cadiz and the Azores, and he also joined Essex's great Irish expedition of 1599. Essex probably appointed Standen to a bureaucratic post in Ireland, because he was granted a healthy pension there of 5's'. per day and did not accompany Essex back to England after the expedition ended in disaster in September 1599. Standen remained in Ireland for three years, thereby avoiding direct entanglement in Essex's final fall and execution, which was soon followed by the death of Bacon, both in 1601. Late in that year, when he offered his services to Cecil, he claimed that his chief abode was with Mabel, dowager countess of Kildare, a woman who had long been regarded as a Catholic 'subversive' by the Dublin authorities. 
When news reached Ireland of Elizabeth's death and the accession of James I, Standen wasted no time in returning to England, arriving there in mid-April 1603. He now sought to capitalize on his earlier career as a servant of James's parents, even petitioning for arrears on wages owed to him and his brother Anthony from the 1560s. In July 1603, to the surprise of many observers, Standen was chosen by James to carry news of his accession to Lorraine, Venice, and Florence. He was not an official ambassador and there is much about the mission that is mysterious. James probably hoped that Standen would exploit his Italian contacts to ensure good will for James among Catholic princes and forestall any hostility by the pope. However, the very latitude allowed to Standen gave him delusions of grandeur and he repeatedly ruffled diplomatic feathers during his journey. In France he antagonized the English ambassador, Sir Thomas Parry, and was judged a loose and boastful talker by French ministers. In Italy Standen met Edmund Thornhill, an equally ambitious Englishman who was a canon at Vicenza. Together they promoted a scheme to advance toleration for Catholics in England by trying to encourage contacts between Pope Clement VIII and James's wife, Queen Anne. They claimed that Anne could be used to convert James and ultimately his subjects. It is uncertain whether this venture represented simply an extravagant scheme to win fame and fortune on an international scale or a genuine commitment to religious toleration by Standen. Either way, the venture was spectacularly ill-timed because the high hopes which English Catholics had attached to James's accession had already begun to attract an official backlash. When Standen returned to England in early 1604, he was accused of corresponding with the Jesuit Robert Persons and sent to the Tower. Although an indiscreet letter from Standen to Persons had been seized in Paris (probably by the Scottish spy John Colville, acting with Parry's encouragement), James's chief cause of anger may have been that Standen's activities threatened to direct unwelcome attention to his queen's Catholicism. 
Standen was released from the Tower after a few months and was granted a licence to travel abroad again in July 1605. He subsequently breached the conditions of his passport by travelling to Rome, where he seems to have spent the final years of his life. In 1615 he was reported as spending time there with the exiled Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone. Nothing further is recorded of him, and perhaps appropriately for a man who lived a life of sustained deceit and was 'conformable to our English proverbe of the rowling stone' (LPL, MS 648, fol. 266'v'), the date and place of his death remain uncertain. 


@@@@@


doc= 39704


Hawkyns, Henry (c.1553-1630), civil lawyer and diplomatic agent, was the son of John Hawkyns and his wife, Ann Yelverton. He was connected to the leading East Anglian protestant families through his mother, and was probably born at Wisbech on property which she had acquired through her first marriage to Thomas Rede. Hawkyns matriculated at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1568, and graduated BA in 1571 or 1572 and MA in 1575. He became a fellow of Peterhouse in 1575 and served as a university proctor in 1583-4. In March 1584 he entered Gray's Inn, where many of his relatives were members, being admitted on the same day as fellow puritans Sir Richard Knightley and Humphrey Davenport. In November 1585 Hawkyns was given leave from Peterhouse to join the staff of Sir Thomas Cecil, newly appointed as governor of Brill. It is unclear how long he served as legal adviser in the Low Countries, but he was nominated to accompany Edward, eleventh Lord Zouche, 'for conference in learning' during his European tour in July 1586 (Walker, 1.267). Hawkyns's name may have been suggested to Zouche by mutual contacts at Gray's Inn. 
Zouche's party left England in March 1587 and spent the next few years travelling through Germany, Switzerland, and Italy. Hawkyns apparently left Zouche and returned to England by March 1591, when Archbishop Whitgift wrote to the University of Cambridge and requested that he be made doctor of laws on the basis of his study in European universities, especially Padua, where he had been unable to take his degree for religious reasons. Hawkyns received the degree, but had to perform the requisite exercises in Cambridge. He now began to be 'employed in publick matters of state' (Hammer, 362) and was resident in London, relying upon Whitgift to prevent the forfeiture of his fellowship at Peterhouse on grounds of absenteeism. In 1594 Hawkyns visited Scotland, probably as an aide to Lord Zouche, who served as Elizabeth's special ambassador to James VI during the early months of the year. 
In mid-1595 Hawkyns was chosen for a quasi-diplomatic role as gatherer of intelligence and formal representative of the earl of Essex in Venice. Approved by the queen, this venture was intended to co-ordinate intelligence gathering by Italian contacts of Antonio Perez, the exiled former secretary of Philip II of Spain, to recruit new spies in Italy, and to establish an open, but deniable, diplomatic presence for England. More covertly, the agent at Venice was also expected to burnish the earl's international reputation. Hawkyns was chosen for this position in some haste, after the sudden death of the original choice, Peter Wroth. Essex and Elizabeth clearly approved Hawkyns's nomination at the urging of Anthony Bacon, who oversaw the Venice operation on the earl's behalf. Bacon was a distant relative of Hawkyns, a fellow member of Gray's Inn, and regular correspondent and former student of Whitgift. Bacon presumably judged that Hawkyns's expertise and travel, together with his continuing correspondence with foreign contacts such as Richard Willoughby of Padua, made him an ideal choice for Essex's work. 
Hawkyns was based at Venice from December 1595 until about March 1598. After an uncomfortable start (which helped to spark a feud between Bacon and Henry Wotton, one of the earl's secretaries), he proved an adequate co-ordinator of intelligence from Venice (Ungerer, vol. 2), but his resolute puritanism made him a less than ideal diplomat in a Catholic country. A complaint by the tutor of Francis Davison, who travelled through Venice in 1596, criticized Hawkyns, perhaps unfairly, for being both petty and excessively proud of his quasi-ambassadorial status (BL, Harley MS 296, fol. 114'v'). Hawkyns visited Vienna and Paris on his journey home to England. He finally resigned from Peterhouse in January 1599. Unfortunately his hopes of further advancement, as promised by Essex and Bacon, were dashed by the earl's declining influence and subsequent collapse into political oblivion. As a well-known partisan of Essex, Hawkyns was arrested after the earl's London insurrection in February 1601 and briefly placed in the custody of Alderman Lee. Although Hawkyns was a commissioner for the admiralty court in Middlesex in 1603, his career apparently never recovered from the fall of Essex and the death soon afterwards of Anthony Bacon. 
Hawkyns's will indicates that he spent his old age in the company of influential London puritans such as William Gouge, Richard Sibbs, and John Davenport. His legacies included money for the poor of the French church in London, distressed protestant ministers in England and Germany, and towards the purchase of impropriated livings. He also provided $300 to build almshouses for the godly poor of Wisbech, $100 'for the erecting of twoe new 'Bible' clarks' at Peterhouse, and various bequests (including his books) to members of the Hatcher family of Careby, Lincolnshire, to whom he was related by the marriage of his half-sister, Katherine Rede, the child of his mother's first marriage. Hawkyns apparently never married; he died in London in early December 1630 and was buried on 15 December at St Andrew's, Holborn. 


@@@@@


doc= 39706


Stanford, Henry (c.1552-1616), compiler of a manuscript miscellany, was the fourth son of Sir William Stanford (1509-1558), judge, of Hadley, Middlesex, and his wife, Alice (died 1573), daughter of John Palmer. Henry's twin sister, Margaret, married Richard Astley, groom of the jewels and plate to Queen Elizabeth. Henry graduated BA from Trinity College, Oxford (23 October 1570), was elected a fellow of the college in 1572, and proceeded MA on 14 May 1573. He was ordained about 1579, held the benefices of Checkley and Handsworth in Staffordshire, but served from at least 1580 as tutor to William Paget, heir to the barony of Paget. Stanford copied his pupil's poetical new year's gifts (1582-7) to various members of this staunchly Catholic family into his private manuscript anthology, now in Cambridge University Library (MS Dd.5.75). He probably composed the verse epitaph for William's aunt, Lady Anne Lee (died 1590), inscribed on her monument in Aylesbury church. Texts of the poem in Stanford's hand are preserved in this manuscript and another at Berkeley Castle. 
William's father, Thomas, second Baron Paget, had fled to the continent after the exposure of the Throckmorton plot in 1583; he was attainted of treason early in 1587. Sir George Carey gained custody of young William, and Stanford accompanied his charge into the Carey household where he served as both tutor and chaplain. The Carey family's artistic patronage and standing at court placed Stanford in a stimulating cultural atmosphere that included access to elite texts in manuscript circulation. His anthology preserves verse he wrote for members of the Carey family along with works by the age's leading courtier poets: Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Edward Dyer, Sir Arthur Gorges, Sir Walter Ralegh, and Queen Elizabeth herself. About 1589, through Carey's father, Lord Hunsdon, lord chamberlain of the royal household, Stanford sent verses of his own composition to Queen Elizabeth. 
Stanford's Catholic connections caused him numerous difficulties despite his ordination in the Anglican church. On 2 September 1586, just weeks after the exposure of the Babington plot, he was examined by local authorities at Portsmouth 'as a man to be in som sort suspected' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/193/7), but there is no further explanation of what he was doing on the coast at this time or what punishment, if any, he received. His employment by the Pagets may also have encouraged the lawyer Richard Crumpton to seize his parsonage and glebe lands at Checkley for which Stanford sued him in chancery. As late as 3 April 1599, in a letter to Walter Bagot, Henry denied charges that he 'lived as a vagabond and recusant... When I taught Mr. Paget I was somoned uppon the same suggestions and cleared the matter in the court at Lichefeild. Lyving with my Lord Chamberlain as a dayly folower and having so many yeares byn his only houshould Chaplain, to be proscribed as a recusant cannot greatly touche me. (Bagot MS L.a.885)' Yet Henry was at some other time touched by accusations about his faith. In an undated, holograph document addressed only to 'Syr' and 'your worship', Stanford professed his belief in justification by faith, and denounced invocation of saints and the pope's supremacy, admitting in the process that 'I have byn so often chaleneged to hold and maynteyn erronious Doctrine' (Berkeley Castle muniments, gen. series, misc. MS 63). 
In his will, George Carey, second Baron Hunsdon, bequeathed $40 to Stanford. After Carey's death in 1603, Stanford apparently remained in the employ of his widow. He maintained a lively literary correspondence with her daughter, Elizabeth, Lady Berkeley, to whom he apparently sent his autograph copy of Ben Jonson's verse epitaph for Thomas Nashe. From time to time he instructed her son, George, in versifying, examples of which are preserved in CUL, MS Dd.5.75. Further evidence of his ties with Lady Berkeley is the sonnet in MS Dd.5.75 commending the translation of Camden's 'Britannia' by her protege, Philemon Holland. The poem was published in the edition of 1637. 
Stanford was devoted to books and learning. In defending his religious position he cited specific works and passages from Gregory Nazianzen, Cyprian, Jerome, Basil, Plutarch, and Cicero. Verses that accompanied his new year's gifts to members of the Carey family mention Spenser's 'Faerie Queene', Popellimiere's 'Historie of France', 'The Queene of Navarres Tales', and Chapman's translation of 'Homer'. He was one of the earliest contributors to the Bodleian Library, donating twenty-one volumes including copies of Vitruvius's 'De architectura' and Copernicus's 'De revolutionibus'. Additionally it has been discovered that over a hundred books in the Royal Library, all with imprints before 1601, belonged to and were annotated by Stanford. In all probability he presented them to Queen Elizabeth at about the same time that he made his gift of books to the new library at Oxford. 
By 1610 Stanford was complaining of attacks of gout that made writing difficult. He apparently never married, and upon drawing up his will on 23 April 1614, he left $200 each to his nephews Edward and Charles Stanford, sons of his eldest brother, Robert. He remembered Lady Berkeley and her son with gold rings. The will was proved on 2 November 1616; Stanford was probably buried at West Drayton, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 39710


Jorden, William (1685-1739), college teacher, was born and baptized on 19 November 1685 at Newland, Gloucestershire; his mother, Catherine Jorden (died 1685), died in childbirth. His father, the Revd Humphrey Jorden ('b'. 1651/2, died in or after 1715), lecturer of Newland, was of a Staffordshire family. Jorden matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 28 March 1702, but migrated to his father's old college, Pembroke, where he was founder's kin, and graduated BA in 1705, before proceeding MA in 1708, and BD in 1728. A fellow of the college, he served as bursar, chaplain, and vicegerent, but he is now remembered only as Samuel Johnson's tutor. Johnson disparaged Jorden's scholarship and absented himself from lectures; it was to Jorden that Johnson admitted he had been sliding in Christ Church meadow instead of attending his lectures. Johnson none the less loved and respected the man. 'Whenever (said he) a young man becomes Jorden's pupil, he becomes his son' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.61). Johnson's first published poem, a Latin version of Pope's 'Messiah', was written as an exercise for Jorden in the Christmas vacation of 1728. 
On 14 November 1729 Jorden was presented to the rectory of Standon, Staffordshire, by William Vyse (1709-1770), his pupil and Johnson's friend. He resigned Standon on 18 October 1733, having been instituted to the vicarage of nearby Seighford on 1 December 1731. He died, unmarried, at Seighford in January 1739 and was buried there on 17 January that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 39714


Plowman, Mark (1883-1941), pacifist and writer, was born on 1 September 1883 at Northumberland Park, Tottenham, the fourth son of Mark Plowman (died 1929), brickworks owner, and his wife, Anna Maria, 'nee' Hunt. He was educated at 'various inferior private schools' ('WWW', iv), including Paradise House School, leaving at sixteen to go into his father's business. At the age of twenty Plowman renounced the restrictive creed of his parents, who were members of the Plymouth Brethren sect. Yet he continued to work for his father for more than a decade, before breaking free into the life of literary journalism. This was soon interrupted by his military service in the First World War and conversion to a lifelong pacifism. 
Superficially, Plowman's journey towards pacifism was an erratic one, from medical orderly, via combatant infantry officer, to a court martial following the resignation of his commission and dismissal from the army. However, his published correspondence reveals an interior logic to his moves. Plowman married Dorothy Lloyd Sulman ('b'. 1886/7), writer, on 1 May 1914 and avoided the first rush of enthusiastic volunteers, waiting until December 1914 to enlist. To his brother he wrote on 18 December that he was 'wondering about trying the R.A.M.C. Repairing's bloody enough work' but at that juncture he preferred it to combat (Plowman, 'Letters', 28). It was with a kind of resigned and relieved fatalism that he accepted his own participation in the 'bloody mess of war', as he wrote to a friend five days later: 'When everything is a horrible muddle this really seems an easy way as well as a right way out of it' (ibid., 31). After some months as a wagon orderly with the 4th field ambulance at its Essex headquarters, Plowman decided to transfer to a fighting regiment, applying for a commission to do so. To his close friend Hugh de Selincourt he wrote: 'Who am I that I should say to another man -- You do my killing?... One either believes in active resistance or non resistance. If I lived in an ideal world I should believe in non resistance & to make that dream reality I shall always throw in my tiny weight. That's my direction. (ibid., 36)' By the summer of 1916 he was in France with the 10th Yorkshire regiment, soon experiencing the horrors of the front. He continued to examine the contradictions of his position in correspondence with de Selincourt, prefiguring the Peace Pledge Union in October 1916: 'I want to exploit the fear of war... I want to start an International League of individuals sworn never to take up arms... And so I'm here in mud & blood & all the damned insanity of war & I wouldn't be out of it, 'things being as they are'. (ibid., 56, 57)' In January 1917 Plowman was concussed by a shell-burst and invalided home: 'If only I could get decently wounded now I should be most awfully glad I'd been out here... nothing has surprised me except the way in which some of the men 'stick it'. And that will always be a romance in my mind. (ibid., 59)' He was in hospital or convalescent homes or on leave for the first seven months of 1917; by May he had 'come to think the Army has had all the useful service it will ever get out of me... I'm too tired of it -- too entirely soul sick of it' (ibid., 69). During this period, before he was transferred to the reserves, he wrote his pamphlet 'The Right to Live', then on 14 January 1918 he submitted the resignation of his commission on grounds of conscience: 'I have always held that... war is a 'relic of barbarism', but my opinion has gradually deepened into the fixed conviction that organised warfare of any kind is always organised murder' (ibid., 92). 
Plowman was as a result dismissed from the army; the subsequent delays and uncertainties of the conscription procedure spared him the likely sentence of imprisonment as a conscientious objector and he returned to family life and his work as a writer. Despite his conversion, he was at this time dismissive of pacifists: 'The best men went to the Front and died' (Plowman, 'Letters', 261), and it was not until 1927 that his recollections of active service, 'A Subaltern on the Somme', appeared. In the same year he also published 'An Introduction to the Study of Blake', the fruit of his reading, of collaboration with Geoffrey Keynes and correspondence with the Blake scholars S. Foster Damon and Joseph Wicksteed. During the latter part of the decade Plowman suffered physically from a duodenal ulcer and emotionally from the death of his elder son Christopher Mark (Tim) at the age of eleven, of pneumonia during apparent recovery from meningitis. Ten years after Tim's death, Plowman wrote that 'since then, I have only lived as it were at one remove', comparing 'what little I know of the Divine Vision' with its appearance through the broken heart of Enitharmon (ibid., 622). 
Plowman first met the writer and critic John Middleton Murry early in 1929 and the remaining years of his life were marked by a growing friendship and debate with Murry and an active, though still highly critical, involvement in pacifist affairs as the world situation deteriorated. Plowman's literary and editorial activities in his last dozen years included work on Dent's 'Everyman' and editorship of 'The Adelphi'. Of particular value to posterity was his encouragement of and assistance to Mrs Wood (formerly Jessie Chambers, 'Miriam' of 'Sons and Lovers') in the completion and publication of her memoir of Lawrence: 'D. H. Lawrence: a Personal Record' by 'E. T.' (1935). 
Although he lacked the benefit of a university education, Plowman's passionate commitment to literature, which achieved scholarly status in his work on Blake and with which his pacifist philosophy was closely connected, provided both his raison d'etre and the livelihood for himself and his family. Although organization was not his forte, Plowman took on the general secretaryship of the Peace Pledge Union in March 1937 and ''sacrificed' a year to the P.P.U.' (Plowman, 'Letters', 629), six months of it in the demoralized aftermath of the death of its founder, the Revd Dick Sheppard. This period was made more difficult by Plowman's conviction that pacifism and practical action could not be separated, a view not shared by the majority of those of influence in the Peace Pledge Union, which led to Plowman's promotion of the Langham voluntary service scheme in 1939. It has been argued that for Plowman, as for Clifford Allen and Fenner Brockway, his socialism 'was a complete surrogate for... former Christian beliefs' (Ceadel, 'Semi-Detached Idealists', 49). Although there was an element of political protest against industrial society in Plowman's reaction to the carnage of the western front, his situation was in fact more complicated. In April 1938 he wrote a long letter to Middleton Murry explaining in some detail his views on Christianity and their relation to his pacifism. In his late teens Plowman had gone 'through the hoop of the metaphysical Christ'; a few days before writing this letter to Murry, he had had a 'moment of illumination', which revealed that the orthodox Christian view of God was 'as 'God at one remove'' (Plowman, 'Letters', 629). Whereas to Plowman 'Christ & God in every man are One -- the Divine Humanity -- the essential person. And it's 'that' recognition -- & that alone, it seems to me -- which has power to save the world' (ibid., 630). This view had been prefigured in a cryptic fashion in his 1918 commission resignation statement that 'killing men is always killing God' and it was reinforced by his post-war immersion in the works of Blake. 
In September 1939 Plowman went to The Oaks, Langham, Colchester, the Adelphi Centre set up by Middleton Murry, expecting to wind it down by the end of the year. Instead he plunged into the practical pacifism he advocated, sheltering some twenty elderly evacuees from the East End and working a co-operative farm of 70 acres with a group of young conscientious objectors. Despite the arduous work coupled with the pressures of producing 'The Adelphi', Plowman was able to provide his fellow pacifist Vera Brittain with inspirational support when she stayed several times at The Oaks in the spring of 1941, a time when she felt 'stranded and lonely' (Berry and Bostridge, 411-12). In turn, she paid him generous tribute in her 'Letter to peace-lovers', following his death at The Oaks on 3 June 1941, a sick man worn out by the complications and responsibilities of running The Oaks (Plowman, 'Letters', 11). 
In 1944 a substantial selection of Plowman's letters, edited by his widow, was published and it is through them, rather than his poetry, which has not stood the test of time, that his generous and enthusiastic, but often tormented, spirit survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 39715


Philipps, Sir John, sixth baronet (1700-1764), politician, was born on 8 November 1700, the second son of Sir John Philipps, fourth baronet (c.1666-1737), politician, of Picton Castle, Pembrokeshire, and his wife, Mary (1675?-1722), the daughter and heir of an East India Company trader, Anthony Smith. He and his elder brother, Erasmus Philipps, were educated by a private tutor until they both went to Pembroke College, Oxford, in 1720. John, a younger son without expectations, soon decided on a legal career and entered Lincoln's Inn in August 1721; he was called to the bar in 1727. By then he had married, on 22 September 1725, a London bride, Elizabeth (died 1788), the daughter of Henry Shepherd. His father marked the occasion by giving him the Pembrokeshire estate of Kilgetty, worth $400 a year. The Philipps family was related to the prime minister, the two brothers being first cousins of Sir Robert Walpole's wife, Catherine. In 1724 John gave young Horace Walpole, the future diarist, 'a little riding mare', and presented the Walpole family with a genealogical chart purporting to show their joint descent from the medieval Welsh prince Cadwalladar. In 1727 Lady Walpole was godmother to his first child, John. The boy died of influenza in 1733, but there were seven further children of the marriage, his heir, Richard, being born about 1742. 
Picton Castle was a whig stronghold, and Philipps naturally tried to exploit his family's connection with the whig ministry. In 1727 he vainly sought a place, as a bankruptcy commissioner. As late as 1735 he and Erasmus Philipps persuaded Sir Robert Walpole to kill an election petition against Erasmus as MP for Haverfordwest. Yet both brothers were opponents of his ministry. Horace Walpole later stated that John became a tory only because Sir Robert had not given him patronage. This claim does not accord with his role as founder secretary, in 1726, of the Society of Sea Serjeants. For this was an electoral organization, as well as a social club, in south-west Wales dedicated to securing the return of opposition MPs. It was not the Jacobite club of repute, but that Philipps himself had Jacobite sympathies is indicated by his possession of appropriate glassware and literature. He never became involved in plotting a Stuart restoration, though his cousin Horace Walpole regularly attributed disaffection to him. 
It was the Sea Serjeants' control of Carmarthen that enabled Philipps to enter the House of Commons in 1741, and, already an experienced barrister, he soon made his mark in parliament by intemperate attacks on the ministry of Lord Carteret, whom Philipps compared unfavourably with Walpole: 'The late minister was too wise a man... to advise the King to employ Hanoverians, to render him odious to his British subjects' (Chandler, 14.190-94). A frequent debater, by the time he succeeded his unmarried brother as baronet and master of Picton Castle, on 15 October 1743, Philipps was already a member of the elitist tory club the Loyal Brotherhood. Little over a year later, in December 1744, he was appointed a lord of trade when the new prime minister, Henry Pelham, took a few tories into office. But he refused to accept the implicit obligation of supporting government in debate, and informed the Commons on 29 January 1745 that 'the late change in my circumstances has produced no change in my way of thinking, nor shall produce any change as to my way of acting in this House' (Almon, 2.47). He proved to be 'as troublesome a placeman as a patriot' -- so commented Lord Chancellor Hardwicke's son Philip Yorke (BL, Hardwicke MSS, Add. MS 35337, fol. 87). Opposing ministerial policy at every turn, he personified the incompatibility of country attitudes with ministerial office and, accepting the inevitable, resigned his post in March 1745. 
At the general election of 1747 Philipps inexplicably decided to quit parliament, though not the political scene, his importance in tory circles being signified by a DCL from Oxford University in 1749. He retained links with parliamentary tories, and involved himself in London politics. He kept in the public eye when in 1751 he challenged as a barrister the authority of parliament to punish individuals who offended it, in a speech published as a pamphlet, 'The Argument of Sir John Philipps Bart'. In 1754 he unsuccessfully fought Bristol at the invitation of the Tory Steadfast Society, which then paid $2200 to a London ally of his, William Beckford, to give Philipps a seat at Petersfield he had kept in reserve for himself. Even independent MPs of tory hue supported government over the current imperial conflict with France, and Philipps ostentatiously did so after William Pitt became effective head of the ministry in 1756. He was now much cosseted by government: he received invitations to dine with ministers; he was permitted to enact some 'country' measures, including an act he introduced in 1760 to strengthen the 1711 'Landed Qualification Act' for MPs; and he was even granted some patronage requests. But he never hesitated to embarrass the administration by speaking his mind. He still grumbled about military expenditure, and in 1758 seconded a 'Shorter Parliaments Bill' -- the need for more frequent elections to purify parliament being a favourite hobby horse. Quirky in behaviour and old-fashioned in political attitudes, he came to symbolize the independent MPs in the House of Commons. And so it was he who on 18 March 1761 moved the official vote of thanks when Speaker Arthur Onslow retired after thirty-three years in the chair. This he did wretchedly, according to Horace Walpole. 
At the 1761 election consequent on the accession of George III Philipps now took without a contest the county seat for his native Pembrokeshire. He had always continued to play a prominent role in the political and social life of south-west Wales. As president of the Society of Sea Serjeants from 1752 he organized, and largely financed, their annual weeks at seaside towns. The society by now was a social rather than a political body, and ended on his death. In more serious vein, Philipps, like his father and brother, was a keen supporter of the SPCK. At Westminster he was one of the tories who had flocked to the new king's favourite, Lord Bute, by the time he became prime minister in May 1762. High in favour at court, he was invited to second the address, and, as in 1744, was offered junior ministerial office, as a lord of the Admiralty. This post he refused, but he accepted the honour of appointment to the privy council, on 10 January 1763. But this country squire never became a tame courtier. On 2 February 1763 he objected to increased naval costs, and on 11 February he proposed a commission on public accounts to examine past government expenditure, an antiquated procedure which the embarrassed Bute ministry watered down to a committee of inquiry: George III himself had thought the idea 'very silly' ('Letters... to Lord Bute', 190). When Bute resigned in April 1763 Philipps was so concerned about the political situation that he took literally his duty as a privy councillor and had a private interview with his sovereign. He gave invaluable assistance to Bute's successor, George Grenville, in the 1764 parliamentary battle over general warrants, despite his own personal reservations on their legality, gaining him enough independent support to squeeze home by fourteen votes. That was his last political act, for he died suddenly, at his residence of Norbiton Place, near Kingston, Surrey, on 23 June 1764, 'in very odour with his present Majesty', Horace Walpole recalled in 1784 (Walpole, 33.455). He was buried in St Mary's, Haverfordwest. His heir, Richard, was in 1776 created Baron Milford in the Irish peerage, and his widow died at Norbiton Place on 28 September 1788, aged eighty-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 39717


Harvel, Edmund (d. in or before 1550), merchant and diplomat, was probably the gentleman of that name of Besford and Cowley, Worcestershire, who appears on the pardon roll at the accession of Henry VIII and in a genealogical table in a Worcestershire heralds' visitation of 1564. Little else is sure about his family and early life, except that he had a brother, a London merchant, who visited him in Venice in 1539. This man was almost certainly the Richard Harvel who was an exile in Zurich and Geneva in the reign of Mary I. Edmund Harvel was in Venice by 1524, when he acted as an agent for the Paduan philosopher Niccolo Leonico Tomeo. He was by then a friend to Tomeo's circle of English students, which numbered Thomas Lupset, Reginald Pole, and Thomas Starkey. He developed particularly strong relations with Starkey and Pole, and in the 1530s came to be on close terms with Starkey's associate Richard Morison, and with one of Pole's servants, Bernardino Sandro. By the 1540s a succession of English students and tourists were in contact with him as a potential aid and protector in Venice, and several of them, including Thomas Hoby and John Denny, stayed in his home. 
Harvel's semi-official activities on behalf of Henry VIII date at the latest from 1530, when he acted as an agent for Richard Croke and John Stokesley, who were in Italy to find solutions to the problem of the royal divorce. He transmitted money from England to Croke in Venice, and sent back to the king Croke's letters and writings, activities for which he received royal grants in 1530 and 1531. It was probably through Thomas Starkey -- who was back in England by 1534, and with whom Harvel carried on a regular correspondence in the mid-1530s -- and through Thomas Winter, Cardinal Wolsey's illegitimate son, that Harvel became known to Thomas Cromwell, who offered him employment in 1535 and advised him to move back to England. At this time Starkey was himself in Cromwell's service as an intelligencer for Italian affairs, and was working to persuade Reginald Pole to come to terms publicly with Henry VIII's divorce and royal supremacy. Although Harvel wrote to Starkey in 1535 communicating his plans to return to England as soon as he had tied up his business affairs in Italy, and reassuring him that Pole would satisfy the king, it appears that Harvel was misleading Starkey. In the autumn of 1535, while Pole stayed in his house in Venice, Harvel visited Sicily. This journey, apparently made to settle his business interests, was at least in part a mission on Pole's behalf to Charles V, then in Palermo, probably intended to persuade the emperor to take action against the schismatic king of England. In April 1536 Pole, whose passionate denunciation of Henry VIII had by then reached England, still regarded Harvel as one of his clients, claiming to his friend Alvise Priuli that he could not send Harvel again to Charles V without causing suspicion in England. This material explains why Harvel in the event thought it prudent not to return to England, instead marrying Apollonia Uttinger, the daughter of an Augsburg merchant resident in Venice, in 1538. Uttinger brought a substantial dowry worth 1500 Venetian 'ducati' to the union. 
Harvel's work for Pole also testifies to his skills of concealment: in 1537 he entered government service and through Cromwell was granted a stipend from the crown and a licence to export wool from England. Thereafter he sent regular newsletters to Cromwell until the latter's death in 1540. But his diplomatic status remained ambivalent. From the English side he was not yet an official agent in 1538, when Richard Morison begged Cromwell to make him so. By 1539 he was specifically instructed as an intelligencer by Cromwell 'under the colour of his feate and trade of merchandise, keping this Commission secrete from all men'. His task was to include spying on the papacy and on Reginald Pole; fostering evangelical and anti-papal sentiment among 'notable and honest persons'; and secretly conveying the king's favourable disposition to the duke of Urbino, who was under threat of invasion from the pope (Merriman, 2.167-75). His letters to Cromwell also include extensive reports on Mediterranean and Turkish matters. After Cromwell's fall Harvel wrote directly to Henry VIII, or occasionally to Thomas Wriothesley and William Paget. 
From the Venetian government Harvel gained some, but not total, diplomatic recognition. In 1542 he was granted permission for his thirteen servants, four of them English, to carry arms, and the authorities gave him retrospective exemption from taxes on the basis of his ambassadorial status in 1545. On the other hand, although permitting him a grand funeral in 1550, partially paid for by the state, the signoria did not follow the procession because Harvel was considered more of an 'envoy' and 'vice-ambassador' than a full ambassador. Although most of his business activities remain obscure, they included trade in corn in Sicily and, more importantly, the export of wool from England to Venice and elsewhere. The Venetian republic's traditionally warm relations with England were maintained in this period because of the wool trade in particular, and some of Harvel's diplomatic dealings reveal the Venetian authorities' anxieties not to alienate Henry VIII because of this. For example, the republic was reluctant to act against the Bolognese 'condottiere' Ludovico dalle Armi, accused of various criminal activities in the 1540s, in part because he was in the employment of the king; Harvel acted as a negotiator over this matter, helping to postpone dalle Armi's execution until after Henry VIII's death. 
Harvel's marriage to a German probably reflected his religious sympathies. His connections in the late 1530s and 1540s with Italian evangelicals, Lutherans, and critics of the established church were wide-ranging. His physician (Girolamo Donzellino) and his secretary (Baldassare Altieri) were both noted heretics, while he maintained relations with Pietro Aretino, Antonio Brucioli (whom he recommended to Cromwell as a potential spy in Rome in 1539), Ortensio Lando (who dedicated to him his 'Lettere di molte virtuose donne' in 1548), and, possibly, Michelangelo Florio and Vincenzo Maggi. Harvel used his diplomatic position to protect evangelicals in Venice and to foster protestant connections between England and Italy, but apparently always with sufficient prudence and discretion not to come under suspicion himself. 
It was indeed for his prudential qualities that Harvel was highly regarded by the Venetian government as a diplomat. He also gained a reputation for kindness, friendship, and learning. By the 1540s his household was a substantial one and the inventory of his goods, drawn up after his death, indicates possessions (including 170 books) valued at 930 Venetian 'ducati'. From this, 446 'ducati' and 12 'grossi' were spent on paying off his servants and on his funeral in the church of San Geremia and burial in the church of Santi Giovanni e Paolo; these took place before 7 January 1550. His wife, by whom he was deeply mourned, inherited the remainder as the return of her dowry. 


@@@@@


doc= 39720


Silvester, Eusebius (bap. 1714, d. in or after 1759), lawyer and projector, was baptized at Tamworth, Staffordshire, on 19 January 1714, the first of the eight children of Nicholas Silvester (1680-1745), gentleman, and his wife, Susanna, daughter of Euseby Dormer and his wife, Mary ('nee' Fenwick). Feckless, self-pitying, and importunate, he owes his reputation to his correspondence of the 1750s with the novelist Samuel Richardson, which Richardson closed by threatening to circulate or publish as 'a 'Warning Piece' to Posterity' (Forster MSS, XV, 1, fol. 58). 
Early in the correspondence Silvester wrote that his life had been 'a confused Scene of Advers Perplexitys almost from my Cradle', owing first to the worldly failure of a father 'defeated by those very Qualitys which ought rather to have merited success; an open frankness and generosity of Heart, which led him, to place too much Confidence in those, who by an abuse of it, were the occasion of a series of Misfortunes which at length... weighed him down & deprived him of his life! (Forster MSS, XIV, 4, fol. 4)' The misfortunes, and the speculative and litigious temperament that drew them on, are copiously documented in chancery records concerning Nicholas Silvester. He shared with his son ambitious theories of land improvement, and ran into financial difficulties following his lease from Lord Weymouth in 1714 of property in Bangley Park, Staffordshire, and his later lease from Ralph Floyer of 'many hundreds of acres of waste and barren land' in Hints, Staffordshire, which he claimed to have 'improved at vast expense' (TNA: PRO, C 11/2053/18). He first became mired in chancery proceedings in 1724 over a disputed legacy, and subsequent family wrangles, together with actions for arrears and debts arising from failed agricultural projects, involved him in protracted and ruinous litigation for the next two decades. 
In his late teens Eusebius Silvester served for two and a half years as articled clerk to his uncle Thomas Harris of Dorking, but left about 1734, probably in connection with the family quarrels. He later served for two and a half years as clerk to George Garnett of Took's Court, Holborn, the address he gave when swearing an affidavit in May 1738 to secure his recognition as a qualified attorney. He duly appears in the rolls of the common bench attorneys, which give his place of residence as Middlesex until, in Michaelmas 1745, the addition 'now Warwick' (where he remained) appears against his name. 
In 1754 Silvester used a letter praising 'Sir Charles Grandison' to initiate his correspondence with Richardson, which ended acrimoniously in 1759 after two meetings and at least forty-five letters. At the outset he made much of his refusal to conform to professional type, lamenting that his honesty gave him 'no great reason to believe, that I... ever shall attain to any great Eminence in my Profession', and made fellow attorneys think him 'a Dastardly Unnatural Brother' (Forster MSS, XIV, 4, fol. 5). Though Richardson later rebuked Silvester for his 'parading Epistles' (ibid., XV, 1, fol. 58), he seems to have been favourably impressed, and in November 1755 was still applauding 'that good Heart which so visibly dictates to yr Pen' (ibid., XIV, 4, fol. 8). At this point he seems to have complied with Silvester's request that he print 'a manuscript containing some Observations on Agriculture' (ibid., fol. 7), now untraced, but outlining ideas which, if ministerially adopted, would make his fortune: a later note by Richardson records that the project 'was to obtain Grants to himself of thousands of Acres... to be cultivated according to a Method invented by himself, and Father, he being a great Schemer in Agriculture' (ibid., fol. 26). At the same time Richardson advanced the first of two loans of $25 in response to Silvester's worry that 'just in the very Crisis & turn of my Fortune, I sho'd, after so many Years Painful Struggles, be dashed down & sunk again... for want of that small Assistance' (ibid., fol. 11). It was only when repayment failed to materialize that Richardson's opinion began to change. Late in 1756 he frostily declined to print a further piece 'on a Popular Subject now under the Consideration of our Legislators' (ibid., XV, 1, fol. 38), and relations subsequently collapsed. Understandably, though perhaps unjustly, Richardson ended by thinking Silvester a cynical confidence-trickster, berating him for 'the Repetition of such gross Pretensions to 'Integrity' of 'Heart', as you abounded with in every Letter, and continue thro' 'Detection'' (ibid., fol. 58). 
Undaunted by Richardson's refusal to touch the second piece, Silvester succeeded in publishing it (with a dedication dated 12 December 1757 to Francis Greville, Earl Brooke, of Warwick Castle) as 'The causes of the present high price of corn and grain, and a state of the abuses and impositions practised... by the millers or meal-men'. A year later, in similar fraud-busting vein, he submitted a memorial to the Treasury commissioners, detailing how tanners were evading the duty on hides, and hoping to 'meet with Your Lordships Favour and Encouragement' (BL, Add. MS 32886, fol. 92). Thereafter he fades from the record, and his last surviving correspondence with Richardson is dated August 1759. 


@@@@@


doc= 39721


Bradshaigh, Dorothy, Lady Bradshaigh (bap. 1705, d. 1785), letter writer, was baptized on 21 March 1705 at Rufford, Lancashire, the younger of the two daughters of William Bellingham ('c'.1660-1718), son of James and Elizabeth Bellingham of Levens, Westmorland, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William Spencer of Ashton, Lancashire, and widow of Robert Hesketh of Rufford (died 1697). The Bellinghams were a prominent landed family, but the estate inherited by Dorothy's father in 1693 had been squandered by his elder brother Alan (1656-1693), and Levens Hall, the Bellingham home for more than a century, had been sold. Called to the bar in 1686, William Bellingham seems to have practised the law for a while, but his marriage of 1703 restored his fortunes and provided the Rufford home in which Dorothy and Elizabeth Echlin, his coheirs, were raised with their half-sister, Elizabeth Hesketh (1694-1776). He also seems to have retained some Bellingham lands in Poulton, near Lancaster, so that his death in 1718 (little regretted by a daughter to whom 'he had made himself indifferent... by his cool and awful behaviour') left her 'the mistress of a considerable fortune' ('Correspondence of Samuel Richardson', 4.272-3). 
It is likely that Dorothy Bellingham then lived in the Preston household of Edward Stanley (1689-1776), afterwards earl of Derby, who had married Elizabeth Hesketh in 1714, and of whom she later spoke as being 'not only a Brother, but a Father' (V&A, Forster MSS, XI, fol. 19). She was resident in Preston at the time of her marriage on 6 April 1731 to Roger Bradshaigh (1699-1770) of Haigh, near Wigan, who became fourth baronet on the death of his father in 1747. The courtship was complex (she later described herself as 'one who obstinately refused her lover for nine years, and was prevailed upon to alter her condition in the tenth'; 'Correspondence of Samuel Richardson', 4.260), but on marriage they became a devoted couple. They reportedly honoured the debts incurred by the 'parliamentary 'mania'' of the third baronet, and from 1742, when they took over Haigh Hall, they lived quietly on 'a straitened income' ('GM', 74, 1804, 900). Sir Roger restored the estate by exploiting its deposits of cannel (a high-grade, jet-like coal, from which, as though to blazon the source of their returning wealth, Lady Bradshaigh built a summer house). The house was briefly commandeered by the Jacobite army in 1745, but otherwise there was little to disturb an existence which Lady Bradshaigh divided between social pursuits in Lancashire and London, and practical or charitable tasks which included cow-doctoring, training fallen women for service, and endowing an almshouse for retired miners. There were no children, and the baronetcy became extinct at Sir Roger's death. 
Lady Bradshaigh owes her place in literary history to her voluminous correspondence with the novelist Samuel Richardson, which Richardson circulated in manuscript and considered publishing as 'the best Commentary that cd. be written on the History of Clarissa' ('Selected Letters of Samuel Richardson', 336). Elaborate ruses surrounded the early exchanges, which began when Lady Bradshaigh addressed him in two anonymous letters of July 1748, pleading for a happy ending to 'Clarissa', the serial publication of which was then in progress. Richardson replied by advertising in the 'Whitehall Evening Post', and for the next eighteen months she besieged him with letters written under the pseudonym Belfour, which elicited in reply (along with much sparring and banter) some of his most revealing literary statements. Lady Bradshaigh disclosed her identity only in February 1750, and the two at last met in March. Thereafter she consolidated her position as the most intimate and influential member of Richardson's literary circle, voicing her instinctively sentimental responses to the novels with an eloquence that remained unaffected by her distaste for learning in women. Richardson did not exaggerate when telling her that 'Sir Charles Grandison' (1753-4) was 'owing to you... more than to any one Person besides' (ibid., 319), and the influence persisted in revisions later made to the work in response to her marginal annotations. In his final months he borrowed her annotated copies of 'Pamela' and 'Clarissa', apparently with a view to undertaking comparable revisions. Many of her letters appeared in Barbauld's 'Correspondence of Samuel Richardson' (1804); the 'Clarissa' annotations, with Richardson's marginal responses and her sketch of an alternative ending, were published in 1998. 
Robust in personality and appearance, Lady Bradshaigh described herself in 1749 as 'middle-aged, middle-sized, a degree above plump, brown as an oak wainscot, a good deal of country red in her cheeks' ('Correspondence of Samuel Richardson', 4.300-01). She was probably right to see herself in the vivacious Charlotte of 'Sir Charles Grandison', and the same identification was made by her sister, Lady Echlin, who recalled her rebellious nature in youth and still found her, in middle age, 'this ungovernable Lady B -- ' ('Correspondence of Samuel Richardson', 5.31). Her great-niece reported that she 'carried a dash of Miss Do [her childhood nickname] to the latest period of her valuable existence' ('GM', 74, 1804, 900). She died at Haigh, and was buried in the Bradshaigh family vault at All Saints, Wigan, on 21 August 1785. 


@@@@@


doc= 39722


Echlin, Elizabeth, Lady Echlin (bap. 1704, d. 1782), author, was baptized on 6 March 1704 at Rufford, Lancashire, the elder of the two daughters of William Bellingham ('c'.1660-1718), son of James and Elizabeth Bellingham of Levens, Westmorland, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William Spencer of Ashton, Lancashire, and widow of Robert Hesketh (died 1697), of Rufford. The Bellinghams were a prominent landed family, but the estate inherited by Elizabeth's father in 1693 had been squandered by his elder brother Alan (1656-1693), and Levens Hall, the Bellingham home for over a century, had been sold. Called to the bar in 1686, William Bellingham seems to have practised law for a while, but his marriage of 1703 restored his fortunes and provided the Rufford home in which his two daughters and coheirs were raised with their half-sister, Elizabeth Hesketh (1694-1776), the future countess of Derby. Decades later the younger daughter, Dorothy Bradshaigh, had Elizabeth in mind when describing 'a sister, that, before [the age of twenty], read divinity... lectured me for saying short prayers, and talked like a sage old woman' (Barbauld, 6.112). 
The air of religiosity did not impede Elizabeth's marriage in 1727 to Sir Robert Echlin, second baronet (1699-1757), an Irishman of Scots descent, and for the next thirty years Lady Echlin lived at Rush House, the family estate (previously owned by the dukes of Ormond) in north-east co. Dublin. She also resided for periods in Dublin itself, but at some distance from a fashionable society in which, by her own account, she was thought uncouth, methodistical, and 'a strange, old-fashioned, humdrum creature' (Barbauld, 5.40). Her two sons, Henry and Robert, died young, but her daughter Elizabeth survived to marry, in 1747, Francis Palmer of Palmerston, co. Mayo, into whose family the Rush estate eventually passed. Little trace of the scenes described in her letters now survives: the house was devastated by fire in the following century, and its grandiose Victorian successor, Kenure House, was demolished in 1973. A coastal grotto or 'shell house' built by Lady Echlin in 1755-6, and engraved with verses composed for the occasion by the novelist Samuel Richardson, is marked on Rocque's 1759 map of co. Dublin, and has recently been discovered in use as a cattle pen. 
It is from her association with Richardson, begun in 1753 through the grudging offices of Lady Bradshaigh, that Lady Echlin's reputation now derives. Until Richardson's death in 1761 the two corresponded regularly on subjects including the alternative ending to 'Clarissa' which Lady Echlin seems to have written at her sister's Lancashire house in the winter of 1748-9 (when the novel's final instalment was published), and which she at last sent to Richardson six years later. Several of her letters, including picturesque accounts of Villa Russa (Rush House) and Rock-savage (the grotto), appeared in Barbauld's 'Correspondence of Samuel Richardson' (1804), but the alternative ending remained unpublished until 1982. Presented with an odd mixture of self-deprecation and assertiveness -- the ending is 'a jumble of ill-connected thoughts... badly told', but sets right the original 'in several material points, which I presume to think faulty' (E. Echlin, 174, 172) -- it is a providentialist attempt to evade the tragic logic of 'Clarissa', written in the sentimental mode of the early Sarah Fielding, but lightened by comic touches. The novel's two protagonists still die, but Clarissa's rape is averted and Lovelace turns penitent; Bella marries 'a dirty, stinking, cross-leg'd prick-louse' named Mr Cabbage (ibid., 162-3). 
Sir Robert Echlin died on 13 May 1757 and was buried at nearby Lusk, where his tomb bears a memorial inscription adapted by Lady Echlin from Pope's epitaphs on Mrs Corbett and Elijah Fenton. From 1759 Lady Echlin lived mainly in England. A year later she was still describing herself to Richardson (whom she had yet to meet) as 'the most unfashionable plain country body you can imagine' (Barbauld, 5.100), but the unflattering picture presented by Barbauld's selections and character sketch of 1804 was contested in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' by Lady Echlin's granddaughter Elizabeth Budworth ('nee' Palmer), who stressed her polite accomplishments, charitable works, and religious orthodoxy. At the time of her death she was living at Bellingham Lodge, on the edge of Lady Bradshaigh's Lancashire estate, Haigh Hall. She was interred in the Bradshaigh family vault at All Saints, Wigan, on 9 July 1782. 


@@@@@


doc= 39723


Chapone, Sarah (1699-1764), author, was born on 11 December 1699 at Stanton, Gloucestershire, the second of the nine children of the Revd Lionel Kirkham (1675-1736), rector of Stanton, and his wife, Damaris (1677-1750), daughter of Robert and Damaris Boyse of Wellesbourne, Warwickshire. A lifelong intimate of her neighbour in childhood, Mary Granville (later Delany), she was briefly courted by John Wesley in 1725 (as Varanese to his Cyrus) but married the Revd John Chapone (died 1759), the young vicar of nearby Childswyckham, in December that year. She remained in Stanton, where she bore five children (one of whom died young) and ran a boarding-school with her husband, but from 1734 financial difficulties forced the family into a series of moves between neighbouring villages which lasted until 1745, when her husband became vicar of Badgeworth, near Cheltenham. 
In 1734 Delany saw an 'ingenious MS.' by Chapone, commenting that 'when 'she' (the author) has rectified the 'law part' of it, it will be fit for the press and the perusal of the 'smartest wits of the age'' (Llanover, 1.487), and Wesley read her manuscript 'Essay on laws' (Green, 294n.) the same year. This work was almost certainly 'The Hardships of the English Laws in Relation to Wives' (published anonymously in May 1735 and partly reprinted in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for May and June), a trenchant analysis of female subjection which is attributed to Chapone in a contemporary manuscript annotation to the British Library copy and in a letter to George Ballard of 14 December 1741 from Anna Hopkins of Evesham. 
Despite struggling in this period with 'a pretty large family and a precarious income' (Green, 293n.), Chapone was able to orchestrate the relief from privation of Elizabeth Elstob (the pioneering Saxonist then living in obscurity in Evesham, Worcestershire), on whose behalf she wrote a circular letter which elicited a subscription of $100 from Queen Caroline. She later helped George Ballard in the compilation of his 'Memoirs of Several Ladies of Great Britain who have been Celebrated for their Writings' (1752), found patronage and subscriptions for the work, and urged Ballard to strengthen its polemical edge. Feminist priorities also mark her published admonition of Teresia Constantia Phillips, 'Remarks on Mrs. Muilman's Letter to the Right Honourable the Earl of Chesterfield' (1750), and the lengthy correspondence on 'Clarissa' and related subjects which she held in the 1750s with Samuel Richardson, who found her 'a great Championess for her Sex' (Carroll, 340). 
Delany wrote that Chapone 'would shine in an assembly composed of Tullys, Homers, and Miltons' (Llanover, 1.586), and she formed an intellectual as well as a personal link (via Elstob) between Mary Astell, whose works she recommended to Wesley and Richardson, and later writers of the bluestocking circle, including her daughter-in-law Hester Chapone, nee Mulso. She was buried at Stanton on 24 February 1764. 


@@@@@


doc= 39724


Du Moulin, Pierre (d. 1676), political propagandist, was born in Dunois, France, the son of Cyrus Du Moulin ('b'. 1608), a Reformed church minister, and his wife, Marie de Marbois or Marbais. He came from a family of distinguished Huguenot scholars, which included his grandfather, Pierre Du Moulin (1568-1658), and uncles Peter Du Moulin (1601-1684) and Lewis Du Moulin (1605?-1680). It is not known where Du Moulin was educated, but he had a knowledge of classical languages and of English, Spanish, Dutch, and French. The date of his arrival in England is uncertain, but he was naturalized by act of parliament in May 1664. 
Du Moulin found work as a clerk in the office of the secretary of state, Sir Henry Bennet, earl of Arlington from 1665. With Arlington as a patron, Du Moulin then embarked on a career in the diplomatic service. He served as secretary to the envoy Sir Gilbert Talbot in Denmark (1664-6) and to the ambassador Sir Thomas Clifford in Denmark and Sweden (1665-6). Talbot was impressed by Du Moulin's abilities and recommended him as 'a man of very good parts, and perfect honesty' (Haley, 17). The following year Du Moulin joined the entourage of the English ambassadors at the peace negotiations with the Dutch at Breda, whence he supplied Arlington with political and military intelligence. A warrant exists appointing Du Moulin as assistant to the master of ceremonies, Sir Charles Cotterell, but if he held this office it was not for long, as in March 1668 Clement Cotterell was named to the post. From February to August 1668 Du Moulin was secretary to Sir John Trevor, envoy-extraordinary to France, the French ambassador to England noting that Du Moulin was highly intelligent and in Arlington's confidence. In October 1668 Du Moulin was appointed secretary to the council of trade, following a recommendation from Arlington and against a nominee of the duke of York, but at the beginning of 1669 he was named to the entourage of Ralph Montagu, the new ambassador-extraordinary to France: his post was not that of secretary to the ambassador, but Montagu was told it would 'do well for his credit to let it pass so' (ibid., 20). Du Moulin, however, did not find relations with Montagu easy, and, given the new pro-French direction of English foreign policy, his days in favour were numbered. He was recalled after only a few months and left for England on 26 June 1669. 
Du Moulin continued to serve the council of trade, but he was increasingly out of sympathy with the new pro-French foreign policy, and especially with the Dutch war which began at the start of 1672. He eventually left England following an order from the privy council on 31 July 1672 for his arrest for visiting the Dutch deputies residing at Hampton Court. He blamed three years' persecution by his former patron, Arlington, for his predicament. Du Moulin now entered the service of William, prince of Orange, who had been stadholder of the states general since June. In the autumn of 1672 Du Moulin wrote to his English contacts soliciting information upon which to base Dutch policy, and as early as September 1672 Dutch agents were active in England following policies developed by Du Moulin in a series of memoranda to William. Initially the aim was to divide the English ministers, particularly the earls of Lauderdale and Shaftesbury. However, hopes of disrupting the Franco-English alliance came to focus on influencing parliament to refuse to grant supplies for carrying on the war. It was in these circumstances that Du Moulin penned 'England's Appeal from the Private Cabal at Whitehall to the Great Council of the Nation', which may have been in Arlington's possession at the end of January 1673, but which became widely available in England only in March, near the end of the parliamentary session. 
In the summer of 1673 Du Moulin was employed by William as a confidential secretary to deal with foreign correspondence, and he continued his efforts to force England out of the war. Meanwhile in England there was a marked growth in anti-French sentiment, for which 'England's Appeal' had some responsibility, with its clever play on the consequences of the French alliance for England's politics, religion, and trade. The result was two very uncomfortable parliamentary sessions for Charles II's ministers in October-November 1673 and January-February 1674, which forced England to the negotiating table, a peace with the Dutch being signed on 19 February 1674. 
In 1674 Du Moulin was still serving as William's secretary, but English ministers were determined to use the desire of William for good relations with Charles II to force him from favour, and Arlington came to the Netherlands with the intention of forcing his dismissal. Du Moulin, realizing his position could not be sustained, wished to be appointed governor of Surinam, but this required the assent of all the Dutch provinces and for some time Zeeland proved recalcitrant. Du Moulin's last official letter to William was written on 17 November 1674, although he was still available to offer informal advice. In the summer of 1675 Du Moulin was sent as Dutch representative to the imperial general Montecuculi. 
Du Moulin's commission as governor of Surinam was dated 24 February 1676, and he was also voted a pension of 1600 gulden. However, he never took up his post. On 13 June 1676 he took a vomit which caused him to burst several blood vessels, and he died at The Hague, 'strangled in his blood' (Haley, 217). He was buried in the Kloosterkerk in The Hague on 16 June, and his papers were seized by the judge of the high court of the Netherlands to prevent them from falling into the wrong hands. 


@@@@@


doc= 39725


Strangways, Sir John (1584-1666), politician, was the third, but eventually the eldest surviving, son of John Strangways (died 1593) and Dorothy Thynne (died 1592). He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, in 1601 and was admitted to the Middle Temple on 4 January 1611, by which time he was already a knight. Before 1607 he married Grace Trenchard (1583-1652). He became sheriff of Dorset in 1612-13, and served as a justice of the peace. In 1623 he succeeded his elder brother in possession of the family estates at Chirk Castle and Melbury Sampford in Dorset. He represented Dorset in the Addled Parliament of 1614, and sat in all the parliaments of the 1620s, for Dorset (1621, 1624, 1628-9) and in 1625 and 1626 for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis; by then he was established as a protege of John Digby, earl of Bristol. 
Strangways emerged in these parliaments as one of the duke of Buckingham's strongest critics. He opposed the Spanish war and in 1626 supported the duke's impeachment. On 5 June 1626 he responded to Dudley Carleton's threat that the king might turn to 'new counsels' by asserting that: 'all kings that are not tyrants or perjured, will keep themselves within the bounds of the laws of the[ir] own kingdoms, and those that counsel them to other ways are vipers fitting to be cast out, and pests of the commonwealth. (Bidwell and Jansson, 3.370)' He refused to pay the forced loan and was temporarily imprisoned and removed from the commission of the peace as a result. He became increasingly concerned that royal policies threatened the rule of law, and reportedly declared on 1 May 1628 that 'what has been acted to the prejudice of the liberties of the subject of late, had it been in former ages, had been sufficient to have shaken the frame and foundation of the kingdom' (Keeler, 'Long Parliament'; Bidwell, 3.197). 
Strangways's relations with the crown remained touchy during Charles I's personal rule. In 1634 the king firmly rejected his request to keep Christmas in London and ordered him to return to Dorset. It is uncertain whether he paid ship money, but in 1637 he and three others were tried before Star Chamber for transporting a total of $200,000 in gold out of England. He ignored the king's request for a contribution to the campaigns against the Scottish covenanters. 
Strangways was returned for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis to both the Short and Long parliaments. In April 1640 he argued vigorously that redress of grievances should precede any grant of supply. He also objected to the Laudian altar policy, primarily on the characteristic grounds that he regarded it as contrary to law. However, once the Laudians had been removed, he strongly defended the existing institutions and liturgy of the Church of England. When, on 9 February 1641, the Commons debated the London root-and-branch petition, he insisted that 'if wee made a paritie in the church wee must at last come to a paritie in the Commonwealth. And that the Bishops weere one of the three estates of the kingdome and had voice in Parliament' ('Journal', ed. Notestein, 339-40). 
Like many other moderate royalists, Strangways's attachment to the established church and to the rule of law led him, during the summer and autumn of 1641, to regard Charles I as less of a hazard than his fiercest critics. In September Sir Edward Nicholas identified Strangways as one of the king's supporters in the Commons. By the end of the year the anti-episcopal demonstrators milling outside the Palace of Westminster listed him among 'persons disaffected to the kingdom' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.464), and on 29 November, trying to enter the Commons, he found himself 'encompassed with above 200 sworded and staved' who demanded that he 'give his vote against Bishopps' (S. D'Ewes, 'The Journal of Sir Simonds D'Ewes from the Final Recess of the Long Parliament to the Withdrawal of King Charles from London', ed. W. H. Coates, 1942, 214). 
On 19 May 1642 Strangways acted as teller against the houses' demand that the king be 'bound by his oath to pass such bills as shall be presented unto him by both Houses of Parliament for the good of the kingdom' ('JHC', 2.580), but the proposed clause was carried by 103 votes to 61. On 9 July he acted as teller against a proposal to raise an army of 10,000 volunteers, and when this proposal was carried by 125 votes to 45 he promptly withdrew to his home in Dorset. 
Strangways was among the first royalists to be disabled, on 6 September 1642. He sat in the Oxford Parliament which assembled in January 1644, and he was consistently one of the royalists specifically exempted from any pardon in successive parliamentarian propositions. On 28 July 1644 the committee for the advance of money imposed a fine of $4000 on him. In October 1645 he was taken prisoner and eventually, in March 1648, he was allowed to compound for a fine of $10,000, in return for which he and his son Giles Strangways (1615-1675) were pardoned for their delinquency and the sequestration was taken off their estates. 
While imprisoned in the Tower, Strangways wrote a commonplace book and some verses that throw much light on his beliefs. As with many other royalists, the central elements of his outlook were a commitment to the established church, complete with non-Laudian episcopacy, and a belief in royal authority operating within the rule of law. He defended 'Church goverment' as 'an hedge or wall about the doctrine of religion: a curbe to licentious courses', and he opposed 'the extirpation of prelacie out of the Church of England' (Beinecke Library, Yale University, Osborn MS b. 304, 35, 75). He insisted that: 'we of the Kings partie doe detest monopolyes and Shippe Monie and all the greivances of the people as much as any men living: we doe well know that our estates, lives and fames are preserved by the lawes; and that the King is bound by his lawes: we love p[ar]laments. (ibid., 47)' Just as his commitment to the rule of law had led him to oppose royal policies of the later 1620s, so it now prompted him to deplore the way in which the parliamentarians flouted legal propriety in order to win the war.In May 1648, having paid $5000 and secured the rest, Strangways's sequestration was discharged and he was released from the Tower. He returned at once to Melbury Sampford, where his property had suffered considerable damage during the years of civil war. In October 1649 he told Sir Simonds D'Ewes, a distant relative with whom he shared a love for antiquarianism, that 'the greatest part' of his collection of 'old evidences' had been 'either burnt or plundered' (S. D'Ewes, 'The Autobiography and Correspondence of Sir Simonds D'Ewes, Bart.', ed. J. O. Halliwell, 2 vols., 1845, 2.317). He apparently lived very quietly throughout the interregnum, and when Charles II visited Melbury Sampford during his flight after the battle of Worcester it fell to Strangways's son Giles to give him $100 in gold and to apologize for his inability to provide the monarch with a boat. The family's political loyalties, although covert, remained firm. 
Strangways's first wife died in 1652 and on 8 June 1653 he married Judith Edwards (died in or after 1670). He apparently played no part in Penruddock's rising but he was nevertheless among the Dorset gentry imprisoned in Dorchester gaol following it. He appeared before Major-General Desborough in December 1655. He pleaded 'his integrity', but after the major-general 'dealt very plainly and indeed roundly' with him he finally agreed to pay the decimation tax and was released (Thurloe, 'State papers', 4.336-7). Thereafter he apparently lived in retirement at Melbury Sampford until the Restoration. 
On 14 May 1660 Strangways presided over the Restoration ceremonies at Sherborne, and in the celebrations which followed he 'rode along the streets, encourag[ing] and commend[ing] the people of Sherborne for their hearty and constant loyalty to the King' ('Mercurius Publicus', no. 21, 17-24 May 1660, 329, 331). The following month Strangways and his son Giles were among the signatories of a declaration of thanksgiving from the nobility and gentry of Dorset which was presented to the king at Whitehall. Subsequently he sat for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis in the Cavalier Parliament. Between May 1661 and May 1663 he was named to a total of thirty-two committees, but thereafter he seems to have played no active part in the parliament. He died on 30 December 1666 at Melbury Sampford, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 39727


Costa, Alvaro Jacob da (1646-1716), merchant, was born in Lisbon, the only child of Fernao Mendes da Costa (1608-1670), an important New Christian merchant and government official from Trancoso, Beira Alta, Portugal. He was the son of his father's first marriage to Brites da Costa, daughter of Alvaro Rodrigues of Elvas. His father, widowed twice, was suspected, together with his third wife, Branca Rodrigues, of judaizing; Branca was finally condemned at the Lisbon 'auto-da-fe' of 14 April 1666 and probably burnt at the stake. Fernao fled to London in 1662 or earlier with his son Alvaro, then a youth and reputedly a page-boy to Catherine of Braganza. In a list of good Catholics, Fernao is referred to as 'forced to leave Portugal for fear of the Inquisition and living in London' (Samuel, 1961, 42, n. 26); as such, he may well, as Samuel suggests, have been associated with Duarte da Silva in handling the dowry of Catherine of Braganza in 1662. He certainly arrived with substantial funds. The ledgers of Alderman Edward Backwell, goldsmith and banker, show for 1663 accounts in Fernao's name with a turnover of $30,490, and he was able to buy a huge quantity of pepper at an East India Company sale. 
Da Costa himself is frequently referred to as the founding father of the Anglo-Sephardi community in London, though neither he nor his father was ever a professing Jew in the usual sense of the term. He remained uncircumcised, never figured in the synagogal records, and in his will of 1710 did not leave money for alms-giving to the synagogue, or ask to be buried in the Jewish burial-ground at Mile End. Indeed, he continued to profess Christianity, perhaps because initially he hoped to return to Portugal, perhaps from religious indifference or cynicism, and certainly through self-interest. As a Christian he could and did become a naturalized Englishman -- the first Jew to do so -- on 30 October 1667, as soon as he attained his majority, taking the sacrament as required, and swearing the prescribed Christological oaths of allegiance and supremacy. 
Da Costa was admitted, on 5 August 1668, as a freeman of the East India Company, again taking the Christological oaths, and now in a position to promote his own, his family's, and his friends' mercantile interests. Chief among these was the import of diamonds from India. As well as cotton stuffs from there, he imported brazilwood from the Azores, and exported a variety of goods, such as coral from Italy to India, essential as a trade for diamonds, and hats, woollen cloth, and stockings for the South American trade via Lisbon, Seville, and the Canaries. He and his associates (principally his first cousins, Dr Fernando Moses Mendes (1647-1724) and John Joseph Mendes da Costa (1655-1726), two other founding fathers of the Anglo-Sephardi community) acted as brokers for customers in Antwerp, Amsterdam, Paris, and other European centres, and were involved in shipments of bullion, thus moving from trade to finance. Da Costa dominated Jewish mercantile activities in the City of London for the next thirty years; he was, for instance, one of the two largest individual London importers of diamonds from 1669 to the end of the century. Despite the fact that he had certainly been baptized in Lisbon, as a young man of twenty-six he received adult baptism on 9 October 1672 at St Katharine by the Tower, thus confirming his allegiance to the established church, and parrying any charge of popery. He appears in the court books of the East India Company, buying and selling stock and having his knuckles rapped on occasion for allowing his name to be used by non-freemen ('interlopers') to avoid paying dues. He was one of the first Jews to subscribe to Bank of England stock (7 December 1696). 
As a naturalized Englishman, da Costa could hold absolute title to land, and was the first Jew to do so. In 1675 he bought a house on Highgate Hill (later known as Cromwell House), which he shared with his cousins, and in 1677 bought a house in Budge Row in the City. In 1667 he married his cousin, Leonor Mendes Gutierres (1651-1727). Their three sons, Anthony Moses da Costa, John Benjamin da Costa (1674-1752), and Fernando Joseph da Costa (1683-1753) were in their turn noted merchants; all were professing Jews, although Anthony was baptized on 12 January 1679. Da Costa died in early February 1716 and was, despite all, buried in the Jewish burial-ground at Mile End. His religious beliefs remain a mystery. Although Hyamson and others see him as a pillar of Anglo-Jewry, the evidence is against this. His ties with the Portuguese Jewish community seem to be based on ethnic identity and family solidarity rather than on any religious beliefs or practices. 


@@@@@


doc= 39728


Costa, Anthony Moses da (1667x9-1747), merchant, the eldest son of Alvaro Jacob da Costa (1646-1716), also a merchant, and Leonor Mendes Gutierres (1651-1727), was born in Budge Row, in the City of London. He was baptized on 12 January 1679 at St Antholin, Budge Row, presumably because his father wished him to have the advantages of being a member of the established church. But he became a professing Jew. He was a member of the 'mahamad' (governing body) of the Sephardi synagogue in Bevis Marks, 1720-21. He had been its 'gabay' (treasurer) in 1710, and was a 'parnas' (warden) in 1716, 1720, and 1730. He was presiding warden in 1735 and was on the board of deputies in 1739. On 13 August 1698 he married his second cousin Catherine Mendes (1679-1756) ['see 'Costa, Catherine da], the daughter of Dr Fernando Moses Mendes (1647-1724), and they had six children. Catherine is reputed to have been born and baptized in Somerset House, where her father was body physician to Queen Catherine; although there is no documentary evidence that, as is asserted, the queen was her godmother, the infant is at the least likely to have been named after her, as this is the first time that anyone in the family was called Catherine. 
Like his father, da Costa was in his day prominent in the East India trade and was also a leading figure in banking and commerce. He owned Bank of England stock, but was never, as used to be said, a director. He aligned himself firmly with Jewish interests on occasion. From 1713 to 1717 he was involved in gradually persuading the East India Company to relax its attitude to non-company diamond merchants (many of whom were Jews), and in 1735 he successfully protested, with five other firms (four of them Jewish), against the reimposition of higher import duties on coral going into Madras. In 1739 he was one of the 'deputados' of the Spanish and Portuguese Jewish congregation who, albeit fruitlessly, prepared and presented a petition to the lord mayor and aldermen of the City asking for an increase in the number of sworn Sephardi brokers. 
Besides engaging in the India trade, da Costa dealt in East India Company stock and was well known in the exchange and discount business. To his considerable cost he invested heavily in the South Sea Company. He could be litigious. In 1727 he applied for admission to the Russia Company (either because he was diversifying or because he wanted to bring a test case). Although there was no legal impediment to admitting a Jew, the company refused him entry -- as a Jew. Justifiably indignant, he published a brief account of the affair. The following year he took legal steps to force the company to admit him but was defeated, as the company successfully petitioned parliament to emend its charter to provide for exclusion on the grounds of religion. In 1736, when he, again probably with justice, considered himself unfairly treated in a financial matter, he again resorted to print to publicize the injustice. About 1730 he was, together with two other noted Jewish merchants, appointed commissioner for the new colony of Georgia; the three raised a fair sum of money, but instead of handing the money over to Lord Egmont and the other trustees, they spent it on sending out in 1733 forty emigrants, including two poor Ashkenazi families, of their own choice. By the time, a year later, that the trustees procured the surrender of their commissions, their proteges had already landed in Savannah. 
Da Costa lived in style in his house in Winchester Street, off London Wall, and in the house on Highgate Hill that he had inherited from his father in 1716. He died on 3 March 1747, his fortune much diminished, probably as a result of his speculations in the South Sea Company. He was buried the following day, in the Jewish burial-ground at Mile End, as his will requested. 
Catherine da Costa is notable as the first Anglo-Jewish miniaturist. From 1712 to 1730 she was a pupil of Bernard Lens, royal miniaturist and drawing master to the royal children. There is a signed miniature by her of Mary Stuart (probably copied from one by Bernard Lens) in Ham House, Surrey. Miniatures by her on ivory of her little son Abraham and of a cousin are in the Jewish Museum, Albert Street, London, and a full-length portrait of her father in his doctoral robes is now in the synagogue of the Spanish and Portuguese Jewish congregation in Ashworth Road, London. While Voltaire was in London (1726-8) to publish the 'Henriade', he became acquainted with Anthony and Catherine da Costa, and they both, together with six other members of the family, subscribed to the publication. 


@@@@@


doc= 39729


Mendes da Costa, Philip Jacob (1708-1780), merchant, was born in London on 24 February 1708, the elder surviving son of John Abraham Mendes da Costa (1683-1763), a rich Anglo-Jewish merchant of St Christopher-le-Stocks in the City of London, whose father had fled from Portugal to France to escape the attentions of the Inquisition. The family moved to London from Rouen about 1696 and joined other members of the family in the Anglo-Indian diamond trade and the import of gold and other commodities. In 1702 John Mendes da Costa married Johanna Ester (1692-1749), a daughter of the important merchant Alvaro da Costa (1646-1716); they had nine children, the youngest of whom was the naturalist Emanuel Mendes da Costa (1717-1791). As a youth, Philip Mendes da Costa spent some time in the Netherlands, presumably gaining mercantile experience with the Amsterdam branch of his family. Back in London in the mid-1720s, he led the life of a rich young blade and reputedly traded on his own account, presumably in the Anglo-Indian trade. 
It seems that a marriage was intended between Philip Mendes da Costa and his first cousin, Catherine Rachel (Kitty) da Costa (1710-1747), but he acquired a dubious reputation as a rake and fortune-hunter and Kitty was married off in 1727 to the rich Joseph Isaac Villareal (1673-1730). When Villareal died, on 27 December 1730, Kitty speedily agreed to marry her former suitor, but under family pressure later rejected him. On 11 January 1732 Mendes da Costa, now using his Hebrew forename of Jacob, involved his family in a scandalous lawsuit by bringing an action against his cousin in the ecclesiastical court of arches, at Doctors' Commons, for breach of promise, the first Jew ever to do such a thing. His application for fulfilment of a marriage contract or damages of $100,000, and a subsequent suit for similar damages at the king's bench, were dismissed on the grounds that Kitty's promise of marriage had been conditional on her father's consent, which was refused. The vindictive Mendes da Costa promptly published a partial and embittered account of the trial, probably printed by the notorious Edmund Curll. M. J. Landa suggests that Mendes da Costa was the inspiration for the caricatural Jew in the second scene of Hogarth's 'Harlot's Progress' of 1732. 
Presumably as a consequence of the public scandal, Mendes da Costa, still only in his mid-twenties, was dispatched to Hamburg, which had one of the oldest Sephardic communities in Europe. He settled there permanently and formed a connection with the mercantile family of Bravo (which also had a branch in London) by marrying two daughters of the family in succession. During the course of the century, Hamburg, gradually dispensing with the intermediary services of Amsterdam, developed direct connections with London for the purchase of colonial goods of divers sorts, including coffee, hides, and tobacco, as well as diamonds. The Englishman may well have been a useful link between the cities. He was not, however, a successful businessman. In 1746 Frederick I invited rich Portuguese Jews to settle in Sweden as traders; 'Jacob Mendes da Costa of Hamburg Altona' acted as spokesman and negotiator for a group of twenty-two Jews. But the merchants were unenthusiastic and, worse, Mendes da Costa turned out to be bankrupt. The project was dropped. His subsequent career is unrecorded; he died at Altona in April or May 1780, leaving one daughter, Esther. 


@@@@@


doc= 39731


Mellish, Catherine Rachel (1710-1747), breach of promise defendant, was born in London in the summer of 1710, probably in the Budge Row house of her paternal grandfather, Alvaro da Costa. She was the eldest child of Joseph da Costa (1683-1753), a rich Anglo-Jewish merchant, trader, and financier, and of his wife and first cousin, Leonora Sara Mendes (died 1767). Kitty was brought up in Budge Row and also, from about 1722, in her father's much admired mansion, Copped Hall, Totteridge, Hertfordshire. Her upbringing was that of a rich and well-educated English lady. 
About 1724 a match was mooted between a willing Kitty and her eager first cousin, Philip Jacob Mendes da Costa (1708-1780), but the young man was unacceptable to Kitty's parents on moral grounds. On 24 May 1727 the reluctant Kitty, 'at the age of almost seventeen' ('Proceedings'), married the wealthy but 54-year-old Joseph Isaac Villareal (1673-1730), son of the former comptroller-general of the armies of the king of Portugal, who with his family had arrived in London in 1726, fleeing Lisbon to escape charges of Judaizing. Kitty and Joseph had two children, Sarah and Abraham, born on 10 June 1728 and 15 May 1729. On 27 December 1730 Joseph Villareal died leaving Kitty, at twenty, a rich, beautiful, and by no means inconsolable widow. 
Only three weeks after her husband's death the seemingly besotted Kitty was promising to marry her former suitor as soon as her year of mourning was ended. Love-tokens of a ring and a miniature were exchanged; indiscreet assignations took place in Kitty's own house in College Hill in the City of London; Philip's letters to Kitty were pressing, Kitty's to him passionate, and virulent about alleged machinations on the part of members of her family to gain control of her fortune. There was an abortive elopement from Copped Hall, and a feigned illness on her part designed to persuade her father to accept Philip. But eventually Philip, probably a libertine and certainly a fortune-hunter, was sent packing. Furious, he ill-advisedly sued Kitty for breach of promise in the ecclesiastical court of arches on 11 January 1732 (the first time a Jew had done such a thing), demanding fulfilment of the alleged contract or damages of $100,000. On 25 June 1733 judgment went against him on the grounds that Kitty's promise of marriage had not been absolute but conditional on her father's consent. In February 1734 Philip brought a civil suit in the court of king's bench for damages, but lost it on the same grounds as before. Later that year he published an embittered and venomous account of the court of arches proceedings, bringing additional shame on the Sephardi community. 
Kitty, by no means blameless and undoubtedly headstrong, finally broke with her family and Judaism on 27 February 1735 by marrying a Christian, William Mellish (c.1710-1791) ['see under 'Mellish, William (1764-1838)], of Blyth, Nottinghamshire, the younger son of a good local family who had made their fortune in trade with Turkey and Portugal. William was a barrister, educated at Eton and at Cambridge. A month after the wedding Kitty was baptized at St George's, Bloomsbury. Her children from her first marriage, by agreement under the tutelage of her father, were returned to her after a protracted legal battle and also baptized, as Elizabeth and William, on 11 April 1738 at St Anne's, Soho. Kitty and William Mellish had one surviving son, Charles, born on 16 July 1737, who became recorder of Newark, and an MP in 1774, only the second man of Jewish blood to enter parliament. Elizabeth married the future second Viscount Galway in 1747 and thus became the first person of Jewish birth to marry into the peerage. Her brother, William, married the sister of a future English bishop. Possibly with the help of his wife's fortune, William Mellish himself had been returned to parliament as member for Retford from 1741 to 1751, and then became commissioner of excise, then receiver-general of customs. Kitty's younger brother, Benjamin (1712-1782), also converted to Christianity and married a gentile. 
Kitty died, still young, at Blyth on 19 March 1747, and was buried on 27 March at Blyth church, leaving her entire estate to her 'dear and loving husband'. She and her kin were striking early examples of defection or drift from Judaism by Anglo-Jews and of assimilation into mainstream English society. 


@@@@@


doc= 39736


Slatin, Sir Rudolf Carl von (1857-1932), colonial governor and author, was born on 27 June 1857 at Ober Sankt Veit, near Vienna, the fourth of six children born to Michael Slatin, a silk dyer, and his wife, Maria Anna Feuerstein, who was born in Lwow (Lemberg). Slatin's grandfather was a Jew who had been converted to Catholicism. The family lived at 1 Wolfrathplatz, where their six children were born between 1852 and 1864. Rudolf was baptized Rudolf Anton in the Catholic church at Ober Sankt Veit, but was later known as Rudolf Carl. He entered Oberrealschule am Schottenfelde in September 1866, but his academic record was poor and he left school after three years. In 1870 he entered a commercial school in Vienna, the Wiener Handelsakademie, and graduated three years later. 
Aged sixteen, Slatin was eager to begin a life of adventure. Chance decided that it was to be in Egypt, where a bookseller was in need of a clerk and a tutor for his sons. Slatin spent a few months as tutor and left for a trip up the Nile. Once the boat reached Korosko in Turco-Egyptian Sudan, he continued by camel to Berber and then to Khartoum, where he spent two months. He left Khartoum for the Nuba Mountains in southern Kordofan, but for reasons of security was ordered back. Chance intervened when he met Edward Schnitzer -- better known by his Muslim name, Emin Pasha -- who was about to join the Egyptian service in Equatoria under the governorship of General Charles Gordon. Slatin asked Emin to recommend him to Gordon's attention for future employment. In December 1875 Slatin returned to Vienna and joined the Austrian army, serving with the 18th Bohemian infantry regiment. In December 1877 he was posted to the 19th Hungarian regiment as a sub-lieutenant for service in the lines. In July 1878 Gordon Pasha, now governor-general of Turco-Egyptian Sudan, invited Slatin to join his staff in Khartoum and he accepted eagerly. 
Slatin's career in the Sudan covered thirty-six eventful years. He started in January 1879 in the finance department as an inspector with the rank of a 'bimbashi' (the Turkish equivalent of a major). Later that year he was appointed governor of Dara, in south-western Darfur, and after less than a year became governor-general of the whole province. In his major publication 'Fire and Sword in the Sudan' (1896) Slatin was vague about his duties in Darfur. However, his life as governor-general was soon disrupted by Muhammad Ahmad ibn 'Abdullahi, who in June 1881 declared himself the 'Mahdi' of the Sudan. Soon the Mahdi and his followers ('ansar') escaped from Aba Island, on the White Nile, to the Nuba Mountains and Slatin became actively involved in the uprising. Many of the tribal and religious leaders in Darfur joined the Mahdi. Slatin led his troops in numerous battles against the Mahdist forces and lost many soldiers. In January 1883 al- 'Ubayd, capital of Kordofan, fell into Mahdist hands and Darfur was cut off from Khartoum. Slatin decided 'nominally to adopt the Mohammedan religion' since he was told by his Egyptian and Sudanese followers that they had lost confidence in his ability, as a Christian, to win the war against the Mahdi. 'I am not a foreigner, I am not an unbeliever', he responded, 'I am as much a believer as you... I bear witness that there is no God but God and Mohammed is his Prophet' (Slatin, 216-17). However, disastrous defeats at the battle of Shaykan in November 1883 and the fall of al-Fasher, capital of Darfur, convinced Slatin to surrender. He sent a letter to the Mahdi in al- 'Ubayd declaring his submission and in December 1883 he and his troops surrendered at Dara. Slatin was renamed 'Abd al-Qadir Salatin, a name he carried thereafter. 
From 1884 to 1895 Slatin was a prisoner, first of the Mahdi and, following his death in 1885, of Caliph 'Abdullahi al-Ta 'aishi. After a brief period in Dara, where he was allowed to live in his old house and keep his servants, Slatin was ordered to join the Mahdi's camp at al- 'Ubayd and to take part in the march to Khartoum. During the siege of Khartoum, Slatin was asked by the Mahdi to write on his behalf to General Gordon and seek his surrender. Slatin, according to his account, attempted to explain to Gordon the circumstances of his conversion to Islam and to justify his surrender. Gordon was willing to forgive Slatin's surrender but not his conversion to Islam. After the Mahdi's death Slatin became the caliph's orderly, and was entrusted with confidential administrative and financial duties. He described the caliph as a 'cruel beast' and accused him of brutalities, but failed to mention how kindly he and some of the other European prisoners were treated. During this period Slatin apparently had two wives, Hassaniyyah, a Fur girl he brought with him when he surrendered to the Mahdi in December 1883, and an Abyssinian, Desta, who bore him a child shortly after his escape from Omdurman in 1895; the child died after a few weeks (Neufeld, 206-7). He left both women behind when he escaped in 1895. 
Slatin's problematic relations with the caliph may also be observed in a letter he wrote to the caliph from Cairo on 6 April 1895, some six weeks after his escape from the Sudan. In this letter Slatin asked his former patron to continue to rely on his love and loyalty and to disregard any rumours to the contrary emanating from Cairo. He ended his letter by asking the caliph to forgive him for having left Omdurman without notifying him and offered to return to his service once he received his letter of pardon (Slatin to Caliph 'Abdullahi, 6 April 1895, Durham University Library, Sudan archive, SAD/100/20). 
Of Slatin's value as an intelligence agent there are conflicting views. Few of the communications he smuggled to Cairo contained valuable information. Colonel Reginald Wingate, who since 1887 had served in the military intelligence department of the Egyptian army, ignored most of them as probably written under duress. For intelligence purposes he needed Slatin in Cairo, where he could interrogate him freely. On 20 February 1895 Slatin escaped from Omdurman, led by two guides hired by the intelligence department. He arrived in Cairo on 19 March and was met by Wingate at the railway station. Two days later the Egyptian khedive, Abbas II, received him and raised him to the grade of pasha. His detailed intelligence report to Wingate was entitled 'General report on the Egyptian Sudan, March 1895, compiled from statements made by Slatin Pasha'. Wingate, who helped Slatin to write his memoirs, worked to convince the British government and public opinion that the Sudan had to be reconquered because of the caliph's cruel autocracy, and Slatin's literary contributions were both timely and essential. 'Fire and Sword in the Sudan' was published in English in 1896 and was dedicated to Queen Victoria. Its impact on public opinion in Europe was greater than Wingate had expected. It appeared in numerous editions until 1935, and was translated into German, Italian, French, and Arabic. Slatin spent several months of leave, partly with his family in Austria and partly in travelling throughout Europe, receiving decorations from heads of state and lecturing at geographical societies. He had become a celebrity and seemed to enjoy it. 
From 1896 to 1898 Slatin was Wingate's assistant director of military intelligence in the Egyptian army. Both were practical and down-to-earth, methodological of mind, and scornful of the abstract. Articulate, uninhibited, and simple, they trusted each other absolutely and became close friends. Although Slatin was a full colonel and a pasha, while Wingate, his superior, was a mere bey and a lieutenant-colonel, this did not affect their close relationship. Their aim was the reconquest of the Sudan and the total destruction of the Mahdist state; nothing else mattered. They therefore cultivated the press, an art at which both men excelled. Eager to return to active service in the Sudan, Slatin was allowed to take part in the final battle, which took place at Karrari, near Omdurman, on 2 September 1898. His knowledge of Omdurman and its people, as well as his fluent command of Arabic, proved to be invaluable. 
During the conquest Slatin's views condoning slavery were brought to the attention of Queen Victoria and he was warned to be more careful in future. However, he continued to express his view that black people were inferior and 'do not deserve to be treated like free and independent men', and suggested that black people 'should be made to remain under the protection of their former masters' (Hill, 55-6). The queen forgave Slatin and also overlooked his years as apostate. He became a favourite correspondent and a frequent visitor at Windsor and Balmoral. In 1898 Queen Victoria awarded him a knighthood, and upon his retirement in February 1899 the khedive, Abbas, promoted him to general and granted him a yearly pension. In 1906 he was created a baron of the Austrian-Hungarian empire. 
Slatin's retirement did not last long. In the summer of 1900 Wingate, now governor-general, arranged for Slatin's appointment in the Sudan government as inspector-general and director of intelligence. It was, according to Wingate, a personal post which would cease when Slatin left the service. Given his experience and command of Arabic, his position as Wingate's right-hand man was unchallengeable. His duties and authority were never clearly defined but his role was paramount in shaping the government's Islamic and tribal policy. He knew most of the leaders personally and advised on the establishment of a 'Board of Ulemas', arguing that a government consisting of Christians should not interfere in daily decisions regarding Muslims. Slatin decided who would serve on this board and he acted as the liaison officer between the board and the government. He personally kept in touch with former Mahdist leaders, including members of the families of the Mahdi and the caliph, both for intelligence purposes and because of his loyalty to old friends. His idea was to propagate 'orthodox' Islam as a barrier against Sufi and Mahdist fanaticism. In April 1913 he wrote to Wingate: 'I am expelling 3 fikhis from the Yemen and Hejaz, who were preaching Rott and Nonsense' (Hill, 93). Slatin was more apprehensive regarding Sufism than he was with regard to a possible Mahdist revival. He knew that most of the condominium's Sudanese employees had previously served in the Mahdist state but did not question their loyalty. Slatin himself lacked religious zeal of any kind. Christian missionaries were forbidden to proselytize in the Muslim provinces and were ordered to limit their activities, including education, to the non-Muslim regions. In tribal affairs he sought to strengthen family bonds, tribal leadership, and the administration of justice according to tribal law. He believed that by lowering taxes and encouraging tribes to revert to their traditional economies, the government would be relieved of many of its administrative burdens. He relied on his acquaintances, many former Mahdists, in deciding whom to appoint as tribal sheikhs or in other senior positions. Slatin's British colleagues resented his constant interference in their provinces and one of them claimed that 'he was not popular among the Sudanese as he was supposed to show favoritism to his pals among the tribes' (Butler, journal, 1911, Durham University Library, Sudan archive, 422/12). However, with Wingate's unrelenting support Slatin's position was maintained. On Slatin's departure in 1914 following the outbreak of the First World War the position of inspector-general ceased to exist. 
For Slatin it was a difficult decision: he was fifty-seven years old and had served under the British crown for most of his life. Due to his superior knowledge of Turkey and the Middle East he was asked occasionally by the Austrian authorities to give advice. In December 1914 the khedive, Abbas, met Slatin in Vienna and offered to appoint him as his general aide-de-camp, for the duration of the war. Slatin turned the offer down since he did not want to commit himself to active participation in the war against England. His sole active service was in the Austrian Red Cross, in which he served as unpaid head of the division for prisoners of war. In this capacity he also did his best for British prisoners of war in Austrian captivity. However, with the patriotic feelings prevailing in Europe, the British press frequently slandered Slatin as a double-crosser. Wingate came to his defence whenever he could, but the misrepresentations prevailed. 
When the war ended Slatin was included in the Austrian delegation to the peace conference and in October 1919 he was offered the post of Austrian minister in London. He declined because of ill health and lack of financial means. During his years of retirement he often travelled to England where he saw Wingate and other old friends who had served with him in the Sudan. He also met George V. On 21 July 1914 he had married Baroness Alice von Ramberg (1873-1921). The couple had a daughter, but Alice died from cancer on 26 June 1921. In the winter of 1927 he made his last visit to the Sudan, as the guest of Sir John Maffey, the new governor-general. He wrote to Wingate following the visit and commented favourably on the vast Gezira irrigation scheme, which Wingate and he had initiated in 1913, but criticized the glorification of Sayyid 'Abd al-Rahman al-Mahdi, the Mahdi's posthumous son. In his last diary, covering 1932, he noted on 16 March: 'Today it is 37 years that I reached Assouan on my escape from Omdurman' (Sudan archive, 441). He died on 4 October 1932 at the Cottage Nursing Home, Vienna, Austria, and was buried at Ober Sankt Viet. 


@@@@@


doc= 39737


Rawlinson, Alfred Edward John (1884-1960), bishop of Derby and theologian, was born at Park Road, Newton-le-Willows, Lancashire, on 17 July 1884, the first son of Alfred John Rawlinson ('b'. 1865), accountant, and his second wife, Anna Margaret Marshall of Sekondi, Gold Coast. After education at Dulwich College, in 1900-03, he became an exhibitioner and later scholar at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Although his parents were Congregationalists he adopted a non-dogmatic Anglo-Catholicism at Oxford. After graduating with a first in mods and Greats in 1907, he won the Liddon and Denyer and Johnson scholarships, achieving a first in theology in 1908. He trained at Cuddesdon and was ordained to a tutorship at Keble in 1909, where he contributed to the controversial volume 'Foundations' (1912). In 1913 he became lecturer in theology, and from 1914 to 1929 was student and tutor, at Christ Church. He was a popular tutor, visited by students with religious doubts who 'soon discovered that their... uncertainties were but a drop in the bucket compared with his, and departed much reassured' (H. Chadwick, 446). He was chaplain to the forces during 1915-17, becoming priest-in-charge of St John's, Wilton Road, London (1917-18). In 1919 he married Mildred Ansley Ellis ('Cuckoo'), daughter of the Revd Ansley Ellis, a missionary with the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. 
During the 1920s Rawlinson gave the Paddock lectures, published as 'Authority and Freedom', in New York (1923), contributed to 'Essays Catholic and Critical' (1926), and edited 'Essays on the Trinity and the Incarnation' (1928). He was well versed in German theology, assessing both Catholic modernism and liberal protestantism in his Bampton lectures, 'The New Testament Doctrine of Christ' (1926). In 1925 he published his widely read textual commentary on 'St Mark', one of the first 'form-critical' works in English. He took part in the Anglo-German theological conferences at Canterbury (1925), Wartburg (1928), and Chichester (1931), and continued to write on the authority of the church. He was much in demand as a lecturer and preacher, becoming select preacher at both Oxford (1923-5, 1941-2) and Cambridge (1924, 1928, 1937). He was awarded DDs at Oxford (1925) and Durham (1931), and served on the archbishops' doctrine commission from 1922. Nevertheless, he failed to secure both the Oxford Lady Margaret chair in 1927 (losing by two votes to his friend N. P. Williams) and the regius chair in 1943. 
In 1929 Rawlinson became archdeacon of Auckland and canon of Durham under Hensley Henson, who found him 'able and amiable' (Henson, 2.250). Rawlinson's brand of liberal Catholicism, which denied any claim to absolute truth, made him a natural ecumenist, and in 1934 he helped establish ecumenical relations with the Finnish church. In 1936 he became second bishop of Derby, one of the few theologians on the bench. According to Michael Ramsey, 'If you walked from Humber to Severn and dodged Derby, you would not find a bishop who could read or write' (O. Chadwick, 76). His primary charge called for increased clergy discipline, which helped make him unpopular in the diocese. He seldom visited rural parishes and often dealt with pastoral matters in a heavy-handed fashion. He continued to play a leading role in ecumenical discussions with the free churches and the Church of Scotland, staunchly defended the Church of South India scheme, and was an official delegate to the Russian Orthodox church in 1956. He was a frequent speaker in the House of Lords, where, although maintaining conservative attitudes on moral issues, he was outspoken on social issues. He retired on 11 April 1959, dying at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, on 17 July 1960. His ashes were interred at Derby Cathedral on 17 September. 
Throughout his life Rawlinson remained a scholar, displaying an aloofness and shyness which made him unsuited to episcopal life. He was a man of contradictions: although he taught a liberal theology of authority he exercised episcopal authoritarianism; although he stressed religious experience, he was 'without an ounce of mysticism' (Dell, 154). A man of small stature, he was often overshadowed by his wife, an extrovert and dominant personality. Potentially one of the leading theologians of his generation, he was not served well by either his church or university. 


@@@@@


doc= 39742


Aram, Peter (bap. 1667, d. 1735), gardener and writer, was baptized on 13 October 1667, at Clifton, Nottinghamshire, the son and eldest of three children of Henry Aram, fisherman, and his second wife, Dorothy ('b'. 1630), daughter of Thomas and Alice Westbrook of Lenton, Nottinghamshire. Little is known of Aram's childhood. His detailed knowledge of Clifton and nearby Wollaton Hall suggest he grew up in the area. As a young man he travelled to London to train as a gardener under George London, and worked for the bishop of London at Fulham Palace. By 1694 he had begun working as gardener to Sir Edward Blackett at Newby Hall, near Ripon, Yorkshire, and he remained there until Blackett's death in 1718. Thereafter he took employment with Sir John Ingilby of Ripley, Yorkshire, apparently in the role of steward (some account books of Ripley Castle appear to be in his hand). Aram had married into a substantial family from Ramsgill in Nidderdale within a few years of his arrival in Yorkshire, but nothing more is known of his wife. They had four children, the ill-starred Eugene Aram (bap. 1704, d. 1759), who was executed for murder, a daughter, Orinda, and two younger sons, Henry and Stephen. The family lived in Skelton upon Ure, near Newby, until about 1709, then moved to Bondgate, near Ripon. 
Aram began writing in the 1720s. By 1723 he was planning the ambitious prose work that would become 'A Practical Treatise of Flowers', and in 1733 his most important poem, 'Studley-Park', was published in an anthology of local materials compiled by Thomas Gent. He died two years later and was buried on 10 June 1735, at Ripley parish church. 

'Studley-Park' has a minor place in literary history as a well-informed, eloquently turned contribution to the tradition of local descriptive poetry. The publication in 1985 of Aram's 'A Practical Treatise of Flowers' adds substantially to his achievement. Its detailed advice on the cultivation of flowers is solidly based on first-hand experience and observation, and offers a valuable insight into early eighteenth-century gardening. Aram's training and employment brought him into contact with the latest ideas, particularly at Newby where he held a key role in developing the garden; his duties included a trip to the Netherlands early in 1696 to buy plants. 
Aram seems to have been a modest and likeable man. His unpublished notebooks, containing poetry and prose, give some sense of his personality -- by turns practical, fanciful, pious, and humorous, but always omnivorous in his interests. 


@@@@@


doc= 39743


Batchelor, Thomas (1775-1838), farmer and writer on language, was born on 25 September 1775 at Marston Moretaine, Bedfordshire, the fifth child of Joseph Batchelor (1741-1804) and Ann Brandon (died 1792), farmers. He was baptized in 1785 at Ampthill where, from the age of ten to thirteen, he went to school. At this time, spelling book fables were the only texts he could read with any real sense of enjoyment, his particular favourite being 'Robinson Crusoe'. After he left school, Quarle's 'Emblems' became his favourite, and this, in conjunction with Isaac Watts's hymns, nourished his interest in rhyme. These were subsequently complemented by 'Paradise Lost', Edward Young's 'Night Thoughts', and Daniel Fenning's 'The Royal English Dictionary, or, A Treasury of the English Language' (1761). 
In 1792 the family moved to Boughton End, half a mile south of Lidlington, where they were tenant farmers of the duke of Bedford. Although Batchelor initially had difficulty in reading without the help of a dictionary, by the age of nineteen he had written about 1500 lines of verse mainly dealing with local news. He continued to compose short pieces while working in the fields, and one of his poems was published in the 'Monthly Mirror' in 1801. A journey through his native village of Marston in 1799 provided material and the inspiration for his 'Village Scenes: the Progress of Agriculture, and other Poems' which was eventually published in 1804, the year of his father's death. The draft with its numerous corrections was eventually deposited in Bedfordshire Record Office. 
In conjunction with his brothers Batchelor continued to run the farm, but his precarious financial position compelled him to look for other forms of income. In 1806, while employed by the board of agriculture, he embarked on an extensive survey of his native county. His 'General View of the Agriculture of the County of Bedford', one of a series edited by Arthur Young, was published two years later. On 6 August 1807 he married Elizabeth Franklin; their only child, Elizabeth, was born in 1809. The same year his texts 'An Orthoepical Analysis of the English Language' and 'An Orthoepical Analysis of the Dialect of Bedfordshire' were published in one volume. The former focused on explaining the provincial variations in pronouncing various words in different languages and dialects. Batchelor invented an orthoepical alphabet of his own consisting of thirty characters all designated by new names. One of the key aims of the latter was to provide a means of 'explaining the diversity of dialect among civilised nations' (Zettersten, xi). Batchelor's interest in orthography also encompassed several other fields of linguistics but principally phonetics and phonology. His research into dialects led him to study vocabulary and syntax, and he was responsible for pioneering a detailed investigation of the Bedfordshire dialect. 
The long-term aim of Batchelor's research was to enhance the quality of pronunciation in the provincial schools of Bedfordshire. Shortly after its publication, however, his work was criticized in the 'Monthly Review' (63, 1810) and, following the bankruptcy of his publishers in the same year, his interest in the topic virtually ceased. According to Zettersten, Batchelor occupies a distinguished place in the history of English phonology, being the first scholar to appreciate the dipthongizations of two of the most significant sound changes in the English language. His area of research remained virtually untouched until the completion of D. H. Shaw's PhD thesis in the 1960s and the publication of the first volumes of the 'Surveys of English Dialects' (Zettersten, x). 
After 1810 Batchelor devoted his energies to devising numerous series of shorthand based on the phonetic principle. His interest in this topic was prompted by Thomas Gurney, brother of his grandmother, who had been appointed the first shorthand writer to the House of Commons in the 1750s. While Batchelor's efforts in this sphere proved too cumbersome to be used commercially, the subsequent transcription of his manuscripts provides a valuable insight into the language used by the contemporary middle class in Batchelor's locality. 
After 1809 Batchelor focused primarily on agricultural interests and was commissioned by the board of agriculture to undertake a survey of Dorset, a task which he finished in the following year. Much to his annoyance, however, it was published in 1814 under the name of William Stevenson, who had revised Batchelor's work and incorporated some additional material. In addition to his farming activities he was a prolific agricultural writer of articles on a wide variety of rural issues. Many of his contributions were published in the 'Farmers' Journal' under the name of Bedfordshire. It is also highly likely that he was the editor of the Bedfordshire 'Monthly Review' after 1823. He also invented the lever drill (an improvement to the seed drill) which was of limited commercial success. 
Batchelor died at Lidlington on 23 February 1838 and was buried alongside his wife and other relatives in the old graveyard near the church of St Margaret, which rapidly fell into disuse and was pulled down ('VCH', 3.307). Despite his lowly social position, living an isolated life in a country village, and being almost completely self-educated, Batchelor achieved a modest level of distinction in linguistics, agriculture, and poetry which was only recognized after his death. He was a perceptive observer who did not accept the evidence of other orthoepists in an uncritical way. Batchelor was an enterprising and enthusiastic pioneer whose potential had been inhibited by family, farming, and financial troubles. 


@@@@@


doc= 39745


Chicken, Edward (bap. 1698, d. 1745/6), poet, was born at White Cross in the parish of St John's in Newcastle upon Tyne, and baptized at St John's on 10 September 1698, the third of seven children of Edward Chicken, weaver, who died in 1707 leaving two surviving sons and a daughter. The mother, Catherine, 'nee' Radcliffe, being of limited means, Edward and his brother Robert were educated at the parish charity school. 
Chicken entered his father's trade, taking his freedom in the Company of Weavers in 1718, becoming elector of the company in 1720 and clerk in 1721. Also about this time he was elected parish clerk of St John's, an office he held until his death. He opened a school, and through these various sources of income became a substantial figure locally, and 'being a man of strong individuality of character, he became a sort of oracle and arbiter among his fellow-townsmen' (Welford, 1.547). 
Chicken married Ann Jordan of Newcastle (died 1768) on 6 February 1719. They had four children: Edward ('b'. 1721), who served as chaplain of the 'Monmouth' (he was present at the notable single-ship action with the 'Foudroyant' in 1758), later curate of Bridlington and Hornsea; Catherine (1723-1759); George (1726, died in infancy); and Eleanor (1728-1810); neither daughter married. 
Two poems survive. The first was occasioned by the local election of 1741, hotly contested between Sir Walter Blackett and Matthew Ridley. Attributed to Chicken is a verse attack on Ridley entitled 'No -- this is the Truth' as a riposte to an anti-Blackett polemic, 'Is this the Truth?' He is far better known for 'The Collier's Wedding', a candid and uncensorious narrative of the riotous courtship, marriage, and revels of a collier lad and his Jenny, adorned with description of local custom of such detail as to be regarded by local historians as a valuable source: 'Chicken's poem is a classic in accuracy and record' (Colls, 58). The poem has real quality in its vigorous and sharply focused narrative, unvarnished yet affectionate, and clearly based on direct experience. No date has been proved for this poem. Cail claims to have seen a manuscript dated 1729; this has not been traced. Chicken was buried in St John's churchyard on 2 January 1746. 


@@@@@


doc= 39746


Law, Samuel (fl. 1772-1783), poet and weaver, is of unknown origins. The title-page to his single publication, 'A domestic winter-piece: a poem, exhibiting a full view of the author's dwelling place in the winter-season. In two parts. Interspersed with a great variety of entertaining reflections' (1772), tells that the author lived in the village of Barewise, near Todmorden, Yorkshire, near the border with Lancashire. Archival records held in Halifax of contracts to enter into a cotton manufacturing business indicate that later on Law may also have lived in Toad Carr and then in Hundersfield, and that he supplemented his work as a weaver with work as a clog maker. 
In the preface to his poem Law claims to have been illiterate until the age of twenty-one, and to have suffered many 'grievous calamities' in the years subsequent. Like many other eighteenth-century labouring-class poets, Law published his poem by subscription. In the autobiographical preface to 'A Domestic Winter-Piece', Law appeals to his readers' charity, reminding them that he undertook the composition of his poem without thought of publication, and dedicated himself to his studies only in hours stolen from sleep. He claims to have sought solace in poetical musings while at his loom to distract himself from the torments of the winter season. The overtly pious and self-deprecating tone of the poem and its prefatory material suggest that Law was a humble man with no great literary aspirations. None the less the poem is directly modelled upon James Thomson's 'Seasons', and Law attempts many of the same poetic techniques, including similar panoramic sweeps and eagle's eye views of his native region. The numerous classical allusions (particularly in the first part of the poem), all of which are carefully documented by the author's footnotes, contradict Law's claim to a total lack of poetic education. The poem perhaps outdoes Thomson's in its vivid presentation of the ghastly horrors caused by the winter weather and approaches an almost Gothic representation of the sublime horror inspired by the season. In his preface Law explains that he chose to describe his native region because: 'It is more like a dreadful wilderness of stony promontories, and direful sinking vales, where roaring lions, savage bears, ravenous wolves, hissing snakes, and horrid birds of prey resort, than an inheritance from any of the human race. And the singularity whereof, was the very first motive that induced me to write a poetical essay on Winter; giving a display of Nature's face, even as it, in this strange, sequestered, solitary desert, appears, when terrible storms and tempests roar, and binding frosts intensely freeze.' The second part of the poem relies upon biblical rather than classical allusions and focuses particularly on the figure of Wisdom as a source of solace to poets and other rural dwellers enduring the hardships of the season.The religious themes of the poem and Law's emphasis on the morally beneficial effects of his self-improvement, as well as the absence of historical records pertaining to baptism or marriage for Law, would indicate that he may have been Methodist. His work is significant in so far as it bespeaks the variety of poetic production by labouring-class poets. The poem's direct relationship to Thomson's masterpiece reveals not only Thomson's widespread and enduring popularity throughout the eighteenth century but also the self-conscious erudition of labouring-class writers. 


@@@@@


doc= 39747


Mather, Joseph (1737-1804), file cutter and songwriter, was born either at Chelmorton, Derbyshire, or in Cack Alley, Sheffield. Nothing is known of his parentage or early life but after serving an eight-year apprenticeship (1751-9) Mather became a journeyman file cutter (otherwise known as file hewer) in the Sheffield workshop of Nicholas Jackson. At one stage he seems to have become a 'small mester' himself before reverting to journeyman status. He struggled to maintain himself, his wife, Nell, and their five (or more) children, and he served terms of imprisonment for debt in the town gaol at Pudding Lane. 
Starting in the 1770s, Mather began to supplement his income by making up and setting to well-known tunes ballads which he sang at fairs and races, in streets and taverns. He could read, but his inability to write meant that the process was entirely oral, although later some items were taken down from his dictation and printed on broadsides: 'our author used to 'raise the wind' by vending his songs in the streets, seated on a grinder's donkey, or on the back of Ben Sharp's bull. Should it chance to begin raining, he would ride the animal into the nearest alehouse. ('Songs', vii)' Mather's high spirits were reflected in his lively celebrations of the pleasures of artisan life, from horse-racing, bull-baiting, and cock-fighting to singing, dancing, and drinking, but he turned more and more to virulent invective, drawing on vocabulary and imagery which derived from his assiduous reading of the 'Old Testament'. For several years he was a Methodist, though by 1787 he had left the sect after succumbing to the temptation of the alehouse and falling into sin. So said a contemporary, James Montgomery (Hobday, 78); a more recent commentator suggests that Mather rejected 'Methodism's egocentric obsession with individual salvation for a morality based on solidarity with his fellows' (ibid.). 
An orientation of this kind is undoubtedly reflected in many of Mather's songs, of which the best-known was 'Watkinson and his Thirteens', written in 1787 in response to the campaign led by the master cutler of the day to reduce workers' perquisites, and hence their income. Its subject, Jonathan Watkinson, was forced on a memorable occasion to leave the theatre when the audience in the gods struck up the song with its vitriolic chorus: '
And may the odd knife his great carcase dissect, 

Lay open his vitals for men to inspect 

A heart full as black as the infernal gulph, 

In that greedy blood-sucking bone-scraping wolf. 
('Songs', 63)' In the same song Mather wished 'Success to our Sovereign who peaceably reigns' ('Songs', 65), yet only six years later he was identified with the Jacobin movement in Sheffield and parodying the national anthem as 'God Save Great Thomas Paine' (1793). In 1795, after what has been called Sheffield's rehearsal for Peterloo (Palmer, 'The Sound of History', 26), when the local volunteer corps fired on an unarmed crowd in Norfolk Street, Mather wrote ballads attacking the 'Raddle-neck'd Tups', as he called them, and their commander, 'beef-headed Bob' (Colonel Robert Althorpe). 
Mather's being bound over to keep the peace for a year, and thus prevented from singing in public, may date from this time. He wrote again when the ban had expired -- one of his songs has the refrain 'I was muzzled a year' -- but gradually reverted from radicalism to religion in the shape of Wesleyan Methodism. One of his last pieces, 'Repentance', stayed in the Methodist repertory for many years, while in a different context -- that of 'loosings' and 'foot ales', theatre galleries and public houses -- his radical songs remained in oral tradition. 
Embittered by illness and poverty, Mather declined into his last years and died at his home in Pond Hill in Sheffield on 12 June 1804. The affection felt in the town for this stocky, pugnacious man was demonstrated at his funeral in St Paul's Church when 'his remains were followed to the grave by many of the working classes of the town, who regarded him as their champion' ('Songs', x). 
In 1811 fifty-four items by Mather were gathered together and printed under the title 'A Collection of Songs, Poems, Satires, &c. Written by the Late Joseph Mather'. The publisher was John Crome (1757-1832), a Scot who settled in Sheffield and became a lifelong radical. A further edition of Mather's songs appeared in 1862 with a memoir by John Wilson which included a great deal of information culled from veteran cutlers. After a long period of eclipse during which the songs might be briefly quoted in histories of the cutlery trades, Mather's work was rediscovered in the 1960s through the influence of the folk music revival of the time, with its interest in industrial material. Astonishingly enough, one of his songs, 'Roundlegs' (about a local carter) was found to be still circulating orally (Smith, 295). Other pieces of his were revived, in Sheffield and elsewhere. Anthologists sought them out. The 'filesmith' (Armitage, 320) or 'sansculotte' (Hobday, 61) poet found fresh audiences. 


@@@@@


doc= 39749


Tatersal, Robert (fl. 1734-1735), poet and bricklayer, is an obscure figure. Nothing is known of his origins or life beyond the publication in 1734 and 1735 of a two-part collection of poems entitled 'The Bricklayer's Miscellany'. The work is described as 'in allusion to Stephen Duck' and is both heavily indebted to the successful thresher poet and aspiring to similar recognition. 
The preface to 'The Bricklayer's Miscellany' reveals Tatersal to be 'A poor country bricklayer of Kingston upon Thames'. The poems have been written during the winter, 'wherein I had not the employment to exercise the more material business of my calling... For the gentlemen of our profession I may not improperly compare to cuckoos who are brisk and gay... so long as the summer endures, but when winter approaches retire to their respective cells. (Tatersal, 'Bricklayer's Miscellany, Second Part')' Tatersal's minor collection of verses is significant for the light it casts on the nine-days-wonder phenomenon of Stephen Duck, and on the working life of a jobbing bricklayer in the 1730s. Tatersal is engagingly candid about his calling, especially on its seasonal ups and downs -- in winter 'you may behold him, with an empty purse, forlorn and dirty' contenting himself with 'a few boil'd sprats and a dram of gin (which are a dish of great repute among bricklayers in the winter season'. In the summer, by contrast, when the sun 'begins to dart his oblique rays over Hampstead Hill; then we begin to look as sharp after a job, as a hound after a hare' (Tatersal, 'Bricklayer's Miscellany, Second Part', i-iii). 
The title poem of Tatersal's collection 'The Bricklayer's Labour' is a competently written, lively, and informative descriptive poem of the daily work of a bricklayer: '
'A line, a line,' the foreman cries, 'my boys', 

When tuck and pat with Flemish bond they run, 

Till the whole course is struck complete and done. 

' The echoes of Duck are very strong, and Tatersal is clearly hoping to attract something of the thresher's fame. '
Since rustick Threshers entertain the Muse 

Why may not bricklayers their subjects chuse? 

' proclaims the title page, and he adds: 'O happy Stephen! Were my life like thine' (Tatersal, 'Bricklayer's Miscellany, Second Part', 1). He uses an apposite conceit in invoking the 'trowel' of Ben Jonson to validate his claim as a literary bricklayer, despite the modern preference for the 'stupendous flail'. 
In an advertisement in the endpapers of 'The Second Part' Tatersal offers his services not only as bricklayer and surveyor, but also as tutor in 'writing, arithmetick, geometry and dialling'. The advertisement refers to one William Tatersal -- presumably a close relative -- as a writing-master of Kingston. 
As a poet Tatersal, like his envied rival Duck, is effective when he is depicting his working day, and trite when addressing topics such as 'temperance' or in complimentary verses on Richard Onslow, lord lieutenant of Surrey and the dedicatee of the collection. He does, however, display a sense of humour, some awareness of literary works and styles, and a pleasing ability to poke gentle fun at his solitary artisan life. 


@@@@@


doc= 39750


Yewdall, John (1795-1856), poet, was born in Quarries, Leeds, on 29 September 1795, the second of the three children of John Youdel. Nothing further is known about Yewdall's parents, and little is known of his childhood; he received only three weeks' formal education. As a young man he undertook an apprenticeship in the cloth industry, but continued to educate himself, and was an active member of the Wesleyan community in Leeds. Yewdall married Sarah Newton on 3 March 1812 (nothing more is known about his wife, but they had three children: James, George, and Edwin). Following a decline in the woollen industry about 1820, he obtained the post of toll-keeper at Hunslet toll bar, Leeds: this experience provided the inspiration for 'The Toll Bar'. 
'The Toll Bar' comprises two cantos, is written in the style of Byron's 'Don Juan', and was included within 'The Toll Bar and other Poems' (1827). Canto 1 defends the conduct of toll-keepers and gives a satirical account of the means by which persons from all social ranks attempt to avoid the payment of tolls. The remaining poems within the volume touch on a variety of subjects; there are poems in praise of the Yorkshire cloth industry, two poems in praise of economy, and several poems with Wesleyan themes. Yewdall's poetry is not of great literary significance, but the unusual subject matter and the circumstances surrounding its composition lend it interest. 
Yewdall became involved in local politics during the late 1820s when, as a parochial economist, he was involved in the Leeds vestry dispute. He formed an association with Edward Baines senior, and was elected to Leeds council in 1843. During this period Yewdall also established himself as a tea merchant in Briggate, and was appointed assistant overseer for Hunslet where he continued to live. He died at his home in Glasshouse Street, Hunslet, on 30 March 1856. 
The autobiographical preface to 'The Toll Bar and Other Poems' gives some indication of Yewdall's personality. He seems to have been pious and determined, but also to have possessed a sharp sense of humour 


@@@@@


doc= 39752


Cowie, Mervyn Hugh (1909-1996), conservationist, was born on 13 April 1909 in Nairobi, Kenya, the younger son of Herbert Hugh Cowie, settler, and his wife, Ada, 'nee' Harries. His father was formerly the chief magistrate of Johannesburg, and his mother was a determined pioneering woman of considerable character and fortitude. After spending his childhood in Kenya, Mervyn was sent 'home' to England to complete his schooling at Brighton College, which he entered with his elder brother, Dudley, in 1922. From there he went in 1930 to Brasenose College, Oxford, to read law, but his university career was cut short by his father falling seriously ill, necessitating his return to Kenya. He then went back to England and studied chartered accountancy. In 1932 he once more sailed for Kenya where he began working as an accountant. 
On his return to east Africa, Cowie was shocked at the degradation of both wildlife and habitats that had occurred during his years away, and he set about trying to force the government to address the situation. His pleas falling on deaf ears, he took a drastic and somewhat bizarre measure. Writing pseudonymously to the 'East African Standard' and other newspapers, he suggested all wildlife be eradicated in order to improve the country's farming. The public outcry at this 'radicalism' jarred the authorities into action. Cowie was made an honorary game warden, and conservation became a major legislative concern. Throughout the 1930s he worked as an accountant, served as a district councillor in Nairobi, joined the King's African rifles reserve, hunted big game in his spare time, and founded the game policy committee to oversee wildlife concerns such as the control of hunting licences. In 1934 he married Erica Mary (Molly) Beaty, a former ballet dancer, with whom he had two sons and a daughter. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 Cowie was commissioned into the Kenya regiment, and he served in Abyssinia, Madagascar, and the Middle East, rising to the rank of lieutenant-colonel. With the cessation of hostilities he returned to civilian life, determined to do all he could for game conservation. In 1946 he was appointed the founder director of the Kenya national parks service and succeeded in establishing the country's first game reserve, the Nairobi National Park. This was not without considerable, often vituperative, opposition from both die-hard colonials and native herders who had to surrender their grazing to the project. Undeterred, Cowie went on to create many other game reserves, including the internationally famous Tsavo Park and Amboseli Maasai Game Reserve. At the same time he considerably scaled down his hunting activities. In 1951 he was appointed a member of the legislative council, the colonial parliament. From this position of authority he was able to guide the development of conservation and at the same time foster the increase of tourism. From 1953 to 1956 his plans were temporarily upset by the Mau Mau uprising, during which he became director of manpower. Once the revolt was over he greatly contributed to the development of the tourist industry until it became the country's biggest foreign currency earner after coffee. For sixteen years from 1950 he was vice-president of the East African Tourist Travel Association. He was appointed CBE in 1960. Following the death of his first wife, Molly, in 1956, he married in 1957 Valori Hare Duke, formerly his secretary, and they had a son and a daughter. 
With Kenya gaining its independence in 1963, Cowie's position came under threat, and in 1966 he was summarily dismissed with one month's salary in lieu of notice and no pension entitlement. His high-profile job, he was told, was being 'Africanised'. For six years Cowie struggled to make a living as an accountant and as a senior consultant to the World Wildlife Fund, fund-raising mostly in London. Finally, in 1972, he returned to Nairobi as financial director of the African Medical and Research Foundation, which operated Kenya's flying doctor service. He retired in 1979 and, after a brief flirtation with Britain, tried to live out his years in Kenya. However, the rapid increase in violent crime in Nairobi forced him finally to leave his beloved Kenya for good, in 1989, and he settled near Saxmundham, Suffolk. 
Always keen to share his passion for African wildlife with others, Cowie presented a series of BBC television natural history programmes, and served in a number of wildlife organizations. He wrote three books, of which the most famous, 'Fly, Vulture' (1961), arose from his involvement with the 1951 film 'Where No Vultures Fly'; it concerned his lifelong fight to establish game parks and counter ivory poaching. Considered to have been one of the most important conservationists of the twentieth century, Cowie was working on a fourth book at the time of his death from a heart attack, at the Ipswich Hospital, Ipswich, Suffolk, on 19 July 1996. He was survived by his second wife, Valori, and his five children. 


@@@@@


doc= 39753


Hunter, John Alexander (1882-1963), hunter, was born on 3 June 1882 at Shearington, on the coast of the Solway Firth near Dumfries, one of the five children of David Hunter, a farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth. He was educated at local schools, after which he joined his father working the family farm, but his heart was not in agriculture. By his teens he was a keen hunter and a good shot, especially of geese and duck, and spent more time shooting and poaching than ploughing. At the age of twenty-six he was discovered to be having an affair with a married woman, and his parents persuaded him to emigrate to avoid a scandal. Having a distant relative dairy farming in British East Africa, he sailed for Mombasa, and arrived in 1908 with little more than his clothes and a Purdey shotgun. After working on the farm for a short time, he obtained employment on the railway. With the co-operation of locomotive drivers he shot big game from the trains and then sold the ivory and hides. 
In the First World War, Hunter fought with distinction in German East Africa (now Tanzania) and then, upon demobilization, co-founded a transportation company delivering goods by wagon to outlying regions and began working for Safariland, one of the earliest safari operators. He married on 3 June 1918 Hilda Banbury (died 1985), whose parents founded east Africa's first music shop in Nairobi in 1912; they had six children. In 1920, in collaboration with the famous gunmaker Morrison Shaw, he established the well-known Nairobi gunsmiths Shaw and Hunter. Two years later he set himself up as a professional hunter and joined the colonial government's game department. 
Hunter's primary responsibility was to shoot marauding game, especially crop-destroying elephant or rhino and stock-killing lions. An expert shot with extraordinarily acute eyesight, he rarely failed to kill with a single bullet. He aided the cattle-herding Maasai, shooting 360 lion in one year and becoming a tribal legend. For a small fee tribal chiefs offered him ownership of the world-famous Ngorongoro crater by way of gratitude but Hunter could not afford the minimal payment. As a professional hunter he accompanied the famous explorers Martin and Osa Johnson to the Congo. 
Widely known and liked in the hunting fraternity, Hunter was a member of the Professional Hunters' Association and a close friend of many prominent colonials. He was an intimate confidant of Denys Finch-Hatton, with whom he opened up Masai, and was the last person to see Finch-Hatton alive before his aircraft crashed at Voi in 1931. His acute sense of humour made him very popular and he was a great practical joker. On one occasion he came upon a fellow hunter's lion bait, a dead zebra. Creeping up, he placed a tobacco pipe in the zebra's mouth and withdrew to nearby cover to observe the consequences. The hunter arrived, approaching the bait with extreme caution -- then he saw the pipe. Hunter burst into uncontrollable laughter, his victim lost his temper and opened fire on him: Hunter fled, tears of mirth streaming down his face. 
In addition to hunting, Hunter owned a small coffee farm near Kiambu and Clairmont, a guest house (which was also the family home) in Nairobi, much frequented by hunters. He also founded Hunter's Lodge, a celebrated wayside inn on the Nairobi-Mombasa Road near Makindu. In later life he wrote four books about his hunting exploits, most famously his autobiographical 'Hunter' (1952) and 'Hunter's Tracks' (1957). He decried the destruction of wildlife and habitat by increased farming and population pressures, and was a dedicated naturalist and conservationist, frequently collecting specimens for the Natural History Museum in London. He died at Hunter's Lodge on 27 June 1963 and is buried at Langata cemetery, near Nairobi. 


@@@@@


doc= 39755


Carter, Thomas (1690-1763), politician, was born at Hollybrook, co. Dublin. He was the only surviving son of Thomas Carter ('c'.1650-1726), a lawyer and MP, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Houghton ('c'.1660-1696), and descended from Thomas Carter, armiger, born in the reign of Edward IV. Following his early education at Mr Wall's school in Dublin he matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1707 and graduated BA in 1710. He entered the Middle Temple, London, in 1708. He became an attorney of the court of king's bench, Dublin, and clerk of the crown and protonotary in the same court following his father's purchase of that office in 1717 for the sum of $4000 (it remained in the family until 1790). In 1718 he was admitted a bencher of King's Inn, and from 1737 to 1741 served as treasurer there. 
Carter married in 1719 Mary ('c'.1700-1780), the daughter and coheir of Thomas Claxton, armiger, of Dublin, and his wife, Mary Pearce, the sister of Lieutenant-General Thomas Pearce, military governor of Limerick; she brought Carter a dowry of $3000. The couple had two sons, Thomas Carter ('bap'. 12 July 1720), MP for Old Leighlin, and Henry Boyle Carter ('bap'. 21 Nov 1726), and three daughters, one of whom, Frances, married Philip Twysden, bishop of Raphoe. 
Carter was MP for Trim, Meath, from 1719 to 1727, and was returned as a member for Hillsborough, Dungarvan, and Lismore in 1727; he elected to sit for Hillsborough, and held the seat until 1761. In 1723 he obtained the reversion of the office of second serjeant-at-arms from his father (the office was in the Carter family from 1692 to 1753). In April 1725 William, Lord Berkeley, master of the rolls, appointed Carter his deputy and obtained permission to sell him the reversion of that office, much to the disapproval of Hugh Boulter, Anglican primate of Ireland, who was promoting the English interest, that such an important office could be purchased by an Irishman. 
Carter was a protege of Lord Chancellor Midleton. By September 1725 he had allied himself with Midleton's son St John Brodrick, who headed an influential party in the Commons. They proposed to the viceroy, Lord Carteret, to undertake the king's business in parliament, but as he rejected their plan they opposed practically everything his parliamentary managers initiated. 
On 6 May 1727 Carter was appointed second examiner in chancery. In 1729 he acquired Castle Martin, co. Kildare, as his family seat, and from 1730 to 1752 he was judge and ranger of the curragh of Kildare. 
By the end of the 1720s Carter had been won over to the Dublin Castle party, and he was approached by the duke of Dorset, appointed viceroy in June 1730, to secure his support. Dorset assisted him in his purchase of the mastership of the rolls in 1731 -- for which Carter paid in excess of $11,000 -- made him his chief parliamentary manager, and entrusted him with the care of his son, Lord George Sackville, in his absence. Dorset recognized that Carter was due further reward for the considerable expense in purchasing this office, and the following May the king granted him an additional $500 per annum to his office of clerk of the crown and protonotary. It was in 1731 that Carter commissioned Sir Edward Pearce, his wife's cousin, to build him a magnificent house, with the finest staircase hall in Dublin, opposite Archbishop Boulter's residence in Henrietta Street, where much government business was conducted. 
In 1732 Carter was raised to the privy council, and when Speaker Gore died in February 1733 he was among the candidates most acceptable to Dublin Castle; however, the position went to Henry Boyle, a close friend and godfather to his younger son. When Walpole sent instructions to Dorset to attempt the repeal of the 'Sacramental Test Act' of 1704 (which prevented protestant dissenters from holding public office, from receiving a military commission, and from enjoying full civil rights), Carter and Boyle were against it, and Dorset soon realized this proposal would fail. 
Carter now had a substantial income. He had inherited about 4000 acres in co. Meath from his father, following the latter's death in 1726. In addition to this he inherited the extensive Roscommon estates in and around Trim which his father had acquired in 1702 when he married Isabella, the widow of the celebrated Wentworth, fourth earl of Roscommon. Carter's estates realized $4000 per annum and his combined offices a further $7500 per annum. 
Carter was still at the height of his political career when in 1745 Lord Chesterfield, as viceroy, described him as 'the leading person in the [Irish] Parliament' ('Letters', 3.638). However, in 1748 he was seriously ill and wished his eldest son to be granted the reversion of the office of master of the rolls. He approached Lord Harrington and then George Stone, primate of Ireland, but the latter, who wanted his nominee to occupy the post, refused to countenance the suggestion. Carter, who believed he had a right to determine the reversion because of his purchase, was resentful, and this drove him into opposition and led to his co-ordinating an intensive campaign against Stone. 
For many years Carter had been in charge of financial business in the Commons, as chairman of the committees of supply and ways and means. In 1753 he opposed the claim of the crown to dispose of unappropriated revenue in the Irish exchequer and engineered the defeat of this money bill. This incurred the king's displeasure, and as a result Carter was dismissed from his office as master of the rolls in 1754. Although a settlement followed the next year when Carter was appointed principal secretary of state, keeper of the privy seal, with an additional salary of $1200 per annum (which office he held until his death), he remained dissatisfied and was regarded by Dublin Castle as one who was most against English interests in Ireland. 
The earl of Shelburne described Carter as 'a man of a very original character, whose uncommon sagacity and shrewdness as well as depth of understanding, would have distinguished and advanced him in any country' (Fitzmaurice, 1.239). His shrewd judgement of character is well illustrated by his advice to the duke of Dorset: 'whatever he did with his son never to put him into the army' (ibid.). Lord George Sackville was later to face a court martial and was found 'unfit to serve his Majesty in any military capacity whatsoever' (A. C. Valentine, 'Lord George Germain', 1962, 68). Speaker Pery attributed to Carter the ingenious invention of conveying libels in toasts which afterwards gained circulation through the newspapers, while Walpole characterized him as 'an able, intriguing man, of slender reputation for integrity' (Walpole, 1.192). Plowden's 'Historical Review' refers to Carter's talent for 'keeping the table in a roar of laughter by his archness, vivacity and wit' (Plowden, 1.310). 
Carter also made significant contributions to farming and country pursuits, not sparing any expense to bring them to perfection. He imported the best breed of cattle and built several mills for grinding corn. He died while staying with his son at Rathnally House, near Trim, on 3 September 1763 and was buried at St Patrick's Cathedral at Trim. 


@@@@@


doc= 39756


Angel, Edward (d. 1673), actor and comedian, first came to public notice in winter 1659-60, when he joined the troupe assembled by John Rhodes at the Cockpit in Drury Lane. Angel's earliest recorded appearance was as Florimel in Fletcher and Rowley's 'The Maid in the Mill', a part which required the young actor to dress as a woman. Following Charles II's return to England, Angel joined the Duke's Company at Lincoln's Inn Fields. In November 1662 he appeared before the king, playing the part of Pyropus in Ferdinando Parkhurst's translation of George Ruggle's Latin comedy 'Ignoramus, or, The Academical Lawyer'. During the next few seasons Angel took on a variety of parts, including serious dramatic roles such as Warwick in the earl of Orrery's 'Henry V' (1664) and Viche in Orrery's 'Mustapha' (1665). However, it soon became apparent that Angel's particular talent lay in scenes of low comedy and farce. In November 1667 he played Stephano in Dryden and Davenant's adaptation of Shakespeare's 'The Tempest', a role which he reprised throughout the season. In February 1668 he again appeared before King Charles, this time taking the lead comic part in a revival of Thomas Tomkis's 'Albumazar'. The role of the country farmer Trincalo, whose imitation of the airs of a city gentleman results in a series of farcical episodes, proved a perfect vehicle for Angel's talent as a mimic and a clown. The actor's success in 'Albumazar' was noted by Samuel Pepys, who recorded that 'The King here, and, indeed, all of us, [were] pretty merry at the mimique tricks of Trinkilo' (Pepys, 9.85-6). 
As a member of the Duke's Company, Angel often appeared onstage alongside James Nokes, an actor with a similar gift for low comedy. In an attempt to rival the physical humour of the French and Italian comedians popular at court, Angel and Nokes took to the stage in a series of outlandish costumes. In the central comic scene of Orrery's 'Mr Anthony' (1669) the two comedians acted out a mock battle, Angel wielding 'two Crab-tree Cudgels with Basket-hilts', Nokes carrying a bow and arrow ('Dramatic Works', 2.542-5). Several of Angel's contemporaries regretted the actor's success in such roles as furthering the trend towards visual and slapstick humour in Restoration comedy. In the prologue to the first part of 'The Conquest of Granada' (performed 1670) John Dryden describes Nokes and Angel as 'the best Comedians of the Age'. However, he protests at the tendency of the two actors to debase the productions in which they appear, observing that 'A broad-brim'd hat, and wastbelt' are no substitute for true comic wit ('Works of John Dryden', 11.19). The playwright Edward Howard likewise saw Angel's love of physical humour and ridiculous costume as symptomatic of declining dramatic standards. In the prologue to Howard's 'The Womens Conquest' (1671), Angel, Nokes, and another leading comic actor, Cave Underhill, appear together on stage, where they plot to replace the subsequent play with an extended farce. Angel boasts that the entertainment he has devised contains 'sixteen Mimicks in it, several Jack-Puddings, and Punchinellos, never presented before, with two and thirty Dances and Jiggs a-la-mode besides'. Before they can usurp Howard's play, however, the conspirators are scared away by the ghost of Ben Jonson, which rises from the grave to reassert the rules of true comedy (Howard, sigs. c2'v'-c4'r'). 
The reservations expressed by Dryden and Howard as to the puerility of Angel's brand of low comedy were shared by Aphra Behn. In her prologue to 'The Amorous Prince' (1671), Behn castigates those: '
Who swear they'd rather hear a smutty jest 

Spoken by 'Nokes' or 'Angel', than a Scene 

Of the admir'd and well-penn'd 'Cataline'. 
('Works of Aphra Behn', 5.87)' Despite such reservations, Angel's talent for exaggerated mimicry and physical humour continued to attract London audiences. Within a few months of his attack upon the 'Mimikry and other ridiculous Gestures' favoured by Angel (Howard, sig. b3'v'), Howard sought to accommodate the actor's talent for farcical humour in his new play, 'The Six Days Adventure' (1671). Here Angel took the role of Peacock, a preening buffoon who appears onstage in a gaudy suit of parrot and parakeet feathers. The following spring Angel again appeared alongside Nokes, this time as Don Diego in Wycherley's 'The Gentleman Dancing-Master' (1672). As this was the only play by Wycherley to be performed by the Duke's Company, it seems likely that the dramatist was attracted both by the elegance of the new playhouse at Dorset Garden, and by the opportunity it afforded to exploit the talents of Angel and Nokes. The play itself contains a reference to Angel's talent as a comedian, Wycherley's Hippolita suggesting that 'Angel is a very good Fool'. Although Wycherley's Monsieur disagrees, preferring the talents of Nokes, he none the less concedes that in England 'all the beaux monde' go to learn the art of foolery from the two comedians ('Plays of William Wycherley', 174-5). 
In addition to his fame as a mimic and clown, Angel had a reputation for improvisation. During the winter of 1667-8 the actor's habit of interpolating topical innuendo while on stage may have landed him in trouble. On 2 January 1668, during the intermittent run of Dryden and Davenant's 'The Tempest', the lord chamberlain issued a warrant for the comedian's arrest. Although the reasons behind the order remain unclear, one possible explanation is that Angel had repeated the offence of James Lacy the previous season, causing offence with his talent for unscripted political satire. Several years later Aphra Behn expressed her own annoyance at Angel's propensity for comic improvisation. In the preface to 'The Dutch Lover' (1673) she notes that the actor 'spoke little of what I intended for him, but supplied it with a great deal of idle stuff, which I was wholly unacquainted with until I heard it first from him' ('Works of Aphra Behn', 5.163). 
In March 1673 Angel appeared as DeBoastado in Edward Ravenscroft's 'The Careless Lovers'. This appears to have been his final performance, though the circumstances of the actor's death are unknown. Angel was buried in the burial-ground of St Clement Danes on 26 April 1673. Following his death 'An Elegy, upon that Incomparable Comedian, Mr. Edward Angell' was printed and sold as a folded single-sheet poem. The lines, 'Written by C. B.', praise Angel's talent for comedy, calling him 'the best of mimiques'. The elegist records how Angel's performances for the Duke's Company 'Rung Peals of Mirth, in Gallery, Box, and Pit', and insists that the loss felt by the actors and audiences at Dorset Garden will be shared by the court of Charles II. The poem concludes with a fitting epitaph: '
Here lies Ned Angel, who rul'd as he thought fit, 

The English Stage of Comick, Mimick Wit. 
(C. B., 38-9)' 



@@@@@


doc= 39757


Arthur, John (bap. 1708?, d. 1772), actor and designer of stage machinery, was most probably the son of Thomas and Mary Arthur who was baptized at St Paul's Church, Covent Garden, London, on 23 April 1708. In September 1730 he made an appearance at Southwark fair as a forester in the pantomime 'Harlequin's Contrivance', and in the summer of 1737 he joined the theatre company at York, where he appeared in his own ballad opera 'The Lucky Discovery, or, The Tanner of York'. A quarto edition of Arthur's play was published in York in 1737, and a second edition appeared in London the following year. In the autumn of 1737 the actor joined the company of John Rich at Covent Garden, where he made his debut on 17 November as Clodpole in Thomas Betterton's 'The Amorous Widow'. He went on to play a number of different roles in his first season, including Pate in Richard Brome's 'The Northern Lass' and Lyrick in George Farquhar's 'Love in a Bottle'. In 1739 he was engaged by Hippisley and Chapman to appear at Bartholomew fair, where he was billed as Signor Arthurini, a comedian possessing 'upwards of 50 Whimsical, Sorrowful, Comical and Diverting Faces'. 
In the summer of 1741 Arthur left Covent Garden and joined Charles Fleetwood's company at Drury Lane. Three years later, following the walkout led by David Garrick and Charles Macklin, he returned to Covent Garden. He moved again to Drury Lane at the beginning of the 1747 season, and performed under the joint management of Garrick and James Lacy. Although Arthur remained at Drury Lane for only a single year, his comic performances, most notably as Gripe in Mendez's 'The Double Disappointment', gained him favourable reviews. 
In September 1748 Arthur returned to Covent Garden, where he remained for ten seasons. During this, his third and longest spell with Rich's company, he developed an enormous repertory of minor comic roles, including Fondlewife in William Congreve's 'The Old Bachelor' and Dashwell in Edward Ravenscroft's 'The London Cuckolds'. According to the 'Theatrical Review', his comic skills were best displayed in the characters of old men and country fools: 'His eyes in particular have an odd cast... His features are very variable, and there runs thro' his whole countenance and performance a certain ludicrous gravity, that commands laughter irresistibly' ('Theatrical Review', 1758, 27). 
The earliest evidence of Arthur's interest in stage design exists in proposals published by the actor in April 1741 for building 'a new and commodious Theatre' at York. Although his plans came to nothing, he quickly developed a reputation as a skilled designer of stage machinery. In the summer of 1741 he became involved with Garrick in a mysterious 'Catapult-project' ('Letters', 1.21). Three years later he was paid $1 1's'. for scenery he produced for a performance of John Dryden's 'All for Love' staged by the duke of Bedford at Woburn Abbey. After his return to Covent Garden in 1744, Arthur's ability to contrive and build elaborate stage machinery was exploited by Rich, who commissioned the actor to create original devices for his pantomimes. 
In 1760 Arthur became manager of the Orchard Street Theatre, Bath, under the ownership of the elder John Palmer. While at Bath he pursued his long-standing interest in theatre design, and modelled and built a new theatre at Portsmouth in 1761. On 30 May 1766, together with William Powell and Matthew Clark, he opened a new theatre in King Street, Bristol. The first night, which included a prologue and epilogue written specially for the occasion by Garrick, raised $63 for the benefit of the Bristol Infirmary. Having been forced out of the King Street management at the end of the summer, Arthur concentrated on remodelling the Orchard Street Theatre at Bath. His fascination with grand design helped produce a building 'esteemed in fancy, elegance, and construction, inferior to none in Europe' (Penley, 34). The theatre reopened on 28 March 1767, but faults in the architecture soon became apparent. The large dome, the centrepiece of Arthur's new design, was found to hamper the acoustics, and in 1778 the theatre had to be extensively rebuilt. 
Arthur was twice married. Although little is known of his first wife, it seems likely that she was the Mary Arthur who later found employment in the service of the actress Margaret Woffington. A letter from Garrick reveals that this Mrs Arthur was 'brought to bed' in July 1741, but there is no evidence that the child survived ('Letters', 1.26). Following her death, on 6 August 1768, Arthur's first wife was described as 'a Woman of nice Chastity, and possess'd of those amiable wifely Qualities that render Marriage happy' ('Bath Journal', 8 Aug 1768). On 29 October 1768 Arthur married the actress Grace Read, previously a performer at Drury Lane and the Haymarket. Read had acted alongside Arthur at the opening of the King Street Theatre, Bristol, in 1766, and had moved back with him to the Bath company in 1767. In the summer of 1769 the two joined Samuel Foote's company at the Haymarket, where they made a joint appearance in Foote's 'The Devil upon Two Sticks'. 
Arthur died at Bath on 8 April 1772, after which Grace Arthur retired from the stage. The couple are not thought to have had any children. 


@@@@@


doc= 39759


Berry, Edward (1706/7-1760), actor and singer, made his first recorded appearance on the London stage at Drury Lane on 6 February 1729 as Hobinol in Charles Johnson's 'The Village Opera'. For five seasons Berry was employed as a singing actor, primarily in the new genre of ballad opera. Unsuited by his large, heavy build and low-pitched voice for romantic leads, he played character roles such as Squire Clodpole in William Chetwood's 'The Lover's Opera' (14 May 1729), the Butler in Charles Coffey's 'The Devil to Pay' (6 August 1731), and the Old Debauchee in Theophilus Cibber's 'The Harlot's Progress' (31 March 1733). His first benefit, shared with three other performers, came in May 1731 and at this time he began to take roles in plays, including Antonio in 'The Tempest' and Mortimer in '1 Henry IV'. During the first part of the 1733-4 season Berry was one of the breakaway group of Drury Lane performers led by Theophilus Cibber that acted at the Haymarket Theatre, and there he developed his acting skills by taking a large number of small roles in straight plays. The rebels returned to Drury Lane in March 1734 and Berry had his first solo benefit that April. He continued to add non-singing roles to his repertory and by the end of the 1736-7 season he had taken well over 100 different parts in plays and musical pieces. In the summer vacations during the early 1730s Berry appeared in theatre booths at the Bartholomew and Southwark fairs. He joined other Drury Lane performers in a summer season at Canterbury in 1736 and at Bristol in the 1740s. 
Berry's benefit on 7 May 1737 was advertised as 'For the Entertainment of the Grand Master, and the rest of the Brethren... of the Free and Accepted Masons' (Scouten, 669). The evening included songs by Berry and another masonic actor, James Oates, who was to lose his place in the Drury Lane company at the end of the season. On 30 August, the first night of the new season, Berry, Oates, and their fellow mason and actor Charles Shepard caused a disturbance in the pit, calling for Oates to be reinstated, and it would seem that Berry and Shepard were also dismissed. Berry was by then married and a father, for a daughter, Ann, had been born to Edward and Ann Berry (died in or before 1749) on 1 April. During his absence from the stage he ran a coffee house in Bridges Street, Covent Garden, known as Berry's Coffee House or the Theatre Coffee House, and masonic records show that a lodge met there from 1738 to 1740. Berry appeared again at Drury Lane at a benefit for him organized by the masons on 15 May 1739; he returned as a full-time member of the company that autumn and remained at Drury Lane until the onset of his final illness in 1759. 
Berry was a hard-working, reliable, middle-ranking actor. He retained a few roles involving singing, notably the gaoler Lockit in John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera'. As other actors died or changed companies Berry built up a large repertory in both tragedy and comedy, almost always playing older characters. In 1759 Thomas Wilkes wrote: 'He has the art, known but by few on the stage, of diversifying his old men: his Adam in 'As You Like It', is genuine nature in a low sphere. It is a praise to his judgement that he preserves a proper dignity in the grief of King Henry ['Richard III']. (Wilkes, 274-5)' Berry specialized in anguished fathers, including Leonato in 'Much Ado about Nothing', Brabantio in 'Othello', and Sciolto in Nicholas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent'. Audiences were moved by his real tears in such roles, but according to Thomas Davies in his 'Life of Garrick' 'this actor's great fault was too violent an attempt to pathetic feeling; his tears were shed abundantly indeed, but often loudly and ungracefully' (Davies, 1.172). During Berry's last twelve seasons David Garrick was the leading actor and manager at Drury Lane; Berry played the Ghost to his Hamlet, Gloucester to his Lear, and Sir Epicure Mammon to his Abel Drugger in Ben Jonson's 'The Alchemist'. At the very end of Berry's career the author of 'An Essay upon the Present State of the Theatre' found him 'very indifferent' in tragedy but praised him in comedy: 'In the characters of Sir Epicure Mammon, Boniface, Serjeant Kite, Caliban, and many others, he hits the true spirit of comedy, and never loses sight of nature' (p. 218). 
Berry's wife had died by 20 April 1749, when he made a will leaving all his estate to his 'Dear Child Ann'. From this time until his death he had lodgings with Mr Pope, a peruke maker, in Russell Street, Covent Garden. His last appearance was as Sir Epicure Mammon on 15 March 1759. An advertisement in the 'Public Advertiser' for 11 April 1759 stated that he would be unable to act at his benefit on 16 April 'having been confined for some Time past by a severe Illness'. Berry died at his lodgings in Russell Street on 8 January 1760 and was buried in the churchyard of St Martin-in-the-Fields five days later. He was said to have left about $1000 to his daughter, by then the wife of James Hyde; she erected an affectionately worded monument to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 39761


Blanchard, Thomas (1760-1797), actor and singer, baptized at Bulmer, Yorkshire, on 16 June 1760, was born into a theatrical family. His father, the elder Thomas Blanchard ('fl'. 1760-1787), was a seasoned actor who built a reputation for himself at York and Norwich before joining the Drury Lane company in 1773; his mother, Elizabeth, also enjoyed a theatrical career. The younger Thomas Blanchard was prepared for a life on the stage as a young child, when he was taught to sing and dance. He is thought to have made his theatrical debut in Norwich when he was about twelve, and in October 1773 he joined his father at Drury Lane, making his first appearance as Cupid in Whitehead's 'A Trip to Scotland'. He took a number of juvenile parts in the 1773-4 season, the most notable being Prince Arthur in Garrick's production of 'King John', and he remained with the Drury Lane company for a further year, singing and playing juvenile roles, before embarking upon a career as an adult actor in the small provincial theatres of Plymouth and Exeter. After two years he was spotted by the managers of the Theatre Royal, Bath, who engaged him for the 1778-9 season. He became popular with the audience there, achieving particular applause as a singer of rustic songs and as a hornpipe dancer. 
For the next four years Blanchard toured the west of England with a small troupe of players, though he rejoined the Bath company in 1783. On 19 May 1787 he married Charlotte Wright ('b'. 1761), the daughter of the actor Roger Wright. Miss Wright was already a singer of some repute, having performed at Drury Lane between 1779 and 1783. Following their marriage the Blanchards moved from Bath to London, Thomas having agreed terms with Thomas Harris to join the company at Covent Garden. He made his debut there on 3 October 1788, playing the part of Hodge in Bickerstaffe's 'Love in a Village'. Blanchard remained at Covent Garden for several seasons, becoming famous for his comic portrayal of simple, rustic characters, notable among them the part of Sim in John O'Keefe's 'Wild Oats'. Haslewood records the extent of his popularity at this time, attributing it to the actor's 'unaffected simplicity, and native humour on the Stage, his affability and laudable conduct off it' (Haslewood, 212). 
However, despite the warmth of his reception on the London stage, Blanchard was afflicted with chronic stage fright. In an effort to subdue his frequent bouts of anxiety, the actor appears to have turned increasingly to alcohol. He continued to perform at Covent Garden until the end of the 1793-4 season, when he was summarily dismissed from the company on account of his excessive drinking. He then travelled to Scotland, where he accepted an offer from Stephen Kemble to appear at the theatre in Edinburgh. According to the account given in 'The Thespian Dictionary', Kemble was aware of Blanchard's fondness for alcohol and tried his utmost to ensure that his new recruit remained sober. On the afternoon of his Edinburgh debut, Kemble invited Blanchard to dinner, thinking it the easiest way to prevent him from becoming drunk. However, while Kemble slept in his armchair, Blanchard helped himself to a bottle of the theatre manager's best brandy. Kemble awoke to discover his star actor insensible, and was obliged to cancel the evening performance. Despite this inauspicious start, Blanchard remained with Kemble's company for two seasons. 
In the summer of 1796 Blanchard returned to London. Unable to find work in the theatres, he was obliged to perform at the circus in St George's Fields. At the beginning of the 1797 season he was engaged by the Fishamble Street theatre in Dublin. However, his tenure with that company lasted only a few weeks. He died at his lodgings in Hamilton Row on 30 December 1797, a victim of 'the fatigue he underwent in the late storms' ('GM', 1st ser., 67, 1797, 1134). He was buried in St Mark's churchyard, Dublin, in January 1798. Charlotte Blanchard continued her stage career after her husband's death, appearing in Dublin and Limerick in 1798. Blanchard's daughters, Elizabeth and Charlotta, also enjoyed brief stage careers. His only son, Thomas John Blanchard (1789-1859), became a pantomime actor. 


@@@@@


doc= 39762


Anthony Boheme (d. 1732). Highfill suggests that he was probably in his forties by the time his name first occurs in theatrical records. Avery records his first appearance in the capital as 16 October 1718, at Lincoln's Inn Fields, in the role of Decius in 'Cato'. According to Doran, he joined the company from Southwark fair, and continued to play there and at Bartholomew fair in the summers of 1720-22. At the fairs he seems to have established a reputation for comedy, although his later reputation was built upon his playing of tragic roles. Performing in the same cast of that debut performance at Lincoln's Inn Fields was Anna Seymour, as Lucia, who was later to become his wife. Both of them were to spend virtually all of their London careers at that theatre, although there were rumours of Boheme's imminent departure to Drury Lane at about the time of his marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 39763


Brereton, William (1750x51-1787), actor, was probably born at Bath, a son of William Brereton (1723-1813) of Carrigslaney, co. Carlow, Ireland, and his first wife, Marion Edmonston (died 1782), reputedly a cousin of Flora MacDonald. The Breretons of Carrigslaney were descended through Sir William Brereton (died 1541?), lord high marshal of Ireland, from the family of Brereton of Brereton, Cheshire. Brereton's father, a major in the 6th Inniskilling dragoon guards, had fought at Culloden and between 1777 and 1780 was master of ceremonies at the Lower Assembly Rooms at Bath. His brother Robert (1747-1816) rose to major-general in the army and was lieutenant-governor of St Lucia; his father's second marriage produced Sir William Brereton (1789-1864), army officer. 
Promoted by David Garrick, a family friend, Brereton made his debut on 10 November 1768 at Drury Lane -- where he was to act tragic and comic parts for another seventeen years -- in the title role of John Home's 'Douglas'. Despite his good looks and fine voice Brereton earned harsh and often disparaging reviews. None the less Garrick cast him as Chamont in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan', Altamont in Nicholas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent', and as Shakespeare's Romeo, Orlando, and Posthumus. Following the 1774-5 season at Drury Lane, Brereton spent the summer in Dublin where, unknown to Garrick, he signed articles with the manager Spranger Barry. Though exasperated with Brereton's disloyalty, Garrick eventually relented, for Brereton returned to Drury Lane in the autumn. Following Garrick's retirement in June 1776 Brereton was retained by the new manager, Richard Brinsley Sheridan. The 'Westminster Magazine' discerned a 'bloated vulgarity' about Brereton 'which should ever deter the manager from assigning [him] the parts of cavaliers or men of fashion' (I. McIntyre, 'Garrick', 1999, 557). Yet William Hopkins, the Drury Lane prompter, wrote 'very well' in his diary after Brereton's first performance as George Barnwell in George Lillo's 'The London Merchant' in December 1775. On 24 September 1777, at Bath, Brereton married Hopkins's daughter Priscilla (1758-1845) ['see 'Kemble, Priscilla]. The couple's son, Thomas (died 1832), was born in May 1782 in King's co., Ireland, and later became a lieutenant-colonel in the army. 
Thomas Davies had noted that as Mendoza in Robert Jephson's 'Braganza', Brereton 'gave the publick a happy presage of that improved state of acting to which he is now arrived. When he has thrown off that diffidence which hangs about him, and has acquired a greater confidence in his power to please, I dare venture to prophesy he will be an excellent performer. (Davies, 2.298-9)' The return of Sarah Siddons to Drury Lane in December 1782 was the catalytic force that breached Brereton's diffidence. Reportedly he was smitten with her. Whatever the truth, he 'derived a new soul from the collision' (Boaden, 1.345). In no play was his thespian transformation more striking than in Otway's 'Venice Preserved', in which he played Jaffeir to Mrs Siddons's Belvidera. On 21 December the 'Public Advertiser' declared that his performance had 'touched the 'true Chords' in Unison with Belvidera!... it was unequivocally the Hand of a 'Master!'' Between 1782 and 1785 he acted with Siddons in tragedies such as 'The Fair Penitent', Aaron Hill's 'Zara', and Arthur Murphy's 'The Grecian Daughter'. They had performed together previously at Drury Lane early in 1776 in Ben Jonson's 'Epicoene'. 
The Siddons-Brereton association reached a painful impasse in Dublin during the summer season of 1784 over a benefits dispute; this was misrepresented to the public, who blamed Mrs Siddons. Increasingly unstable on stage and off, Brereton is said to have attempted suicide and threatened his wife. On 5 October 1784 Mrs Siddons and William and Priscilla Brereton returned to Drury Lane where, in 'The Gamester' by Edward Moore, Siddons faced a hostile, hissing audience. Neither of the Breretons defended her, for which Sheridan's sister Betsy much blamed them. They played at Portsmouth in summer 1785, when unmistakable signs of his mental illness -- encouraged, some said, by his unrequited love for Mrs Siddons but more probably by excessive drinking -- became apparent to audiences. Brereton improvised ludicrous lines, obliged his wife to dance an unscripted minuet, and abruptly walked off stage in a critical scene. For pelting a magistrate's carriage he and two fellow actors were forced to make a public apology. Back at Drury Lane on 3 November 1785 Brereton gave his last performance as Frederick in Garrick's adaptation of Francis Beaumont's and John Fletcher's 'The Chances'. The night before he had played Claudio to Sarah Siddons's Isabella in 'Measure for Measure'. 
It was reported thirteen days later that Brereton had suffered a relapse of his mental illness. He was overpowered by keepers posing as bailiffs, despite attempts to ward them off with a poker, strait-jacketed, and taken by coach to a private house at Blackheath, to the south-east of London, where, on being denied access to his wife, he wept bitterly. Hopes of his recovery were soon abandoned. His malady was not 'productive of any violence, but rather of ridiculous actions, accompanied by melancholy' ('The Times', 19 Nov 1785). A year later, having been confined for some time at the private lunatic asylum at Hoxton, north of the city of London, in the care of the eminent mad-doctor John Monro (or his son Thomas), he was 'in so nervous a state, that he can scarcely utter a sentence' (ibid., 2 Nov 1786), though he recognized friends and retained power of recollection. For his support Priscilla Brereton gave $100 a year in addition to the $70 contributed by the Drury Lane Theatrical Fund. 
Brereton's illness was no shield from the verse satire of Anthony Pasquin (1786), but some reserved judgement on what might have been, had not the 'hydrophobia of a Lear ensued' ('Green-Room Mirror', 14). John Quick the comedian took him to church, at which he sat patiently and behaved well. Brereton greeted the clergyman afterwards: ''Sir... you act charmingly -- but your part is too long -- here's Quick here will cut it for you.' The Clergyman looked astonished -- and the Comedian laying hold of the Tragedian -- cut all further discourse -- by taking poor Brereton out of the church. ('The Times', 21 Feb 1787)' The physicians 'sometimes used to recall his memory to the stage: -- at those intervals, he would mention the name of Mrs Siddons -- and sometimes of a picture he wished to have had drawn of her and himself' (ibid.). Whatever his feelings for Mrs Siddons, the actor long 'considered rather serviceable than great' (Boaden, 1.345) basked in her reflected glory. His regretful musings on the unpainted portrait may show more desire to enshrine fleeting fame than to mourn unrequited love. 
Brereton died of unknown causes at Dr Monro's lunatic asylum, Hoxton, on 17 February 1787 and was buried in Shoreditch churchyard. Brereton's unstable personality and unfulfilled promise as a performer intrigued many, but few knew what to make of him. His perceived infatuation for Mrs Siddons, his descent into madness, and, following his death, his widow's speedy marriage to Sarah Siddons's brother -- his former rival actor -- John Philip Kemble, united the four in a private drama worthy of an eighteenth-century Gothic novel. A curious biographical piece, illustrated with Brereton's portrait as Douglas -- equal parts obituary, castigation, and grudging appreciation -- appeared in the 'European Magazine' for June 1796. In January 1832 Brereton's son, Thomas, committed suicide during his trial by court martial following the Bristol riots of October 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 39764


Bulkley, Mary (1747/8?-1792), dancer and actress, was the daughter of Edward Wilford (died 1789), a minor official at Covent Garden. Wilford's sister Priscilla Steevens had in 1744 married John Rich, the proprietor of Covent Garden Theatre, as her second husband. Mary was brought up in some comfort at the centre of the theatrical establishment and moved naturally into a career on the stage. 
Mary first appeared at Covent Garden in 1758 as a dancer, and in 1761 she became a member of the company. She remained with them until 1780, first as a dancer (until 1765) and thereafter as an actress specializing chiefly in comedy. Her acting debut was as Miranda in Susanna Centlivre's 'The Busy Body'. She later played all the main female roles in Shakespearian comedy, as well as Cordelia and Portia, and innumerable parts in contemporary plays. She was the first Miss Richland in Oliver Goldsmith's 'The Good-Natur'd Man' (1768), the first Kate Hardcastle in his 'She Stoops to Conquer' (1773), and the first Julia in Richard Brinsley Sheridan's 'The Rivals' (1775). Her beauty helped to ensure her initial success. Hugh Kelly praised her thus: '
Blest with a person wholly without fault; 

Tho' polish'd, gay, and natural, though taught, 

See where that Wilford elegantly moves, 

Leads up the graces, and commands the loves. 
('Thespis II', 1767)' He noted, however, that her voice was not strong, and in his life of Johnson James Boswell records an occasion in 1773 when Goldsmith commented that she could not sing. 
In her personal life Mary was exuberant and profligate. Her marriage to George Bulkley (died 1784), of the Covent Garden orchestra, on 9 August 1767 produced a daughter, of whom nothing is known after her baptism at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 9 November 1768. Bulkley had 'a grateful heart and useful virtues' ('Theatrical Biography', vol. 2) but she found him dull. In the summer of 1768, during the annual closure of the London theatres, when metropolitan actors customarily worked in the provinces, the Bulkleys were engaged at the King Street Theatre, Bristol. Also in the company were James William Dodd (c.1740-1796) and his wife, Martha, both of Drury Lane. Mary Bulkley's indiscretions with Dodd gave rise to scandal and Martha refused to accompany her husband again to Bristol in the following year. She died shortly afterwards and public sympathy moved against the lovers. The relationship persisted, however. In London they worked in separate theatres and were on the whole successful; in the vacations they worked together with mixed fortunes. In the summer of 1774 they had a disastrous season in Dublin:'Some recent transactions had excited strong prejudices against them' (Hitchcock, 2.259). Dodd was left penniless and was bailed out by Garrick, and Bulkley returned temporarily to her husband. In contrast their season for Tate Wilkinson in York in 1779 was highly successful. They had by this time set up house together, an arrangement which lasted until another scandal erupted, this time with Dodd as the wronged party. Mary's lovers were reputed to include John Banks, a notable Harlequin, and John Brown Williamson, a minor actor. 
Mary Bulkley ceased to appear regularly at Covent Garden after the 1779-80 season and her career was clearly in decline. From 1781 until 1788 she worked in the summers at the Haymarket Theatre. She was engaged by Drury Lane for one season only, in 1783-4, and she made one last, single appearance at Covent Garden in 1789-90. In the winter months, with neither of the patent theatres employing her, she was probably hard-pressed for money. She reached the bottom of her career as a member of a company of strolling actors in Shrewsbury in 1784. Edward Cape Everard, another Covent Garden child dancer whose own downward spiral had set in early, relates in his 'Memoirs of an Unfortunate Son of Thespis' (1818) the arrival of John Jackson, proprietor of the Edinburgh theatre, who recruited four of the Shrewsbury troupe for his own company. Jackson remembered Mary Bulkley as a girl, with admiration and affection, and was clearly rescuing her. 
Sadly public disapproval followed Mary to Scotland and her first benefit was a failure, but she overcame the hostility when she played Hamlet successfully on 23 March 1784. On 22 July 1788 she married Captain Ebenezer Barrisford and used his name henceforward. She remained with the Edinburgh company until 1791, by which time she was drinking heavily. She died in poverty on 19 December 1792 in Dumfries, survived by her husband; the 'Newcastle Courant' of 29 December 1792 gave her age as forty-four. She was buried in Dumfries churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 39765


Chapman, Thomas (1683?-1747), actor and theatre manager, is of unknown place of birth and parentage. The only information available about his pre-theatrical life is provided by a star-struck descendant, George D. Ford, whose 'These were Actors' is a fictionalized and unsubstantiated account of the Chapman family. Chapman may, as Ford claims, have been invalided out of the army, having been wounded in the eye at Blenheim. The earliest theatrical playbill featuring his name is dated 14 May 1723 and records his sharing a benefit performance of 'Julius Caesar' at Lincoln's Inn Fields with two other actors. That same year he also played at Drury Lane and at William Pinkethman's Southwark fair booth. This sets the pattern for the first few playing years of his life; from 1724 to 1727 he performed as stock actor (and perhaps also some kind of administrator) for John Rich at Lincoln's Inn during the theatrical season and, over the summer, played in booths at fairs. 
Noted for his skill in playing low comics -- 'a most excellent actor... in all Shakespeare's clowns, in petulant would-be-wits, fops and fantastics, and many other absurd humorous characters' (Davies, 1.165) -- Chapman nevertheless always aspired to serious, tragic roles. Rich indulged him in his yearning for tragedy -- to no good effect, according to Thomas Davies. For the season of 1727-8 he was promoted to playing major roles. He created a number of new performances, including the Beggar in John Gay's 'Beggar's Opera', and continued to shine in comic parts: Osric in 'Hamlet', Shamwell in Thomas Shadwell's 'Squire of Alsatia', Brisk in William Congreve's 'Double Dealer'. Ford claims that Chapman married a woman named Nora Lynch and had two children with her, whom he does not name. Theatrical documentation, however, refers only to his alliance with Hannah Chapman (died 'c'.1756), who may have been his first or second wife; she is first mentioned in 1729, when playbills record that she played Faunia to Chapman's Polixene in the anonymous, droll 'Dorastus and Faunia' at William Bullock's booth in Bartholomew fair. From 1729 onwards Chapman was cast in major roles at Lincoln's Inn Fields; from 1732 he also performed in Covent Garden. Sometimes Rich made him act in both places on the same evening: on one night he performed the Beggar in 'The Beggar's Opera' at Covent Garden, and Southampton in John Banks's 'The Unhappy Favourite' in Lincoln's Inn Fields. He continued to act in summer fairs when the theatrical season ended, stopping for good when booths were forbidden in 1744 (though they were reallowed from 1746). 
Besides being an actor Chapman was also manager in charge of a number of booths at Bartholomew fair -- first with Lacy Ryan, John Laguerre, and Jacob Hall in 1734, then with William Hallam in 1736, and finally with John Hippisley and Laguerre in 1739. In 1730 he completed a theatre in Richmond on the site where Pinkethman's playhouse had stood. There he was manager and principal performer until his death, taking such noted parts as that of Harry Wildair in George Farquhar's 'The Constant Couple' but also indulging his yearning to play serious roles 'to the destruction of his own property, as well as of all propriety'; among other ill-chosen parts 'he strutted in the robes of King Richard III to empty benches' (Davies, 1.167). The theatre was successful however and in the 1740s performances were extended out to Twickenham. In addition Chapman kept billiard tables near where he lived in Bow Street; his apprentice marker and general errand boy was Edward (Ned) Shuter (1728?-1776), whom he taught to act and brought to the stage. In 1735 Chapman was still close enough to Rich to be made one of the first members of the Sublime Society of Beefsteaks but in 1739 their association came to an end; in that same year he also recorded that he was having health problems and found himself 'in danger of losing one of my eyes' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). From 1739 to 1741 he played at Drury Lane, taking on several roles that he had not performed before, including Touchstone in 'As You Like It' and Marplot in Susanna Centlivre's 'The Busy Body', 'in which he excited as much good laughter as ever shook a merry audience' (Davies, 1.167). Having returned to Covent Garden in 1741 he was once more cast in major roles, such as Bayes in 'The Rehearsal' by George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham, though he was increasingly plagued with ill health. On 14 July 1747, having completed the 1746-7 season at Covent Garden, he died of a fever at Richmond, where he was buried on 17 July. After his death his widow, Hannah Chapman, took over the management of the Richmond theatre. 


@@@@@


doc= 39766


Esten, Harriet Pye (1761?-1865), actress, was born, according to her death certificate, in May 1761, at Tooting, Surrey, the natural daughter of Admiral Sir Thomas Pye (1708/9-1785), and his housekeeper, Anna (or Agnes) Maria Bennett (d. 1808). She had a brother, Thomas Pye Bennett, who joined the Royal Navy. In February 1784 Harriet Bennett married Lieutenant James Esten, with whom she had two children. The ill success of her husband in a business venture is said to have prompted her to pursue an independent career as an actress. 
Esten received her theatrical instruction from her mother. She made her debut at Bristol on 19 June 1786 as Alicia in Nicholas Rowe's 'Jane Shore', and acted regularly throughout the 1786-7 season at Bristol and Bath, where the local press dubbed her 'the Bath Abington'. The following summer she joined the company of Richard Daly at Smock Alley, Dublin, where she acted alongside William Holman. In July 1789, while performing in Dublin, she obtained a deed of separation from her husband: Mrs Bennett had agreed to rescue her son-in-law from bankruptcy on condition that he relinquish his wife and children and live abroad. 
In January 1790 Harriet Esten took up an engagement with John Jackson in Edinburgh. She made her debut as Juliet and 'was received as one scarcely inferior to Mrs Siddons or Mrs Jordan' (Haslewood, 1.6). She then joined the company of Tate Wilkinson at York, where her performance as Shakespeare's Rosalind was received with 'violent applause'. Wilkinson recalls how an enamoured theatre critic of York 'made the press groan with lavish praises of the Esten' (Wilkinson, 3.109). 
The popularity of Mrs Esten in the provinces resulted in an engagement for the 1790-91 season at Covent Garden. On 20 October 1790 she made her London debut, once more playing Rosalind. 'She is rather small in stature', reported one critic, 'but well made, with a most eloquent eye and a very expressive countenance. Although she is rather underhung, her face may fairly be pronounced pretty, and her figure engaging. Her voice, in the pathetic tones, resembles that of Mrs Siddons, but is more clear and articulate' ('Woodfall's Register', 21 Oct 1790). Esten performed throughout her first London season 'without receiving any salary; but with the indulgence of appearing in whatever characters she chose' (Gilliland, 2.757). Her first London benefit performance, as Letitia Hardy in Hannah Cowley's 'The Belle's Stratagem', raised $353 18's'. Other roles included Indiana in Richard Steele's 'The Conscious Lovers', Roxalana in Isaac Bickerstaff's 'The Sultan', and Monimia in Otway's 'The Orphan'. Thomas Harris, manager of Covent Garden, under strong pressure from the duke of Clarence and Dorothy Jordan, agreed to re-engage Esten for three further seasons on a salary of $11 a week. 
In July 1792 Esten obtained the lease of the Theatre Royal, Edinburgh, from Stephen Kemble. The theatre patentee, Douglas, eighth duke of Hamilton (1756-1799), with whom Esten had begun an affair, withdrew from Kemble the authority to perform, thereby obliging him to part with the lease, occasioning considerable local controversy. A year later Esten returned the lease to Kemble for a consideration of $200 per year. In May 1794 she retired from Covent Garden. Two months later she gave birth to a daughter by the duke of Hamilton. 
In 1797 James Esten returned from the Caribbean with a fortune estimated at $200,000, which he had accumulated while working as a rent collector for Adam Williamson, the British governor of Santo Domingo. He obtained a divorce from his wife in July, although an action brought against the duke of Hamilton for adultery failed in the House of Lords. The duke died on 1 August 1799, leaving Harriet Esten an annuity of $3000. In the winter of 1802 she made a brief reappearance on the Edinburgh stage, where she earned $50 a night. 
On 15 October 1812 Esten married Major John Scott-Waring (1747-1819), formerly MP for Stockbridge and agent to Warren Hastings. The marriage produced a son, Lieutenant John T. Scott-Waring, and a daughter. Following the death of Major Scott-Waring at their house in Half Moon Street, Piccadilly, Esten raised her children alone. She died at her home, 36 Queen's Gate Terrace, Kensington, on 29 April 1865. Notice of her death 'at a very advanced age' was carried in 'The Times' for 2 May 1865. Her death certificate gave her age as 103 years and 11 months. Anne Douglas Hamilton, her daughter by the duke, married Henry Robert, third Baron Rossmore (1792-1860), and died childless in 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 39767


Giffard, Henry (1694-1772), actor and theatre manager, the youngest of the eight sons of William Giffard (died 1722) of Buckinghamshire, was born in London and educated at a private school. In 1716 he found employment as a clerk in the South Sea Company, but after three years he abandoned this position, moved to Bath, and joined an itinerant group of actors. About a year later he moved to the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin, where he took a number of major roles, including Valentine in William Congreve's 'Love for Love' and Sir Charles in Colley Cibber's 'The Careless Husband'. Giffard's importance to the company at Smock Alley led to his being offered a part share in the management. While in Dublin he married Mary (Molly) Lyddal, an actress in the company. In either 1726 or 1727 she gave birth to a son, William, and a year later she died while giving birth to a daughter. In 1728 Giffard married Mary's sister, Anna Marcella (Nancy) Lyddal. The couple then moved to London, where they joined the company of Thomas Odell, who had recently opened a theatre at Goodman's Fields. 
Giffard made his London debut as Plume in George Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer', and he went on to play a number of leading roles in the 1729-30 season. His wife Nancy also made her London debut around this time, and the two often appeared on stage together. Their roles as a dramatic couple included those of Bevil Junior and Indiana in Richard Steele's 'The Conscious Lovers' and Altamont and Calista in Nicholas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent'. Following Odell's decision to relinquish control of Goodman's Fields in 1731, Giffard took over the management. He quickly drew up plans to erect a second, more spacious theatre near the site of the first, meeting the cost of over $2000 through a number of individual subscriptions. The new theatre, designed by Edward Shepherd, opened on 2 October 1732 with a performance of '1 Henry IV'. As well as managing the theatre, Giffard made regular appearances on stage until the end of the 1735-6 season, playing parts as diverse as Jaffeir in Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd' and Loveless in John Vanbrugh's 'The Relapse'. In September 1733, while still managing the theatre at Goodman's Fields, he purchased a share in the theatre at Drury Lane, and appeared on stage there several times at the beginning of the 1733-4 season before selling his share to Charles Fleetwood. In the summer of 1735 he toured Ireland with the company of the Aungier Street Theatre, Dublin. 
In the autumn of 1736 Henry and Nancy Giffard moved to the vacant Theatre Royal at Lincoln's Inn Fields. In order to fill this older, larger house, Giffard offered subscribers the chance to purchase books of twenty tickets 'at half the expense' ('Daily Post', 19 Nov 1736). He made only occasional appearances as an actor during the 1736-7 season, the majority of his time being taken up by the management of the theatre. In December 1736 he found himself in dispute with E. D. Cole, a dancer in the Drury Lane company. Cole accused him of causing a disturbance in the Drury Lane audience during a performance of 'Tiddi-Doll', a burlesque featuring Cole's daughter. Giffard rejected the charge. Gifford's counter-accusation, that Cole had employed a number of people to hiss performances at Lincoln's Inn Fields, was similarly denied. 
In May 1737 Giffard attempted to sell his interest in Goodman's Fields. However, the simultaneous introduction of Walpole's 'Licensing Act' made the sale impossible. Walpole, who believed himself to have been unfairly lampooned by Fielding's players at the New Haymarket, found an ingenious way of persuading George II of the merits of the 'Licensing Act'. He commissioned a two-act anti-government play, 'The Vision of the Golden Rump', and made sure that it found its way to Giffard at Lincoln's Inn. Giffard refused to stage the piece, but mistakenly attempted to earn Walpole's favour by surrendering the play to the government. Walpole was able to present the play to George II as the work of an anonymous player, and the king's fury was such that the 'Licensing Act' was pressed through parliament with ease. The act prohibited the staging of theatrical performances in London beyond the confines of the city of Westminster, a measure that rendered Giffard's theatre at Goodman's Fields useless. 
In June 1737 the Giffards left London to join the Smock Alley company in Dublin. The following summer Henry Giffard sold off the scenery, props, and costumes belonging to the theatre at Goodman's Fields. In autumn 1738 the Giffards accompanied the Smock Alley players on a tour of Carlow and Drogheda, and in the winter of the same year Henry Giffard led a company to Edinburgh. In March 1739, however, the Giffards returned to London, where they rejoined the company at Drury Lane. A year later Giffard successfully petitioned the lord chamberlain for permission to reopen the theatre at Goodman's Fields. He ran the theatre for two seasons, taking advantage of the summer break in 1741 to take his company to Ipswich. 
Although by no means a great actor himself, Giffard was a keen student of the theatre and a diligent coach of his fellow players. His insistence upon the importance of thorough rehearsals brought the best out of the young actors in his company, chief among them David Garrick. In October 1741 Giffard gave Garrick his London debut in the title role of Shakespeare's 'Richard III'. For the 1742-3 season he returned to Lincoln's Inn Fields, but without the attraction of Garrick the theatre quickly began to lose money, and the company was soon disbanded. In the autumn of 1743 the Giffards joined the company at Drury Lane for a third time, where they remained until the summer of 1747. Henry Giffard's final performance, as Aimwell in Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem', was given at Covent Garden on 7 October 1748. Four days later Nancy Giffard made her final stage appearance, as Lady Fanciful in Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Wife'. Following their retirement from the stage the couple moved to New Brentford, Middlesex, where they lived for over twenty years. Henry Giffard died there on 20 October 1772, and was buried in the local cemetery five days later. He was survived by Nancy Giffard, who died on 21 January 1777. 
William Giffard, Henry Giffard's son by his first wife, also made a career from the stage. He appeared as a child at Goodman's Fields in the early 1730s, and made his adult debut at the same theatre in the 1740-41 season. He remained at Goodman's Fields for two years before moving with his father to the theatre at Lincoln's Inn. William Giffard's final London performance was on 5 May 1744, after which he appeared exclusively in the regional theatres. He finally retired from the stage towards the end of the 1760s, and died at Cockermouth, Cumberland, in 1807. 


@@@@@


doc= 39768


Greenwood, Thomas (bap. 1752?, d. 1797), scene-painter, is believed to be the son of the engraver John Greenwood (1729-1768), who may have come to London from Yorkshire where there was a thriving branch of the family. Thomas Greenwood was not, however, related to the American-born painter John Greenwood (1727-1792) who settled in England in 1763, and exhibited at the Society of Artists. His parents may have been John Greenwood and Elizabeth Holroyd, who married in St George's Chapel, Hyde Park, London, on 1 July 1750. If so, it is likely that he was the Thomas Greenwood whose baptism was recorded in London at St Andrew, Holborn, on 23 February 1752, and that he was nineteen in November 1771 when we have the earliest definite evidence of his career, from an account book for the Theatre Royal Drury Lane, London, which records a payment to him, possibly for work on the spectacular masque 'The Institute of the Garter'. Greenwood worked at Drury Lane from 1771 until his death in 1797, becoming chief scene-painter there in 1776 after the death of John French, who had held the post since 1765. On 13 August 1774 he married, at St Leonard's, Shoreditch, Elizabeth Meaburn, with whom he had several children, including a son Thomas, baptized at St Andrew, Holburn, on 4 April 1779. 
Greenwood did not work exclusively at Drury Lane, since he also worked for the 1777-8 season at the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden, and for Sadler's Wells Theatre from 1778 to 1797; he was the first scene-painter to be associated with that theatre. Other work included repainting the interior of Drury Lane with William Capon (1757-1827), before the opening of the 1782-3 season; painting scenery for Privy Garden, the duke of Richmond's private theatre, in 1788; for theatrical entertainments at Blenheim Palace, in 1778; for the King's Theatre, in 1791-4, when the Drury Lane Company were playing there, and in 1795 for the new Theatre Royal, Birmingham, which opened the following year. 
Greenwood started working at Drury Lane at a time of great change and innovation in scene design on the British stage, when David Garrick's improvements there in lighting and the mechanics of mounting scenery on stage made scene design more exciting and creative than was formerly possible. He may have begun working at Drury Lane Theatre as a pupil of French (just as Andrew Roberts later became Greenwood's pupil at Sadler's Wells), but probably most influential for his work was that of the innovative scene designer Philippe Jacques de Loutherbourg (1740-1812), whom David Garrick employed at Drury Lane from 1772 as scenic director. De Loutherbourg, noted for his creation of spectacular stage effects, had taken the unusual step of stipulating that Garrick employ him solely as a scene designer, with overall authority to supervise the execution of his ideas, and hence Greenwood's early work for Drury Lane entailed realizing many of de Loutherbourg's designs, including 'Maid of the Oaks' (1774) and 'Queen Mab' (1775). Generally in the eighteenth-century theatre artists who designed scenery painted it themselves, and by 1778 Greenwood was realizing his own designs and his name was credited in playbills accordingly. 
Greenwood excelled at landscape and topographical work, and the two anonymous watercolour designs credited to him in the Victoria and Albert Museum (believed to be scenes for Covent Garden Theatre, 1777), reveal his mastery of architectural detail and perspective, and an appreciation of the dramatic effect of monumental backdrops. Much of Greenwood's work was for opera and pantomime, which demanded a wide variety of settings, especially at the rebuilt Drury Lane Theatre of the 1790s, where audiences loved spectacular presentations on the enlarged stage. Thomas Greenwood died in October or November 1797 at his home in Charles Street, Covent Garden, London, and was described in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' as 'an artist of great eminence, and conductor of the painting department of Drury Lane theatre' ('GM', 984). His last work there was for 'The Castle Spectre', which opened at Drury Lane in December 1797, and for which his son, Thomas Greenwood (1779-1832), completed his work, with Charles Pugh. Greenwood was succeeded at Drury Lane by his son, who designed much of the scenery for Edmund Kean's performances at Drury Lane in 1814-15. Thomas junior's son was the theatrical manager and writer Thomas Longdon Greenwood (1808-1879). Elizabeth Ann Greenwood was executrix and sole beneficiary of her father's will, proved on 11 November 1797. 


@@@@@


doc= 39769


Keene, Theophilus (c.1680-1718), actor and theatre manager, was born into a dissenting family in London about 1680 and educated at a Presbyterian academy in Little Britain, London, in preparation for a teaching career. According to the sententious sketch of his life published by William Rufus Chetwood, Keene 'chose rather to quit a Fortune amongst his Wealthy Relations' than to continue as a dissenter ('Memoirs', ii). He learned to act first in the provinces with John Coysh, then with Joseph Ashbury's company in Dublin. At an unknown early date, he married a Mrs Wilmot. Keene was first advertised in a complex role in London at Drury Lane on 12 June 1705. In John Fletcher's 'The Royal Merchant, or, Beggar's Bush' he portrayed Gerrard/Clause, an earl's stepfather, who, disguised behind a beard, has been named king of a local group of beggars. This assignment typifies Keene's line of business: serious older men, usually in tragedies, though also in tragicomedies or comedies that require maturity. Descriptions of him stress 'the Stamp of Majesty in his Presence, and the stern Roughness of a Soldier in his Voice'; hence 'the Softness of a Lover' did not 'sit so Natural upon him' (ibid., iv). Because of his 'manly Voice' and 'Majestick Mien', his skill with the 'aweful Gesture', and his 'Godlike Form' (ibid., 2, 12, 18), he appeared regularly with Thomas Betterton, playing Claudius to his Hamlet, Duncan to his Macbeth, and Odmar to his Montezuma in John Dryden's 'The Indian Emperor'. This fortunate early connection permanently affected Keene's playing style and later retarded his career, inclining him to favour old plays over new ones. Thus he took over Montezuma in 'The Indian Emperor', the Emperor in Dryden's 'Aureng Zebe', Mahomet in Joseph Trapp's 'Abra-Mule', and Heartwell in William Congreve's 'The Old Batchelor'. The last is an example of his old man in comedy, as are Sir Edward Belfond in Thomas Shadwell's 'The Squire of Alsatia' and Justice Balance in George Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer'. 
Keene was lured away from the patent company by John Vanbrugh, who signed him to the generous salary of 8's'. 4died per acting day for the 1706-7 season at his new theatre in the Haymarket (Milhous and Hume, 'Register', no. 1866). At Drury Lane for the 1708-9 season, Keene participated in a sham managerial committee, an assignment which ended in June when the owner, Christopher Rich, was silenced by the lord chamberlain following complaints from his leading actors. Keene continued there for 1709-10, but Aaron Hill, who was appointed to oversee the company, so offended the actors that on 2 June 1710 they broke into the locked theatre and denied him access to the backstage area. Hill's account of the riot plausibly suggests that Keene and John Bickerstaff were being made cat's paws by more senior actors, all of whom were officially reprimanded. Keene spent the next four years in a completely subordinate position. He acquired some good supporting roles, such as Sullen in Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem', Lord Brumpton in Richard Steele's 'The Funeral', and Creon in 'Oedipus' by John Dryden and Nathaniel Lee, but in Joseph Addison's 'Cato' he got only the minor part of Lucius. Thus at the end of 1714 he took the opportunity to join John Rich's new company at the rebuilt Lincoln's Inn Fields theatre. There he played many of the same roles as before, but had the latitude to experiment with Macbeth, Timon in Shadwell's play of that name, Manly in William Wycherley's 'The Plain Dealer', the Governor in the musical version of Fletcher's 'The Island Princess', and Sir John Brute in Vanbrugh's 'The Provok'd Wife'. He was less successful with the lead role in Thomas Southerne's 'Oroonoko' (instead of his previous role, the Governor), and the Earl of Essex in John Banks's 'The Unhappy Favourite' (instead of Burleigh). 
At the beginning of the 1717-18 season Keene and Christopher Bullock agreed to rent Lincoln's Inn Fields from John Rich and his brother. Keene, who was regarded as honest and good-natured, was probably a good choice to try to stabilize the venture, but his accomplishments are hard to assess. No financial record of this management survives, and changes in repertory take longer to accomplish than a single season. In an untimely accident on 23 July 1718 Keene was thrown from a horse, and he died two days later at his home in Cooks Court, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London. To mourn him, the rival theatres joined in a walking funeral with pallbearers from each company, and he was buried in St Clement Dane's on 30 July. The 'Memoirs' suggest that Keene was widely admired and known for his charity to those in need, but no details of his private life are known. He appears to have been a reliable performer. However, the list of over 110 roles played in his short career suggests that he was more backward-looking than was ideal for a new company. Whether he could successfully have expanded his range is uncertain: he continued to bear the mark of the generation whose performing manner was influenced by Thomas Betterton and Joseph Ashbury. His wife survived him, and in 1720 was in business at Cooks Court hiring out masquerade habits; she also received benefits at Lincoln's Inn Fields until 1730, and may have been a dresser there until as late as January 1748. 


@@@@@


doc= 39770


Lacy, James (1696-1774), actor and theatre manager, was descended from an old Anglo-Irish family. Although the Lacys possessed a vast estate before the civil war, their loyalty to the house of Stuart served only to ruin them, their descendants as a consequence being 'forced to follow Fortune in almost all the different Services of Europe' (Victor, 83). Little is known of the early life of James Lacy, but by 1722 he was living in Norwich, where he earned a living as 'a reputable Dealer in the Manufactures of that City' (Victor, 64). With his business failing, however, he looked towards the stage, and made his first appearance with the Norwich company in the season 1723-4. Soon afterwards he moved to London, where he appears to have found employment with John Rich's company at Lincoln's Inn Fields. The date of his stage debut in London is uncertain, but on 2 May 1727 he made an appearance as Herodorus in David Lewis's 'Philip of Macedon'. 
Lacy remained at Lincoln's Inn for a further year, before moving to the Haymarket Theatre for the 1728-9 season. His roles there included Acasto in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan' and Worthy in George Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer'. The following year he appeared both at the New Haymarket and with Odell's troupe at Goodman's Fields. He then spent a further season at the Haymarket before engaging with the Covent Garden company in the autumn of 1732. He left Covent Garden in the summer of 1734, possibly to rejoin the players at Lincoln's Inn, with whom he is known to have appeared in the summer of 1735. In the autumn of 1735 Lacy returned to the Haymarket to work under the direction of Henry Fielding. As a member of 'the Great Mogul's Company of English Comedians', he appeared in two popular farces by Fielding, taking the parts of Fustian in 'Pasquin' (1736) and Sour-Wit in 'The Historical Register' (1737). On 4 May 1737 Lacy appeared in an afterpiece of his own, 'Fame, or, Queen Elizabeth's Trumpets', advertised as 'a new Satyrical, Allegorical, Political Farce'. 
The passage of the 'Licensing Act' in 1737 brought an end to all performances at the Haymarket. In December 1737, and in a direct challenge to the terms of the 'Licensing Act', Lacy began to offer public 'lectures' at the York Buildings in Villiers Street. These readings, which comprised a number of separate speaking parts shared out between Lacy and his assistants, were dramatic performances in all but name. Lacy was consequently arrested and sent to Bridewell, where he remained until the end of February 1738. After being released from prison he continued to defy the 'Licensing Act', offering a further series of 'orations' at the York Buildings. In 1740 he negotiated the lease of Ranelagh House and gardens, where he designed and built a theatre. 
In May 1742 Lacy returned to the London stage, taking the title role in a Drury Lane performance of Thomas Southerne's 'Oroonoko'. In 1744 he was approached by Amber and Green, city bankers keen to take an interest in the Drury Lane theatre. The two men, perhaps encouraged by Lacy's reputation for 'candor and integrity' (Victor, 73), entered into an agreement whereby they loaned him the money to buy the theatre patent from Charles Fleetwood. David Garrick, who had himself been offered the patent by Fleetwood, quickly fell out with Lacy. The refusal of the new manager to honour Fleetwood's debts incensed the young actor, who in the summer of 1745 quit London for Dublin. The absence of Garrick and the turmoil of the Jacobite rising caused the receipts at Drury Lane to fall alarmingly. 
In the spring of 1747 Lacy made his peace with Garrick, and offered the actor the opportunity to buy a half-share of the business, including patent, theatre lease, properties, and costumes, for $12,000. The partnership was immediately successful, and by the summer of 1750 the accumulated profits already outweighed the sum of each partner's original investment. In addition to a handsome share of the profits at the season's end, Lacy paid himself a salary of $500 per year. He ran the financial side of the business, ensuring the theatre remained in good condition, and that the props, costumes, and sceneries were paid for. Garrick managed the actors, and supervised all artistic business. The association between Garrick and Lacy continued until the latter's death in 1774. 
In January 1728 a 'Mrs Lacy' appeared alongside James Lacy in a performance of John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' at Lincoln's Inn Fields. It is assumed that this actress was Lacy's wife. The same actress appeared with Lacy at the Bartholomew and Southwark fairs in the summer of 1730 and spent the following season at the Haymarket. This Mrs Lacy revisited the fairs in 1734 and 1736, and made her final appearance at Southwark in 1740 in a performance of the pantomime 'Harlequin Faustus'. Some time before 1748 James Lacy began a relationship with Ann Willoughby, an actress in the Drury Lane company. Willoughby made her debut at Drury Lane in September 1748, and remained there for four seasons. She retired at the end of the 1752 season, and died on 11 November 1768. Although she styled herself as a second 'Mrs Lacy', there is no firm evidence that she and Lacy were married. 
According to one report, despite the financial success of Drury Lane, Lacy's attraction to increasingly outlandish forms of speculation caused him to lose much of his fortune, a significant part of which was wasted 'searching for coal-mines in Oxfordshire' ('GM', 1st ser., 69, 1779, 172). On 21 January 1774 Lacy died at his home, Turk's House, Isleworth, Middlesex. He was buried in the churchyard of St James's Church, Paddington, on 30 January. 
In 1774 Willoughby Lacy (1749-1831), the son of James Lacy and Ann Willoughby, inherited his father's share of the partnership with Garrick. The same year he appeared on stage in Birmingham, in Norwich, and then at Drury Lane. In 1778, following Garrick's decision to sell the moiety of his patent and other interest in the Drury Lane theatre, Lacy followed suit, selling his half-share in the theatre to the partnership of Sheridan, Linley, and Ford. The sale of the Lacy share raised $45,000, half of which was already owed to Garrick. Following the sale Lacy spent time as an itinerant actor, appearing in London in 1784, and Dublin in 1785. A recipient of a series of theatre benefit performances between 1798 and 1801, he seems to have fallen heavily into debt in later life. In 1813 he published a direct appeal to the public for financial assistance. He died, aged eighty-two, on 17 September 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 39771


Lessingham, Jane (1738/9-1783), actress, was born in 1738 or 1739 if the age at death inscribed on her tombstone was correct. Nothing is known about her parents, although a brother served as a witness at her marriage in 1753. Very little is known about her personal life before coming to the stage. As Jane Hemet, spinster, she was married to John Stott, naval commander, at St Paul's, Covent Garden, in 1753. In their divorce proceedings in 1765, recorded in 'Trials for Adultery' (1780), witnesses attested to the fact that Mrs Stott had given birth to a daughter during the three years her husband was away at sea. John Taylor in his 'Records of my Life' (1832) recalled that she lived with the poet Samuel Derrick (1724-1769) as his wife and that Derrick was responsible for bringing her to the stage. If so, it seems probable that their relationship began in the years when her husband was at sea, as they coincide with her initial appearance on the stage as Desdemona in 'Othello' in 1756. She did not appear again until February 1762, when she played the title role in Nicholas Rowe's 'Jane Shore'. She evidently took the name Lessingham as her stage alias and used it first in March 1762, when she played Sylvia in 'The Recruiting Officer' by George Farquhar. Taylor also noted Lessingham's ability as a comic actress, but further described her as an extraordinary character who frequented coffee houses in men's clothing. 
Lessingham remained at Covent Garden until 1763, but subsequently worked at Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin and at Drury Lane in London, as well as at provincial theatres in Bath, Bristol, and Richmond. She returned in 1767 to Covent Garden, where she remained for the duration of her career. There was always some suspicion that she maintained her position at Covent Garden because of her long-standing relationship with the theatre manager Thomas Harris (d. 1820). David Garrick thought her not worth the $4 a week she demanded in 1767 and refused to re-employ her at Drury Lane. As Harris's mistress she was a focal point in the managerial disputes at Covent Garden in 1768; she was named several times in the pamphlets, arguing for her right to a private dressing-room and to particular roles, specifically that of Imogene in 'Cymbeline'. The critic Francis Gentleman did not think she was worth all the fuss, and in 'The Theatres' (1772) described her as a 'tasteless milksop'. William Hawkins was more complimentary in his 'Miscellanies in Prose and Verse' (1775), commenting that she was agreeable in comedy but dismal in tragedy. Such criticism is borne out by the roles she favoured: Clackit in 'The Guardian' by Garrick, Madame Florival in 'The Deuce is in him' by George Colman the elder, Nerissa in 'The Merchant of Venice', and Lady Anne in 'Richard III'. Harris himself was quick to defend her and in 'The Ring: an Epistle, Addressed to Mrs. L -- M' (1768), amid protestations of her beauty and virtue, argued that she was as strong a performer as Elizabeth Barry and Mary Ann Yates. 
Jane Lessingham also won a reputation for her writing: there were rumours that she herself wrote 'The Ring', and she advertised two publications that either never appeared or were published in such small numbers as not to have survived. 'Expostulations with George Colman' was advertised as forthcoming in December 1767, and a pamphlet entitled 'The Hampstead Contest' was mentioned in a legal dispute over some property in 1775. The 'Town and Country Magazine' noted in May 1777 that she 'still amuses herself and the world, with her pen in the public papers'. 
Jane Lessingham's last appearance on the stage was in November 1782 as Jacintha in Benjamin Hoadly's 'The Suspicious Husband'. Her salary of $7 a week in the last five seasons of her career places her below the premier performers Mary Ann Yates and Frances Abington in prestige and talent, but well above the poorer actresses, who were paid less than $1 a week. She died on 13 March 1783, and was buried four days later in Hampstead churchyard. Her will, written in the December before her death, left her estate to Thomas Harris in trust for the use of her sons Thomas, Charles, and Edwin. A fourth son, William Frederick, was also named, but there was no mention of the daughter she bore while she was married to John Stott. The will was signed 'Jane Hemet' and was proved by Thomas Harris in 1784. The original stone on her grave, bearing her maiden name, was replaced in 1802 by her son William Frederick with a stone inscribed 'Mrs. Jane Lessingham of the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden', and noting her age as being forty-four. 


@@@@@


doc= 39772


Martyr, Margaret (1761/2-1807), singer and actress, was the daughter of Mr Thornton, a London tailor, and his wife, Margaret (died 1788). A pupil of James Hook, she sang his music at Vauxhall Gardens in the summers of 1778-80. Miss Thornton appeared at Covent Garden Theatre for a few months in 1779, making her debut as Rosetta in the comic opera 'Love in a Village' on 13 February. She married Captain Martyr (died 1783), whose forename is not known, a half-pay officer, before her return to Covent Garden in November 1780. She was not yet nineteen at this time ('Histories of the tete-a-tete annexed', 484). An attractive brunette, 'sportive, playful, arch, and free' (Bellamy, 25), she excelled in lively second-woman roles in English operas and musical afterpieces, such as Lucy in 'The Beggar's Opera', Euphrosyne in Thomas Arne's music for 'Comus', and Phoebe in Frances Brooke's 'Rosina'. William Shield composed and arranged the music for 'Rosina', as he did for many of the works by John O'Keeffe which included parts for her. She created and played for many years the roles of Kathlane in 'The Poor Soldier' (1783), Flora in 'Love in a Camp' (1786), and Molly Maybush in 'The Farmer' (1787). In his 'Recollections', O'Keeffe recorded that he wrote the part of George Streamer, 'a sprightly little midshipman' (p. 413), especially for her in 'Sprigs of Laurel' (1793). Her 'neat breeches figure' (Haslewood, 140) was also shown to advantage in one of her most popular roles, the page in 'The Follies of a Day' (1784). In this adaptation of Beaumarchais's 'Le mariage de Figaro' she sang to the countess the play's only song, Shield's 'Ah weladay my poor heart'. 
Margaret Martyr's marriage was not a success, since her husband got into debt and gossip claimed that she was unfaithful. Martyr fled to France to escape his creditors and news of his death at Calais reached his widow on 1 October 1783. Some later accounts claim that he died in the king's bench prison, but the prison records do not bear this out. A tempestuous liaison with James Wild, the company's prompter, seems to have ended in summer 1784, after which she established a lasting relationship with William Thomas Parke (1761-1847), the principal oboist at Covent Garden from 1783. They were living together at 16 Martlet Court, Bow Street, by April 1790, but gossip in the 'Morning Herald' for 31 January 1787 shows that their love affair was already common knowledge. She sang at Vauxhall Gardens, where Parke was a regular performer, in 1786 and 1789. They appeared together in the summer vacations in the English provinces and went together to Dublin, Limerick, and Cork in 1796. Parke wrote in his 'Musical Memoirs' of their success when she sang Arne's 'Sweet Echo' from 'Comus' to his oboe obbligato at Birmingham and Cheltenham. They had two children, William Byrne Parke ('b'. 1799) and Henry Parke ('b'. 1800), but never married. Margaret, her daughter by Captain Martyr, trained as a singer and was described in 1801 as the favourite pupil of Madame Mara (Gertrud Elisabeth Mara). Miss Martyr sang in London oratorios and provincial music festivals for a couple of years but later became a minor actress. 
Mrs Martyr was 'a very great favourite, but never a very great actress, or very great singer', who always seemed 'to be in a good humour with herself and the audience' (Wilson, 30, 32). At Covent Garden she received the high salary of $10 a week until the 1799-1800 season, but after the birth of her sons she made fewer advertised appearances. In October 1804 she was billed as playing the page in 'Follies of a Day', the lively maid Susan in the operatic farce 'Hartford Bridge', and Catherine in the comic opera 'Netley Abbey', where, disguised as a sailor lad, she performed Parke's song 'Yo! heave ho!'. Her obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' stated that 'for upwards of seven months she had been in a rapid state of decline, which the most skilful medical aid was unable to resist' (p. 597), but she remained on the weekly salary list at Covent Garden Theatre until the day before her death on 7 June 1807. She was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 14 June 1807. Her will appointed Parke as her sole executor and left half of the proceeds from the sale of a farm she owned at Yalding in Kent to her daughter and a quarter-share to each of her two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 39774


Calverley, William (d. 1572), writer, was born early in the sixteenth century in Yorkshire, the eldest of the three sons of Walter Calverley and Anne Danby, daughter of Sir Christopher Danby of Farnley. It seems that he participated in the Pilgrimage of Grace in the north of England, and his name is found in a muster of Lord Darcy's men taken in 1536. Calverley was imprisoned in the Tower of London for his part in the uprising, and there wrote 'A Dyalogue Bitwene the Playntife and the Defendaunt', a verse dialogue in which the eponymous plaintiff is made to admit to his errors, and to attest to the justice of his punishment, and which concludes with a warning to those who counsel rebellion against the crown: '
From yll counsayle fast loke thou flee 

For that hath brought many to mischaunce. 

' Calverley was released from the Tower in 1537, and was enjoying a prominent place in the Yorkshire community as early as 1539, where he is listed in a local muster roll as constable. In 1540 he was apparently granted the wardship and marriage of his relation, Anne Calverley, although he married Katherine Thorneholme, daughter of John Thorneholme of Haysthorpe. He died in 1572, and according to the visitation of Yorkshire of 1665-6 had six children, including the murderer Walter Calverley (d. 1605). 


@@@@@


doc= 39775


Baker, Henry (d. 1689), army officer, was a lieutenant in the Irish army during the reign of Charles II. He was one of the protestant officers purged by the earl of Tyrconnell in 1686, after which he returned to his land at Dunmahon, co. Louth. After the English revolution of 1688 he left his family, swore allegiance to William III, and was promoted to the rank of major by the rebel 'consult'. He was joint commander of the abortive raid on Carrickfergus (21 February 1689), when he led a thousand men on a night march from Belfast for a surprise attack at dawn. The weather was so bad that they did not reach their destination until the next day, and were kept out by musket fire from the walls. 
Tyrconnell sent Richard Hamilton with an army to crush the rebellion in the north. The rebels attempted to block Hamilton's advance at Dromore, co. Down, which Baker occupied with four ill-armed companies of foot on the night of 13 March. The next day two troops of Irish horsemen were reported to be approaching Dromore, and Baker formed his men up to block the entrance to the town. The horsemen supporting him sallied out to find that they were facing Hamilton's army. In the rout that followed, 'the Break of Dromore', Baker's men fled to Hillsborough and beyond. 
On 15 March Baker reached Coleraine, where he took part in the unsuccessful defence of the Bann (7 April), when Hamilton's men crossed in boats at Portglenone. With the remnants of the rebel anti-Jacobite forces, now leaderless, Baker fled to Londonderry. He arrived in mid-April to find the leadership of the city in crisis. Adam Murray had raised a mob against the governor, Robert Lundy, who was suspected of planning to surrender. On 19 April 1689 Baker was elected joint governor of Londonderry with George Walker, and commander of all the forces in the city, positions he held throughout the worst fighting of the siege. He was attainted of high treason by the Dublin parliament. 
Baker's relationship with John Michelburne, who had also put himself forward as a candidate for the governorship, became strained. On 15 May he and Michelburne drew swords on each other following an argument over the allocation of the tobacco ration. In the fight that followed Baker wounded Michelburne in the leg and had him arrested and confined to his quarters. 
Baker fell ill with a cold in early June and by 21 June was confined to bed. He appointed Michelburne as his deputy 'saying he was the fittest person to fill that station' (Ash, 79). He returned to duty and stayed up directing his men throughout the night of 28 June when fresh troops led by Lord Clancarty attacked the butcher's gate. Weakened through fever and exhaustion, he died on 30 June 1689. 'He was a great loss to the garrison, greatly beloved and very well qualified for the government, being endured with great patience and moderation; free from envy or malice as may be seen in the affair betwixt him and Mitchelburn. (Ash, 82)' Michelburne, Walker, and four others acted as his pallbearers. He was buried in St Columb's Cathedral in the city. Ann Baker, his widow, survived him with their four children, who were compensated by the crown with a forfeited estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 39777


Martin, Josiah (1737-1786), colonial governor, was born on 23 April 1737 in Dublin, the son of Samuel Martin (1694/5-1776), a landowner and sugar planter in Antigua, and his second wife, Sarah (died 1748), the widow of William Irish and the daughter of Edward Wyke, governor of Montserrat. He grew up in Dublin and the London area, where his education, with tutors, was managed by his half-brother Samuel, a Pelhamite MP and London agent for Antigua, Montserrat, and Nevis. His adolescence in Antigua was painful, his widowed father frequently denouncing his 'indolence' and 'mulish' disposition (BL, Add. MS 41346). 
Early in the Seven Years' War Martin seized his father's approval for study at the Inner Temple as an opportunity to leave Antigua, and he then joined the 4th regiment of foot as an ensign; later he obtained a commission as lieutenant-colonel in the 22nd regiment of foot. According to his biographer, Martin became interested in colonial administration while serving in Canada. He drew on his father's espousal of efficiency, accountability, and humanitarian concerns as the basis of his new personal outlook and imperial perspective. In January 1761, while serving at Crown Point, New York, Martin married his cousin Elizabeth (Betsy) Martin (died 1778), in defiance of his father's negotiations. Marriage into the New York gentry was consistent with his financial and political status, but he was disappointed in hoping for a New York political appointment. He succeeded only in keeping his wife (in his words) 'breeding sick'. Having sold his commission, he remained at a loose end until 1770, when Samuel junior's efforts obtained him the governorship of North Carolina. 
Pleased to have his foot on the ladder, Martin approached this lower rung with disdain and resignation. He delayed leaving New York and conferred with William Tryon, whose transfer to New York had made the North Carolina governorship available. Martin perceived that Tryon's departure involved face-saving, both for Tryon and for his and Martin's superiors, and he sensed an opportunity to pacify his troubled new charge. 
Tryon had faced the regulator movement, a backcountry farmers' insurrection against the eastern North Carolina planter elite. He had successfully led the colonial militia against the regulators, but the backcountry grievances of corrupt local government and legislative under-representation remained. Martin approached the regulators cordially and with an open mind. His challenge came from eastern leaders in the lower house, who moved to narrow the governor's field of political action. Regulator issues were in abeyance -- that is, until Martin's efforts to address them raised the eastern leaders' fears that backcountry hostility towards themselves would buttress the governor's political defences. In response, eastern leaders now courted former regulators. Thus Martin unintentionally brought regulator demands to the discussions with which his colony approached the American War of Independence. 
Martin was handicapped from London and outmanoeuvred by his challengers, in particular Abner Nash and Cornelius Harnett, who aimed to take control over the proceedings of the lower house and then build public support for the house's authority. Their winning tactic was a foreign attachments clause, which they added to a court bill when the law establishing the colony's courts expired in 1773. Martin's instructions forbade his concurrence. He tried to gain approval for a foreign attachments clause, but he was insecure with London following the resignation in 1772 of his patron, the earl of Hillsborough. In August 1774 the speaker of the house convened a provincial congress composed of most of the assemblymen. Under mounting pressure, Martin withdrew from his New Bern residence in late May 1775 and installed his headquarters aboard the 'Cruzier', a sloop of war in the Cape Fear river. 
There Martin worked steadily until May 1776, sending emissaries into the backcountry and among the highland Scots in the upper Cape Fear valley. He received messages and visits from loyalists throughout the southern backcountry and corresponded with Native American agents and neighbouring governors. Martin pleaded with the government for troops to support a proposed loyalist uprising, and in early 1776 his London dispatch informed him that a southern campaign was in preparation, with troops and arms 'en route' from Ireland for the Cape Fear river. 
By the time Martin received this news, the nature of the expedition had been altered without his being informed. His loyalists observed the original timetable. Their clash with revolutionary militia at Moore's Creek Bridge on 26 February 1776 was a fiasco. Martin joined a fleet from Boston in their unsuccessful attack near Charles Town, South Carolina. Soon he was at New York, where he remained until British forces returned to Charles Town, this time successfully, in May 1780. British planners approached the southern campaign of 1780-81 on premises Martin had laid out in 1775: British troops occupying major ports and coastal areas, to be assisted by loyalists, largely in the interior, and by Native Americans. Martin accompanied the campaign's commander, Cornwallis, through the Carolinas, earning his trust and praise. Many of Martin's 1776 commissions remained active, and groups originating therein continued through 1783 in the Carolinas and East Florida. 
Martin, widowed in October 1778, returned to his children at New York in 1781. His eldest child, Mary Elizabeth, remained with relatives on Long Island, but the others, Sarah, Alice, Samuel, Josiah Henry, and Augusta, had moved to London with him by 1782. Three other children had died. The family lived among sugar grandees and ranking civil servants near Grosvenor Square and Hanover Square and at an estate near Richmond, Surrey. Martin assisted loyalists who lodged compensation claims with the American loyalist claims commission. He estimated his own losses at $6500, exclusive of perquisites, and the commissioners fixed the amount of his compensation at approximately $3000. He received a governor's salary of $1000 annually during the years 1775-83. Martin died on 13 April 1786 and was buried at St George's, Hanover Square. 
Martin undertook his office as governor as a stepping stone. He quickly became absorbed in colonial politics, however, and worked to reconcile the desire for greater representational and legislative integrity with imperial concerns. Once royal authority was usurped, his energetic formulation of a regional plan to displace the usurpers became the base-line of the British southern strategy. 


@@@@@


doc= 39778


Fulhame, Elizabeth (fl. 1780-1794), chemist, was an original chemist but little else is known of her life. Her husband, Thomas Fulhame, had come from Ireland and enrolled in the chemistry class at Edinburgh University in 1779-80. He graduated MD in 1784 and, unusually, retained a presence in the chemistry class until 1790. He travelled or lived briefly in Spain, and was a correspondent of Joseph Black, the Edinburgh physician and chemist, who in 1793 noted that Fulhame had found a new method of manufacturing white lead. Elizabeth Fulhame presumably shared her husband's interests, for in 1794 she published a remarkable monograph, 'An essay on combustion with a view to a new art of dying and painting wherein the phlogistic and antiphlogistic hypotheses are proved erroneous'. This book later appeared in German translation (Gottingen, 1798) and in an American edition (Philadelphia, 1810). It was favourably noticed by Priestley, Rumford, Herschel, Woodhouse, and others and was the subject of a long review by Coindet. 
In her preface the author remarked that in 1780 her husband had deemed improbable 'the possibility of making cloths of gold, silver, and other metals, by chemical processes'. In spite of such connubial discouragement and 'an expense so disproportionate to the fortune which supported it' she persevered. Such perseverance does not surprise, for the preface reveals a formidably assured woman who stated frankly: 'I published this essay in its present imperfect state, in order to prevent the furacious attempts of the prowling plagiary, and the insidious pretender to chymistry, from arrogating to themselves and assuming my invention in plundering silence'. She was well aware of the criticism she might receive from opponents, especially as a woman writing on controversial subjects, and took the robust line that 'censure is perhaps inevitable; for some are so ignorant, that they grow sullen and silent, and are chilled with horror at the sight of any thing that bears the semblance of learning, in whatever shape it may appear; and should the 'spectre' appear in the shape of 'woman', the pangs which they suffer are truly dismal.' Driving the point home she went on to declare that: 'happen what may, I hope I shall never experience such desertion of mind, as not to hold the helm with becoming fortitude against the storm raised by ignorance, petulant arrogance, and privileged dulness'. It is perhaps not entirely fortuitous that her book was sold by Joseph Johnson, the publisher of Thomas Paine, Joseph Priestley, and Mary Wollstonecraft. 
The body of the book details the approach Mrs Fulhame took towards the attainment of her original goal, her crowning achievement being the production of cloth 'maps, the rivers of which are represented in silver, and the cities in gold'. The lengthy, systematic study of the action of various reducing agents (hydrogen, sulphur, phosphorus, charcoal, even light) on metallic salts in aqueous, alcoholic, and ethereal solution was unusual, even unique, for its time. Several incidental observations -- the passivation of iron, the production of colloidal gold, and the formation of images by the action of light -- have been viewed as foreshadowing discoveries made later and assigned to others. Indeed, late twentieth-century histories of photography include Mrs Fulhame. 
Perhaps the most remarkable feature of this remarkable book are Mrs Fulhame's imaginative and iconoclastic views on the nature of combustion, the central problem of late eighteenth-century chemistry. Clearly she was fully familiar with the contending phlogistic and anti-phlogistic theories of those chemically revolutionary years. She postulates a reaction sequence in which water plays the role of what would later be termed a catalyst. No wonder Rumford called her 'the lively and ingenious Mrs Fulhame'. She concludes her essay with an early statement of the ecological dogma: 'This view of combustion may serve to show how nature is always the same, and maintains her equilibrium by preserving the same quantities of air and water on the surface of our globe: for as fast as these are consumed in the various processes of combustion, equal quantities are formed, and rise regenerated like the Phenix from her ashes.' In quoting this paragraph, J. R. Partington, the historian of chemistry, added the footnote: 'The phoenix, it may be noted, was a fabulous bird regarded as sexless' (Partington, 3.708-9). Mrs Fulhame would not have been amused. 
No other work by Mrs Fulhame exists, and attempts to locate her biographically have so far proven fruitless. Of her significance and interest there is, however, no doubt. 


@@@@@


doc= 39779


Channon, Sir Henry (1897-1958), politician and diarist, was born in Chicago on 7 March 1897 (although he claimed 1899 as the year of his birth, until a distressing exposure in the 'Sunday Express'). He was the only child of Henry Channon (1868-1930x39), who inherited a fleet of vessels plying the Great Lakes, and his wife, Vesta Westover ('c'.1870-1943). After accompanying the American Red Cross to Paris (1917), he was subsequently an honorary attache at the US embassy there (1918). His lifelong Proustian infatuation with the aristocratic civilization of Europe was enhanced during eighteen happy months as an undergraduate at Christ Church, Oxford (January 1920-June 1921). He acquired the nickname of Chips, which afterwards was his London telegraphic address. On leaving university he shared a house in Westminster with Viscount Gage and Prince Paul of Serbia. When the prince became regent of Yugoslavia (1934), Channon described him as 'the person I have loved most... the only human being with whom I am completely, wholly natural' ('Chips', ed. James, 20). Adoring London society, privilege, rank, and wealth, he became an energetic, implacable, but endearing social climber who pursued the Curzons of Kedleston as part of his self-reinvention as an upper-class European. But away from the smart drawing-rooms of Mayfair and Belgravia he was often less comfortable. He seemed spurious to many of those on whose acceptance his happiness depended. To Lady Gladwyn he was 'that American pipsqueak (alas naturalized British)' and a 'twerp' ('Diaries of Cynthia Gladwyn', 26, 40). James Lees-Milne thought him 'a flibbertigibbet' (Lees-Milne, 'Ancestral Voices', 204) and Duff Cooper 'a toady' (Charmley, 79). 
The prosaic populism of American culture was the object of Channon's revulsion in two books. The heroine of his novel 'Joan Kennedy' (1929) is an Englishwoman whose marriage to a rich, boisterous American is spoiled when he takes her to his harsh, crude homeland. In 'Paradise City' (1930) Channon traced the ruin by industrial capitalism of a calm, contented town based on early Chicago, and the effects on characters including an aesthete who dies in Venice and a beauty who marries into the English peerage. His final book, 'The Ludwigs of Bavaria' (1933), was a romantic biography of the royal dynasty of Wittelsbach: 'their charm, their dark nervous beauty, their cruel fates, their passion for the arts, their follies and madness make them one of the most fascinating families in history' ('The Ludwigs of Bavaria', 11-12). 
Channon is chiefly remembered, however, for his diaries which survive for the years 1918, 1923-8, and 1934-53. Discreetly edited extracts compiled by Robert Rhodes James and published in 1967 open with Lady Diana Cooper's announcing the death of King Albert I of the Belgians (12 February 1934) and close with Channon's cocktail party for King Umberto II of Italy (18 November 1953). The intervening entries are by turns scintillating, epicene, snobbish, fatuous, self-mocking, and cliche-ridden. There are captivating descriptions of great parliamentary occasions as well as intriguing confidences about backstairs intrigues; but each page demonstrates Channon's preference for manners over principles. 'Everybody is on about Chips's diary -- you can't think how vile & spiteful & 'silly' it is,' Nancy Mitford wrote after its publication. 'One always thought Chips was rather a dear, but he was 'black' inside how sinister!' ('Love from Nancy', 465). 
Channon's American patrimony was insufficient for the life he craved. He married on 14 July 1933 a glamorous heiress, Lady Honor Dorothy Mary Guinness (1909-1976), daughter of Rupert Edward Cecil Lee Guinness, second earl of Iveagh, and his wife, Gwendolen Florence Mary Guinness. He proudly doted on their only child, (Henry) Paul Guinness Channon (1935-2007), who was created Baron Kelvedon in 1997. The Channons acquired a sumptuous house at 5 Belgrave Square (1935) and an estate at Kelvedon Hatch, near Brentwood in Essex (1937). Hospitality at these homes was as effervescent and lavish as their interiors were ornate. The newly married Chips was a thoughtful, shrewd, witty, and worldly gossip who loved to help people. His social radiance could be entrancing; he was resolute in promoting the interests of his friends. The earl of Drogheda found him 'an immensely kind man, with many acts of generosity to his credit' (Drogheda, 59-60): when Viscountess Castlerosse sat on a wasp, Chips sucked the sting out of her buttock. Channon wrote of himself in 1935: 'I have flair, intuition, great good taste but only second rate ambition: I am far too susceptible to flattery; I hate and am uninterested in all the things most men like such as sport, business, statistics, debates, speeches, war and the weather; but I am rivetted by lust, furniture, glamour and society and jewels. ('Chips', ed. James, 38)' Channon replaced his mother-in-law as Conservative MP for Southend-on-Sea in 1935 and remained in parliament until his death (after a division of the constituency, he represented Southend-on-Sea West from 1950). He in turn was succeeded by his son, Paul, who won the constituency in the by-election after his father's death, and held it until 1997 (when he was elevated to the House of Lords as Baron Kelvedon). At constituency work Channon was diligent. In political ideas he had no interest; only personal loyalties and emotions moved him. The masculinity of the House of Commons gratified him, but he was too dapper and ingratiating for many men. 'Channon, who has the Servants' Hall mentality', Hugh Dalton sneered in 1941, 'would make a good butler to minor royalty' ('War Diary', 179). He detested with a convert's ferocity individuals who betrayed or organizations which threatened the aristocratic ambience which he adulated. Always ferociously anti-communist, he was an early dupe of the Nazis because his attractive German princelings hoped that Hitler might be preparing for a Hohenzollern restoration; later he became a devoted, nervous supporter of appeasement. The political hero of his life was therefore the arch-appeaser Neville Chamberlain, with whom he 'fell in love' on the day that Hitler took Vienna ('Chips', ed. James, 150). Robert Byron said at the time of Chamberlain's Munich accord, 'the trouble with you, Chips, is that you put your adopted class before your adopted country' (Lees-Milne, 'Ancestral Voices', 161). R. A. Butler, in explanation of his appointment of Channon as his parliamentary private secretary when under-secretary at the Foreign Office (March 1938-July 1941), declared that he needed to attach a first-class restaurant car to his train. 
At a dinner given by Lady Cunard in July 1939 Channon met Peter Daniel Coats (1910-1990), nicknamed Petticoats, 'a classic English queen' (Vidal, 195). Although this intimacy led to Channon's separation from his wife in 1940 and the dissolution of their marriage in 1945, he continued to live magnificently on money the Guinnesses had bestowed. He dazzled the playwright Terence Rattigan with splendid gifts in 1944 during a light-hearted affair, but it was a symptom of the self-doubt that increasingly afflicted him after the war that he betrayed possessive distress as the affair petered out in 1948-9. Rattigan thought him 'an iron butterfly'. He became a cruder debauchee: 'Chips fell upon me, round rosy face flushed with drink, like an antique depraved schoolboy', Gore Vidal recalls of their first meeting in 1948 (Vidal, 195). The artificiality of his life became over-strained -- Noel Coward found his dinner for King George II of the Hellenes in 1946 'very grand and rather agony' ('Coward Diaries', 50-51) -- and party-giving may have staled even for the self-styled lord of hosts himself: entertaining the queens of Romania and Spain in 1947, he 'laced the cocktails with Benzedrine, which I find always makes a party go' ('Chips', ed. James, 419). His friendship with the duchess of Windsor had discredited him at the royal court after 1936; he lost hope of political importance after 1941; declining sexual powers, portliness, and heart attacks further dismayed him after 1950. He became an increasingly poignant, fantastic figure: bibelots, scandal-mongering, voluptuous living, and queens for dinner were not enough to revive his spirits. After the glorious coronation summer of 1953 he abandoned his diary. 
Channon's persistent intrigues for a coronet resulted in a knighthood in 1957. He died after several strokes, on 7 October 1958, in the London Hospital, Whitechapel, and was buried on 14 October in his grounds at Kelvedon Hall. Elliot Templeton in Somerset Maugham's novel 'The Razor's Edge' (1944) and the disappointed schoolmaster Croker-Harris in Rattigan's play 'The Browning Version' (1948) were partly inspired by Channon. 


@@@@@


doc= 39780


Graham, Caroline Agnes, duchess of Montrose (1818-1894), racehorse owner, was born at Bolam, Northumberland, on 23 January 1818, the third and youngest daughter of John Horsley-Beresford, second Baron Decies (1774-1855), and his wife, Charlotte Philadelphia (died 1852), only daughter and heir of Robert Horsley of Bolam House, Morpeth. On 15 October 1836 she married James Graham, fourth duke of Montrose (1799-1874) and Conservative politician, at St George's Church, Hanover Square, London, and entered on a career as a prominent society hostess. They had three sons and three daughters; the youngest son, Douglas Beresford Malise Ronald Graham (1852-1925), succeeded to the dukedom. 
It was while married to Montrose that Caroline began her long association with the turf. Although she was thoroughly knowledgeable on all aspects of thoroughbred racing and breeding, she was obliged to race under the pseudonym of Mr Manton, as racing was not then considered a suitable pastime for a lady. (The actress Lillie Langtry raced under the name Mr Jersey.) Her interest was, however, no secret: her association with the Manton trainer Alec Taylor was well known. 
Caroline was widowed in 1874, but in 1876 she married the celebrated owner, Jockey Club member, and dandy William Stuart Stirling Crawfurd (1819-1883). It was largely as a result of this second marriage that her turf career really developed. Together with Craw, as her husband was known, the duchess (who still preferred to be addressed by her title) patronized not only Taylor at Manton but also Joe Dawson's Bedford Lodge stables at Newmarket, which they later bought and turned into a private stable under the supervision of Buck Sherard. 
The couple's scarlet racing colours which, with the duchess's bright red hair -- usually crowned with a large Homburg hat -- earned her the nickname Carrie Red, were highly successful, winning a number of England's classic races. Their most famous racehorse was the 1878 Epsom Derby winner, Sefton, after whom the duchess named the purpose-built stables to which she moved her interests in the winter of 1882-3. Their other classic winners included Craig Millar (winner of the St Leger) and Moslem (joint winner in a dead heat for the 1868 Two Thousand Guineas). In addition Craw's filly Thebais won both the One Thousand Guineas and the Oaks in 1881 and the couple together enjoyed further One Thousand Guineas success with St Marguerite and Mayonnaise. 
The duchess was shattered by Craw's death at Cannes in 1883. She had his body brought back to England and buried at St Agnes's Church, Newmarket, which she had built and endowed in his memory. All Craw's horses were kept in training, many of them ridden by the most brilliant jockey of the times, Fred Archer. Archer's ease with his social superiors was often remarked upon and he certainly enjoyed a close relationship with the duchess. It was rumoured that the two were planning to marry, until Archer found out that marriage to a duchess was not enough to make him a duke and cried off. 
But Caroline did marry again. Her third husband, Marcus Henry Milner (1864-1939), son of Henry Beilby William Milner, banker, whom she married on 26 July 1888 at the age of seventy, was forty-six years her junior and the couple were widely believed to be unhappy. The duchess, however, who continued to live at Sefton Lodge, was unlikely to be troubled by gossip. A number of her contemporaries, most notably the Hon. George Lambton, testified to her strength of personality and grand disregard for the opinions of others. She was said to have threatened the vicar of St Agnes's with dismissal for uttering a prayer for a fine, dry harvest time shortly before one of his patroness's horses, with a known fondness for heavy going, was due to race in a big handicap. 
Caroline died on 16 November 1894 at her home at 45 Belgrave Square, London; she was buried four days later, near to her beloved Craw at St Agnes's. The dispersal sale of her stud on 11 December 1894 had far-reaching results for the British turf: the mare Canterbury Pilgrim, sold to the earl of Derby, went on to establish one of the most influential strains in British racing. 


@@@@@


doc= 39781


Day, John Barham (1793-1860), jockey and racehorse trainer, was born at Houghton Down, Hampshire, the son of John Day, a local trainer and racing adviser to George, prince of Wales, and his wife, Alice, daughter of a Mr Barham of Stockbridge, Hampshire. Little is known of John Barham Day's education save that from an early stage it took second place to his career as a lightweight jockey. Unusually small, Day was able to weigh in at 7 stone until he retired from race riding about 1840. He began riding at minor tracks near his father's stables. Fees were low as was the standard of the racing, but in 1826 Day was retained by the fourth duke of Grafton on the recommendation of his brother, Lord Henry Fitzroy. In that year Day rode the duke's horses Problem and Devise to win the Two Thousand Guineas and the One Thousand Guineas respectively, for which he was awarded a $20 present and a lecture on the perils of suddenly acquired wealth. 
As a lightweight lacking real strength, particularly in a close finish, Day was a useful rather than a great jockey. It was more as a trainer that he was known. In 1835, though still riding competitively, especially in big races, he began training at Danebury, 4 miles north of Stockbridge. The stable's remoteness and its inaccessibility to newspaper touts made it ideal for a trainer fond of a bet. The rewards open to the early nineteenth-century jockey and trainer were limited without recourse to the betting ring; Day's willingness to deceive not only bookmakers but also owners earned him the sarcastic nickname Honest John Day. His first significant patron was Lord George Bentinck who spent lavishly on Danebury in the late 1830s. The pair enjoyed considerable success, especially with the outstanding Crucifix winner of both the One Thousand Guineas and the Two Thousand Guineas and the Oaks in 1840, although their most characteristic success came in the 1836 St Leger with Elis. Beaten in the Derby, though heavily backed by his connections, Elis was a warm favourite for the final classic, his Epsom conqueror being an absentee. He was priced prohibitively in the betting ring. In 1836 it took about a fortnight to move a horse north to Doncaster and with only a week to go it was known that Elis was still with Bentinck and he began to drift in the market. His owner, however, had been busy constructing one of the first horseboxes, in which he managed to transport the horse to Town Moor in just three days. Elis won the race at 7/2, rather less than the price Bentinck and Day secured. 
The association did not, however, last. Midway through the season of 1841 Bentinck discovered, thanks to some carelessly confused letters, that Day was deceiving him about the condition of one of his horses, the better to get a good price on it. With Bentinck gone to Goodwood, Day was left searching for another patron. The first men to fill the post are best known as the Danebury confederacy, a group of professional gamblers including the prizefighter-turned-legislator John Gully, Harry Hill, William Pedley, and Joshua Arnold. In his book 'Reminiscences of the Turf', Day's son William Henry Day denies that his father knew anything of the activities of these men, but that is unlikely. The formal association, whatever its nature, was ended in 1845 when Day moved to Michel Grove, Findon, Sussex, to act as private trainer to the solicitor, money-lender, and erstwhile confederacy member, Henry Padwick. Day's eldest son, John (1814-1882), took over work at Danebury while William was established as a breeder at Woodyates, Cranborne Chase, Wiltshire, at his father's expense. Day's time at Findon was not without controversy and in 1855 Padwick had to surrender Day's services on finding that his excellent colt St Hubert had lost the Two Thousand Guineas, for which he had been heavily backed, thanks to an arrangement with the trainer's son which allowed William Day's Lord of the Isles to triumph. Day was promptly evicted from Michel Grove and he spent the rest of his life as a guest at Danebury, where he died on 21 March 1860. 
Day was known to be as hard on his horses as he was on their owners, always galloping them uphill, often in rugs and blankets. His regime of sweats, drenching, purging, and even bleeding, favoured tough horses and did result in heavy casualties. But Day believed in sending his horses to post fit and with little room for improvement; Danebury runners were unusually successful first time out. Both of his sons who took to training followed his methods. Day was twice married but nothing is known of his wives except that his first wife's name was Goddard. Of his twelve children, all from his first marriage, two more rode professionally: Alfred and Samuel, who won the St Leger on Mango. 
Day is, however, significant as more than just an indication of how loose notions of 'honour' could be on the nineteenth-century turf. Along with the Yorkshireman John Scott he was the first trainer to prove himself as a highly skilled professional, not just another groom. He demanded and secured a good wage from influential men too aware of his talent to be overly concerned by his dishonesty. For every patron who left Danebury in disgust, plenty preferred to stay, including Lord Palmerston, whose Iliona won the 1841 Cesarewitch. As the founder of a racing dynasty which later included among its members Lester Piggott, Day is also of some note. 


@@@@@


doc= 39784


Lambton, George (1860-1945), racehorse trainer and writer, was born on 23 November 1860 at Fenton, Northumberland, the fifth son of George Frederick D'Arcy Lambton, second earl of Durham (1828-1879), and his wife, Lady Beatrix Francis Hamilton (died 1871). Educated privately before proceeding to Eton in 1873, Lambton was a keen huntsman from the start, 'blooded' at the age of seven. After only three years at Eton he moved to a tutor in Dorset before going up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1879. The university was not, however, to his taste and, following the death of his father after his first term there, he left for a crammer at Storrington where he prepared to enter the army. It was later said of Lambton's education that he 'found Eton rather too near Ascot and Cambridge rather too near Newmarket' ('The Times'), and he left the crammer after a short time also, having decided to make racing his career. 
Lambton began as an amateur rider, although as a younger son he was not rich and, unlike most of his colleagues, depended on betting to live. His family was steeped in racing and at the time that he rode his first winner, Pompeia, at Nottingham in October 1880, six of his brothers had thoroughbreds in training. He enjoyed a successful racing career, winning the Grand Steeplechase de Paris on Parsang, before a heavy fall at Sandown Park in 1892 forced his retirement. During his convalescence he wrote sporting articles for 'St Stephen's Review'. 
Lambton now turned to training and with the help of William Brett, Baron Esher, set up at St Mary's Yard at Newmarket, Suffolk. It was an unusual step for the son of an earl to take, for training was still seen as very much a plebeian concern. But where other 'training grooms', as they were once called, were referred to by their surnames in press reports, the Honourable George, as he was known to the racing fraternity, was always 'Mister' Lambton. He cared little about what society thought, and his indifference and example helped change the status of his chosen profession. But his connections served him well and after some success for Esher, principally with the influential mare Hetty Sorel, he became in 1893 private trainer to Frederick Stanley, sixteenth earl of Derby. 
By 1894 Derby had built Bedford Lodge stables for Lambton and had purchased a number of yearlings, including the 1896 Royal Oaks winner, Canterbury Pilgrim, at the sale of the stock of Caroline Agnes, duchess of Montrose. Moving to Derby's newly built Stanley House stables at Newmarket in 1903, he enjoyed considerable success, becoming champion trainer in 1906, when he won his second Oaks with Keystone II. On the death of Derby in 1908 Lambton continued to work for his successor, the seventeenth earl, and between 1908 and 1926 Stanley House sent out eight classic winners and won the trainers' championship twice. 
On 7 December 1908 Lambton, known for his dapper dress and handsome appearance, married Cecily Margaret (1882-1972), the daughter of Sir John Horner of Mells. They had four children: John; Edward, who succeeded his father as a trainer; Ann Katharine Swynford Lambton, whose middle name commemorated one of her father's St Leger winners; and Sybil, who similarly recalled the 1917 One Thousand Guineas winner, Diadem. Ann Lambton later became a renowned scholar of Persian history and the Persian language. Cecily Lambton was herself extremely knowledgeable about horses and a constant support to her husband throughout their long and happy marriage. 
In 1926 old age encouraged Lambton to surrender his training responsibilities in favour of managing Derby's horses, but in 1930 financial pressures forced the earl to dismiss his trainer, Frank Butters, and Lambton combined the roles of trainer and manager until 1933. In that year he enjoyed probably his greatest success, winning the Derby and the St Leger with the magnificent Hyperion. It therefore came as a particular shock when in November Derby wrote informing him that he would not be required as trainer for the following year. Lambton's ill health was undoubtedly a factor in Derby's thinking and he offered a generous pension to his trainer, whom he expected would now retire. In fact Lambton was determined to continue, and hoped to provide a platform for his son Edward, and he felt that his prospects had been harmed by Derby's actions. It was particularly sad that one of the great partnerships in English racing should thus end acrimoniously. 
Lambton next purchased the Kremlin House stables and trained the horses of his nephew the fifth earl of Durham, and after an indifferent start began winning again, securing his last classic, the Irish One Thousand Guineas, with Major Dermot McCalmont's Lapel in 1938. During the war he made an influential appeal for the continuation of racing, on the same grounds that he had defended it during the First World War, arguing that a prolonged break would destroy the industry and that the public in any case wanted racing to continue. He won the Lincolnshire handicap in 1941 and sent out his last winner, Golden Cloud, at Windsor early in June 1945. He was too ill, though, to see it win, and died at his home, Mesnil Warren, in Newmarket on 23 July 1945. He was deeply mourned by the racing community and not least by Derby, with whom there had been a rapprochement in later years. 
As well as enjoying success as a trainer Lambton was also the first to demonstrate to a sceptical Jockey Club the potential influence of doping in racing. The practice of using cocaine as a dope had been brought to Britain by American trainers and jockeys in the late 1890s, and by 1900 it had become 'a serious menace' (Lambton, 254), threatening to undermine the whole bloodstock business. In 1903 its influence was so harmful that Lambton decided to act, informing one of the Jockey Club stewards of his intent. He doped five of his more mediocre charges, what he called the 'biggest rogues in training' (ibid., 255), and watched four of them win and one come second; he was careful not to bet on any of these races. The stewards, having seen reluctant and incompetent animals transformed into unstoppable athletes, banned doping, which in 1904 became a criminal offence. He was not solely acting to protect the business interests of the racing community but was concerned equally for the welfare of the animals involved and his love of horses and respect for them is conveyed strongly in his 1924 memoir 'Men and Horses I have Known', from which he emerges as a genial and opinionated professional. Discursive and entertaining, it is a record of every celebrity of the turf during the heyday of English racing and it remains, like its author, one of the most popular of its kind in the sport. 


@@@@@


doc= 39788


Bunbury, Sir (Thomas) Charles, sixth baronet (1740-1821), horse-racing administrator and politician, was born in Suffolk (probably at Mildenhall) in May 1740, the elder son of the Revd Sir William Bunbury, fifth baronet ('c'.1710-1764), and his wife, Eleanor Graham (died 1762), daughter of Vere Graham of Wix Abbey, Essex; his brother was the caricaturist Henry William Bunbury. The family had been prominent landowners in Cheshire for several centuries and his father, the vicar of Mildenhall, inherited estates in Suffolk also. He was educated at a school in Bury St Edmunds, at Westminster School, London, and at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, from where he matriculated in 1757 and graduated MA in 1765. He travelled to France and Italy on the grand tour in 1760-61. 
Bunbury entered parliament as MP for Suffolk at the general election in 1761 and held his seat until 1812, apart from a break from 1784 to 1790. He held briefly the post of secretary to the lord lieutenant of Ireland, Lord Weymouth, from May to July 1765. He was a whig and later a supporter of Charles James Fox. Fox was a nephew of his first wife, Lady Sarah Lennox (1745-1826) ['see 'Napier, Lady Sarah], whom he married on 2 June 1762. She was the daughter of Charles Lennox, second duke of Richmond and Lennox (1701-1750), courtier, and Lady Sarah Cadogan (died 1751). Lady Sarah, whose beauty had attracted the young George III, was unsuited to life with a good-natured but neglectful sporting gentleman who preferred the company of grooms and jockeys. She had several affairs and the daughter she gave birth to during the marriage was not her husband's but Lord William Gordon's. The union was dissolved by act of parliament on 14 May 1776. 
Bunbury's main interest was horse racing and he regularly attended meetings at Newmarket, which was near his country seat at Barton Hall, Great Barton, Suffolk. He was co-founder of the Oaks (1779) as well as of the Derby. The story goes that he lost the toss of a coin with the earl of Derby for the privilege of having a new race at Epsom named after him. Ironically he won the first running of the Derby with his colt Diomed in 1780, and he owned two more winners of the race, Eleanor and Smolensko. He also bred Highflyer, the greatest stallion of the eighteenth century. 
Bunbury was steward of the Jockey Club for the first time at the age of twenty-eight and for many years he ruled racing even when not in office. At first the club had authority only at Newmarket, but under his leadership it became the governing body of the turf throughout the country. He transformed the pattern of racing and helped to create the modern thoroughbred by replacing 4 mile heats with races that demanded greater speed and precocity. His determination to eradicate sharp practice in racing was shown in 1791 when he took action over the inconsistent running of Escape, a horse owned by the prince of Wales, who subsequently withdrew from racing at Newmarket. 
Bunbury was a mild, kindly man but decisive in promoting the interests of the sport he loved. Little is known of his second wife, Margaret (1744?-1822), except that she was of humble origins and little education. He died at his London house in Pall Mall on 31 March 1821 and was buried in the family vault at Mildenhall ten days later, on 10 April. His widow died on 6 February 1822. He had no children and was succeeded in the baronetcy by his nephew Lieutenant-General Sir Henry Bunbury (1778-1860). 


@@@@@


doc= 39791


Disraeli, Mary Anne, Viscountess Beaconsfield (1792-1872), political wife, was born in Exeter on 11 November 1792, the second surviving child and only daughter of John Evans (1760-1794), naval lieutenant, and his wife, Eleanor Viney (died 1842), daughter of James Viney, vicar of Bishopstrow, Wiltshire. After her father's premature death in the West Indies, Mary Anne Evans and her elder brother, John, were brought up by their mother at Brampford Speke, near Exeter, the home of her Evans grandparents, a family of Devon farmers. In 1807 Mary Anne and her mother moved to Gloucester to live with her uncle, Sir James Viney of College Green. She was poorly educated, even by early nineteenth-century standards (according to Benjamin Disraeli, she never could remember which came first, the Greeks or the Romans), and her handwriting was execrable; but she early on acquired the habit of keeping accounts and compiling albums. In 1810 she moved to Bristol, where her mother married a second husband, the shadowy and unsatisfactory Thomas Yate. Mary Anne's life at this stage is clouded by myths, some of them invented by her; Augustus Hare's story that she walked barefoot to work in a factory each morning is untrue, though she may have worked in a milliner's shop. Small and birdlike -- her feet were size four, her rings the size of a child's -- she was a vivacious flirt in Bristol society. In 1815 she married Wyndham Lewis (1778-1838), fourteen years her senior and a wealthy ironmaster (he owned a one-fifth share in the Dowlais ironworks), and she went to live at Greenmeadow, near Cardiff, a small plain house, nestling under green hills and surrounded by dripping trees. She soon tired of the country, and as Wyndham Lewis grew rich on Dowlais profits, becoming MP for Cardiff (1820-26), Mary Anne propelled herself into London society. In 1827 they moved into 1 Grosvenor Gate (now 93 Park Lane), a smart white stucco house belonging to the Grosvenor estate overlooking Hyde Park, and here she flourished in a whirl of parties, one foot in the marquess of Worcester's disreputable set (she had several affairs), another in the literati: she was a friend of Rosina, wife of Edward Bulwer Lytton, and it was through her that she met Benjamin Disraeli in 1832. 'A pretty little woman, a flirt and a rattle', was his verdict; but he made sufficient impression for Lewis to invite him at the last minute to come in as second tory member for Maidstone at the 1837 election. 
In March 1838 Wyndham Lewis suddenly died. On 28 August 1839 Mary Anne married Benjamin Disraeli (1804-1881). Initially, at least, it was a match of expediency. Disraeli, desperately in debt, needed the wealthy widow's money; Mary Anne, who at forty-seven was twelve years older than Disraeli, was in no position to tarry. A thin, scrawny figure, outlandishly dressed in girlish pink satin and ringlets, she was mocked by the smart young men who revolved around Disraeli. Sir William Gregory found her repulsive -- 'flat, angular, under-bred, with a harsh, grating voice' -- and her embarrassing remarks provided copy for countless unkind stories. She once announced, after learning that Lord Hardinge was sleeping in the room next to hers at a country house party, that she had slept between the greatest orator and the greatest soldier. 'You should see my Dizzy in his bath', she declared, when someone mentioned the beauty of white skin. Then there was the story of her remark about a picture of Venus and Adonis in her bedroom at a country house: 'I have been awake half the night trying to prevent Dizzy from looking at it.' 
But Mary Anne was not wholly ridiculous. That Disraeli's ascent of the greasy pole only began in earnest after his marriage was no coincidence. Her role was crucial. At elections she campaigned tirelessly and tactfully, winning over the shopkeepers estranged by Disraeli's offhand manner. She entertained, as the rising politician's wife must, but her real strength was less as hostess than as manager. Unstintingly generous in paying off Disraeli's debts, she advanced his creditors about $4000 each year out of her income of approximately $6500, running a very tightly budgeted domestic establishment in order to do so -- every expenditure, down to the very last cup of tea or spoonful of sugar, was costed in her account book. Each morning early while Disraeli slept Mary Anne digested 'The Times', scanned the reviews for references to her husband, and sorted through his post (this had its disadvantages). She cut his hair and paid his tailor. Above all, Mary Anne's earthy wit and native shrewdness enabled her to give the practical advice and support Disraeli most needed, and her unshakeable belief in his genius gave him the emotional anchor he lacked. 
Nervous and prone to bouts of acute anxiety, when she became near-hysterical, Mary Anne was jealous of other women. She quarrelled with Disraeli's sister Sarah and with his brothers. As she grew older, she grew odder. Her stinginess was legendary. She once ordered a quarter pound of cheese from the shop at Hughenden (where their country house was), only to send it back next day when Disraeli returned unexpectedly to London; when the prince and princess of Teck came to stay, she ordered six rolls for breakfast. Despite the strains, and probably the occasional infidelity on Disraeli's part, they were a devoted couple. Driving down to the house one day in 1852 when Disraeli was to make an important speech, she slammed her hand painfully in the carriage door, but remained silent in order not to upset him. Disraeli never forgot how much he owed her. 'Why, my dear, you are more like a mistress than a wife', he famously remarked when he returned home late from the Carlton Club, after celebrating his triumph over the 1867 'Reform Bill', to find the 75-year-old Mary Anne waiting up with a Fortnum and Mason's pie and a bottle of champagne. 
On his resignation as prime minister in 1868, Disraeli persuaded Queen Victoria to create his wife Viscountess Beaconsfield in her own right. Cynics sneered; they little knew that Mary Anne was already gravely ill with stomach cancer. She battled bravely on, her face garishly painted, her body shrunken and swollen; she died at Hughenden on 15 December 1872, a heartbroken Dizzy by her side, and was buried at Hughenden church on 20 December. After her death he discovered that she had squirrelled away packets of his hair, as well as every scrap of paper he ever wrote -- the latter a devotion for which historians must be truly grateful. 


@@@@@


doc= 39792


FitzRoy, Sir Almeric William (1851-1935), civil servant, was born on 12 November 1851, the elder son of Francis Horatio FitzRoy (1823-1900), the grandson of Admiral Lord William FitzRoy KCB (1782-1857), and the great-grandson of the third duke of Grafton (1735-1811). He was therefore descended from Charles II through his liaison with Barbara Villiers. His mother, Gertrude, 'nee' Duncombe (died 1916), was the second daughter of the second Baron Feversham. 
FitzRoy was sent to Cheam preparatory school, Surrey, but after two years his formal schooling was ended by rheumatic fever. His private studies, however, enabled him in 1870 to enter Balliol College, Oxford, where he obtained a first-class degree in history. 
In 1876 FitzRoy joined the inspectorate of schools within the education department, then under the aegis of the privy council. Between 1885 and 1892 he was successively private secretary to Edward Stanhope, Sir Henry Holland, and Sir William Dyke. One of his duties was to negotiate with Cardinal Manning to secure the votes of the Irish members to the 'Technical Education Bill' of 1889, and he retained a vivid sense of the cardinal's 'genius of command' and 'magnetism of will' (FitzRoy, 1.xiv; 2.537-8). 
FitzRoy greatly admired the eighth duke of Devonshire, lord president of the council from 1895 to 1905, who immediately appointed him departmental private secretary. In 1898 the duke recommended FitzRoy to the queen to succeed Sir Charles Peel as clerk of the privy council. When FitzRoy was received at Balmoral, Queen Victoria was fascinated by his resemblance to Charles II. 'He was very much at his ease, rather too much, I thought', considered Marie Mallet, one of the ladies-in-waiting. 'He is so cynical and makes fun even of his poor little wife, because she is fond of her children. He has secured a tremendous place and looks extremely self-satisfied' ('Life with Queen Victoria', 141-2). 
The establishment in 1900 of a separate Board of Education reduced the work of the privy council, which, however, retained miscellaneous responsibilities in higher education, local government, medicine, and scientific research. FitzRoy chaired the interdepartmental committee on physical deterioration (1903-4), set up as a result of concern about the poor physical condition of potential recruits in the South African War. The committee advised that all county councils should have full-time medical officers of health (achieved in 1909), while other recommendations led to the systematic medical inspection of schoolchildren, established by the 'Education Act' of 1907. This act also empowered local education authorities to provide school meals. 
FitzRoy presided over a committee on the 'Midwives Act' (1909), and served on the royal commission on venereal diseases (1913-16), which concluded that not less than a tenth of the population suffered from syphilis. He also sat on the committee on the 'Dentists Act' (1918-19). His routine work, however, was simply to organize meetings of the privy council and to arrange for the formal presentation to the sovereign of legislation brought into force by orders in council. Much concerned with ceremony and protocol, FitzRoy read the official proclamation of the accession of Edward VII in 1901 and that of George V in 1910; in 1917 he also submitted a draft of the declaration by which George V changed the name of the royal family to Windsor. But despite FitzRoy's self-important air and his relish for being at the centre of events, attributes which attracted some mockery, he played no part in the formation of policy. 
FitzRoy was always immaculately turned out, with a keen instinct for social niceties. In October 1922, however, he was fined $5 at Marlborough Street magistrates' court for 'wilfully interfering with and annoying persons using Hyde Park' ('The Times', 9 Oct 1922). He maintained that he had merely approached a woman under the delusion that she was someone he knew (FitzRoy to Stamfordham, 10 Oct 1922, RA/PS/GV/O1812/2). The conviction was dismissed on appeal, and he was granted costs ('The Times', 11 Nov 1922). Though Lord Balfour (lord president at the time of the incident), Lord Stamfordham (George V's private secretary), and the king himself were all supportive, the fourth marquess of Salisbury, who replaced Balfour in October 1922, considered that FitzRoy had been 'indiscreet, to put it mildly', and advocated that he should retire after a few months (Salisbury to Stamfordham, 12 Nov 1922, RA/PS/GV/O1812/9). FitzRoy duly left the clerkship at the end of May 1923. His successor, Sir Maurice Hankey, was also secretary of the cabinet and of the committee of imperial defence. 
In 1925 FitzRoy published two large and ill edited volumes of memoirs. Though overladen with unremarkable accounts of council meetings and dinner parties, these tomes contain some interesting anecdotes, notably about the duke of Devonshire, Winston Churchill, and Lord Morley. There is also a fine purple patch on his attending mass in Westminster Cathedral at Christmas 1903. FitzRoy was instinctively attracted to Roman Catholicism, though he never renounced the Anglican faith in which he had been born. 
The memoirs did not find favour at court. Lord Stamfordham was horrified that FitzRoy should have included an account (12 July 1904) of Edward VII's receiving an address from the House of Commons while having his corns cut. He also found it 'impertinent' that 'this noble descendant of Charles II' should have presumed to express his approval of Queen Mary's intelligence (Stamfordham to Rosebery, 18 Sept 1925, RA/PS/GV/O1812/16). When FitzRoy sent a copy of the 'Memoirs' to the queen, it was politely returned. 
FitzRoy served on the council of the Stage Society, and helped the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art to obtain its charter. He published 'Henry Duke of Grafton' (1921), 'History of the Travellers' Club' (1927), and 'History of the Privy Council from Earliest Times' (1928). He was appointed KCVO in 1909 and KCB in 1911. 
FitzRoy married, on 30 July 1887, Katharine, daughter of Sir Henry Farquar, fourth baronet. They had a son and a daughter. Lady FitzRoy died on 24 November 1933, and FitzRoy himself on 31 May 1935 at his home, 4 Eaton Terrace, London. His funeral took place on 5 June 1935 at Holy Trinity, Sloane Street, and his body was subsequently interred at Holy Trinity, Hawley, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 39793


Stead, Christina Ellen (1902-1983), writer, was born on 17 July 1902 in Sydney, Australia, the daughter of David George Stead (1877-1957), naturalist, and Ellen Butters (1876-1904). Her mother died two years after her birth, and her father married again in 1907. His second wife, Ada Gibbons Stead, bore six more children. In 1917, in straitened circumstances, the family moved to Watson's Bay, Sydney, then a modest fishing village perched between the Pacific Ocean and Sydney harbour. Stead's autobiographical novel, 'The Man who Loved Children' (1940), gives a vivid impression of the tensions of her early childhood and her escape into writing. Sam Pollit (the 'man' referred to in the title) is closely based on Stead's father: a self-educated naturalist and gifted story-teller. He was an overbearing, charming, manipulative man who constantly taunted his eldest daughter that she was too plain to find a husband. Stead battled internally all her life with the ghost of her father. 
Christina Stead did well at Sydney Girls' High School; in her final year, 1919, she was editor of the school magazine. She attended Sydney Teachers' College (1920-22), where she developed a strong interest in psychology, but she hated teaching. In 1925, on the brink of a nervous breakdown, she left the New South Wales department of education. In the same year Angus and Robertson, Australia's major publishing house, rejected her children's stories. For the next three years, though her wages as a secretary were meagre, Stead obsessively saved for the boat fare to Europe. Determined to become a writer, she felt the pull of the world's cultural centres. 
Stead sailed to London in March 1928 and found work as a secretary in a firm of grain merchants. Her American manager, William James Blech (1894-1968), who later changed his name to Blake, became her lifelong, supportive companion; they eventually were to marry on 23 February 1952. A Marxist and financier, he later wrote historical fiction. 
In 1929 Stead and Blake went to Paris, where they worked in a private American bank. In her spare time Stead wrote feverishly. She was contracted by the London publisher Peter Davies, and 'The Salzburg Tales' and 'Seven Poor Men of Sydney' were both published in 1934. The stories, in particular, received lavish praise from well-known critics in Britain and the United States. Australian critics, steeped in the realist tradition, responded less favourably to the elements of modernist eccentricity in Stead's early fiction. Her next two novels, 'The Beauties and Furies' (1936) and 'House of All Nations' (1938), had Paris settings. Stead's genius for portraying different locales, voices, and expressions make her one of the truly cosmopolitan writers of the twentieth century. In her homeland this meant she was dismissed (until the late 1960s) as 'un-Australian'. 
In 1937 Stead and Blake moved to New York, where they stayed for the next nine years, moving in communist literary circles. Eager to write about her childhood in Sydney, Stead embarked on 'The Man who Loved Children', a psychological character novel of searing intensity. Her publishers, Simon and Schuster, persuaded her to give the novel an American setting. It went entirely against the grain, but Stead transplanted her family narrative to Washington and Chesapeake Bay. Her Australian family members were made into Americans, with American speech and habits -- a feat that, according to some American critics, Stead did not manage convincingly. Whether or not the novel for which Stead is best-known is flawed in this way, its American setting has complicated her standing within the Australian literary canon. 'For Love Alone' (1944) forms an autobiographical sequel, though the writer protagonist (called Louisa in 'The Man who Loved Children') is now called Teresa, and this time the setting is Sydney and London. The novel is a bold and courageous evocation of female sexual desire (in a world that permitted no outlet for it) and the terror that the prospect of spinsterhood aroused in young women. The 'New York Times' compared the novel with D. H. Lawrence's early fiction. 
In 'Letty Fox: her Luck' (1946), Stead again explored the female condition, from a very different angle. Letty is a sexually promiscuous New Yorker in a sexually liberated world. Once again, Stead explores the sexual, social, and political binds in which her characters are caught up. And once again, the reviews made it obvious that she had touched nerve centres. From the mid-1930s and throughout the 1940s Stead was greatly admired in London and New York literary circles. The American critic Clifton Fadiman hailed her in the 'New Yorker' as 'the most extraordinary woman novelist produced by the English-speaking race since Virginia Woolf' (Fadiman, 84-6). And yet during the 1950s and early 1960s her reputation suffered a complete eclipse. Stead and Blake left the United States at the end of 1946. Already the House Un-American Activities Committee was persecuting left-wing writers and threatening the autonomy of publishing houses. (The Federal Bureau of Investigation opened a brief file on Stead in 1947, but there was a substantial file on Blake, who was an active fellow traveller.) For several years they wandered from place to place in Europe, impoverished and receiving rejection slips from publishers. In 1952 they settled in London. 
For Stead, the departure from the United States represented a significant turning point. From then on her fiction offered neither moral integrity nor hope. Instead, she confronted readers with poverty, corruption, and self-deception. Apart from 'The People with the Dogs' (1952), a gentle Chekhovian narrative, her books became angry. 'A Little Tea, a Little Chat' (1948) was about wartime profiteering by New York financiers. After 1952 there was a publishing gap of thirteen years, and it was thought that Stead had writer's block. In fact, although publishers did not consider her books marketable, she was writing some of her best, most critical fiction: 'Cotter's England' (1966), 'The Puzzleheaded Girl' (1967), 'Miss Herbert' (1976), 'The Little Hotel' (1973), and 'I'm Dying Laughing' (published posthumously in 1986). There was a brief resurgence of interest in Stead when 'The Man who Loved Children' was reissued in 1965, but nevertheless her later novels sank with little trace. 
Stead was an uncompromising writer. She was not interested in carefully wrought 'literature'; she wanted to disturb, even madden the reader. She aimed, she once said, for 'intelligent ferocity' (Rowley, 316). Her fiction is energetic and furious, with loose threads, open endings, and ambiguous moral messages. Angela Carter, one of her most admiring critics, wrote that reading Stead is 'like plunging into the mess of life itself'. 
When Bill Blake died in 1968 Stead was bereft. More and more she turned to alcohol for solace. In 1974, frightened by heart problems, she returned to Australia to live. She was feted now in Australia, and in 1974 she was awarded the Patrick White literary award. But the recognition came too late and Australia no longer felt like home. She died in Sydney on 31 March 1983. Her ashes were scattered on 6 April at the Northern Suburbs crematorium in Sydney. 


@@@@@


doc= 39794


Novikov, Olga (1840-1925), journalist and apologist for Russia, was born in Moscow on 29 April 1840. She was one of the five children of Aleksey Kireev (died 1849) and his wife, Aleksandra, 'nee' Alabyev. Her father was educated by W. E. Baxter, later a Liberal MP, and, though strongly Slavophile, he spoke English as his second language, as did her mother. In 1860 she married Ivan Novikov (died 1890), a colonel, and later general, in the 'etat major'; they had one child, Aleksandr. The Novikovs continued to move in pan-Slavist circles and were friends of Rector Keyserling of Dorpat University and K. P. Pobedonostsev, later the procurator of the Holy Synod. Initially by correspondence, Olga established connections with C. P. Villiers, Lord Clarendon, A. W. Kinglake, and John Tyndall. She was a keen supporter of links between the Old Catholics and the Orthodox churches. She first visited England in 1868 and returned in 1873, on which occasion she met the prince of Wales, Gladstone, and Disraeli. She argued that there was no necessary antagonism between Britain and Russia in central Asia and that good sense could lead to an entente. 
In July 1876 Olga Novikov's brother Aleksandr was the first Russian volunteer to be killed in Serbia, and she embarked on an anti-Turkish crusade, which was bitterly hostile to Disraeli's government. She came to Britain in 1876, just after agitation against the Bulgarian atrocities had begun in earnest, setting up in Claridge's Hotel and becoming a prominent public figure through her letters and articles justifying the Russian position: it was for her activities at this time that Disraeli called her 'the MP for Russia in England'. She was always a representative of Muscovite pan-Slavism, rather than official Russian policy. Although less influential than her notoriety at the time suggested, she was an unusual figure and, as a woman taking part in a political campaign on a foreign policy question together with the duke of Westminster and a former prime-minister, almost unique. Rumours that she was Gladstone's mistress -- 'an extremely accomplished whore' was R. B. D. Morier's description (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 9.lxxxix, note) -- were wholly unfounded, as was the story that Gladstone escorted her to her hotel following the famous conference on the Eastern question on 7-8 December 1876. However, she supplied the anti-atrocitarian campaign with much information and was a convenient link with Russian opinion. She became a regular writer of articles on Anglo-Russian affairs in W. T. Stead's 'Northern Echo' and 'Pall Mall Gazette', the 'Fortnightly Review', 'Contemporary Review', 'Fraser's Magazine', and other journals. She later crossed swords with Gladstone on Russia's record on liberty and on the pogroms of the 1880s. At the end of the century she defended the autocracy and later opposed the Duma. Olga Novikov had a considerable interest in spiritualism and played a part in introducing Helena Blatavsky to London life. She continued to visit Britain quite frequently and regarded the Anglo-Russian entente of 1907 as the fruit of her endeavours. During the First World War she wrote extensively for the 'Westminster Gazette' and the 'Asiatic Review'. Although she settled in London after 1917, living with one of her nieces, she was always something of a nomad, moving from personality to personality and collecting tokens of recognition. She died of pneumonia at 4 Brunswick Place, London, on 21 April 1925. 


@@@@@


doc= 39795


Ashmole, Bernard (1894-1988), archaeologist and art historian, was born on 22 June 1894 in Ilford, Essex, the youngest in a family of two sons and three daughters of William Ashmole, auctioneer and estate agent, and his wife, Sarah Caroline Wharton, 'nee' Tiver. Both parents had strong literary and religious interests. He was educated at Forest School (1903-11) and in 1913 went to Hertford College, Oxford, with a classics scholarship. In 1914, having taken pass moderations, he was commissioned in the 11th Royal Fusiliers, served in France, and was severely wounded on the River Somme. He was awarded the MC in 1917. Back in Oxford, he obtained an ordinary pass degree and went on to study for the diploma in classical archaeology under the guidance of Percy Gardner and John Beazley. He developed an interest in numismatics, but classical sculpture was to be his main interest for the rest of his academic career and he helped catalogue the collection in the Palazzo dei Conservatori in Rome and, later, that in Ince Blundell Hall, Lancashire (1929). In 1920 he married Dorothy Irene de Peyer (died 1991), daughter of Everard de Peyer, chartered accountant. A biographer remarked that 'anyone who knew the couple finds it hard to think of them apart'. They had two daughters and a son. 
In 1923 Ashmole had taken his BLitt at Oxford and joined the staff of the coin room in the Ashmolean Museum there. (He was a collateral descendant of the founder, Elias Ashmole.) He was persuaded in 1925 to take up the directorship of the British School at Rome, which he held until 1928. In 1929 he was appointed to the Yates chair of classical archaeology at University College, London, adding to this the part-time keepership of the Greek and Roman department in the British Museum in 1939. Here he had to supervise the packing of its treasures on the outbreak of war in 1939. 
Ashmole was commissioned as a pilot officer in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve, serving in Britain, Greece, and the Middle and Far East, and returning as a wing commander. He was twice mentioned in dispatches. After the war ended in 1945, he supervised the reinstallation of his department in the British Museum, giving up his chair in 1948 to become a full-time keeper. In 1956 he was persuaded to succeed Beazley to the Lincoln chair of classical archaeology and art at Oxford, where, as a fellow of Lincoln College, he served until his retirement in 1961. This was followed by busy travelling and visiting appointments at Aberdeen, Yale, Cincinnati, and Malibu, where he advised J. Paul Getty on the purchase of antiquities, and also by fieldwork, at the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus in Turkey. 
Ashmole was not a prolific scholar, but all his writing was characterized by a precision of learning and perceptivity that made him an unrivalled and internationally recognized authority on classical sculpture. This was displayed by concise articles, not without some acidity when dealing with the inadequacy of others, and perhaps best enjoyed in his lectures, notably the Semple lectures ('The Classical Ideal in Greek Sculpture', 1964) and the books 'Olympia' (with Nicholas Yalouris, 1967) and 'Architect and Sculptor in Classical Greece' (1972). By looking beyond connoisseurship of Greek sculpture to the problems of its context and logistics of its creation he demonstrated the value of the study to many other fields of classical archaeology. His memorable lecturing style was quiet yet dominating, but as a teacher he was probably most influential through the example he set. He had a remarkable skill for organization, which showed in his scholarship no less than in his work on the British Museum collections before and after the war, in his installation of the cast collections in University College, London, and in Oxford in the Ashmolean's new building in 1961. 
Ashmole's interest in art did not stop with antiquity: he was the friend of contemporary artists, even adviser to the feted 'I, Claudius' film of 1936 with Charles Laughton; and in the late 1920s he commissioned from the architect A. D. Connell one of the first concrete-frame houses in Britain, High and Over, near Amersham, Buckinghamshire. His practicality ranged from the design of garden fountains cast in concrete in upturned umbrellas to a rare skill with the camera which he employed to good effect on ancient sculpture. His collection of sculpture photographs was given to King's College, London (the Ashmole archive), with copies in the Beazley archive at the Ashmolean Museum. He was in many respects not the last of an older generation of scholars but the first of the new, displaying in his work and life the finer standards of his predecessors and adding an almost non-academic breadth and originality. 
Ashmole was made a fellow of the British Academy in 1938, was appointed CBE in 1957, and became honorary associate of RIBA in 1928. He was an honorary fellow of Hertford (1961) and Lincoln (1980) colleges, Oxford, and of University College, London (1974). Aberdeen awarded him an honorary LLD (1968). He was an honorary member of the Archeological Institute of America (1940) and the Archaeological Society of Athens (1978), and was awarded the Kenyon medal of the British Academy in 1979. 
Ashmole was a tall, slim man; his bearing was almost military but tempered by a sprightliness of step and unforced charm. In 1972 he and his wife moved to Peebles, Scotland, to be near their son, and he died there on 25 February 1988. He was buried at St Mary's, Iffley, Oxfordshire. 
John Boardman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39796


Ayer, Sir Alfred Jules (1910-1989), philosopher, was born on 29 October 1910 at Neville Court, Abbey Road, north-west London, the only child of Jules Louis Cyprien Ayer, financier, later in the timber trade, who came from a Swiss Calvinist family, and his wife, Reine Citroen, who came from a Dutch Jewish family, associated with the Citroen car manufacturer. He had no religious upbringing, and his childhood years, which he described as solitary, were spent in London. At the age of seven he was sent to Ascham, at Eastbourne, and from there went on, first to Eton College as a scholar, and then, in 1929, with an open scholarship in classics, to Christ Church, Oxford. Choosing not to read classical honour moderations, he obtained in 1932 a first in 'literae humaniores', which, so out of sympathy was he with the prevailing tone of Oxford philosophy, he owed entirely to his marks in ancient history. 
On the advice of his tutor, Gilbert Ryle, who had already introduced him to the ideas of Bertrand Russell and Ludwig Wittgenstein -- and to the latter personally -- Ayer spent the winter of 1932-3 in Vienna, attending Moritz Schlick's lectures and the meetings of the Vienna circle, and then returned to a lectureship at Christ Church, to which he had been elected while still an undergraduate, and which he held until 1939. 
In 1936 Ayer published his most famous book, 'Language, Truth and Logic', written at the age at which (as he liked to recall) David Hume had written his 'Treatise of Human Nature' (1739). It was his version of Viennese logical positivism, though he also saw it as a recasting of the traditional theses of British empiricism into linguistic terms. The book is full of passionate iconoclasm, expressed in a fine cadenced prose. Its central thesis is the verification principle, which divided all statements into the verifiable or the unverifiable. Verifiable statements were either, like everyday beliefs or science, reducible to observation statements, or, like mathematics or logic, transformable by means of definitions into tautologies, and only they were meaningful. Unverifiable statements (metaphysics, ethics, religion) were literally nonsense. Difficulties found in formulating the principle were treated as comparatively insubstantial, though, when the book was reissued in 1946, the new thirty-six-page introduction, itself a model of philosophical frankness, gave them much greater weight. 
Ayer's ideas scandalized established philosophy (notably H. W. B. Joseph, H. A. Prichard, and Harold Joachim), not least through their self-assurance, and they infiltrated pre-war Oxford mainly through a discussion group of younger dons who met in Isaiah Berlin's rooms in All Souls College. The young J. L. Austin was an early convert, but only briefly, and was then, for more than twenty-five years, Ayer's relentless critic. The more open-minded of the older philosophers, such as William Kneale and H. H. Price, regarded Ayer's impact on Oxford philosophy as salutary. 
Ayer's next book, 'The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge' (1940), philosophically his most refined work, supplemented the earlier attempt to set the limits of human knowledge with an account, based on sense-data, of how we attain this knowledge. By the time of its publication Ayer was in the army. He was commissioned in the Welsh Guards, but mostly served in the Special Operations Executive. He ended the war as a captain, attached to the British embassy in Paris. 
In 1945 Ayer went to Wadham College, Oxford, as philosophy tutor, a post to which he had been elected in 1944, but in 1946 he obtained the Grote chair of the philosophy of mind and logic at University College, London. Here Ayer's charismatic powers as a teacher, enhanced by his swiftness in discussion, and his broad and growing fame as the author of 'Language, Truth and Logic', came into their own, and he converted a run-down department into the rival of Oxford and Cambridge. This was the happiest period of his career. In 1956 he published 'The Problem of Knowledge', in which, abandoning reductionism, he justified our everyday beliefs by their power to explain our sense-experience. This line of argument was developed in such later works as 'The Origins of Pragmatism' (1968) and 'Russell and Moore' (1971), in which the history of philosophy was deftly blended with philosophical argument, and 'The Central Questions of Philosophy' (1973), which aimed at updating Russell's 'The Problems of Philosophy' (1912). 
In 1959 Ayer had accepted the Wykeham chair of logic at Oxford, which was held at New College, partly to continue his polemic with Austin, who died the following year. Ayer always held that philosophy, to be worthwhile, must aim at generality: Austin saw no reason to believe this. In 'Sense and Sensibilia', a very influential work in the late 1940s and 1950s, Austin had tried to show how Ayer's phenomenalism had grown out of a refusal to pay attention to the detail of the way in which we report our perceptual experience. 
Though perhaps no longer at the epicentre of debate, Ayer fought with immense skill and undiminished speed and agility against such developments as ordinary-language philosophy, Wittgensteinianism, and the new essentialism. He liked philosophy to be high-spirited as well as serious. He remained a great and generous teacher, and a prolific writer, with twenty-six books to his name before his death (including two volumes of rather unrevelatory autobiography) and one after. He shone at international conferences. He retired in 1978 and was a fellow of Wolfson College, Oxford, from 1978 to 1983. 
Like his friend and hero, Bertrand Russell, Ayer did not treat philosophy as a cloistered enterprise. In the post-war years he reached a wide audience through the BBC's The Brains Trust, and later was active against anti-homosexual legislation. Immediately after the war he helped to familiarize British readers with the leading ideas of such French philosophers as Jean-Paul Sartre, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, and Albert Camus. But it was their role in the world of letters, of which there was no equivalent in Britain, that appealed to him, and in due course what he saw as their indifference to clarity exasperated him. 
Freddie, as Ayer was known, was highly gregarious, elegant, and an animated conversationalist. He was short, with large, dark brown eyes, and a sudden smile which irradiated his fine, somewhat pensive features. He spoke very fast, and to the accompaniment of quick, fluent gestures. His friends included writers, painters, politicians, and journalists. He hated religion, and followed competitive sport, particularly football, avidly. He loved the company of women, and was much loved in turn. Vanity was in his nature, but he combined this with great charm and total loyalty to his friends. 
Ayer was made FBA in 1952, and a foreign honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1963: he was knighted in 1970, and became a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1977. He received honorary degrees from Brussels (1962), East Anglia (1972), London (1978), Trent, Canada (1980), Bard, USA (1983), and Durham (1986). He became an honorary fellow of New College, Oxford (1980). 
Ayer was married four times: first, in 1932 to (Grace Isabel) Renee (1909-1980), daughter of Colonel Thomas Orde Lees, explorer, of the Royal Marines (she subsequently married Ayer's friend and colleague the philosopher Stuart Hampshire). The marriage was dissolved in 1941 and on 18 July 1960 he married Alberta Constance (Dee) Wells (1925-2003), former wife of Alfred Wells, American diplomat, and daughter of John Chapman, business executive, from the local newspaper-owning family in Providence, Rhode Island: they had one son. The marriage was dissolved in 1983 and in the same year he married Vanessa Mary Addison, former wife of Nigel Lawson MP and daughter of Felix Salmon, businessman. She died in 1985 and on 26 April 1989 he married again Dee Wells, who survived him. Ayer also had a daughter with Sheilah Graham, the Hollywood columnist (see W. W. Fairey, 'One of the Family', 1993). When Ayer died in University College Hospital, London, on 27 June 1989, the event received much publicity in the press, serious and popular, and it was seen as bringing to an end a long line of outspoken arbiters of liberal or secular opinion. 


@@@@@


doc= 39797


Blunt, Christopher Evelyn (1904-1987), merchant banker and numismatist, was born on 16 July 1904 at the vicarage, Ham Common, London, the second of the three sons (there were no daughters) of the Revd (Arthur) Stanley Vaughan Blunt (1870-1929) and his wife, Hilda Violet (1880-1969), daughter of (John) Henry Master of Montrose House, Petersham, London. He was educated at Marlborough College, but, unlike his brothers, Wilfrid Jasper Walter Blunt, writer and artist, and Anthony Frederick Blunt, art historian and Soviet agent -- both of whom were destined for academic careers -- he did not go to university. After a year in Germany and Spain and two years as a trainee accountant, in 1924 he joined the small banking house of Higginson & Co. in London, which later became part of Hill Samuel. There he ultimately became head of corporate finance. Tall, fair, and patrician, he was a distinguished figure in the City for many years. In 1930 he married Elisabeth Rachel (died 1980), daughter of Gardner Sebastian Bazley, barrister, of Hatherop Castle, Gloucestershire; they had a son and two daughters. The family moved from London to Hungerford, Berkshire, in 1944, and in 1952 to Ramsbury Hill, near Marlborough. For most of the war Blunt had worked for Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force, being mentioned in dispatches for his liaison work in the evacuation from Bordeaux in 1940, and he was later engaged in preparations for the Normandy invasion. He was demobilized as colonel, and in 1945 was appointed OBE and the American Legion of Merit. 
While at Marlborough, Blunt had met John Shirley-Fox, a leading student of medieval English coins, a subject to which Blunt himself was to devote the greater part of his leisure for the rest of his life. In 1935 he became director of the British Numismatic Society and from 1946 to 1950 was its president. The society, which had acrimoniously spun off in 1903 from the Royal Numismatic Society in order to give more attention to British coins, had lost momentum. Under his leadership its finances were strengthened, its membership increased, and its academic standing established. 
From 1956 to 1961 Blunt served as president of the Royal Numismatic Society, finally laying to rest the lingering tensions between the two societies. In 1965 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy -- an exceptional distinction for an amateur scholar who had no formal education after his schooling, and one that recognized his leading role in establishing the 'Sylloge of Coins of the British Isles', a project for publishing fully illustrated catalogues of English coins in major collections in Britain and abroad. A committee was set up in 1953 with Sir Frank Stenton as chairman, the first volume appeared in 1958, and when Blunt died the fortieth was in course of preparation. 
Blunt's early numismatic work was devoted to the later middle ages, but after the Second World War his interests turned towards the Anglo-Saxon series, largely neglected in the previous generation. Although increased responsibility in the City and his editorial duties with the 'British Numismatic Journal' and the sylloge left relatively little time for his own research, in conjunction with R. H. (Michael) Dolley, appointed to the British Museum coin room in 1951, Blunt soon brought about a fundamental reappraisal of early English coinage. After retirement from Hill Samuel in 1964, he remained a director of Eucalyptus Pulp Mills Ltd and as chairman guided it through the difficulties of the political revolution in Portugal. But he was now able to devote most of his time to numismatics, moving on from the Heptarchic period between Offa and Alfred, on which he had previously concentrated, to the tenth century, during which previously fragmented English coinage gradually became unified. This work culminated in three seminal publications: a magisterial monograph on AEthelstan (1974); for the British Museum, 'Athelstan to the Reform of Edgar' (with Marion M. Archibald, 1986), volume five of 'Anglo-Saxon Coins'; and 'Coinage in Tenth-Century England' (with B. H. I. H. Stewart and C. S. S. Lyon, 1989). Blunt's contribution to English numismatics was exceptional. In addition to his own scholarly achievement, his judgement and diligence as editor had a pervasive influence on the standards of English numismatic literature for half a century. Through hospitality at Ramsbury and extensive correspondence he was able to provide a focus and continuity for a subject in which professional scholars have always been in a minority. Although distressed by revelations about his brother Anthony in 1979 and by the death of his wife, Elisabeth, in 1980, he continued to work productively until a few weeks before his own death at his home at Ramsbury Hill, on 20 November 1987. He was buried at Ramsbury. With the needs of future students in mind, one of his last acts was to provide for his magnificent coin collection (incorporating that of Shirley-Fox, which he inherited in 1939) to be offered to the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, in lieu of estate duty. 
Stewartby', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39798


Braithwaite, Richard Bevan (1900-1990), philosopher, was born on 15 January 1900 in Banbury, Oxfordshire, the eldest in the family of three sons and one daughter of William Charles Braithwaite, of Banbury, barrister, banker, and historian of Quakerism, and his wife, Janet, daughter of Charles C. Morland, of Croydon. He was educated at Sidcot School, Somerset (1911-14), Bootham School, York (1914-18), and as a scholar at King's College, Cambridge (1919-23), where he became a wrangler in part two of the mathematical tripos (1922), and gained a first class in part two of the moral sciences tripos (1923). 
In 1924 Braithwaite was elected to a fellowship at King's College, which he retained until his death. He was successively a university lecturer in moral sciences (1928-34), Sidgwick lecturer (1934-53), and Knightbridge professor of moral philosophy (1953-67). He did much to foster the philosophy of science in Cambridge, lecturing on it regularly for the philosophy tripos (his lectures on probability being particularly memorable). He also brought it into the natural sciences tripos, working with the historian Herbert Butterfield to found the department of history and philosophy of science. 
Braithwaite's own work was in the Cambridge tradition of scientifically informed philosophy exemplified by Bertrand Russell, J. M. Keynes, Frank Ramsey, and C. D. Broad. His mathematical training showed most clearly in his philosophy of science, notably in his explication of the concept of probability invoked in modern science. This culminated in 'Scientific Explanation' (1953), the published version of his Trinity College Tarner lectures of 1945-6, a classic work whose influence ranks him as a methodologist of science with Sir Karl Popper and Carl Hempel. 
Braithwaite's philosophy ranged far wider than the philosophy of science. His 1955 inaugural lecture, 'Theory of Games as a Tool for the Moral Philosopher', showed the significance for moral and political philosophy of modern theories of games and decisions. His 1955 Eddington lecture, 'An Empiricist's View of the Nature of Religious Belief', showed his long-standing concern with religion. In this he was greatly influenced by his Quaker upbringing, as in the pacifism, later rejected, that made him serve in the Friends' Ambulance Unit in the First World War. He eventually joined the Church of England, being baptized and confirmed in King's College chapel in 1948. 
Braithwaite took a keen interest in public affairs, and was active in college and university politics. He took especial satisfaction in helping to promote the grace admitting women to membership of Cambridge University, and thus to its degrees. His principal recreation was reading novels. 
It was the way Braithwaite philosophized that most inspired his students, colleagues, and friends. In height and weight he may have resembled the average Englishman, but not in his intellectual exuberance. In discussion, even in old age, deaf, with spectacles and thinning hair, sometimes apparently asleep, his attention rarely flagged; and the intensity of his contributions -- often prefaced with roars of 'Now look here, I'm sorry...' -- was a continual refutation of the popular dichotomy of reason and passion. His curiosity was boundless, his grasp of issues quick and complete, his comments clear, forceful, and original. No one could be more passionate in the rational pursuit of truth, nor less concerned to impress, dominate, preach, or be taken for a guru. He was a great scourge of the obscure, the portentous, the complacent, and the slapdash -- diseases to which philosophy is always prone and to which his incisive irreverence was the perfect antidote. 
Braithwaite received an honorary DLitt from Bristol University in 1963, and was visiting professor of philosophy at Johns Hopkins University in 1968, the University of Western Ontario in 1969, and the City University of New York in 1970. He was president of the Mind Association in 1946, and of the Aristotelian Society in 1946-7. In 1957 he became a fellow of the British Academy and in 1986 a foreign honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 1948 he helped to found what later became the British Society for the Philosophy of Science, of which he was president from 1961 to 1963. 
In 1925 Braithwaite married Dorothea Cotter, daughter of Sir Theodore Morison, principal of Armstrong College, Newcastle upon Tyne, which later became Newcastle University. She died in 1928, and in 1932 he married Margaret Mary (died 1986), daughter of Charles Frederick Gurney Masterman, a noted Liberal MP and member of the 1914 cabinet. They had a son and a daughter. Braithwaite died of pneumonia on 21 April 1990 at The Grange, a nursing home in Bottisham, near Cambridge. His ashes were interred in King's College chapel, Cambridge. 
D. H. Mellor', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39799


Brenan, Edward FitzGerald (1894-1987), writer and Hispanic scholar, was born on 7 April 1894 at Sliema, Malta, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Hugh Brenan, subaltern in the Royal Irish Rifles, and his wife, Helen, daughter of Sir Ogilvie Graham, cotton and linen merchant. Gerald, as he was always known, spent the first seven years of his childhood either travelling with the regiment in South Africa and India, or living in the family home of the Grahams, Larchfield, near Belfast. However, in 1901 Hugh Brenan became almost stone deaf as a result of malaria, and had to leave the army. Gerald was a precocious, imaginative little boy, and devoted to his mother, who stimulated his love of books and his interest in history, travel, and especially botany. He won an exhibition to Radley College, where he was extremely unhappy, and was awarded the Scott essay prize every year. 
In obedience to his father's wishes, Brenan passed into Sandhurst. Detesting this prospect, at seventeen he concocted and carried out a wildly romantic scheme to escape with an older friend, a donkey, and very little money, and walk to Asia. His friend got no further than Venice, but Brenan plodded on alone, braving wolves and snowstorms until he gave up in the Balkans, after having covered over 1500 miles. His parents were relieved at the return of the prodigal, and -- a year later -- the outbreak of the First World War temporarily settled his future. He was commissioned into the 5th Gloucesters and in due course was sent to France, serving first with the cyclist corps, and later in charge of observation posts, fighting at Ypres, Passchendaele, and the Somme, and gaining the MC (1918) and the Croix de Guerre. It was in the army that he met Ralph Partridge and made the greatest friendship of his life, lasting as it did until Partridge's death in 1960, despite a violent breach over an affair with Partridge's first wife, Dora Carrington. 
Demobilized in 1919, Brenan was eager to get away from England, and acquire the education he felt Radley had failed to supply. With little equipment except his war gratuity and some 2000 books in various languages, including the classics, he embarked for Spain, thinking his war gratuity would last longer there, and rented a little house in the village of Yegen on the beautiful slopes of the Sierra Nevada. Here he began life in his adopted country, devoting himself to reading, walking immense distances in the mountains, and writing quantities of long and brilliant letters. He considered himself a 'writer' from the first, though he never finished his projected life of St Teresa of Avila, and his first publication was a picaresque novel called 'Jack Robinson' written under the pseudonym George Beaton (1933), which received elitist rather than wide acclaim. 
During his visits to London, Brenan made many literary friends, and when in Spain he was visited by Lytton Strachey, Virginia Woolf, Bertrand Russell, Roger Fry, David Garnett, and V. S. Pritchett, with their consorts. At his best a brilliant and amusing talker, Brenan's character was full of contradictions: he had a great capacity for prolonged and concentrated study as well as outstanding intelligence and originality in the interpretation of its results; he would often work far into the night, but he might collapse many times in a month with what he called 'flu'. 'Jack Robinson' was followed by an unceasing output until the book of aphorisms, 'Thoughts in a Dry Season: a Miscellany' (1978), in his eighties. 'The Spanish Labyrinth' (1943), a brilliantly penetrating study of the history of modern Spain, and 'The Literature of the Spanish People' (1951) were much admired in academic circles, while Brenan's knowledge of Spain took a form designed to appeal to the general reader in 'The Face of Spain' (1950) and 'South from Granada' (1957). The latter was one of his most successful and often reprinted books. Two volumes of autobiography, 'A Life of One's Own' and 'Personal Record', followed in 1962 and 1974; he also wrote two more novels and a life of St John of the Cross, 'St John of the Cross: his Life and Poetry' (1973). 
As a young man Brenan was tall, sparely built, and agile; he had straight fair hair and small, nearly black eyes set wide apart in a face that was expressive and charming rather than good looking. He kept his agility until his seventies. In comparison with all his intellectual activity his emotional life ran an uneasy course. His love affair with Dora Carrington was far the most serious in his life, producing as it did an enormous two-way correspondence, some ecstasy, and considerable unhappiness on both sides. Otherwise he was obsessed by sex, and inhibited by fears of impotence. A stream of prostitutes, hippies, and peasant girls occupied his agitated thoughts and feelings and directed his travels. In 1930, while in Dorset, he met the American poet and novelist Elizabeth Gammell (Gamel) Woolsey (1895-1968), who was then involved with the literary Powys family, especially Llewelyn. She was the daughter of William Walton Woolsey, plantation owner, of South Carolina. She and Brenan drifted into a relationship, and although their temperaments differed greatly -- between his nervous excitability and her dreamy melancholy -- they grew very close. In 1931 they went through a pseudo-marriage in Rome, ratified later in London. Gamel died of cancer in 1968. Brenan had one child, a daughter, Miranda, whose mother was Juliana Pellegrino, an unmarried girl from Yegen village. She was born in 1931 and later legally adopted by her father and Gamel, who took her to England to be educated. She died of cancer in 1980. 
After the end of Franco's regime most of Brenan's books were translated, and he became a hero in Spain, receiving the Pablo Iglesias award. He was also appointed CBE (1982). In 1970 Brenan moved inland to a smaller house built to his own design, and here he spent his last seventeen years, while his eyesight and health gradually declined. He was cared for by Lynda Price and her husband, Lars Pranger. In 1984 the burden of his rapidly declining state led to his consenting to be taken by Lars to a home in Pinner, near London, to the great indignation of his Spanish admirers. This resulted in an extraordinary and much publicized sequel when two members of the Junta de Andalucia flew to London, kidnapped Brenan, and took him back to Alhaurin, where they arranged for him to be nursed and cared for at his home. He died there on 19 January 1987. 
Frances Partridge', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39800


Burrow, Thomas (1909-1986), orientalist, was born on 29 June 1909 in Leck, north Lancashire, the eldest in the family of five sons and one daughter of Joshua Burrow, farmer, and his wife, Frances Eleanor Carter. He was educated at Queen Elizabeth's School, Kirkby Lonsdale, and won a scholarship to Christ's College, Cambridge. He first read classics, specializing in comparative philology, and obtained first classes in parts one and two of the tripos (1929 and 1930). He then went on to study oriental languages, in which he also got firsts in both parts of the tripos (1931 and 1932). He began research for a year at the School of Oriental Studies, London University, and continued in Cambridge, where after two more years he was awarded a PhD. He became a research fellow of Christ's College (1935-7). 
Burrow's first book, 'The Language of the Kharosthi, Documents from Chinese Turkestan' (1937), was based on his doctoral thesis. The language in question, sometimes known as Niya Prakrit, was an official language in central Asia after the Kushan dynasty; the documents had been discovered and brought to Europe by Sir Aurel Stein. Burrow published his translation of them in 1940. 
Burrow was assistant keeper in the department of oriental printed books and manuscripts at the British Museum from 1937 to 1944. During this period he mainly devoted himself to studying Dravidian languages. In 1944 he was appointed Boden professor of Sanskrit at Oxford University and professorial fellow of Balliol College, positions which he held until his retirement in 1976. Until 1965 he was the university's sole teacher in classical Indology. Besides Sanskrit he had to teach Pali and Prakrit. His practice was to read a set Sanskrit text with a BA student (or students, on the rare occasions when there was more than one in a year) for three hours a week; those texts not covered in class the students read unaided in the vacations. He gave some extra classes in Pali or Prakrit and in Sanskrit composition, but he may never have set an essay. 
Of Burrow's many publications on Sanskrit, the best known are 'The Sanskrit Language' (1955, revised edn 1973) and 'The Problem of Shwa in Sanskrit' (1979). His views on the development of the Sanskrit vowel system were at odds with those of most Indo-Europeanists, but otherwise his exposition of Sanskrit was orthodox in the mainstream of comparative philology. His early interest in Prakrit did not develop further. 
Burrow was happiest as a Dravidologist and did his most important work in Dravidian linguistics. In 1949 he began to collaborate with Professor Murray B. Emeneau of Berkeley. Together they published 'A Dravidian Etymological Dictionary' (1961) and 'Dravidian Borrowings from Indo-Aryan' (1962). After retirement Burrow gave most of his energy to producing the second edition of the dictionary (1984); it was, as he intended, his last book. This work on comparative Dravidian linguistics was complemented by Burrow's research on hitherto unrecorded Dravidian languages which survive in small linguistic communities in central India. To record them, he undertook field trips with S. Bhattacharya of the anthropological survey of India; together they published 'The Parji Language' (1953), 'A Comparative Vocabulary of the Gondi Dialects' (1960), and 'The Pengo Language' (1970). Further fruits of Burrow's research in this field are gathered in his 'Collected Papers in Dravidian Linguistics' (1968). 
Burrow was widely respected as a single-minded scholar of great learning. A Sanskrit panegyric was presented to him by the Sanskrit College, Calcutta. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1970. In 1974 he became a fellow of the School of Oriental and African Studies of London University and in 1979 a number of the 'Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies' (vol. 42, no. 2) was devoted to articles in honour of his seventieth birthday. 
In build Burrow was rather over middle size and his appearance, at least in later life, was somewhat lumbering, but he moved quietly. His habitual expression was mild, even vague. He had very short sight and blinked frequently. To his colleagues and students he was amiable but socially passive and taciturn. There were reports that of an evening he would visit his local pub in Kidlington, near Oxford, and entertain companions with lively conversation; but in Oxford he was reticent about his private life to the point of secrecy. In 1941 he married Inez Mary, daughter of Herbert John Haley; but when she died at their home in 1976 it came as a surprise to his Oxford acquaintances, who believed him to be living alone. He never brought his wife into college, and explained after her death that her health was poor. It may be that she suffered from depression after their only child died in early infancy. Burrow died of a heart attack in Oxford on 8 June 1986 and was buried in St Mary's churchyard, Kidlington. 
Richard F. Gombrich', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39801


Cecil, Lord (Edward Christian) David Gascoyne- (1902-1986), author, was born on 9 April 1902 at 24 Grafton Street, Mayfair, London, the fourth and last child and the second son of James Edward Hubert Gascoyne-Cecil, fourth marquess of Salisbury (1861-1947), politician, and his wife, Lady (Cicely) Alice Gore (1867-1955), second daughter of the fifth earl of Arran, descended on her mother's side from the Melbourne family. A delicate child, he was much at home and benefited in this from the company of his brilliant aunts and uncles, notorious for their eccentricities, wit, and zeal. Between 1915 and 1919 he was at Eton College, where the confidence fostered by this remarkable family carried him through an unfamiliar and in some ways uncongenial atmosphere. His experience of Oxford -- he matriculated from Christ Church in 1920 -- was different. He loved the life and the place. His exceptionally quick, associative mind served him well in his final examinations where he took a first class in modern history (1924). Though he failed to win an All Souls fellowship, he was elected to a fellowship at Wadham in 1924 to teach mainly history. At the same time, with characteristic independence, he was writing a life of the poet William Cowper, 'The Stricken Deer', his first and one of his best books, which was published in 1929 and won the Hawthornden prize in 1930. 
This success led to Cecil's decision to resign his fellowship in 1930 and take up the life of a writer in London. There he met and fell in love with Rachael Mary Veronica (Rachel) MacCarthy (1909-1982), only daughter of Desmond MacCarthy, literary critic, one of the original members of the Bloomsbury group. Their marriage took place on 13 October 1932. Virginia Woolf in a wry but affectionate entry in her diary describes 'David and Rachel, arm-in-arm, sleep-walking down the aisle, preceded by a cross which ushered them into a car and so into a happy, long life, I make no doubt' ('The Diary of Virginia Woolf', ed. A. O. Bell, 4, 1982, 128). She was not to know how accurate her ironic prediction would prove. A remarkable woman in her own right, Rachel MacCarthy was the perfect match for her husband. Of a simpler, more practical nature, she shared his vivacity and his unfailing curiosity about people, literature, and life. Like him, she was instinctively religious and a practising Christian. They were perfectly happy together, drawing their many friends into that happiness, for fifty years. They had two sons, Jonathan ['see below'] and Hugh ('b'. 1941), and a daughter, Laura ('b'. 1947). 
As he now moved into the country near Cranborne, Dorset, David Cecil's new life, though congenial, showed him that he missed Oxford, especially the teaching. In 1939 he accepted a fellowship in English at New College and it was here as tutor and, from 1949, as Goldsmiths' professor that he exercised his widest influence and produced much of his best work. He had a genius for teaching, communicating enjoyment, and drawing out the best from others. A brilliant conversationalist, his wit consisted in verbal sharpness and accuracy, together with a peculiarly sympathetic humour that was always adapted to the company and the occasion; he was a member of the literary discussion group the Inklings. Cecil was a celebrated lecturer, but his influence was most felt in tutorials, classes, or small, intimate groups. He and his wife, naturally hospitable, were eager to mix their friends and share them with young unknowns. Without condescension or pretension they spread over a wide circle of acquaintances and pupils the best-known cultural, political, and artistic influences of the mid-twentieth century. 
In the 1960s Cecil began to feel that his particular concern for English literature was under attack in an increasingly professional age. He never avoided, indeed enjoyed, debate, and was confident of his position, but he shared his family's clear-sightedness about the signs of the times. Developments in graduate studies, and the insistence on advanced degrees as a qualification for university teaching, made him feel his way was out of favour. In 1969 he reached retirement age and went happily to Cranborne, where he continued to write and entertain until his wife's death in 1982, and, though less happily, with remarkable resilience and little diminished powers of enjoyment until his own death. 
Cecil's writings, especially his biographies of William Cowper, Lord Melbourne (1955), Jane Austen (1978), and Charles Lamb (1983), are a substantial contribution to the understanding of different kinds of personality and period. As such they had a value beyond the academic, and reached a wide readership. His literary criticism came to be seriously underestimated. 'Early Victorian Novelists' (1934) was ahead of its time in a subtle analysis and discussion of the structure of 'Wuthering Heights'. 'Hardy the Novelist' (1943) remains a classic exposition of the work of one of his favourite authors. His best essays, too often written off as 'belles-lettres', are as acute as they are sensitive. But most typical of his imagination is his response to extrovert, worldly figures like Melbourne, or balanced moral observers such as Jane Austen, and, on the other hand, to introverted, despondent, but gentle and humorous spirits, such as Cowper and Lamb. To their situation he was drawn by a sympathy typical of the depth and complexity of his own nature. 
Cecil considered himself, with good reason, the most fortunate of men. Born into one of the first families in the land, gifted with intellectual and imaginative sympathies of a high order, professionally successful, idyllically happy in his marriage and family life, he might well have grown complacent and a figure of envy. But complacency was not in his nature or his background: he was self-critical and self-aware. As for enemies, he had few if any. He was greatly loved because of the unusual sweetness of his temper and his genuine humility. Naturally high-spirited and with some vanity, he felt most strongly an inherited impulse of service and purpose. Himself a devout Christian, what he possessed he wanted to share, and he had been given precisely the gifts to enable this. His appearance was extraordinary and memorable: elegant and at the same time spontaneously gauche, continually in motion from the twirling thumbs to the enthusiastic forward lurch. His voice, too, was rapid, stuttering, and spasmodic, with Edwardian pronunciation. David Cecil was one of the most influential cultural figures of his age. 
Cecil was appointed CH in 1949 and CLit in 1972. He had honorary doctorates from London, Leeds, Liverpool, St Andrews, and Glasgow universities. He was a trustee of the National Portrait Gallery from 1937 to 1951. He died at his home, Red Lion House, Salisbury Street, Cranborne, Dorset, on 1 January 1986. 
Cecil's elder son, Jonathan Hugh Gascoyne-Cecil (1939-2011), actor, known as Jonathan Cecil, was born on 22 February 1939 at 21 Arlington Street, St James's, London, and educated at Eton College and New College, Oxford, where he read modern languages, became a close friend of Dennis Potter, and appeared in cabaret with Dudley Moore and Alan Bennett. After graduating in 1961 he went to the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, followed by work in repertory theatre in Northampton, Dundee, and Salisbury. On 27 July 1963 he married Vivien Sarah Frances Heilbron ('b'. 1944), actress, and daughter of David Granville Heilbron, company chairman. He made both his film debut and his television debut in 1964 and first appeared in the West End the following year. He went on also to build a substantial career on radio and as a narrator on audio recordings (most notably of the works of P. G. Wodehouse). Although he appeared in Shakespeare and Chekhov, and was highly regarded by his peers for his 'straight' acting, it was in comic roles that he excelled, most frequently as a dim-witted or eccentric upper-class 'toff', a role he made peculiarly his own and in which he was much in demand. Greatly interested in the history of the theatre and music hall, he was a regular contributor to 'The Call Boy', the journal of the British Music Hall Society, and for many years was a book reviewer for 'The Spectator' and the 'Times Literary Supplement'. A colourful character, often seen in an immaculate Jermyn Street suit set off by a raffish fedora, he was a bon viveur and a brilliant raconteur, and spent much time at the Garrick Club. His first marriage having ended in divorce, on 3 November 1976 he married the actress and singer Anna Sharkey ('b'. 1937), whom he had met when both were in the cast of Noel Coward's 'Cowardy Custard' at the Mermaid Theatre in 1972. Living latterly in Ravenscourt Gardens, Hammersmith, he died at the Charing Cross Hospital, Fulham, on 22 September 2011, of bronchopneumonia and oesophageal cancer. His wife, Anna Sharkey, survived him. 
Rachel Trickett', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39802


Cheney, Christopher Robert (1906-1987), historian, was born on 20 December 1906 in Banbury, Oxfordshire, the youngest of four sons (there were no daughters) of George Gardner Cheney, director of a family printing business established in the eighteenth century, and his wife, Christina Stapleton Bateman, schoolteacher. It was a close-knit family, with strong musical interests which he shared. He was educated at Banbury county school and Wadham College, Oxford, where he won the Gibbs scholarship in 1927, and took a first-class degree in modern history in 1928. He then began research in medieval English ecclesiastical history under F. M. Powicke. After spells of lecturing in Cairo, then University College, London (1931-3), and Manchester University (1933-7), in 1937 he succeeded V. H. Galbraith as reader in diplomatic in Oxford and became a fellow of Magdalen College. He returned to Manchester as professor of medieval history in 1945, moving to Cambridge in 1955 on his election to the chair of medieval history, which he held until his retirement in 1972, and to a fellowship at Corpus Christi College. During the Second World War he worked in the War Office with MI5. 
Cheney's greatest achievement was to lead the way in interpreting the records and history of the medieval English church, and of the relations of the papacy with England, and in furthering the collaborative enterprises, both national and international, necessary to publish the original sources. His upbringing gave him a lasting interest in the practical process of making books, and he always took delight in good craftsmanship and typographical perfection. 
Cheney's university lectures were the seeding ground for many of his published works. His Oxford courses on diplomatic led to his 'Notaries Public in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries' (1972) and to his writings on English episcopal documents. These involved him in two major collaborative enterprises. A project to produce an edition of the corpus of medieval church councils, inspired by Powicke, was in danger of running into the quicksands of planning committees when he took control, brought out, and part edited one volume (1964), and assisted substantially in the completion of another. Later he directed and contributed to the British Academy series of 'Episcopal Acta'. The field he made particularly his own was the age of Innocent III, especially the great pope's relations with England. Critical examination of Innocent's letters concerning England led to two definitive volumes of documents (1953 and, with Mary Cheney, 1967). These provided the groundwork for his Ford lectures, 'From Becket to Langton' (1956), his monograph on Hubert Walter (1967), and his fine book 'Pope Innocent III and England' (1976). All were remarkable for the lucidity, sanity, and breadth of imagination and knowledge they revealed. 
A penetrating but never unjust critic, Cheney was an inspiring if exacting teacher, remembered for his inflexibly high standards, and for his kindness and humour, which, together with intelligence and imagination, were reflected in his face. His originality lay in going more deeply and critically, more precisely and less credulously, into the written materials preserved in archives and other collections. In the memorable words of his Cambridge inaugural lecture, he pointed out that 'Records, like the little children of long ago, only speak when they are spoken to, and they will not speak to strangers.' No one was better able than he to penetrate the minds of the men behind the medieval institutions that he described almost as if he had been there when they were being fashioned. He brought to historical study in England a mastery of the techniques of research in which English scholars hitherto had lagged behind continental writers. At the same time, his deeper penetration into the practical application of the jurisdiction of the medieval church in England provided a model for their future researches. Closely associated with Walther Holzmann, who worked in English archives on the ambitious 'Papsturkunden' project sponsored by the Gottingen Academy, he carried his own researches on collections of papal decretals and the work of judges delegate in England to a point that has inspired French and German scholars to begin filling in gaps in the 'Papsturkunden in Frankreich' series. As joint literary editor of the Royal Historical Society (1938-45), he guided many scholars' work to publication. 
Cheney was appointed CBE in 1984. In 1951 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy; other academic honours included honorary doctorates at Glasgow (DLitt, 1970) and Manchester (DLitt, 1978), and election as a corresponding fellow of the Mediaeval Academy of America and corresponding member of the 'Monumenta Germaniae Historica'. Wadham College made him an honorary fellow in 1968. 
Cheney was a small man with dark hair and an impish glance. In 1940 he married Mary Gwendolen (daughter of Gilbert Hall, of the Malayan civil service), a historian who collaborated with him in two of his books and supported him in his research all his life. There were two sons and one daughter of the marriage. Cheney died in Cambridge on 19 June 1987. 
Marjorie Chibnall', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39803


Daniel, Glyn Edmund (1914-1986), archaeologist and writer, was born on 23 April 1914 at Llanbedr Felffre, Pembrokeshire, the only child of John Daniel, schoolmaster, and his wife, Mary Jane Edmunds. He was educated in his father's school at Llantwit Major (where they moved in 1919), and then at Barry county school, of which he had many happy memories, vividly recorded in his autobiography 'Some Small Harvest' (1986). He gained a place for 1932 at St John's College, Cambridge, spending the preceding year at University College, Cardiff, studying geology and the organ. Turning to the archaeology and anthropology tripos at St John's, after getting a first in the qualifying examination for the geography tripos (1933), he graduated with first classes in both section A (1934) and section B (1935, with distinction). He continued as a research student at St John's with a Strathcona studentship, receiving also an Allen scholarship in 1937. The remarkable megalithic monuments of western Europe formed the subject of his research, both in Britain (his doctoral dissertation of 1938 being published in 1950 as 'The Prehistoric Chamber Tombs of England and Wales'), and in France, where his first visit to Brittany in 1936 resulted eventually in 'The Prehistoric Chamber Tombs of France' (1960), with an authoritative overview of the whole subject in 'The Megalith Builders of Western Europe' (1958). His doctoral dissertation won him a research fellowship at St John's in 1938, but his tenure was interrupted by the Second World War. He served as an intelligence officer in the RAF (1940-45), during which time he was officer in charge of photo interpretation, India and south-east Asia (1942-5), rose to the rank of wing commander, and was mentioned in dispatches. In India he met his future wife, Ruth (died 2000), daughter of the Revd Richard William Bailey Langhorne, headmaster of Exeter Cathedral choristers' school. They were married in 1946, and their happy partnership formed thereafter a central part of his life. They had no children. 
On his return from India, Daniel resumed his fellowship at St John's, another significant and enduring strand in his life, serving as steward from 1946 to 1955. He was made assistant lecturer in the department of archaeology in 1945, becoming lecturer, then reader, and then, in 1974, Disney professor and head of department until his retirement in 1981. He received a Cambridge LittD in 1962. Already with his first major publication, 'The Three Ages' (1943), he showed an acute awareness of the relevance of the history of archaeology to current archaeological research. His 'A Hundred Years of Archaeology' (1950), a pioneering study in the history of archaeology, perhaps his most important contribution, was followed by several others, including 'The Idea of Prehistory' (1962). 
As a teacher Daniel excelled in kindling the enthusiasm of his pupils, many of whom became also his friends. He held that 'friendship is a conspiracy for pleasure', and while food and drink habitually formed part of that pleasure (a point well documented in 'The Hungry Archaeologist in France', 1963, as also in 'Oxford Chicken Pie', 1965), people mattered more. His keen eye for character is deployed in his two detective novels ('The Cambridge Murders', 1945, and 'Welcome Death', 1954), and his ebullient sense of humour comes over well in the small, privately published 'The Pen of my Aunt' (1961). His love affair with France was consummated in 1964 by the purchase of a house in the Pas-de-Calais, which he and his wife visited frequently until the year of his death. 
While Daniel's most influential academic work was in the history of archaeology, his greatest impact on the archaeology of post-war Britain was as a communicator, not least as chairman of the highly successful television panel game 'Animal, Vegetable, Mineral?', which made both Sir Mortimer Wheeler and Glyn Daniel household names and brought them the accolade of television personality of the year in 1954 and 1955 respectively. Daniel was a founding director of Anglia Television from 1959 to 1981. He was a brilliant and entertaining speaker, and his public lectures and broadcasts made him widely known and recognized. As editor of the 'Ancient People and Places' series for Thames and Hudson he commissioned over 100 volumes. He became editor of 'Antiquity' in 1958, following the death of its founder editor O. G. S. Crawford the previous year. Yet he was not elected a fellow of the British Academy (where his role as a popularizer may have counted against him) until 1982. 
Daniel was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries from 1942, and served as president of the Royal Anthropological Institute in 1977-9. A corresponding fellow of many learned societies overseas, he became a knight (first class) of the Dannebrog in 1961: Princess Margrethe of Denmark, like the prince of Wales, had been among his many distinguished pupils. His scholarly contributions will be remembered, and yet the sheer humanity and zest that sparkle from his 'Antiquity' editorials (of which 'Writing for Antiquity', 1992, forms an anthology), and from the pages of 'Some Small Harvest', give as valid an insight into a remarkable teacher and scholar. A non-smoker, after a short illness he died of lung cancer in Cambridge on 13 December 1986. His ashes were scattered in the fellows' garden at St John's College. 
Colin Renfrew', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39804


Beer, Esmond Samuel de (1895-1990), historian and benefactor, was born on 15 September 1895 in Dunedin, South Island, New Zealand, the second son and fourth and youngest child of Isidore Samuel de Beer (1860-1934), merchant, and his wife, Emily (1864-1930), daughter of Bendix Hallenstein. His family on both sides was Jewish (though his maternal grandmother came of Lincolnshire farming stock) and had reached New Zealand from Germany, by way of Australia, during the 1860s, in his grandfather's generation. The continuing success of Hallensteins, the family clothing chain, gave him ample means for a life of private research in England, where he lived from his schooldays onward; it was never necessary for him to hold a salaried post. After early schooling in Dunedin he attended Mill Hill School, London, from 1910 to 1914, in which year he went up to New College, Oxford, to read history. After army service, first in the ranks of the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire light infantry and then as a lieutenant in the 2nd battalion 35th Sikh regiment of the Indian army (1916-19), he returned to Oxford, taking a special wartime BA in 1920 (MA 1925). He then studied at University College, London, and in 1923 received a London MA for a thesis on political parties during the ministry of Thomas Osborne, first earl of Danby (1631-1712). 
The later seventeenth century remained de Beer's lifelong intellectual centre. As he wrote of his mentor, Sir Charles Firth, whose assistant he became, he was at home there and almost on terms of friendship with its men and women. He built up a large private library, most of which was dispersed by gift, chiefly to the University of Otago in Dunedin, in the 1980s, when he could himself no longer use it. An omnivorous reader, he retained so well what he read that, in his last bedridden years when his sight had failed, he could pass time by recalling it verbatim. Together with his sisters, Mary (1890-1981) and Dora (1891-1982), his companions in a succession of London houses, he acquired a small but well-chosen art collection, which he gave to the Dunedin Public Art Gallery in 1982. He and his sisters had already given Iolo A. Williams's library of eighteenth-century English literature to the university and made a succession of other substantial gifts to the Dunedin Public Art Gallery and the Otago Museum. 
De Beer's scholarly reputation derived from his editions of the diary of John Evelyn and the correspondence of John Locke. They were carried through virtually single-handed, despite the impression given by the punctilio of his acknowledgements. Taken together, they provide a remarkable overview of the cultural and intellectual milieu of their time, being marked by an easy mastery of bibliographical, biographical, literary, and historical skills as well as of the circumstances of living in and out of seventeenth-century England. Their editor's curiosity and his conviction that the treatment of any topic should be complete, as far as its carefully weighed merits allowed, exactly balance his feeling for conciseness and his passion for eliminating the otiose. He began work on Evelyn in the late 1920s by revising an existing transcript. Early in the 1930s he was formally invited by the Clarendon Press to prepare their edition. As published in 1955 the six volumes are the first satisfactory rendering of the diary and its author: a full and scrupulous text, sustained by an introduction and appendices and by some 12,000 footnotes, the whole made accessible by a large and exemplary index. Separately published by-products were magisterial essays on the origin and diffusion of the term 'Gothic', the development of the European guidebook, and the early history of London street lighting. 
In 1956, after the task had been refused by another scholar, de Beer began the second great instalment of his life's work, his Clarendon Press edition of Locke's correspondence. He himself brought together much of the material. When its first two volumes appeared in 1976 he was already past eighty, but he followed them punctually with five more before his health began seriously to decline in 1982. The eighth, completing the record of some 3650 items, came out in 1989. 
De Beer's direct services to scholarship were supplemented by unstinting generosity to institutions, societies, and individuals, for preference through intermediaries, in his lifetime and by bequest. He gave generous and judicious support to the Bodleian, British, and London libraries, where he was a regular reader; his subsidies ensured the publication of John Cawte Beaglehole's edition of the journals of Captain James Cook and the Anglo-Australian edition of Cook's charts and views. He was both benefactor and practical helper of the Royal Historical Society, the Historical Association, the Bibliographical Society, and the London Topographical Society. Two London University institutes engaged his special loyalty: he was honorary librarian at the Institute of Historical Research (1940-45), and he and his sisters established at the Warburg Institute a fund in memory of Fritz Saxl. He was an honorary fellow of New College, Oxford (1959), and the Warburg (1978), and a fellow of the Royal Historical Society (1927), the Society of Antiquaries (1942), the Royal Society of Literature (1958), and University College, London (1967), as well as being vice-president (1966) and president (1972-8) of the Hakluyt Society and vice-president of the Cromwell Association (1980). He held honorary doctorates from the universities of Durham (1956), Oxford (1957), and Otago (1963), and he was a trustee of the National Portrait Gallery (1959-67) and a member of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art (1965-70). In 1965 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy and in 1969 was appointed CBE. 
De Beer valued such recognitions. He prized more highly, however, the private, individual state which allowed him freedom personally and vicariously to advance learning. By disposition bookish, shy, and a little stiff, mildly pedantic, and deliberate and precise in manner and speech, he was also courteous, friendly, and humorous. He had a knowledgeable love of comfort, food, wine, and travel, especially in Italy. His physical stamina matched his scholarly tenacity. A tireless walker and a climber, he took special pleasure in the far south of the South Island of New Zealand and the island of Raasay near Skye in Scotland, where he spent summer holidays in company with his sisters and others. He had a wide acquaintance with literature, particularly drama, Shakespeare and Ibsen being two of his heroes, and with music, principally opera. In adult life he neither practised the Jewish religion nor adopted another. De Beer's aspect was dapper and benevolent: he had a small moustache and wore spectacles. Of middle height, he was broad-shouldered but thinnish in build, with a large and powerful head. A confirmed and lifelong bachelor, he died on 3 October 1990 in Stoke House, a residential home for the aged in Stoke Hammond, near Milton Keynes, north Buckinghamshire. 
J. B. Trapp', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39805


Ellmann, Richard David (1918-1987), literary scholar and biographer, was born on 15 March 1918 in Highland Park, Detroit, Michigan, the second of the three sons (there were no daughters) of James Isaac Ellmann, lawyer, a Jewish Romanian immigrant, and his wife, Jeanette Barsook, an immigrant from Kiev in Ukraine. He attended local schools before going to Yale University, where he graduated with exceptional distinction in English in 1939 and completed an MA dissertation in 1941. 
On the entry of the United States into the Second World War in 1942 Ellmann joined the office of strategic services (OSS), but that August he began his academic career as an instructor at Harvard University. This was interrupted in 1943 when he enlisted in the American navy and was posted to a construction battalion. Although he disliked military service, he was to turn it to account in 1945 when he unexpectedly found himself seconded to the OSS in London. That September he visited the widow of William Butler Yeats in Dublin. Impressed by his knowledge of her husband's work, she gave him access to her immense archive. He returned to Ireland immediately on his discharge from the navy in May 1946 and wrote a LittB at Trinity College, Dublin, while simultaneously undertaking a Yale PhD on Yeats's life and writings. This, the first Yale doctorate on a twentieth-century writer, was published in 1949 as 'Yeats: the Man and the Masks' and remains one of the best introductions to the poet's work. 
In 1947 Ellmann returned to teach at Harvard, where he met, and in August 1949 married, a talented Irish-American feminist critic, Mary Donahue, the daughter of William Henry Donahue, baker, of Newburyport, Massachusetts. Two years later he was appointed professor of English at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois. He had already begun research for his biography of James Joyce, but his next book was a sophisticated critical study of Yeats's poetry, 'The Identity of Yeats' (1954). His magisterial 'James Joyce' appeared in 1959 and immediately confirmed his reputation as the outstanding literary biographer of his generation, its research, narrative control, and wit setting new standards in the genre. His growing distinction was reflected in a series of academic honours, fellowships, and visiting professorships, and in 1963 by his promotion to the Franklin Bliss Snyder chair at Northwestern, which he held until 1968. Deeply involved in editing Joyce's writings and letters, he also found time to co-edit 'The Modern Tradition' (1965), a collection of key modernist texts, as well as anthologies of modern poetry. In 1967 he published 'Eminent Domain', a series of elegant essays on Yeats's various literary relationships. The following year he moved to Yale as professor of English, and it was supposed that he would see out his career at his old alma mater. But after only two years he was invited to apply for the Goldsmiths' chair of English literature at Oxford and was duly elected (1970), with a fellowship at New College. 
The move to Oxford was partly prompted by Ellmann's proposed biography of Oscar Wilde, but was also because, established at Yale, he could predict exactly which meetings he would be attending on any given day in the foreseeable future; Oxford offered no such predictability. The move was marred when his wife suffered a cerebral haemorrhage that permanently confined her to a wheelchair. Of their three children, the eldest, Stephen, remained in the United States while their two daughters, Maud and Lucy, settled in England with their parents. Ellmann delivered his inaugural lecture, 'Literary biography', on 4 May 1971, and in 1972 he published 'Ulysses on the Liffey', which examined the principles of construction of Joyce's novel. A book of essays in the following year, 'Golden Codgers', ranged from George Eliot to T. S. Eliot, and 'The Consciousness of Joyce' appeared in 1977. Ellmann was at once bemused and delighted by Oxford; his forte was the seminar rather than the lecture, and he excelled in his supervision of graduate students. 
In 1984 Ellmann retired as Goldsmiths' professor and took up the Woodruff chair at Emory University in Georgia. But he remained resident in Oxford, holding both an honorary fellowship at New College (1987) and an extraordinary fellowship at Wolfson College (1984), and he and his wife continued to keep open house at 39 St Giles' to a wide circle of friends. During this time he had been working on his biography of Oscar Wilde, garnering new information and drafting and redrafting the book. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1979, and had honorary degrees from several American universities and from Goteborg, Sweden. 
Ellmann was a tall man, balding and bespectacled, and tending to plumpness, with a warm smile and an infectious laugh. It was in the summer of 1986 that his friends began to notice a slight slurring of speech and an awkwardness of posture. These symptoms became more pronounced and motor neurone disease was diagnosed. With typical fortitude he refused to be intimidated by this terrible illness, and when his speech finally failed he communicated through a ticker-tape machine, the messages showing that he had lost nothing of his intellectual edge and personal kindness. His final days were occupied with preparing 'Oscar Wilde' (1987) for the press; he was able to read the proofs shortly before he died in Oxford on 13 May 1987. 
John Kelly', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39806


Evans, George Ewart (1909-1988), historian and writer, was born on 1 April 1909 in Abercynon, Glamorgan, one of the eleven children, seven boys and four girls, of William Evans, shopkeeper, of Abercynon. He was one of the eight children of his father's second marriage, to Janet Hitchings of Maesteg. He was educated at Mountain Ash grammar school, and then University College, Cardiff, where he went as a trainee teacher on a Glamorgan county council scholarship, winning a college bursary 'en route'. He read classics and graduated in the summer of 1930 with a lower second-class degree. There followed a year of professional training, at the end of which he obtained his diploma in education and became unemployed. As he himself bitterly remarked in his autobiography: 'You swore to teach but the Board of Education... could not provide you with the opportunity.' 
When Evans finally found work in 1934 it was quite another aspect of his career which gave him the necessary qualifications. From his late boyhood Evans had been a fine rugby player and an excellent runner. He had played rugby both for the renowned Mountain Ash 'Old Firm' before university, and for University College as an undergraduate. His running was in the rougher school of the old Welsh working-class semi-professional track, where, by side bets, he gained the money to finance part of his university career. It was this athleticism which got him his first job in 1934, as a games master at the newly opened Sawston Village College, Cambridgeshire, where he met Florence Knappett, who was later to become his wife. 
Evans's move to East Anglia, although it happened by chance, was to prove momentous in what was to be his final career -- that of writer and historian of rural life. By 1934 he had already decided, as he later wrote, that 'I did not care ultimately what kind of job I took. I determined that my real work henceforth would be to write.' In the following years he published a number of short stories, poems, and articles and became closely associated with the group around Keidrych Rhys's magazine 'Wales', and the London-based 'Left Review'. These pieces are, in some ways, very much of their time, and yet they also show a close sense of the realities of life in south Wales which distinguish them from the run-of-the-mill socialist-realist fiction of the period. 
In October 1941 Evans was called up into the Royal Air Force. Restricted because of his increasing deafness to home-based and ground-based duties, he served as a radio technician in 206 squadron, Coastal Command. After his wartime service Evans published a full-length novel, 'The Voices of the Children' (1947), but it was badly received outside Wales. In the 1940s he suffered recurrent moods of black depression, in which he constantly questioned his own abilities, and felt a despair which was exacerbated by his deafness, which made it virtually impossible to find work as a teacher. 
In 1948 Evans moved to Blaxhall in Suffolk, where his wife had been appointed village schoolteacher, and it was out of Blaxhall that his first book about English rural life, 'Ask the Fellows who Cut the Hay', came in 1956. The book was based on interviews with the older inhabitants of the village about their lives, their work, and their communities. This was a technique used in folk-life studies, and one which was beginning to find favour in the world of radio, but it was still well outside the bounds of conventional academic history. The book, however, was a success and in the next ten years three more followed. Part of their popularity certainly rested on the English nostalgia for a lost rural past, but, like Evans's earlier fiction, they contained a great deal more than that. Evans also lectured widely, particularly for the Workers' Educational Association. In the late 1960s, with the emergence of the technique of oral history in British academic life, there followed a period of stimulating, if not always easy, contact with academic life, especially the University of Essex, where Evans was Major Burrows lecturer in 1972 and a visiting fellow from 1973 to 1978. His books from this period, particularly 'Where Beards Wag All' (1970), 'The Days that we have Seen' (1975), and 'From Mouths of Men' (1976), represent his best work. Careful and beautifully crafted, they remind the reader that Evans remained a writer as much as a historian. In the 1980s his relationship with academe, never easy, became more tense. His book on the myth of the hare, 'The Leaping Hare', written in 1972 with David Thomson, had been dismissed by academic anthropology, and he felt that oral history was moving away from its roots into ever wilder areas of theory, while neglecting the ordinary people. Some of these feelings are present in his fine volume of autobiography, 'The Strength of the Hills' (1983), and in his last book, the much less satisfactory 'Spoken History' (1987). 
Through all this Evans retained much of his Welshness. Although not tall, he was an upright figure who kept his rugby-playing physique until late in life. He was a native Welsh speaker, and retained a clear Welsh accent all his life, which was often a shock to those who knew him only through his books and assumed he was East Anglian. His past also shaped him in other, more fundamental, ways. Politically he was born into a radical family; he was named Ewart after William Ewart Gladstone, and that radicalism never left him. He was a member of the Communist Party in the 1930s and remained very close to communism throughout his life. His politics and his Welshness drew him back in the 1970s to the subject matter of Wales, and in his last books he became a chronicler of the end of the south Wales coal industry, as he had earlier been the recorder of the end of horse-based agriculture in England. 
Evans remained very much an outsider to the academic world. His honesty, which was often blunt, and always based on a deep distrust of the English ruling elite, ill fitted him for English universities, and it is perhaps not surprising that it was at the politically radical University of Essex of the 1970s that he seemed happiest. He was awarded an honorary DU by Essex in 1982, and an honorary DLitt by the University of Keele in 1983. In 1971 he was president of the anthropology section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science meeting at Swansea. 
In 1938 Evans married Florence Ellen, daughter of Albert George Knappett, clerk in the stock exchange. They had a son, who became a director of Faber and Faber, Evans's publishers, and three daughters, one of whom married David Gentleman, who illustrated many of Evans's books. Florence was a key figure in Evans's life, supporting him with her teaching in the 1940s and early 1950s, when otherwise he would not have been able to write, as well as being a gentle but firm commentator on his work, of which she said once, '[it was] a bit creepy... listening to all those dead voices'. Evans died on 11 January 1988 at Brooke, Norfolk, where he had lived since the 1970s. 
Alun Howkins', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39807


Finley, Sir Moses I. (1912-1986), historian and sociologist, was born in New York on 20 May 1912, the eldest in the family of three sons and one daughter of Nathan Finkelstein, mechanical engineer, of New York, and his wife, Anna Katzenellenbogen. In October 1946 he followed his brothers and changed his name to Finley. He had no second forename, but used the initial 'I'. He was educated at Central High School, Syracuse, New York, and at Syracuse University, where in 1927, aged fifteen, he graduated BA 'magna cum laude', majoring in psychology, and was elected to the American college fraternity Phi Beta Kappa. After taking an MA in public law at Columbia University, New York, in 1929, he worked as a legal clerk before holding several research posts (1930-39). Now, under W. L. Westermann, he began to study ancient history. Between 1930 and 1933 he was research assistant to A. A. Schiller at Columbia and also on the editorial staff of the 'Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences'. In 1934-5 he was a research fellow at Columbia, while also teaching (1934-42) at the City College of New York. From 1937 to 1939 he was an editor and translator at the Institute for Social Research, which Max Horkheimer had brought from Frankfurt in 1934. 
After working for various war relief agencies (1942-7) Finley returned to Columbia in 1948 and was elected a fellow of the American Council of Learned Societies. From 1948 to 1952 he was lecturer, then assistant professor, at Rutgers University, Newark, New Jersey. Simultaneously he was working in the history faculty at Columbia for his PhD, which he took in 1950 with a thesis entitled 'Studies in land and credit in ancient Athens: 500-200BC' (published in 1952). From 1952 onwards he was active in a group around the Hungarian scholar, Karl Polanyi, who was then developing views on the pre-market economy, which had some influence on Finley. 
In 1954, having come under attack for his left-wing opinions and after refusing to answer questions before the notorious McCarran subcommittee (of the Senate judiciary committee) on internal security, created by Senator Pat McCarran, Finley emigrated to Britain. Here he was appointed university lecturer in classics at Cambridge (1955-64) and, in 1957, elected to a fellowship at Jesus College. Finley spent the rest of his life domiciled in Cambridge, becoming a British subject in 1962. He was reader in ancient social and economic history (1964-70) and professor of ancient history (1970-79), and from 1976 to 1982 master of Darwin College, Cambridge. He was knighted in 1979. 
Finley's many writings on the society, economy, and political forms of ancient Greece were influential among fellow scholars, and the general public alike. His vast published output included over a score of books and countless articles and reviews; and he was highly regarded abroad, especially in France and Italy, where he frequently lectured and organized conferences. His training in history and law had familiarized him with the ideas of such scholars as Marc Bloch, Henri Pirenne, Thorstein Veblen, and the Freudians; and his association with the Frankfurt school reinforced his interest in Karl Marx. Later, however, he became dissatisfied with Marxism, preferring Max Weber's emphasis on status rather than class as a tool of social analysis. By employing Weber's concept of 'ideal types' and the controlled use of comparative material from other societies, he tried to overcome the disadvantages of working on ancient Greece, where he found the evidence traditionally employed defective in range, variety, and quality. He insisted on regarding society as a whole; institutions must be assessed within their own social context, and all anachronistic comparisons between primitive and more advanced societies avoided. Though strongly influenced by theoretical constructs, Finley never set out to discuss theory and method 'per se', preferring always to let his attitude emerge from examples of actual historical analysis. 
A high point in Finley's career, and one that gave him great satisfaction, was the invitation to return to the USA in 1972 to deliver the Sather lectures at Berkeley in California (published as 'The Ancient Economy', 1973, 2nd edn, 1985) and the Mason Welch Gross lectures at Rutgers University (published as 'Democracy Ancient and Modern', 1973). These two sets of lectures, which earned him the Wolfson literary award in history (1974), along with 'The Use and Abuse of History' (1975), best exemplify his most mature work; though perhaps his most original book is 'The World of Odysseus' (1956, 2nd edn, 1977). 
Finley's distinction was widely recognized. He delivered endowed lectures in England, France, the USA, and Denmark. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Historical Society (1970), of the British Academy (1971), and of the Royal Society of Arts (1971). He was a foreign member of the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters (1975), the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1979), and the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei (1982), and received honorary degrees from the universities of Leicester (1972), Sheffield (1979), and Saskatchewan (1979), and from the City College of New York (1982). He was president of the Classical Association (1973-4), the Cambridge Philological Society (1974-6), and the Joint Association of Classical Teachers (1981-3); and he was a trustee of the British Museum from 1977 to 1984. 
An insatiable controversialist in discussion and in print, Finley relished polemic. His interjections, usually introduced by a drawled, 'I'm sorry, but...', were characterized by hard hitting. But to friends, colleagues, and students he was warm-hearted and generous, and he built up a productive school to which he was both patron and Socratic gadfly. Finley was of medium height, with a dark complexion, slightly rugged features, and a lively countenance, expressive of his sharp mind. For most of his life he was a chain-smoker and, even after he stopped smoking for reasons of health, from ingrained habit he would hold the fingers of his right hand bent, as if still clutching a cigarette. 
From 1932 Finley enjoyed a happy and mutually reinforcing marriage with his wife Mary ('nee' Moscowitz, who later changed to her mother's surname, Thiers), schoolteacher. They had no children. On the day of her death he suffered a cerebral haemorrhage, and he died the following day on 23 June 1986 at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge. He was cremated at Cambridge crematorium. 
F. W. Walbank', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39808


Francis, Sir Frank Chalton (1901-1988), museum director and librarian, was born on 5 October 1901 in Liverpool, the only child of Frank William Francis, provision broker, who died in 1914, and his wife, Elizabeth Chalton, furrier; both parents were from Liverpool. He was educated at the Liverpool Institute; at Liverpool University, where he took a first in classics; and at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he spent two years (1923-5) engaged in research on early Greek philosophy, and of which he became an honorary fellow in 1959. 
In 1925-6 Francis taught at Holyhead county school, but in the latter year entered the British Museum as an assistant keeper in the department of printed books. He remained in the museum for the rest of his career. His work lay in the routines of the department, including, from 1930, the revision of the general catalogue, but like many of his colleagues he was also required to perform special language duties. For this purpose he acquired a knowledge of Swedish through classes at University College, London. In 1936 he joined the Bibliographical Society and in the same year became editor of its transactions, 'The Library'. Francis served as secretary of the British Museum from 1946 to 1947, and in the following year was appointed keeper of printed books. He had already served as chairman of the Library Association's committee on central cataloguing, and played a major part in the establishment of the 'British National Bibliography', which was first issued in 1950. He was also largely responsible for terminating the revision of the museum's published general catalogue, and replacing it with a photolithographically produced edition of the working copy of the catalogue. This was published between 1960 and 1966, when Francis had already become (in 1959) director and principal librarian of the museum (posts he held until 1968). 
Within the Bibliographical Society, Francis's editorship of 'The Library' (until 1953) was combined with the honorary secretaryship, which he held jointly or solely from 1938 to 1964, guiding the society through the Second World War, and editing its 'Studies in Retrospect' (1945). His position in the museum, his willingness to advise others, and his knowledge of historical bibliography involved him in the reconstruction and cataloguing of a number of older libraries, notably Lambeth Palace Library and the cathedral libraries. He lectured in historical bibliography at University College, London, from 1945 to 1959. 
The British Museum had been severely damaged during the Second World War, and as director Francis continued the work of his predecessors in restoring galleries and in opening new ones (notably the Duveen gallery for the display of the Elgin marbles in 1962). He was particularly concerned to make the museum's collections more accessible to the public, and a feature of his directorship was the expansion of the museum's design, educational, and publication services. A notable example of the new attitude towards display was the Greek and Roman life room (1960). The museum's collections were greatly enriched, and one for which he had particular enthusiasm was the Ilbert collection of clocks (1958). Exhibitions were also brought in from outside the museum. The growth and improved display of both library and antiquities made the museum's need for more space imperative. 
In line with his wish to make the collections of antiquities more accessible, Francis was also sympathetic to the growing demands that the museum's library should serve a wider public than its traditional clientele of scholars who sought manuscripts and older books in the humanities. In particular, a need had been voiced for a greatly improved reference service in the natural sciences. He believed that this must be met with the aid of the museum's existing privilege of legal deposit, and without jeopardizing the unity of the museum's library collections. 
The 'British Museum Act' of 1963, upon which Francis had a direct influence, embodied much of this thinking. Besides changing the composition of the body of trustees, it empowered them to house parts of the collections outside the museum buildings, thus enabling the transformation of the department of ethnography into the Museum of Mankind, creating a legal basis for a new library, and permitting the establishment of the National Library of Science and Invention. The integration of the Patent Office library into the department of printed books, as the basis of the new scientific service, was one of the landmarks of his directorship. Francis also initiated serious planning for a new library building. Architects were engaged, and plans for a new building on the south side of Great Russell Street had reached an advanced stage when in 1967 the government revoked the decision to build on the Bloomsbury site. Thus the establishment of the universal library for which he had worked was set back, though not permanently, by the government's ruling, and by the subsequent setting up of the national libraries committee. 
On his retirement in 1968 Francis moved to Nether Winchendon near Aylesbury, while maintaining his links with the bibliographical and library worlds, and in particular with facsimile publishing. He continued to visit the United States, where he was highly regarded and had many friends. He was president of the Association of Special Libraries and Information Bureaux (1965-6), Bibliographical Society (1964-6), Library Association (1965), Museums Association (1965-6), and International Federation of Library Associations (1963-9). Honorary degrees were awarded by Oxford and Cambridge, and by other universities in Britain, Ireland, and North America. He was appointed CB in 1958 and KCB in 1960. 
In appearance Francis was strong of profile, of medium height, and heavily built. He was handicapped by arthritis in later life. Genial and hospitable in private, he could be forceful and indeed dominating in public and official life. He married in 1927 Katrina Florence 
(Kitty; died 1991)
, daughter of Thomas McLennon, warehouseman. They had two sons and one daughter. Francis died on 15 September 1988 at Chilton House, Chilton, Buckinghamshire, and was buried at Nether Winchendon. 
R. Julian Roberts', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39809


Gray, Basil (1904-1989), museum curator, was born on 21 July 1904 at 13 Elvaston Place, South Kensington, London, the younger son (there were no daughters) of Surgeon-Major Charles Gray of the Royal Army Medical Corps, a passionate traveller, and his wife, Florence Elworthy, daughter of the Revd Henry von der Heyde Cowell. He was educated at Bradfield College and at New College, Oxford, where he gained a third class in 'literae humaniores' (1926) and a second in modern history (1927). On going down from Oxford, in 1928 he worked for a season on the excavations at the great palace of the Byzantine emperors in Constantinople, where, however, his interests firmly turned to eastern rather than classical art, and then, for three months, in Vienna under Josef Strzygowski. 
Gray entered the British Museum late in 1928. There being no vacancy in the antiquities departments, he spent an interim year in the department of printed books. In 1930 he transferred to the subdepartment of oriental prints and drawings, then still a division of the department of prints and drawings, under R. Laurence Binyon, the poet and distinguished orientalist whom he joined, with J. V. S. Wilkinson, to write the standard work 'Persian Miniature Painting' (1933). In 1933 he married Nicolete Mary (1911-1997) ['see 'Gray, Nicolete], daughter of Laurence Binyon, herself a distinguished medievalist, designer of inscriptions, and historian of lettering. They had two sons and three daughters. Their eldest daughter, Camilla (died 1971), the historian of the Russian avant-garde, married the son of the composer Sergey Prokofiev. 
When the department of oriental antiquities was created in 1933, Gray was given the task of redisplaying the collection of Indian sculpture. The Chinese exhibition of 1935 then directed his attention to the Far East. By the outbreak of the Second World War his writings covered the whole field of eastern art, Islam, India, China, and Japan. His later work, however, dealt with the close relations between the arts of China and Persia, following the Mongol invasion and under the successors of Tamerlane -- for example, in his important contributions, as editor and joint author, to 'The Arts of the Book in Central Asia, 1307-1506' (1979), which definitively establish the prime role of princely patronage in the painting of eastern Islamic cultures. 
Gray was placed in charge of the oriental collections in 1938, though, on account of his youth, he was appointed deputy keeper only in 1940 and keeper of oriental antiquities in 1946. Under his long keepership (until 1969) the immensely important collection of orientalia in the British Museum was complemented by a department of carefully chosen distinguished younger specialists. Gray was the friend and trusted adviser of many great collectors, stimulating their interest and moulding their taste. His confidence in their public-spiritedness was more than justified by their generosity to the British Museum. 
Gray's outstanding career at the British Museum was recognized when he was made CBE in 1957 and CB in 1969, and by his appointment as acting director and principal librarian in 1968. In 1966 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy, and was closely associated with the British institutes of Persian and of Afghan (later South Asian) studies. His chairmanship of exhibitions of Islamic art in Cairo (1969) and Beirut (1974) culminated in the exhibition 'The arts of Islam', at the Hayward Gallery, London (1976), the most important of its kind since the Munich exhibition of 1910. His particular contribution to the study of Persian art was marked by his election as president of the Societas Iranologica Europaea, a post he held from 1983 to 1987. 
After his retirement in 1969 Gray continued to travel, lecture, write, and advise official committees, one of his few recreations being the Savile Club, of which he was a member for sixty years. He was a committed member of the Church of England and was churchwarden both in London at St George's, Bloomsbury, and in Oxfordshire at Long Wittenham, where he lived for the last twenty years of his life. He was elegantly neat in physique, with austere features offset by humorous eyes and bushy eyebrows. His suits and shirts were always tailor-made even when he was not well off. His colleagues remember him as forthright and rather autocratic in his earlier years. To his younger colleagues, however, he was a remarkable teacher, by precept and example, and his works reveal his patience and his eagle eye for decorative detail. Gray died in the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 10 June 1989 and was buried in Long Wittenham parish churchyard. 
J. M. Rogers', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39810


Hancock, Sir (William) Keith (1898-1988), historian, was born in Melbourne, Australia, on 26 June 1898, the youngest in the family of three sons and two daughters of the Revd William Hancock, incumbent of St Mark's, Fitzroy, and later archdeacon of Gippsland, Australia, and his wife, Elizabeth Katharine McCrae. He was educated at Melbourne grammar school, the University of Melbourne, and, after a short spell lecturing at the University of Western Australia, as a Rhodes scholar at Balliol College, Oxford, where in 1923 he gained first-class honours in modern history and became the first Australian to be elected to a fellowship of All Souls College (1923-30). From that base he wrote 'Ricasoli and the Risorgimento in Tuscany' (1926). Like much of his later work, the book was about the complexities of nationalism. Already the prose was fluent, supple, and elegant. From 1924 to 1933 he held the chair of modern history at the University of Adelaide. There he wrote 'Australia' (1930), which remained the most professional and profound single volume about the country. The young professor had mixed feelings about his native land. Having been accepted at the heart of empire and now returned to a province, he would never be completely at home in either place. His speaking voice was neither quite English nor quite Australian. An account of his life to 1954, entitled 'Country and Calling', signalled the tension. 
Birmingham University called Hancock to the chair of modern history in 1934 and Oxford to the Chichele chair of economic history in 1944. He was again a fellow of All Souls from 1944 to 1949. Dearly though he loved Oxford, he was not wholly comfortable in that chair, and left it for the University of London in 1949. Here he directed (until 1956) the new Institute of Commonwealth Studies, which was a monument to his own work. Hancock's 'Survey of British Commonwealth Affairs' (3 vols., 1937-42), blending general perspectives with brilliant case histories and exhibiting what he often declared to be the historian's three cardinal virtues of attachment, justice, and span, had transformed the study of empire. The British Commonwealth was in his vision the most benign of modern polities, able, if wisely led and liberally inspired, to deliver democracy and welfare not only to Australians and Canadians but also to Indians and Africans. Jan Smuts, the subject of his two-volume biography 'Smuts: the Sanguine Years' (1962) and 'Smuts: the Fields of Force' (1968), appealed to Hancock as avatar of the new Commonwealth: a former enemy who freely chose imperial loyalty. 
In the First World War Hancock was too young to join up without permission, which his bereaved parents refused, his brother Jim having been named among the missing on the Somme. Like many young British men of his generation who missed the war, he lived after 1918 with a sense of shame and a high appreciation of bravery. In London during the Second World War he threw himself into the most active service he could find, by day directing (1941-6) the production of a thirty-volume civil series of official war histories, by night watching for fires from German bombs. Margaret Gowing, his co-author of the official volume 'British War Economy' (1949), thought that by 1945, though not yet fifty, he looked venerable, with 'white hair and end-of-war exhaustion'. 
Theaden, daughter of John George Brocklebank, farmer, was even more exhausted. Like Jan Smuts, Keith Hancock had fallen in love with a fellow student of great ability who had had to settle for country school-teaching and then, in 1925, married a man needing (Hancock's words on Sybella Smuts) unfaltering support and heroic constancy. Theaden had been the wife of a busy, prolific, and preoccupied professor ever since their marriage in 1925. In 'Country and Calling' he convicts himself of 'barbarous insensitiveness' to her. She found rewarding employment in wartime London as a producer of talks for the Overseas Service of the BBC, but collapsed into depression under the burdens of life and work. Her ill health was among reasons why Hancock did not accept until 1957 an invitation first extended some years earlier to go to Canberra as professor of history (until 1965) and director of the Research School of Social Sciences (until 1961) at the new Australian National University. In Canberra, country and calling were now as nearly reconciled as they would ever be. 
Colleagues and postgraduate students in awe of a legend discovered that Hancock was short, slight, charming, and playful; he was also intellectually exacting, and tough and wily (some called him Sir Fox) in his determination to win resources for his school and distribute them according to his own judgement of quality. He had an undisguised sense of his own achievement, no envy, and a humble curiosity. He was good at coaxing under-producers to get on, as he would say, with their scribbling. He encouraged interdisciplinary and intercultural studies before they were fashionable in his world. He had blind spots, among them an Anglophile disdain for many things American and a patrician distaste for trade. He became a kind of archbishop among Australian historians, at a time when most of the bishops, the professors of history in state universities, were Balliol men. The earliest and most enduring project of archiepiscopal inspiration was the 'Australian Dictionary of Biography' modelled on the British 'Dictionary of National Biography', which he had served in Oxford as a member of the central committee; eleven gratifying volumes appeared during his lifetime. 
Hancock and his wife lived happily in Canberra, enjoying both bush and society, until Theaden was stricken by cancer; she died in 1960. In the following year, as she had counselled, Hancock married Marjorie Eyre (daughter of William Henry Eyre, of Enfield, Middlesex), who had worked for him on every project since the civil war histories, and who gave him support and constancy for the next quarter of a century; she died in 1995. There were no children from either marriage. 
After retirement in 1965, country and calling led Hancock to the region south of Canberra, on which he wrote a pioneering study in environmental history, 'Discovering Monaro' (1972). He became an activist in the cause of conservation, a member of an alliance which tried in vain to prevent a telecommunications tower from being installed on the forested peak he loved just behind the university, and he served as the group's war historian in 'The Battle of Black Mountain' (1974). In a post-imperial epoch, and in his own eighties, he was attracted by the idea of armed neutrality for Australia, and campaigned against the presence of American communication bases on his country's soil. He went on writing, and talking in seminars and on the radio, almost to the end. 'Beyond all else', wrote his close colleague and friend Anthony Low, 'he was the academic animateur'. 
Hancock was knighted in 1953 in recognition of a successful mission to Uganda as a negotiator, and appointed KBE in 1965. He was a fellow of the British Academy (1950) and universities and academies in four continents conferred honours on him. When asked to list his achievements, he might leave some out but he included a medal of the Royal Humane Society won at the age of nine for rescuing another child from drowning. He died on 13 August 1988 in Canberra. 
K. S. Inglis', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39811


Meiggs, Russell (1902-1989), historian, was born on 20 October 1902 in Balham, London, the only son and younger child of William Herrick Meiggs, of no fixed occupation but who described himself on his son's birth certificate as 'general merchant', and his wife, Mary Gertrude May, of Brantham, Suffolk. William Meiggs abandoned his family when his children were young, and they were brought up in great poverty. Russell Meiggs was educated at Christ's Hospital and at Keble College, Oxford, taking first classes in both classical honour moderations (1923) and 'literae humaniores' (1925). He then began to work on Ostia, the ancient port of Rome, as Pelham student at the British School at Rome. On his return he taught at his old school for two years; then in 1928 he was elected to a tutorship at his former college, becoming a fellow in 1930 and dean in 1935. 
This smooth progress was interrupted when, in 1939, Meiggs left Keble and became a fellow of Balliol College, Oxford. Balliol's classical teaching had declined alarmingly, and Meiggs later described his move as 'like a First Division team needing to bring in a goalkeeper from a Third Division side'. He remained at Balliol until his retirement in 1970, and became profoundly identified with the college. During this period he was university lecturer in ancient history. Meiggs married on 6 December 1941, at Christ Church, Clifton, Pauline Gregg ['see below']. They had two daughters. 
For many years Meiggs published little. He lavished his great energies on teaching, college activities, and that wide range of contacts which often enabled him to place a pupil. It was typical of his attitude to scholarship that he put so much energy into co-operative ventures and the revision of standard works. In 1951, with Antony Andrewes, he published a thoroughly revised version of Sir George Hill's 'Sources for Greek History' (1897). He also revised the 'History of Greece' by J. B. Bury (third edn, 1951; fourth edn, 1975). 'Roman Ostia' (1960; revised edn, 1973), his first major book, sprang from thirty-five years of work and reflection. It combines mastery of the evidence with a synthesis of archaeology, social history, economics, and religion, which goes far beyond most local histories. It anticipates interests which historians were to find increasingly central in the next thirty years. Meiggs was elected FBA in 1961. In 1969 he edited 'A Selection of Greek Historical Inscriptions' with David M. Lewis. In 1972 appeared his second main work, 'The Athenian Empire'. It handled the complex and controversial evidence without the violent disagreements which had infected that area of scholarship, and the book is almost surprisingly cool. The mastery of detail is impressive; the work is a judicious account of the views of its period. 
The later years of Meiggs's retirement were darkened by increasing ill health, immobility, and, at the end, loss of sight. With great courage he battled to finish 'Trees and Timber in the Ancient Mediterranean World' (1982). Meiggs had served in the Second World War as chief labour officer in the Ministry of Supply, home timber production, and had published 'Home Timber Production, 1939-1945' (1949). His last major work was a pioneering one on a fundamental feature of ancient society: all the uses of timber and the history of forestation of the Mediterranean area. The work displayed so high a level of technical expertise that most classical scholars were daunted, and disappointingly few reviews appeared. It points forward to interests which are increasingly attracting historians. Meiggs continued to talk of finishing his long projected and much desired book on Herodotus, but ill health prevented him. 
Meiggs was one of the great Oxford tutors. Amid growing specialization he taught both Greek and Roman history; he was an authority on Greek epigraphy who worked closely with archaeologists. His striking exterior, the mane of hair, the Aztec profile apparently hewn from some hard wood, the long shorts, and the uniquely shaped grey flannel trousers, made him a magnet for the cameras of tourists, especially as he tramped to and from his allotment with spade and wheelbarrow. His manner, much imitated, was no less individual. Challenging questions were accompanied with a piercing gaze under eyebrows of matchless bushiness, and he loved to disconcert with his rather ferocious geniality. In tutorials he liked pupils to put up a fight. Slipshod argument or carelessness over details did not pass unmauled, but he never had a 'line' for pupils to follow, nor a narrow or exclusive conception of history. 
Meiggs suffered all his life from the alternation of periods of great elation with others of crippling depression. Physically he was robust and Spartan, famous for rolling in the snow in his bathing costume. He was a gardener, a Christian, a family man; quick to assess people and usually right about them. He did not aspire to promotion, and he published his first important book at the age of fifty-eight, giving his energies without reservation to pupils and college; British universities will see few such careers hereafter. He went his own way, choosing widely different subjects to work on, without regard to fashion. 
In some ways a traditionalist, Meiggs welcomed the coming of co-education to Balliol, and he sympathized with the rebellious students of 1968. From 1945 to 1969 he was praefectus of Holywell Manor, the annexe of the college in which most students from overseas lived. He had many connections in North America and was frequently a visiting professor at Swarthmore. Meiggs died on 24 June 1989 at his home, the Malt House, Pettiwell, Garsington, Oxfordshire. 
Meiggs's wife, 
Jasper Griffin', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39812


Momigliano, Arnaldo Dante (1908-1987), ancient historian, was born on 5 September 1908 in Caraglio, near Cuneo, Italy, the only son and eldest of three children of Riccardo Salomone Momigliano, grain merchant, and his wife, Ilda Levi. His was a prominent Jewish intellectual family; his father and mother died in a concentration camp in the Second World War. He was educated at home, and from 1925 at Turin University, where he came under the influence of Gaetano De Sanctis in ancient history and Augusto Rostagni in Greek literature. 
Immediately after graduating in 1929, Momigliano followed De Sanctis to Rome, where he joined the group of scholars employed on the 'Enciclopedia italiana', for which he wrote over 230 articles, including the long and important 'Roma in eta imperiale' (1936). At the same time, from the age of twenty-four he was teaching Greek history at Rome University as assistant and from 1932 as substitute for De Sanctis. He married in 1932 Gemma, daughter of Adolfo Segre, civil servant; they had one daughter, Anna Laura. 
Despite his connections with De Sanctis and Benedetto Croce (both openly opposed to fascism) in 1936 Momigliano won the 'concorso' for the post of professor of Roman history at Turin University. His inaugural lecture (published posthumously in 1989) was 'The concept of peace in the Graeco-Roman world'. In September 1938 he was dismissed on racial grounds. 
Momigliano's second book, on the emperor Claudius (1932), had been favourably noticed by Hugh Last, professor of Roman history at Oxford, who arranged for its translation into English in 1934; he therefore wrote to Last, who applied on his behalf to the Society for the Protection of Science and Learning (founded to assist academic refugees), which responded with an invitation and a small grant for a year to continue his researches in Oxford. He arrived on 30 March 1939, and his wife and daughter followed shortly. In 1940 he was interned briefly as an 'enemy alien' on the Isle of Man. Throughout the war the family lived in rented rooms, supported first by the society, then by research grants from the Rockefeller Foundation arranged through the Oxford University Press. During this period he was preparing a major book under the title 'Liberty and peace in the ancient world' (later abandoned, although substantial fragments survive). He was the youngest (and only Italian) member of that remarkable group of refugee classical scholars who congregated in the library of the Ashmolean Museum, and who subsequently repaid their debt to Britain by transforming classical studies in the Anglo-Saxon world. 
After the war Momigliano was reinstated as supernumerary professor at Turin in 1945. In 1947 he was appointed lecturer at Bristol University and in 1949 he was promoted to reader. In 1951 he moved to the chair of ancient history at University College, London, where he remained until 1975. From 1964 he was also professor at the Scuola Normale Superiore of Pisa. 
For many years Momigliano played an important part on the editorial boards of the 'Journal of Roman Studies', 'Rivista Storica Italiana', and 'History and Theory'. After retirement he was appointed an associate member of All Souls College, Oxford from 1975 to 1982, and from 1983 a visiting (later honorary) fellow at Peterhouse, Cambridge. From 1975 to his death he was Alexander White visiting professor at Chicago, where he spent a semester each year, and he also lectured widely throughout Europe and in Israel. The deaths of most of his family and childhood friends in concentration camps meant that his connections with Germany remained distant. 
Momigliano's early work was in the tradition of Italian idealist and critical historical studies, and showed a firm grounding in classical philology. His first book was on the Hellenistic Jewish book of 'Maccabees' (1930); after his biography of Claudius, he wrote a study of Philip of Macedon (1934). These were all highly professional works, distinguished by critical use of sources, sympathy with the subject, and a mastery of the extensive bibliography. By the time of his exile his own bibliography already comprised 208 items (apart from encyclopaedia articles). 
The move to England, with the need to master another culture and another language, coincided with a period of deep questioning of the meaning of European history. By the end of the war Momigliano had identified a new subject for research, the history of historiography from antiquity to the present day; his immense learning and sound judgement made him the acknowledged creator and master of a new area of study for a generation. The long delayed publication of the 1962 Sather lectures after his death ('The Classical Foundations of Modern Historiography', 1990) showed that he had already then established the framework for researches which he pursued in detail over the next twenty-five years; these are included in his 'Contributi alla storia degli studi classici e del mondo antico', which appeared in nine volumes between 1955 and 1992. Many selections from these essays have been published, in English, Italian, French, and German. Some have criticized the fact that he preferred the essay to the book; but his choice relates to his conception of history as a way of life and an attitude of mind, rather than a set of permanent results. 
Momigliano's influence was felt in many areas. His work on Edward Gibbon, George Grote, and nineteenth-century continental scholarship is particularly important. He opened up the study of late antiquity in Britain ('The Conflict between Paganism and Christianity in the Fourth Century', 1963). His work on early Rome inspired a new generation of Italian scholars. In 1972 he helped to establish a joint degree in anthropology and ancient history at University College, London, and comparative themes are evident in his London seminar, culminating in 'Alien Wisdom: the Limits of Hellenization' (1975). Since his early contacts with Croce, he had been interested in the idea of liberty and its relation to the concept of the person; this provoked a controversial study, 'The Development of Greek Biography' (1971), and towards the end of his life papers on the idea of the person and biography in late antiquity. He retained a lifelong interest in Jewish history, and his latest work centred on the history of ancient religion. 
It was in the lecture and the seminar that Momigliano's distinctive combination of immense learning and facility with ideas had most impact. Although his accent remained impenetrably Piedmontese, he wrote English with an unacademic elegance and wit, and Italian 'like an Englishman'. His teaching presented no general theory of history, for he respected too much the autonomy of the past to wish to impose general patterns on it; as he said once: 'I have now lost faith in my own theories, but I have not yet acquired faith in the theories of my colleagues'. To him, theory was created by the historian, not by the facts; it was this emphasis on the role of the observer in the interpretation of history which was one of his most distinctive contributions to the study of history. Another was his insistence that methodology (as opposed to ideology) was the central theme of the history of historiography. 
Momigliano's teaching followed the continental tradition of seminars, and his efforts were directed towards the next generation of scholars. In England the main centre of his activity was the Warburg Institute: he contributed many lectures, and from 1967 to 1983 conducted a regular seminar at the institute, which became the centre for young historians throughout Britain. In Italy his annual seminar at Pisa attracted audiences of hundreds, and his Chicago seminar was equally famous. None who presented a paper on these occasions could forget the mixture of awe and fear which he inspired, as he summed up the problem with greater clarity and learning than the speaker could ever hope to achieve. 
Widely held to be the most learned man of his age, Momigliano was 'a masters' master' (as George Steiner dubbed him), and one of the dominant figures in European historical studies for a generation, in which he seemed to many to be the embodiment of history itself. Stocky, untidy, and of immense vitality, a non-drinker always on the move, with his pockets full of medicines, carbon copy cash-books (for writing references in), and bunches of keys, his books in a string bag, his scarf attached by a safety pin, he took scant interest in administration, and lived for intellectual discussion. He was immediately approachable, and paid no attention to rank: he lacked all pomposity and most of the social graces, even forgetting his own retirement dinner -- an act which he described as 'a triumph of the Id over the Ego'. He would move in a cloud of younger scholars; and an hour with him would often change their lives. He was fascinated by ideas, new and old; in his later years he became more insistent on the need to know, and returned to ancestral traditions of rabbinic learning and exact scholarship, but he never lost his delight in discussion. To those he respected intellectually, especially the young, he was generous to a fault; he would dismiss openly those who did not measure up to his standards. As a result he had many devoted friends and disciples, and not a few enemies. For he was a man of passion, capable of quarrelling magnificently and permanently; yet it must be said that he never did so without good cause, personal or intellectual. 
Through his writing and his personality Momigliano made a major contribution to intellectual life in England, Italy, and America. But he remained true to his origins; during a lifetime of exile he retained his Italian citizenship, and as a free thinker was proud of his three inheritances, Celtic Piedmont, Italy of the Risorgimento, and the Jewish tradition of learning. 
Momigliano held a number of visiting professorships in America; he became a fellow of the British Academy in 1954, and was president of the Society for the Promotion of Roman Studies in 1965-8; he received many honorary degrees, and an honorary KBE in 1974. Momigliano died on 1 September 1987 in the Central Middlesex Hospital, London, and was buried in the Jewish cemetery at Cuneo. A memorial meeting was held in University College, London, on 4 March 1988. 
Oswyn Murray', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39813


Morris, Charles Richard, Baron Morris of Grasmere (1898-1990), writer on philosophy and university administrator, was born on 25 January 1898 in Sutton Valence, Kent, the elder child and elder son (the younger was Sir Philip Robert Morris, educationist) of Meshach Charles Morris, inspector of schools, and his wife, Jane, daughter of James Brasier, of St Cross, Winchester, Hampshire. He was educated at Tonbridge School and at Trinity College, Oxford, where he obtained a first class in 'literae humaniores' (1921). He then became a fellow and tutor in philosophy at Balliol College, Oxford, and held these posts until 1943. 
Morris's natural inclination towards an educational career was fostered by his parents and augmented by the general ethos of Balliol under the inspiring mastership of A. D. Lindsay. The horror of the First World War turned that inclination into an absolute commitment to education as the great liberating force beneficial to individuals and society alike. Morris gave this expression in many ways, including by financially supporting his younger sibling's education and by espousing movements to enlarge access to education at all levels at home and abroad. 
The first dozen years at Balliol were 'paradise'. Morris had able and responsive pupils who admired him for his mastery of the subject and respected him for his remarkable insight into their nature and capability. He wrote three, largely expository, books. The first, 'A History of Political Ideas' (1924), was written with his wife, Mary. She was the daughter of Ernest De Selincourt, professor of English, and his wife, Ethel, 'nee' Shawcross. They had a long, mutually supportive marriage, based on shared values; the marriage produced a son and a daughter. Her brother introduced him to the Lake District, for which he developed a lasting affection. The other books were 'Locke, Berkeley, Hume' (1931) and 'Idealistic Logic' (1933). 
The comfortable life of the archetypal Oxford don was challenged in the early 1930s by the vast social tragedy of the depression and the evident threat to democracy posed by the European dictators, especially Adolf Hitler. The Morrises responded privately by assisting refugees and publicly by Morris's becoming an Oxford city councillor (1939-41) and campaigning against the election of a Conservative member in the Oxford parliamentary by-election of 1938, because he deemed inadequate and unacceptable the Conservative government's responses to the dictators' threat to democracy and to evident social injustice in Britain. In this period Morris joined with J. S. Fulton to write 'In Defence of Democracy' (1935). 
In 1939 Morris became a wartime civil servant in the ministries of Supply (until 1942) and Production (1942-3), experiencing at first hand the workings of a command economy and negotiating with counterparts in the USA for the supply of essential war materials. After this he did not return to Oxford but took up the post of headmaster of King Edward's School, Birmingham, to which he had been appointed in 1941. He stayed until 1948, when he became vice-chancellor of the University of Leeds. This brought him and his wife closer to the Lake District, where in 1943 she had inherited a house, gloriously situated above Grasmere, which was to become their real home for the next forty-seven years. 
Morris was ideally suited to this vice-chancellorship, for which it seemed all his previous experience had been a preparation. Though he was short of stature, his bright eyes and lively intelligence commanded the affection and respect of colleagues and students. He led the university through post-war austerity and produced a development plan to ensure that Leeds was well placed to take early advantage of the resources which accompanied the government's acceptance of the report of the committee on higher education chaired by Baron Robbins (1961-4). He also foresaw that internal structures of universities must change. He was an influential figure in the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals, was its chairman from 1951 to 1955, and was much in demand for service on public bodies in the United Kingdom as diverse as the royal commission on local government in Greater London (1957), the Schools' Broadcasting Council (1954-64), and the advisory committee for the wool textile industry (1952). He made a major contribution to the development of universities overseas through his membership of the Inter-University Council for Higher Education Overseas (1957-64) and of the committee of inquiry into Australian universities (1957), whose definitive report was accepted. Some of these activities continued in retirement, when he also helped the newer universities of Bradford and Lancaster. 
Morris was one of Britain's outstanding university administrators and was universally admired for his combination of practicality and total commitment to education. He was knighted in 1953, appointed KCMG in 1963, and made a life peer in 1967. He received eight honorary doctorates. He died, as he would have wished, at Grasmere, on 30 May 1990, two years after his wife's death. There is a portrait of him in the University of Leeds by Robert Buhler. 
Fred Dainton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39814


Mynors, Sir Roger Aubrey Baskerville (1903-1989), classical scholar, was born on 28 July 1903, probably at Langley Burrell, Wiltshire, the eldest of four sons and second of five children of the Revd Aubrey Baskerville Mynors, rector of Langley Burrell, and his wife, Margery Musgrave, daughter of the Revd Charles Musgrave Harvey, prebendary of St Paul's Cathedral. His younger twin, Humphrey Charles Baskerville (1903-1989), later first baronet, to whom he bore a confusing resemblance in earlier years, was to become deputy governor of the Bank of England, a position that had been held by his mother's brother, Sir Ernest Musgrave Harvey, first baronet. He was educated at Eton College (scholar, 1916) and Balliol College, Oxford (exhibitioner, 1922), where he obtained firsts in classical honour moderations (1924) and 'literae humaniores' (1926), as well as the Hertford (1924), Craven (1924), and Derby (1926) scholarships. 
Mynors was elected a fellow of Balliol in 1926; pupils remember how he introduced them to authors remote from the syllabus. In 1940 he went to the exchange control department of the Treasury as a temporary principal. In 1944 he was elected to the Kennedy chair of Latin at Cambridge, where he became a fellow of Pembroke College, but he never seemed to settle. On 12 December 1945 he married Lavinia Sybil (1911-1994), daughter of the Very Revd Cyril Argentine Alington, dean of Durham and formerly his headmaster at Eton, and his wife, Hester Margaret, a daughter of the fourth Baron Lyttelton; it was to prove an ideally happy union. There were no children. His sister-in-law Elizabeth was married to Lord Home of the Hirsel. Lavinia Mynors was a medical researcher and a diarist. 
In 1949 Mynors was disappointed not to become master of Balliol, when Sir David Keir was preferred. In 1953 he returned to Oxford as Corpus Christi professor of Latin in succession to Eduard Fraenkel, and he remained at Corpus Christi College until his retirement in 1970. 
Mynors's contribution to learning for most of his life centred on Latin manuscripts. He saw them as part of the cultural history of Europe; for him the scribes were not anonymous symbols at the foot of the page, but human beings and friends, who could be placed and dated and sometimes identified. He was a rapid and meticulous collator from an age without microfilms; his apparatus criticus was always elegant and unfussy, like everything else including his handwriting, but he was not assertive enough to offer many conjectures of his own. He edited the 'Institutiones' of Cassiodorus (1937), Catullus (1958), Pliny's letters (1963), the 'Panegyrici Latini' (1964), and Virgil (1969). He was a medievalist at least as much as a classical scholar, and he did much to promote Nelson's 'Medieval Texts', where he was generous with unobtrusive help to others. He produced catalogues of the manuscripts of Durham Cathedral before 1200, a sumptuous book (1939), and of Balliol College, a conspicuously professional performance (1963). He was a precise and economical translator who contributed much to the Toronto translation of Erasmus (from 1974) and took part in the final revision of the 'New English Bible'. 
Mynors was a fascinating lecturer whom undergraduates flocked to hear, not because he helped them for their examinations but because they found him so interesting. He supervised graduate students by describing his own researches and inspiring them to do likewise. He was a courteous chairman, yet with something in his manner that discouraged time-wasters. He was a delightful letter-writer to his friends, with great sympathy for the young, but did not hurry to reply on matters of business. He was not easy to find, but was there to help when it mattered most. His charm was memorable, but there was a touch of astringency towards the incompetent and self-important, and in spite of his urbanity he showed a diffidence that was not entirely assumed. Though the least didactic of teachers, he could throw off a remark that changed one's approach to the subject, and sensible people followed up his most tentative suggestions. 
For many years Mynors occupied himself with a commentary on Virgil's 'Georgics' that appeared posthumously in 1990. It paid no particular regard to recent periodical articles, or to the fads and fancies of a younger generation of scholars. Instead it showed an expert knowledge of ancient and modern agriculture, a flair for integrating interesting things from a wide range of reading, and a sensitive ear for what the poet is actually saying. Above all it was directed by the author's feeling for the countryside, and particularly for Treago, the estate he inherited near St Weonards in Herefordshire. Anybody who wishes to know what Mynors was like should read this book. 
He became a fellow of the British Academy in 1944 and was knighted in 1963. He was an honorary fellow of Balliol (1963) and Corpus Christi (1970) colleges, Oxford, of Pembroke College, Cambridge (1965), and of the Warburg Institute. He was an honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the American Philosophical Society, and the Istituto di Studi Romani. He held honorary degrees from the universities of Cambridge, Durham, Edinburgh, Sheffield, and Toronto. 
Mynors died on 17 October 1989 as the result of a road accident outside Hereford; he was driving back to Treago after working on his catalogue of the manuscripts in Hereford Cathedral Library. As he left the cathedral he was heard to say that he had had a good day. He was buried at St Weonards. 
R. G. M. Nisbet', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39815


Myres, (John) Nowell Linton (1902-1989), archaeologist and librarian, was born at 1 Wellington Place, Oxford, on 27 December 1902, the younger son and second of three children of Sir John Linton Myres (1869-1954), archaeologist and historian, and his wife, Sophia Florence, 'nee' Ballance (died 1960), who was of Huguenot descent. Books brought over by her forebears in 1685, as well as sixteenth-century 'incunabula' bought with his own pocket money, contributed to the boyhood inheritance of the future custodian of Bodley. From his preparatory school on the Surrey-Sussex border he won a scholarship to Winchester College. Deeply influenced by the college architecture and the inspired history teaching of A. T. P. Williams, later bishop of Durham and of Winchester, he went to New College, Oxford, in 1921 determined to make history his subject; substituting the history preliminary examination for classical honour moderations, he took a first in 'literae humaniores' (1924) in three years and another in modern history (1926) in two. 
After appointment as a college lecturer in modern history in 1926 Myres was elected a student of Christ Church in 1928. In 1929 he married a teacher, Joan Mary Lovell (died 1991), sister of Charles Stevens, his school friend and fellow excavator of St Catharine's Hill, Winchester, and daughter of George Lovell Stevens, farmer in southern Africa. They had two sons, the elder, Timothy, associate professor of zoology in the University of Calgary, the younger, Rear-Admiral John Myres, hydrographer of the Royal Navy. 
From 1928, apart from wartime civil service (1940-45), in which Myres rose to be head of the fruit and vegetable products division of the Ministry of Food (he was a keen vegetable gardener), tutoring and lecturing were his formal occupation for the next twenty years. 
They were also years of strenuous extra-collegial activity. Earlier excavations at St Catharine's Hill and at Caerleon amphitheatre were now followed by others at Colchester, Butley Priory in Suffolk, and Aldborough in Yorkshire. In 1931 Myres was invited to contribute a section on the English settlements, based on archaeological as well as historical sources, to the first volume ('Roman Britain and the English Settlements', 1936) of the 'Oxford History of England'. R. G. Collingwood was his fellow author. 
Librarian of Christ Church from 1938, Myres, with his versatile scholarship and proven ability as an administrator, was a natural choice in 1948 as successor to Sir H. H. Edmund Craster as Bodley's librarian, after a brief tenure by H. R. Creswick. His own tenure lasted for eighteen years and involved integrating the 1939 extension with the parent institution, the major repair and internal reordering of the buildings round the schools quadrangle, and supervision of a total structural overhaul of the fabric of Duke Humfrey, the fifteenth-century reading room above the vault of the divinity school. He also presided over the establishment of the new law library in St Cross Road. He widened the Bodleian's status and repute by setting up and hosting the copyright libraries conference and establishing the standing conference of national and university libraries; also he founded the Society of Bodley's American Friends. Though a non-professional, in 1963 he was elected president of the Library Association. Bitter disagreement with the university authorities over their refusal to accept his defence of the Bodleian's claim to the premises of the Indian Institute led to his resignation after a dramatic debate in congregation in 1965. (As Bodley's librarian he invariably wore a dark coat and striped trousers, even when riding a bicycle, and in later life grew a huge beard like his father's.) 
From now on Myres gave his whole mind to archaeology and the pursuit of the course he had set himself in 1931. His Rhind lectures of 1964-5 appeared in 1969 as 'Anglo-Saxon Pottery and the Settlement of England'; in 1973 came 'The Anglo-Saxon Cemeteries of Caistor-by-Norwich and Markshall' (jointly with Barbara Green); 1977 saw the achievement of the long-envisaged 'A Corpus of Anglo-Saxon Pottery of the Pagan Period'; finally, in 1986, he was able to bring out a revision and reassessment, as an independent volume of the 'Oxford History', of his 'English Settlements' of fifty years earlier. 
Many societies benefited from Myres's unremitting involvement in their affairs, notably the Oxford University Archaeological Society, the Council for British Archaeology (of which he was a joint originator), the Sachsensymposium, and the Society for Medieval Archaeology. The Society of Antiquaries of London, whose president he was in 1970-75, awarded him their gold medal in 1976 for services to archaeology. He was a valued member of many official bodies including the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments in 1969-74 and the Ancient Monuments Board in 1959-76. He was especially noted for his friendliness and sense of fun, as also for his helpfulness to younger scholars. Totally without pomposity, he brightened his later bedridden days with the use of one of his doctoral robes as a dressing-gown. Quick to apply modern terms to ancient situations, he chuckled a lot when giving the title 'Charlemagne on Miniskirts' to a learned but light-hearted note in 'Antiquity' (42, 1968, p. 125). 
Myres was elected FBA in 1966 and appointed CBE in 1972. He was a fellow (1951-77) and sub-warden of Winchester, honorary fellow of New College (1973), and successively research, emeritus, and honorary student (1971) of Christ Church. He received honorary doctorates from the universities of Toronto (1954), Reading (1964), Belfast (1965), and Durham (1983). Myres died at his home, the Manor House, Kennington, near Oxford, on 25 July 1989. 
Arnold Taylor', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39816


Oakeshott, Michael Joseph (1901-1990), philosopher, was born on 11 December 1901 at Chelsfield, Kent, the second of the three sons (there were no daughters) of Joseph Francis Oakeshott of Harpenden, Hertfordshire, a Fabian civil servant who had played a part in founding the London School of Economics (LSE), and his wife, Frances Maude Hellicar. Oakeshott was educated at St George's School, Harpenden, a progressive co-educational school, and left moving accounts of the excitements a boy of scholarly disposition might enjoy as he came into contact with his classical inheritance. He went to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1920, and after a year in Germany in 1923-4 following graduation (he was placed in the second division of the first class in both parts -- 1922 and 1923 -- of the history tripos), and a short period as a schoolmaster at Lytham St Anne's grammar school in Lancashire, became a history fellow of the college in 1925. 
Oakeshott's early interests were in religion and historiography. Both led him on to philosophy and generated 'Experience and its Modes' (1933), in which he distinguished the different forms of human activity. R. G. Collingwood admired particularly its treatment of history, but the reception of the book was cool. The 1000 copies printed took over thirty years to sell out. In 1936 Oakeshott collaborated with Guy Griffith on 'A Guide to the Classics, or, How to Pick the Derby Winner', an analysis of horse-racing, the second edition of which was called 'How to Pick the Winner' (1947). In 1939 he published 'The Social and Political Doctrines of Contemporary Europe', an anthology of political writings with commentary. 
During the Second World War, Oakeshott enlisted as a gunner and rose to be a captain in Phantom, a special unit whose dangerous work it was to report on the effect of artillery fire from close to the front. In 1945 he returned to Cambridge and wrote his famous introduction (1946) to Hobbes's 'Leviathan' (1651). He edited the 'Cambridge Journal' from 1947 until its demise in 1954 and contributed actively to making it a centre of intellectual resistance to the ideas of social engineering, collectivism, and state planning dominant at that period. His love of freedom was so radical that his conservatism had anarchic tendencies. Most of the essays later reprinted in 'Rationalism in Politics' (1962) first appeared in the journal. In 1949 he went to Nuffield College, Oxford, as an official fellow, and in 1951 he was appointed to the chair of political science at the LSE. 
The contrast between the public profile and enthusiastic socialism of Harold Laski, his predecessor, and Oakeshott's sceptical conservatism made the LSE appointment a dramatic one, and his famous inaugural lecture, 'Political Education' (1951), made an appropriate splash. During his years at the LSE he lived in a small flat in Covent Garden. He administered the government department at the school with unostentatious efficiency, sending a stream of elegant handwritten notes to his colleagues, and was a familiar figure in the common room. He avoided committees when he could, but none the less played his part, and his unmistakable prose in, for example, describing the duties of a tutor, was to pass unscathed through several revisions of the BSc (Econ.) degree. 
In 1961 the University of London established the one-year master's degree, and although Oakeshott thought it an absurd idea, he set up an option within it on the history of political thought, which led to a distinguished seminar he ran with several colleagues. It drew scholars from all over the world, and he continued to attend until his late seventies. The work he did for this seminar, continually revised, appeared in 'On History' (1983). 
Oakeshott retired from the LSE in 1969 and eventually moved to Acton, near Langton Matravers in Dorset. Two cottages near a stone quarry had been knocked together, and he lined the walls with bookcases. Typically, he made something stylish out of the second-hand materials around him. He lived there until he died in 1990, though he often went to London to stay with his friends William and Shirley Letwin, or travelled to Hull or Durham, where favourite pupils were established in departments. He did venture to Harvard University, and to Colorado College in Colorado Springs, a favourite place which elicited 'A place of learning', later republished among other essays on education in 'The Voice of Liberal Learning' (1989), edited by Timothy Fuller. More commonly, he travelled to France. 
Oakeshott was slight of build and elegant in his dress without being ostentatious. Many of his clothes, like the furniture of his cottage in Dorset, were picked up second-hand. In everything he did he was stylish without being precious. His voice was light, but carried remarkably well. No one could better him at making some sense out of the most opaque academic paper; he was a matchless discussant. The real passion of his life, however, was to understand the uniquely human. Philosophy he took to be the search for the postulates of human activities. As exclusively concerned to understand rather than control the world, it was a pure, almost morbid, preoccupation. In 'Experience and its Modes', the most insidious of errors was found to be irrelevance -- applying to one mode of activity the criteria appropriate to another. In his masterpiece 'On Human Conduct' (1975), on which he had been working for years at the LSE but which came out after he had retired, the idea that experience is composed of a few discrete modes (practice, history, science, poetry) was loosened and replaced by 'conditional platforms of understanding', from which the enquirer casts his net to see what may be caught by any particular set of ideas. 
Oakeshott argued that a modern state is best understood in terms of a distinction between two sorts of human association, which he called 'civil' and 'enterprise'. Characteristically, the first of the three essays in the book delineates what it is to enquire philosophically about human conduct, the second postulates the purely ideal forms of civil and enterprise association, and only in the third, long, historical essay does Oakeshott engage with the historical literature on the modern state, of which he had undoubtedly the most profound understanding of anyone in his generation. He has often been described as a 'conservative philosopher', but he regarded this expression as a solecism, for philosophers should not be partisans. Nevertheless he did eloquently characterize a conservative disposition: it corresponded to his own character. 
Oakeshott was married three times. In 1927 he married Joyce Margaret, daughter of Guy Fricker, electrical engineer, of Harpenden; they had one son, Simon. The marriage was dissolved in 1938 and in the same year he married Katherine Alice Burton (died 1964), daughter of Charles Frederick Burton, of Neuilly-sur-Seine, France. The couple had no children and their marriage was dissolved in 1951. In 1965 he married Christel Schneider, who had been brought up in Nuremberg, the daughter of Johann Schneider, bookkeeper and later dairy worker. They had no children. 
Oakeshott refused public honours and honorary doctorates from several universities, but he did accept honorary doctorates from Colorado, Durham, and Hull. In 1966 he became a fellow of the British Academy. He died at his home, Victoria Cottage, in Acton, Dorset, on 18 December 1990. 
Kenneth Minogue', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39817


Oakeshott, Sir Walter Fraser (1903-1987), schoolmaster and college head, was born on 11 November 1903 in South Africa, the second of two sons among the four children of Walter Oakeshott, medical practitioner, of Lydenburg, Transvaal, and his wife, Kathleen Fraser. After Dr Oakeshott's early death his wife brought the family home to England. Walter went to Tonbridge School, Kent, where he became head boy, leaving with an exhibition to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1922. He achieved first classes in classical honour moderations (1924) and 'literae humaniores' (1926). 
Oakeshott became an assistant master at Tooting Bec School, London, whence in 1927 he proceeded to Merchant Taylors' School. In 1931, after a year spent working for the Kent county education committee, he was appointed an assistant master at Winchester College, where he remained until 1938. Two events of his time there were important for him. The first was his discovery in 1934, among the manuscripts in the fellows' library, of the unique manuscript of 'Morte d'Arthur' by Sir Thomas Malory. (His own full account of the find is given in 'Essays on Malory', edited by J. A. W. Bennett, 1963.) The second was the invitation to serve with the inquiry into unemployment sponsored by the Pilgrim Trust, for which he was given a year's leave of absence from the school (1936-7). He took a major part in writing up the findings of the inquiry, in William Temple's 'Men without Work' (1938). 
In 1939 Oakeshott became high-master of St Paul's School, in London. On the outbreak of war he had to supervise the evacuation of the school to Crowthorne, Berkshire; the evacuation, and St Paul's adaptation to new surroundings and unfamiliar routines, were a triumph for his charismatic leadership. Soon after he had brought the school back to London in 1945 he was appointed headmaster of Winchester College, a post which he held from 1946 to 1954. Apart from one dire confrontation at the very end of his time, when his request to a housemaster to resign was challenged and upheld by only a majority on the governing body, this was a period of successful stewardship in a highly individual style. Although capable in administration he had no great taste for it, and where he shone was as a teacher and inspirer of the young, especially of those whom he stirred to share his own keen appreciation of artistic beauty. His personal rapport with boys of all ages and tastes left a very strong impression, fondly recalled by Wykehamists who were in the school during his time. 
In 1954 Oakeshott was elected rector of Lincoln College, Oxford, where he presided for the next eighteen years. His was a period of remarkable expansion for the college, during which its tutorial fellowship more than doubled and its student accommodation greatly increased. In 1962-4 he was vice-chancellor of Oxford, and during his term a commission of inquiry into Oxford University (1964-6) was initiated, under the chairmanship of Lord Franks. 
Both at Winchester and at Oxford, Oakeshott took a keen interest in buildings and restoration. At Winchester he was instrumental in the recovery of surviving panels of the college chapel's original medieval stained glass, dispersed in the nineteenth century, and their refitting in the windows of Thurbern's chantry. At Lincoln he was the moving spirit in the acquisition by the college of the redundant church of All Saints, for conversion into the college library. In Oxford he played a leading part in the restoration work made possible by the Oxford historic buildings appeal, in particular in the restoration of the stonework, sculptures, and interior of the Sheldonian Theatre. 
Oakeshott dedicated the interstices of his busy life to scholarship, where his interests were many-sided. He wrote on Renaissance cosmography and early exploration ('Founded upon the Seas', 1942, and several learned articles). His purchase and subsequent identification of a notebook belonging to Sir Walter Ralegh, written when he was collecting materials for 'The History of the World' (1614), prompted research into the court culture of Elizabethan England and into Ralegh's poetry ('The Queen and the Poet', 1962). His most abiding interest was in medieval art history, and his two studies of the Winchester 'Bible' ('The Artists of the Winchester Bible', 1945, and 'The Two Winchester Bibles', 1981) were authoritative and influential, especially the former, a pioneering work identifying the hands and styles of the painters who worked on the 'Bible' and the influences which shaped their work. Among his other books were 'Mosaics of Rome' (1967) and 'Sigena Wall Paintings' (1972). 
Oakeshott held honorary doctorates of the universities of St Andrews and East Anglia, and was an honorary fellow of both Balliol (1974) and Lincoln (1972). He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1971 and was knighted in 1980. He was master of the Skinners' Company (1960-61), a long-serving trustee of the Pilgrim Trust, and president of the Bibliographical Society (1966-8). 
Oakeshott was a tall man, of gracious bearing, with a high forehead, eyebrows which fluttered in animation, and a characteristically beaming smile. His manner was gentle and courteous; he had an instinctive personal modesty, a delightfully whimsical wit, and a gift for friendship. In teaching, research, and life he strove continually for what he believed could inspire and elevate. He married in 1928 Noel Rose, daughter of Robert Oswald Moon, consultant physician. They had twin sons and two daughters, and the family was a close and affectionate one. His wife predeceased him in 1976, and he was buried beside her after he died, on 13 October 1987, at his home, the Old School House, Eynsham, Oxfordshire. 
M. H. Keen', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39818


Pacht, Otto Ernst (1902-1988), art historian, was born in Vienna, Austria, on 7 September 1902, the elder son (there were no daughters) of David Pacht, a Jewish businessman, and his wife, Josephine Freundlich. He attended the Volkschule and Stadtgymnasium in Vienna and in 1920 proceeded to Vienna University where, with a brief interlude in Berlin, he studied art history and archaeology. He achieved his doctorate in 1925. His first book, devoted to Austrian Gothic panel painting, appeared in 1929. In 1933 he was appointed 'Privatdozent' at the University of Heidelberg, but the Nazi embargo on Jews holding posts in Germany prevented him from taking up the position. 
Frustrated and alarmed by the political situation, Pacht paid his first visit to London at the end of 1935 and settled there in 1938. He was invited to undertake a catalogue of illuminated manuscripts (a field new to him) at the British Museum, liaising with Francis Wormald, then assistant keeper in the manuscripts department, who rapidly became a close personal friend. The evacuation of the manuscripts in 1939 ended this scheme and in 1941 he moved to Oxford to begin a similar project at the Bodleian Library. The resulting three-volume catalogue, completed by his pupil Jonathan Alexander, appeared between 1966 and 1973. Specialists in the study of manuscript illumination were rare and the scope of this undertaking left Pacht with a virtually unrivalled expertise. During his two decades in Oxford he published on a wide variety of topics, paying particular attention to English work of the twelfth century, which he viewed within its wider European context. His contribution to the collaborative monograph on the St Albans psalter (1960) is especially significant. During the same period he turned once more to his original fascination with northern painting of the fifteenth century, publishing 'The Master of Mary of Burgundy' in 1948. 
In March 1945 Pacht had been made fellow and lecturer in the history of medieval art at Oriel College, Oxford. In May 1947 he took British citizenship, which he retained for the remainder of his life. He became senior lecturer in the history faculty in 1952 and was advanced to reader in 1962. His subject was not, however, part of the formal syllabus and opportunities for direct teaching even at postgraduate level were disappointingly meagre. In 1963 he decided to accept an invitation to return to Vienna to fill the chair of art history in succession to K. M. Swoboda, thus becoming one of the few refugee scholars from Austria to return to his roots after the war. His work in England was acknowledged by election to the fellowship of the British Academy in 1956 and by the award of the honorary degree of DLitt at Oxford in 1971. 
In the 1960s Pacht's energies were directed almost entirely to his university commitments. His students welcomed him as an outstanding teacher and lecturer and he, in turn, was greatly stimulated by their enthusiasm. Fortunately for posterity, his carefully prepared lectures were all preserved in typescript and a series of publications, including 'Buchmalerei des Mittelalters' in 1984, made their content and his methodology accessible to a wider audience. After his retirement in 1972 he returned to his own research and published extensively up to the time of his death, paying particular attention once more to the problems of northern painting in the fifteenth century. At the same time he was responsible, in collaboration with Dagmar Thoss and Ulrike Jenni, for the appearance of five volumes in the ambitious catalogue of illuminated manuscripts in the Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek in Vienna (French in 1974 and 1977, Dutch in 1975, and Flemish in 1983 and 1990). A fellow of the Austrian Academy since 1967, he was awarded the Order of Merit by France in 1982 and became a commander of the order of Arts and Letters in 1984. 
Throughout his long career Pacht's circle of scholarly acquaintance was very wide. His attachment to the Bodleian Library brought him readily into contact with the international fraternity of manuscript specialists drawn there by their individual work. He maintained friendships with other members of the academic refugee community, notably colleagues from the Warburg Institute in London. Back in Vienna his many students found his approach inspiring. Pacht was stockily built and bespectacled, with thick dark eyebrows recalling the original colour of his sparse hair. Twenty-five years' residence in England did not entirely rob his speech of the evidence of his German origins. 
Pacht married, on 11 January 1940, Jeanne Thalia (died 1971), the daughter of Constantine A. Michalopulo, import-export merchant; she was an art historical researcher whom he met when she was working as assistant librarian at the Courtauld Institute, London. They had one son, Michael. Otto Pacht died in hospital in Vienna on 17 April 1988. He bequeathed his important personal working library to the Kunsthistorische Gesellschaft in Vienna. 
Janet Backhouse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39819


Piper, Sir David Towry (1918-1990), museum director and writer, was born on 21 July 1918 in Wimbledon, Surrey, the second of three sons (the oldest of whom was killed in action in 1941) of Stephen Harvey Piper, later professor of physics at Bristol University, and his wife, Mary Joyce Casswell. He was educated at Clifton College, and St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he graduated with a first in the modern and medieval languages tripos in 1940, having obtained a first in French and a second in German in part one in 1938. He then joined the Indian army (9th Jat regiment). He was captured in the Malay peninsula in 1942, and endured three years as a prisoner of war in Taiwan. In 1945 he married Anne Horatia, daughter of Oliffe Legh Richmond, professor of humanity in Edinburgh University. They had three daughters and a son. 
After the war Piper moved into the museum world. He was given his first job, as assistant keeper in the National Portrait Gallery, in 1946, when G. M. Young, then a trustee, said, 'we must keep an eye on that young man; he will go far!' They were prescient words. He became its director (1964-7), director of the Fitzwilliam Museum and fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge (1967-73), and director of the Ashmolean Museum and fellow of Worcester College, Oxford (1973-85). He was Slade professor of fine art, Oxford (1966-7), Clark lecturer, Cambridge (1977-8), and Rede lecturer, Cambridge (1983). He was a member of the Royal Fine Arts Commission (1970-86) and trustee of the Watts Gallery (1966-88), and served on the Paul Mellon Foundation for British Art (1969-70), the Pilgrim Trust (1973-90), and the Leeds Castle Foundation (1981-8). This is a formidable list for any man, especially one whose physical health was blighted by three years as a prisoner of war. He never spoke much about that experience, but survivors have described how he encouraged the camp inmates with his civilized acceptance of a particularly horrendous experience. 
Piper's twenty-one years at the National Portrait Gallery were marked by the publication of a pioneering volume in the gallery's series of catalogues, 'Seventeenth-Century Portraits' (1963), and by the initiation of the 'Concise Catalogue'. The years were also remarkable for a number of exhibitions (Oliver Cromwell, William Shakespeare, and Elizabeth of Bohemia, the winter queen), and for some outstanding acquisitions, including portraits of John Milton and Edmond Halley, bought for $24 and $45. As a result, and because of his numerous broadcasts, lectures, and articles, the attendance figures rose to pass the quarter-million mark and the gallery became one of the attractions of London. And Piper found time to write two outstanding books: 'The English Face' (1957 and twice republished) repays frequent rereading; 'The Companion Guide to London' (1964) ran to several editions and has been judiciously compared to Richard Ford's 'Spain' and E. M. Forster's 'Alexandria'. 
Piper left the National Portrait Gallery in 1967 to become director of the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, where he remained for six years, the highlights of which were the gift of Sir Hamilton Kerr's Mill House at Whittlesford, later to become the Hamilton Kerr Institute of Conservation of Works of Art, and Sir Robert Adeane's $100,000, given to launch the extension appeal fund. Acquisitions included pictures by George Stubbs, John Constable, Paulus Morelse, Nicolas Poussin, Jan van Goyen, and Meindert Hobbema, and a remarkable wooden sculpture of a Japanese warrior of the Kamakura period. Piper's eye for quality helped to draw the public towards whichever museum he served at the time, and his reward at the Fitzwilliam was to see the attendance figures increase by a third in the space of three years, and enough money raised for the new extension. 
In 1973 Piper became the first director of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, having been appointed to bring in centralization and to keep the balance among the four departments. The new director's professional familiarity with the museum world greatly strengthened the Ashmolean, and his tactful handling of the many internal problems, arising in a difficult transitional period, endeared him to the museum staff. His departure in 1985 was marked by the acquisition of an Etienne Aubry 'Portrait of a Man' -- depicting an unknown Frenchman of the 1770s, whose genial smile and air of civilized self-doubt curiously enough suggest Pete Piper himself. Striking in appearance, slim and elegant, Piper was tall and lolloping as a young man, with large brown eyes. Latterly a scholarly stoop disguised his height. At all times his rather lugubrious face could suddenly be lit by an enormous and friendly smile. 
Piper was a prolific writer and broadcaster. His articles in the 'Financial Times' and elsewhere drew attention to current exhibitions, books, and affairs in the art world. His own books include 'Enjoying Paintings' (1964), 'Shades: an Essay on Portrait Silhouettes' (1970), 'London' (1971), 'The Genius of British Painting' (1975), 'The Treasures of Oxford' (1977), 'Artists' London' (1982), and 'The Image of the Poet' (1982). Among his novels (written as Peter Towry) were 'It's Warm Inside' (1953), 'Lord Minimus' (1955), a surprising account of Henrietta Maria's dwarf page, and 'Trial by Battle' (1959). 
He was appointed CBE in 1969, knighted in 1983, and made an honorary DLitt of Bristol University in 1984 and an honorary fellow of the Royal Academy in 1985. Piper died at his home, Overford Farm, Wytham, near Oxford, on 29 December 1990, after suffering for many years from severe emphysema, and was buried in Wytham cemetery. Lord Briggs and Sir Hugh Casson gave addresses at a memorial service in St Mary's, Oxford, in March 1991. He was survived by his wife and four children. 
R. J. B. Walker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39820


Roberts, Colin Henderson (1909-1990), classical scholar and publisher, was born on 8 June 1909 in Queen Elizabeth Walk, Stoke Newington, London, the second son and second of five children (four sons and one daughter) of Robert Lewis Roberts, the head of a family building firm founded in the previous generation, and his wife, Muriel Grace Henderson. The family had strong literary and clerical connections. Colin's elder brother, Brian Richard Roberts (1906-1988), had a distinguished career in journalism, and was editor of the 'Sunday Telegraph' (1961-76); like Colin, he ended his days as an honorary fellow of St John's College, Oxford. Colin followed Brian to Merchant Taylors' School and to St John's. At school he distinguished himself as a scholar (and sometimes on the stage, notably as Cassandra in Aeschylus's 'Agamemnon'), and his university career followed its expected course, with first classes in both classical honour moderations and 'literae humaniores' (1931), and a Craven fellowship (1932-4). His classics tutors, J. U. Powell and F. W. Hall, had both been interested in the discoveries of papyrology and in the history of the book in ancient times. This was the subject to which Roberts devoted himself. He took part in excavations in Egypt (Karanis) under the auspices of the University of Michigan in 1932-3 and 1933-4; he studied also with W. Schubart in Berlin; and in 1935-6 published important biblical papyri from the John Rylands Library. During all this period he was first a junior, then a senior research fellow of St John's. 
The Second World War interrupted his studies, and, like many scholars of that time, Roberts spent five years in intelligence work in London and at Bletchley. He returned to St John's in 1946 as fellow and tutor in classics. In 1947 he married Alison Muriel, daughter of Reginald Haynes Barrow, classical scholar and inspector of schools. They had one daughter. 
Also in 1947 Roberts became a fellow of the British Academy, and he played an active part in the academy's affairs, serving as foreign secretary (1960-69), until 1979, when its failure to expel Anthony Blunt led him, with others, to resign his fellowship. In 1948 he became reader in documentary papyrology at Oxford, and in 1951-2 he spent a year at the Institute of Advanced Study at Princeton. His research in these years centred on the publication of the Antinoopolis papyri; but in 1955 he published a long essay, 'The codex' ('PBA', 40, 1955), which gave a pioneering account of the most important development in book production before the invention of printing, namely the replacement of the papyrus roll by 'a collection of sheets, folded or fastened together at the back or spine, and usually protected by covers', in other words the book as we know it. With his close friend T. C. Skeat, he revised and enlarged this essay in 1983. 
Having rejected an opportunity to become professor of Greek at Edinburgh, in 1954 he gave up, as it seemed, his scholarly career to succeed A. L. P. Norrington as secretary to the delegates of the Oxford University Press (he had been a delegate since 1946). He thus had charge of a great publishing house for twenty years, in a time of much change and some difficulty. It was natural that he should have felt most deeply involved in the great enterprises in classical studies and theology which were a special excellence of the press: the completion of 'A Patristic Greek Lexicon' by G. W. H. Lampe, the continuation of E. A. Lowe's 'Codices Latini antiquiores', the 'Oxford Latin Dictionary' under Peter Glare, and above all the 'New English Bible'. But his remarkable capacity for detail and rapid analysis enabled him to exercise his great administrative ability over a wide range of the press's affairs, although they may have also led him to be less interested in systematic delegation than circumstances came to require. In the latter years of his tenure, the organization of the press became seriously inappropriate to the increased scale of its operations. It comprised two separate businesses, one in Oxford, which undertook the learned publishing, and the other in London, which had responsibility for all distribution and marketing and for overseas operations other than those in New York. As the financial situation deteriorated, radical reform became necessary. Roberts was energetically engaged in his later years with the planning, which was to involve the transfer of the whole business to the Oxford site. 
On his retirement in 1974, Roberts once again became a senior research fellow of St John's, proposing to the college to work on 'Manuscript, society, and belief in early Christian Egypt'. The book, given as the British Academy Schweich lectures, appeared in 1979. It demonstrates in its close argument Roberts's command of verbal scholarship, his historical insight (he viewed scholarship as a means to the understanding of the past, not as an end in itself), and his profound concern, grounded in his own spirituality, with the Christian tradition. After a time, he and his wife retired to Hursey House, Broadwindsor, in west Dorset, where they enjoyed country life, animals, the village, and the church. As a lay reader (1982-5), he acquired a reputation for the excellence of his sermons. 
Roberts was a notably handsome young man -- to a famous refugee scholar in the 1930s he seemed the very type of Oxford youth -- and he retained his slim and elegant physique until a car accident not long before he died left him bent and shrunken. He was a man whose gentle manners, immaculate courtesy, and great kindness (especially to the disadvantaged or insecure) sometimes concealed, but could never diminish, the sharpness of vision, strong sense of duty, and tireless energy with which he pursued his aims, whether in scholarship or in the wide world. He was appointed CBE in 1973. Roberts died in Broadwindsor on 11 February 1990. 
D. A. Russell', rev. ' 


