@@@@@


doc= 39821


Shackleton, Robert (1919-1986), French scholar and librarian, was born in Todmorden, Yorkshire, on 25 November 1919, the eldest in the family of two sons and one daughter of (Robert William) Albert Shackleton, shoemaker, and his wife, Emily Sunderland. He attended Broomfield Boys' School and Todmorden secondary school, and subsequently went to Oriel College, Oxford, as a scholar in modern languages, taking a first class in 1940. The next five years were spent in the Royal Corps of Signals, serving in north Africa and Italy. In 1946 he was elected the first modern languages fellow at Brasenose College, Oxford. The college became the physical and affective centre of his life; he resided there, served as senior dean in the difficult post-war years (1954-61), was college librarian (1948-66), and came close to the principalship. An enthusiastic gastronome and a connoisseur of wines, he was a generous host to both young and old. 
Born and bred in north country nonconformity, Shackleton was a lifelong Liberal, taking an active part in politics early on and standing for parliament, unsuccessfully, at Blackburn in 1945. A man of unusual elocution -- his nasal intonation was a striking characteristic -- he was nevertheless a good lecturer. Factually based academic research was, however, one of his real strengths and he soon gained a considerable reputation as both a scholar and an academic administrator. A leading member of his faculty, he was president of the conference of university teachers of French in 1958 and an editor of 'French Studies' from 1960, and in 1965 succeeded Enid Starkie as university reader in French literature. 
Shackleton's early edition of Bernard de Fontenelle's 'Entretiens sur la pluralite des mondes' (1955), linking his childhood love of astronomy with his deep devotion to the European Enlightenment, was followed by his magisterial, if dry, critical biography of Montesquieu (1961), which was translated into French in 1977. Shackleton's identification of Montesquieu's different scribes and the painstaking research behind this volume contributed largely to the resurgence of Montesquieu studies with which his name became synonymous. He took the Oxford degree of DLitt in 1966. A regular traveller abroad and an easy speaker of French and Italian, Shackleton became a major figure in the international learned field, being president of the International Comparative Literature Association (1964-7) and in 1975-9 of the International Society for Eighteenth-Century Studies (where in particular he did much to improve relationships), and chairman of committee of the Voltaire Foundation (from 1983), the transfer of which to Oxford University he did much to assist. From 1972 to 1981 he was a delegate of the Oxford University Press. 
An expert committee man, Shackleton was, though often of firm views, notably articulate in their expression and deft at either compromise or the maintenance of an entrenched position. A frequenter of libraries at home and abroad, and from early days a bibliophile and book collector, he became a curator of the Bodleian Library in 1961 and in 1965-6 chaired the special Oxford committee on the university's libraries. Its report, written at the end of the period of post-war expansion, foresaw notable developments in storage, co-operation, and automation, but took funding for granted. The office of Bodley's librarian fell vacant in 1966 and Shackleton was elected to it. Retaining his rooms in Brasenose, he was active in promoting the cause of the Bodleian and that of sharing the labour and cost of cataloguing between major libraries by using automated techniques. He travelled much during these years and lectured throughout the world. Shackleton was an excellent ambassador but less effective as head librarian in the changed financial and academic climate of the 1970s. The desire for a more active participation in the development of the Bodleian by staff, curators, university administrators, and library users did not chime easily with his autocratic management style. Already suffering from a blood complaint, he resigned the librarianship in 1979 in favour of a return to the more strictly academic post of Marshal Foch professor of French literature (1979-86). 
This translation required removal from Brasenose to All Souls and, for Shackleton as an unmarried man, to the difficulties of practical domestic life. He had built up a renowned private library, and an informal portrait of him by Margaret Foreman (later placed in the college), standing in his beloved rooms in Brasenose, depicts the man better than his formal portrait by Sir William Coldstream in the Bodleian. His superlative Montesquieu collection, the basis of his 1983-4 Lyell lectures in bibliography, was ultimately bequeathed to the Bodleian while many of his books were sold to the John Rylands University Library of Manchester. He was appointed CBE (1986), was a fellow of the British Academy (1966), of which he was publications secretary (1974-7), and a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur (1982), and he held numerous other awards, including honorary degrees from Bordeaux (1966), Dublin (1967), Manchester (1980), and Leeds (1985). 
Shackleton was tall with a domed brow and long arms, which at times made him appear ungainly in his movements. His last professorial years were clouded by illness and he died in Ravello, Italy, on 9 September 1986, a few weeks before he was due to retire. He was buried at the English cemetery in Naples. 
Giles Barber', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39822


Syme, Sir Ronald (1903-1989), Roman historian, was born on 11 March 1903 in Eltham, a small market town in the province of Taranaki in the North Island of New Zealand. He was the elder son and eldest of three children of David Simpson Syme, solicitor, and his wife, Florence Mabel Selley. He was educated at Eltham primary school and Stratford district high school, where his interest in Latin was strongly encouraged by a first-class teacher, Miss Tooman. From 1918 to 1920 he attended New Plymouth Boys' High School, of which he was dux in 1919/20, winning a junior university scholarship. From 1921 to 1923 he was a student at Victoria University of Wellington, studying English, Latin, French, jurisprudence, and constitutional history. In the second year he added Greek; it is a very striking sign of his extraordinary linguistic aptitude, as demonstrated a few years later in Oxford, that it was only then that his formal study of Greek began. From 1922 to 1924, while still technically a student at Victoria, he was studying extramurally at the University of Auckland, to which he transferred formally in 1924. In 1923/4 he acted as assistant to the professor of classics, H. S. Dettmann. The story that in this role, after the professor took a headmastership, he set, sat, and marked his own papers for the BA in 1923 is unfortunately only a legend. 
In 1924/5 Syme studied for an MA in classics at Auckland, winning first-class honours in Latin, a senior scholarship in Greek, Latin, and French, and a postgraduate scholarship in arts, which brought him in the autumn of 1925 to Oriel College, Oxford, to study 'literae humaniores', which then consisted of ancient history and philosophy. He was not to return to New Zealand until 1950, but remained profoundly attached to it, its mountain scenery, and memories of seeing Halley's comet in the clear New Zealand sky of 1910. His first and best-known book, 'The Roman Revolution' (1939), was dedicated to his parents and his homeland ('parentibus optimis patriaeque'), and he kept his New Zealand citizenship throughout his life, speaking with unusual passion of the state-sponsored terrorism practised there by the French government in the matter of the sinking of a Greenpeace ship. 
In Oxford Syme was deeply influenced by his tutor in ancient history, Marcus Niebuhr Tod, a specialist in the illumination of Greek history through the careful study of inscriptions, and famed for the delicacy and precision of his language, both spoken and written. Syme's own linguistic gifts were shown in the remarkable feat of his winning the Chancellor's prize for Latin prose and the Gaisford prize for Greek prose in 1926 (some five years after beginning Greek); these were followed by the Gaisford prize for Greek verse in 1927. 
This quite outstanding talent had two consequences, the one merely of incidental interest, the other fundamental to his whole career. The former was a brilliant series of vignettes of Oxford life of the 1930s, in both Latin and Greek and in prose and verse, published in the 'Oxford Magazine' ('de coniuratione Bodleiana'; or a memorable evocation in Homeric verse of a scene involving Provost L. R. Phelps at Oriel high table). More important was the fact that the areas of his attention, within Roman history, were always to be directed to those periods from which there survives contemporary literature in Latin. In his entire output Greek history is represented only by a single essay on Thucydides; and, with the exception of Strabo, the vast Greek historical literature of the Roman period did not engage his attention. 
But first Syme had to take his degree, achieving a first (with rather modest marks in philosophy) in 1927; a typically elegant note from M. N. Tod informing him of the result is preserved in the extensive archive of Syme's papers which was at Wolfson College, Oxford, and is now held in the Bodleian Library. Tod continued to lend him his support, which led very quickly, in the fashion of the Oxford of those days, to his election as fellow and tutor in ancient history of Trinity College, Oxford, in 1929. 
The decade which Syme spent at Trinity until the outbreak of the Second World War was his happiest and most creative period. Indeed it had already begun in 1928, a year after he took his finals, with an article on the legions under Domitian. That was a sign of one enduring preoccupation: military history, painstakingly reconstructed from literary sources and inscriptions, and set against the vast and varied landscapes of the Roman empire, from Spain to the Euphrates. With that went a deep engagement with European, especially German, scholarship. His command of both French and German was very considerable, but his knowledge of French was more typically deployed in an exhaustive acquaintance with modern novels. In German, however, there was not only a wide knowledge of literature, some of which -- like parts of Goethe's 'Faust' -- he knew by heart, but also a profound relationship to the German scholarship of the previous few decades: not so much Theodor Mommsen, however, as W. Schulze's study of Roman names; the great article 'Legio' by E. Ritterling in Pauly-Wissowa's 'Realencyclopaedie'; Friedrich Munzer on the history of Roman aristocratic families; perhaps (this is not so clear as might be supposed) Matthias Gelzer on the Roman nobility; and above all the two editions of the 'Prosopographia imperii Romani' (1897 and 1933-). Reading in the library was supplemented by many visits to Germany and the Balkans, when he also walked long distances to gain a detailed understanding of the landscape. 
Military history was perhaps the most obvious product of Syme's studies until the end of the 1930s, culminating in his still unsurpassed article entitled 'Flavian wars and frontiers' in the 'Cambridge Ancient History', vol. 10 (1936). But already other dominating themes of his work were developing. Among his papers later given to Wolfson College, there is a manuscript draft dated 1934 of a book entitled 'The provincial at Rome', to which he refers in the preface of his 'Tacitus' (1958): 'It is suitable to confess in this place that the concluding section, 'The new Romans' (Chapters XLIII-XLV), owes something to a book begun many years ago, soon interrupted, and not yet terminated -- 'The provincial at Rome'.' It never was to be terminated, though 'Colonial Elites' (1958) also owes much to it. But it is now clear how rapidly the main lines of his thought had developed, and how consistently he maintained them to the end of his life. The text of 'The provincial at Rome', scrupulously edited by Anthony Birley, has been published as 'The Provincial at Rome' and 'Rome and the Balkans, 80 BC'-AD 14 (1999). 
An interest in the 'provincial' coming to the centre from the periphery must, obviously, have owed much to Syme's background. But there are more general aspects to his use of prosopography, which he turned into a dominant mode in Roman history: the study of families over generations, the interplay of literary and epigraphical evidence; the structure of public careers; the possibility of filling the stage of Roman history not just with the Pompeys, Caesars, and Augustuses, but with a host of lesser mortals. All these themes came together, along with his reactions to the rise of the inter-war dictatorships and their gross misuse of language, to produce 'The Roman Revolution', finished in 1938 when he was thirty-five, and published in 1939. As a work of literature, and as an exercise in intellectual and stylistic control, it has no equal in the historiography of Rome, and few in that of any period or area. 
The war then imposed a quite long hiatus, when Syme served in the Balkans, and was then professor of classical philology in Istanbul. He did indeed teach classics there; as to what other roles he played (as he certainly did), he never, to the end, gave the smallest hint. But one thing which he did was to give close attention to Strabo's account of Asia Minor. His work on this topic was published posthumously by Anthony Birley as 'Anatolia: Studies in Strabo' (1995). 
The post-war period saw Syme back in Oxford, where in 1949 he succeeded H. M. Last as Camden professor of ancient history, and fellow of Brasenose. It was very unfortunate that Last, a major figure but not to be compared with Syme in intellectual creativity, was there still as principal. Their profound disagreements, which the surviving correspondence shows to have been Last's fault, significantly soured his life at Brasenose and his attitude to it. 
None the less it was in 1958 that Syme published the most original and creative of his works, the infinitely complex and fruitful two-volume work 'Tacitus', accompanied by 'Colonial Elites', and followed by his Sather lectures, 'Sallust' (1964). A wider recognition came: in 1959 a knighthood, in 1976 the Order of Merit, as well as twenty honorary doctorates, and memberships of foreign academies. In 1956 (though no earlier) he made the first of many, ever more frequent, journeys across the Atlantic. All his life an extremely private person, Syme rarely developed close relations with colleagues, and tended to gain more pleasure from passing, if repeated, contacts with academic acquaintances made during his travels. 
Before his retirement in 1970 Syme had developed a fascination, possibly excessive, with the late fourth-century collection of imperial biographies in Latin known as the 'Historia Augusta'. In the same period, however, the generous initiative of the newly founded Wolfson College, Oxford, led to his election as a fellow and to his occupation of a fine penthouse apartment overlooking the River Cherwell, where he worked with great contentment, very productively, publishing 'History in Ovid' (1978), 'Some Arval Brethren' (1980), and a work of remarkable complexity, interest, and novelty, 'The Augustan Aristocracy' (1986), at the age of eighty-three -- not to speak of over fifty papers published in the 1980s. 
Always extremely sociable, provided that his essential reserve was respected, Syme never married, something which was not in the least a sign of aversion from the opposite sex, or even of an inability to form a long and deeply affectionate relationship. Never inclined to superfluous expenditure, on clothes or anything else, he none the less maintained to very near the end a brisk and military appearance, walking wherever possible, and at a pace which only very late began to slow to that of ordinary mortals. His reserve also softened somewhat in later years, when he found the support of younger scholars and their families, who regarded him with affection, without rivalry, and with no thought of obtrusion beyond what he wished. The cheerful, multinational society of Wolfson also offered him both stimulus and a more comfortable environment than he had ever enjoyed before, while respecting his privacy. 
Late in August 1989, when already suffering from cancer, he collapsed in his room in Wolfson, and never fully regained consciousness, dying only four days before a party, to be held by the college, which would have celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of the publication of 'The Roman Revolution'. This book, together with 'Tacitus', remains the main memorial to his unique contribution to Roman history; he is universally acknowledged as its greatest practitioner in the twentieth century. His particular qualities are not easy to summarize, and the true importance of his work can hardly yet be assessed. But his qualities included sheer intelligence, and a memory of legendary accuracy; great sensitivity to language, and vast reading; an intense engagement with the individual lives and family histories which can be brought out from behind the surface of Latin inscriptions and Roman literature; and a sense of style, which could lapse into idiosyncrasy. That style is shown at its best in the last paragraph of his 'Tacitus', which may also serve as his own epitaph: 'The irony is restrained and impressive. When Tacitus wrote, colonials and provincials from the Latin West occupied the place of the Caesars. There was only one higher pinnacle: literary renown. To that also the epoch of Trajan and Hadrian might confidently aspire. Men and dynasties pass, but style abides.' He died on 4 September 1989 in the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford. 
Fergus Millar', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39823


Taylor, Alan John Percivale (1906-1990), historian, was born on 25 March 1906 in Birkdale, Lancashire, the only son (and sole surviving child) of Percy Lees Taylor, Preston cotton merchant, and his wife, Constance Sumner Thompson, schoolmistress. His well-to-do Edwardian Liberal parents subsequently became ardent Labour supporters, which shaped Taylor's lifelong commitment to left-wing causes, notably the first Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. Precocious, learned, and spoilt, he was educated at Bootham School in York and Oriel College, Oxford, where, as something of a gilded youth who flirted with the Communist Party, he took a first class in modern history as a medievalist in 1927. 
Abandoning his intention of becoming a labour lawyer, Taylor went to Vienna in 1928 as a Rockefeller fellow to work on modern diplomatic history. Appointed a lecturer at Manchester University in 1930, he came under the influence, which he later denied, of his professor, Lewis Namier, and wrote the first of his more than thirty books, 'The Italian Problem in European Diplomacy, 1847-1849' (1934) and 'Germany's First Bid for Colonies, 1884-1885' (1938), both mischievous products of hard work, rarely repeated thereafter, in the archives. He schooled himself to lecture (and speak publicly) without notes, a craft he later brought to perfection; contributed regularly as reviewer and leader writer on the 'Manchester Guardian' under A. P. Wadsworth; travelled widely; and cultivated his vegetable garden at Disley in the High Peak. 
With Namier's crucial support, Taylor returned to Oxford in 1938 as a fellow of Magdalen College, to which he remained devoted until his retirement in 1976. Soon established as an outstanding tutor of responsive undergraduates and a charismatic, early-morning lecturer, he began to make a wider name for himself as an incisive speaker on current affairs, in person and on the radio. Throughout the Second World War his house at Holywell Ford was a centre for writers young and old, wayward musicians, and the grander Slav refugees clustered in north Oxford as well as his pupils coming on leave. In 1941 he published the most elegant of his books, the elegiac first version of 'The Habsburg Monarchy', and this was followed in 1945 by his initial best-seller, 'The Course of German History', a graphic, opinionated 'piece d'occasion' and the clue to much of his later work in its anti-German assumptions. 
Notorious as an early critic of the cold war, Taylor emerged as a national figure with the advent of television. On 'In the News' and 'Free Speech' he caught the viewers' fancy as a quick-witted debater, a Cobbett-like scourge of the 'establishment', and, quite simply, something of a card, much appreciated by the 'man on the Clapham omnibus', in the phrase of his exemplar, Lord Macaulay. First of the television dons, he retained this primacy into old age as he delivered unscripted lectures direct to the camera on historical themes to a vast audience. Meanwhile he was taken up by Lord Beaverbrook, a lover of maverick left-wingers, as the charms of Oxford faded. A highly paid, sometimes outrageous columnist on the 'Sunday Express', and the first (and last) director of the Beaverbrook Library, Taylor paid uneasy tribute to an improbable but close friend in 'Beaverbrook' (1972), the last of his substantial works and dedicated to the only man who ever persuaded him to cross the Atlantic. 
Long before, Taylor had consolidated his academic reputation. In 1954 'The Struggle for Mastery in Europe, 1848-1918' was at once recognized as a model analysis, with its careful attention to the published records. This massive work, with the brief but perceptive 'Bismarck' (1955) and the self-indulgent Ford lectures, 'The Trouble Makers' (1957), fully justified his election to the British Academy in 1956. (Perversely, he resigned on libertarian grounds in 1980 when Anthony Blunt relinquished his fellowship.) Contrary to many expectations, however, Taylor was not appointed regius professor at Oxford in 1957. This failure, in which Namier played some part, remains a subject of uncertain legend, but it did not prevent an embittered man denigrating the university he loved. Thereafter he was consoled by honorary doctorates at Bristol, Manchester, New Brunswick, Warwick, and York, as well as honorary fellowships of both Magdalen (1976) and Oriel (1980). 
Superficially, Taylor was an old-fashioned historian, holding that 'politics express the activities of man in society', with the addendum that economic and social circumstances must be taken into modest account. A master of narrative but essentially an analyst, he founded no school, despite his influence upon younger historians, and his methods could be a dangerous model. In his heyday Taylor came to rely upon assiduous reading in five languages and sheer intuition -- 'green fingers', in Namier's envious phrase. There was no elaborate filing system, but a prodigious memory could usually supply some evidence for the thousand words tapped out each well-organized morning. Despite his commitment to popular journalism, he was also a superb and creative essayist, and published several volumes based upon serious reviews in the learned journals and 'The Observer'. 
Ultimately, Taylor's scholarly standing depends upon three major achievements. 'The Struggle for Mastery' remains unrivalled as a totally authoritative study of international relations in a complicated period. 'English History, 1914-1945' (1965) is an enthralling, highly idiosyncratic account of his own times, regarded by some as his best book. 'The Origins of the Second World War' (1961) was a dazzling exercise in revisionism, which earned him a mixture of international obloquy and acclaim. Whatever its flaws, this treatment of Hitler as a product of German tradition summed up Taylor's paradoxical, provocative, and inventive approach to historical explanation. A pragmatic loner, suspicious of philosophies of history and a brilliant stylist, he was admired even by his many critics for the range of his erudition, his clarity of presentation, and the fertility of his hypotheses. 
Though he enjoyed portraying himself as a simple, true-born Englishman, Taylor was a cosmopolitan intellectual, with an expert knowledge of European architecture, music, and wine. An admirable but frugal host, his table talk was inimitable; a shrewd if nervous man of business, he was soothed by domestic chores; and in old age he became an indefatigable walker in town and country. Short, stocky, and bespectacled, he was vain about his appearance, but always happiest in a crumpled tweed or, more often, corduroy suit, invariably accompanied by a flamboyant bow-tie. 
An emotional man, despite the brash exterior, Taylor was three times married and devoted to his six children. In 1931 he married a musician, Margaret, the daughter of Harold Adams, an English merchant trading in India; they had two sons and two daughters. Margaret was later an over-indulgent patron of Dylan Thomas. This marriage was dissolved in 1951 and in the same year he married Eve, daughter of Joseph Beardsel Crosland, under-secretary at the War Office, and sister of Tony Crosland, Labour politician. There were two sons of this marriage, which was dissolved in 1974. In 1976 he married the Hungarian historian Eva Haraszti (1923-2005), daughter of Mitse Herczke, an ironmonger in east Hungary, and widow of Vilmos Hudecz, civil servant. Taylor's last years were clouded by Parkinson's disease and he died at a nursing home in Barnet on 7 September 1990. His remains were cremated at Golders Green on 17 September. 
A. F. Thompson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39824


Gardner, Dame Helen Louise (1908-1986), literary scholar, was born at Brookfield, Dukes Avenue, Church End, Finchley, Middlesex, on 13 February 1908, the middle child and only daughter of Charles Henry Gardner (1867-1919), journalist, and his wife, Helen Mary Roadknight, 'nee' Cockman (1877-1967), daughter of Charles Roadknight Cockman, schoolmaster. Helen was eleven when her father died and the family thereafter made their home with her grandparents. Mrs Gardner, a very musical woman, was ambitious for her gifted daughter and her encouragement was stimulating and sometimes a strain. Helen's education was at the North London Collegiate School for Girls, where she benefited from the excellent teaching of her English mistress, Florence Gibbons. In 1926 she went to St Hilda's College, Oxford, and in 1929 obtained first-class honours in English language and literature. Amateur dramatics revealed talents that could be discerned later in her style of lecturing and lively conversational habits. 
Helen Gardner accepted a temporary post at the University of Birmingham. After three years (1931-4) as an assistant lecturer at the Royal Holloway College, London, she seized the chance of returning to Birmingham, as a member of the English department (1934-41). She extended the scope of her lecturing beyond the university audience; canvassed for Labour in a Conservative area; agonized over the Spanish Civil War and refugees from Nazi Germany. It was on a dreary March day in 1940 that her spirits were roused by a first contact with T. S. Eliot's 'East Coker'. In 1941 she sought and took good advice and left Birmingham for Oxford to become a tutor (1941-54), and later fellow (1942-66), at her old college. The next thirteen years she regarded as her 'golden years'. She was memorably steady in her concern for the welfare of her own pupils. To the less able her tutorials were formidable, but to those who could take the wit and severity of her criticism of their essays the experience proved rewarding. In 1954 she was made reader in Renaissance studies and after one set-back was elected in 1966 Merton professor of English language and literature, with a fellowship at Lady Margaret Hall. The distinction of being the first woman to hold this chair gave her special satisfaction. She exerted herself as a supervisor and was as successful as she was strict. Forewords in many publications bear witness to her influence. From 1961 to 1963 she served on the committee on higher education chaired by Baron Robbins. She relished the discussion and travel involved and remained unabashed by some of the criticism of the extent of university expansion which was recommended. She served on the Council for National Academic Awards (1964-7) and enjoyed being a trustee for the National Portrait Gallery (1967-78). As a delegate to the Oxford University Press (1959-75) she made herself felt to the benefit of English studies. On subjects outside her range her judgements were sometimes less happy. 
Meanwhile Helen Gardner's work on the two poets with whom she will chiefly be associated -- John Donne and T. S. Eliot -- went on concurrently. Her masterly edition of Donne's 'Divine Poems' appeared in 1952 and was revised in 1978. The parallel edition of his 'Elegies and Songs and Sonnets' followed in 1965. It was her declared intent to supersede Herbert Grierson's text, believing that she had the advantage of more manuscripts to subject to the rigorous method of collation she favoured. The introductions and commentaries manifest the industry and intelligence she brought to this work. Against subsequent criticism she continued to defend the readings and reorderings she proposed. 
Helen Gardner's tribute to the genius of T. S. Eliot took a different form. In 'The Art of T. S. Eliot' (1949) she provided a way into an originality in thought and prosody in the poems which both fascinated and perplexed many readers. It was gratifying for her to learn that she had her author's approval. This book was written 'con amore' and shows to advantage her critical enthusiasm. Later, in 1978, she drew on her knowledge of the drafts of 'Four Quartets', which she had seen in 1947, to demonstrate a poem in the making ('The Composition of 'Four Quartets'', 1978). She also wrote on Shakespeare and on Milton's 'Paradise Lost'. The British Academy lectures on Othello ('The noble Moor', 1955) and on King Lear (1967) draw out her best. The introductions to the 'World's Classics' selections of metaphysical poets (1961) and of George Herbert are admirable. She collaborated with Timothy Healy in selecting from Donne's sermons ('Selected Prose', 1967), and with G. M. Story in an edition of William Alabaster's poems (1959). 
The popularity of Helen Gardner as a lecturer in Britain, the United States, European capitals, and the Far East owed as much to her style as to her subject. Her enthusiasm could be infectious. She had a clear, strong voice and was aware of its attraction. The phrasing and rhythms of her prose echo in some measure their oral delivery. Her favourite unit of composition was about the length of a lecture, essay, long obituary, or university sermon. Criticism she regarded as a serving art. She was not an innovator but chose rather to consolidate and conserve. Her endeavour was to increase the understanding and enjoyment of the best to be found in the literature of her own language. Later in life she was dismayed to realize how strong was the current of new methods of analysis, in the valuation of poetry and the style of theatrical production, and the effect it had on the teaching of English. She advertised her disapproval with fierce irony and then in more positive chapters reasserted her own beliefs in 'In Defence of the Imagination' (1982). As a reviewer she was thorough, conscientious, severe, and open: everything was signed. She dealt with many of the most important publications of her peers and risked making enemies in the process. Twice she took on the thankless task of an anthologist with good will. The 'Faber Book of Religious Verse' (1972) was followed in the same year by a more ambitious undertaking, The 'New Oxford Book of English Verse'. To her Oxford DLitt (1963) and Cambridge honorary LittD (1981) she added honorary degrees from eight other universities. She was appointed CBE in 1962 and a DBE in 1967. She was made a fellow of the British Academy in 1958, twice won the Crawshay prize (1952 and 1980), and was made a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1962. 
In person Helen Gardner was small and sturdy. Vivacious, temperamental, and occasionally overbearing, she appreciated good food and drink, liked to dress well, and revelled in parties where she talked well but, as she herself knew, too much. She was kinder in her actions than in her wit. No feminist, she liked to be a woman in a man's world, game to compete and reckoning that she could match anyone for scholarly hard work and tough argument. She made no secret of her satisfaction in her success. She was brave in a number of illnesses and limped a little after a repeated hip replacement. She was a devout Anglican in the tradition of the seventeenth-century divines. Retirement at Myrtle House, 12 Mill Street, Eynsham, near Oxford, in 1975 did not greatly change her way of working except that she had more time to give to her pleasure in gardens and foreign travel. She died, unmarried, on 4 June 1986 in a nursing home at Bicester, Oxfordshire, after many months of a distressing illness. 
K. M. Lea', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39825


Braine, John Gerard (1922-1986), writer, was born on 13 April 1922 in Bradford, the elder child and only son of Fred Braine, a sewage-works inspector, and his wife, Katherine Josephine Henry. By religion his father was a Methodist, his mother a Roman Catholic; he was brought up in the latter faith. He was educated at St Bede's Roman Catholic Grammar School, Bradford, and attended the Leeds School of Librarianship -- his mother had worked as a librarian. In 1938-40 he was in rapid succession a furniture shop assistant, bookshop assistant, laboratory assistant, and progress chaser. Between 1940 and 1951 he was an assistant librarian at Bingley Public Library, becoming chief assistant in 1949. This part of his career was interrupted in 1942-3 by service in the Royal Navy, from which he was invalided out. In 1951 tuberculosis necessitated a long spell in hospital, from which he did not emerge until 1954. Over the next three years he worked as branch librarian successively at Northumberland and West Riding of Yorkshire county libraries. He had been writing various items, including a verse play, without much success for some time, and now, in 1957, published his first novel, 'Room at the Top'. Although earlier rejected by four publishers, this book immediately took its place as one of the significant novels of the post-war period. Its author's lack of a conventionally prolonged education may well have contributed to its freshness and vigour, and its story, of the material ascent and emotional coarsening of Joe Lampton, a northern working-class lad, owed something to a tradition of provincial writing that had become weakened. Before long its sales reached 100,000 in hardback and the film rights had been sold before publication. Within four months Braine was able to give up his career as a librarian and devote himself to writing. The film appeared in 1958. 
Braine's second novel, 'The Vodi' (1959), an excursion into the supernatural influenced by his hospital experiences, has never done anything like so well either commercially or in esteem, but in his third, 'Life at the Top' (1962, filmed 1965), he returned to Joe Lampton, now a capable but disaffected executive, and to commercial success. None of Braine's later novels, of which the last, 'These Golden Days', appeared in 1985, attracted the attention the Lampton books received. Joe enjoyed a kind of resurrection as the protagonist of two television series, 'Man at the Top' (1970 and 1972), and several of Braine's other novels were effectively adapted for television. 
It is difficult not to see in Braine's career after 1962 a decline in literary standards of performance as well as of popularity and standing with the public. Inexorably he came to be seen as a man if not of one book then of one character, the uncertainly attractive and far from inexhaustible Lampton. What at one stage had passed as a harsh northern critique of the affluent south seemed more and more to slide into tolerance at best. More than this, in the absence of the narrative thrust of the earlier novels, the general treatment and style was revealed as flatly pedestrian. Autobiography or wish-fulfilment took the place of invention, to the point of occasional embarrassment in late works such as 'One and Last Love' (1981). Besides fiction, he published a critical study, 'J. B. Priestley' (1978), and a handbook called 'Writing a Novel' (1974), which, together with much sound practical advice to the tyro, includes a heartfelt warning, poignant in retrospect, of the dangers of success. He pursued a more ephemeral calling as a political polemicist in writing and in public appearances. At first a supporter of unilateral nuclear disarmament and other left-wing causes, he moved suddenly and spectacularly to the right, calling for the return of hanging and the ending of all foreign aid. 
Though possessing strong views and vociferous dislikes, Braine showed no animosity towards anyone. He was indeed a man of great natural sweetness. Pale, chubby, bespectacled, a serious cigarette smoker and drinker with a perpetual look of being out of condition, he had an expression of settled gloom that easily lightened into a genial smile. He showed an endearing pleasure in his prosperity and no resentment when his star began to fade. 
In 1955 Braine married Helen Patricia, daughter of William Selby Wood, engineering fitter. They had a son and three daughters. The family moved from Bingley to Woking in 1966. Braine died of a gastric haemorrhage on 28 October 1986, in a Hampstead hospital. 
Kingsley Amis', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39826


Chatwin, (Charles) Bruce (1940-1989), traveller and writer, was born on 13 May 1940 in Sheffield, the elder child (his brother was born four years later) of Charles Leslie Chatwin, a Birmingham solicitor, and his wife, Margharita Turnell. He was educated at Marlborough College, where he was dreamily interested in classics and enthusiastic about acting; in his spare time he collected and restored odd pieces of furniture. In 1958 he joined the auction house Sothebys as a porter; he rose rapidly to become head of the department of antiquities and the newly founded and flourishing department of impressionist painting. He was made a director of the firm in his twenties but left in 1966, variously citing failing eyesight and disillusion with the art business, to go to Edinburgh University. 
At Edinburgh, Chatwin studied archaeology with Professor Stuart Piggott; he left after two years, without taking his degree, and went to Mauritania, from which he returned with a sheaf of desert photographs and many more notes on nomads, which were subsequently extended by journeys to Iran and Afghanistan. While visiting Sudan he had developed a fascination with nomads which was to last all his life: he identified with, and to some extent adopted, a travelling way of life, revered its disdain for possessions, and theorized in published and unpublished work about the importance of walking and the pernicious effects of settlement. In 1970 he helped to organize an exhibition entitled 'Animal style art' at the Asia House Gallery in New York. In the early 1970s he worked for the 'Sunday Times Magazine', first as an art consultant, and then as a journalist: his pieces included interviews with Andre Malraux, Indira Gandhi, and the dress designer Madeleine Vionnet, who had invented the bias cut which helped to abolish the corset. He is said to have left the paper with a characteristic flourish, sending a telegram which explained: 'Gone to Patagonia for six months.' 
This trip resulted in Chatwin's first published book, 'In Patagonia' (1977), an imaginative investigation of that region of Argentina, which mixed crisp description with anthropology, biography, and history, relishing strange encounters and esoteric facts, and rendering these in a spare elliptical prose. 'In Patagonia' was awarded the 1977 Hawthornden prize and the E. M. Forster award. Chatwin earned and retained a name as a redefiner of travel writing, though the books that followed were strikingly varied in subject matter and style. 'The Viceroy of Ouidah' (1980), luxuriant, highly wrought, and exotic, provided a fictionalized account of the life of a Brazilian slave trader. The book was in part based on Chatwin's researches in Dahomey, where he had been arrested during a 'coup d'etat' on suspicion of being a mercenary; Werner Herzog filmed the story as 'Cobra verde' (1988). 'On the Black Hill' (1982) -- written, Chatwin claimed, in order to put paid to the label 'travel writer', from which he recoiled -- described in dense domestic detail the intertwined lives of a pair of Welsh twins who never moved from their farm in the border country; the book, which won the 1982 Whitbread award for the best first novel and the James Tait Black memorial prize, was made into a film directed by Andrew Grieve (1987). Five years later Chatwin produced 'The Songlines' (1987), a capacious exploration of Aboriginal creation myths which incorporated some of his early speculations about nomads. 'Utz' (1988), a coolly written study of an obsessional collector of Meissen porcelain, drew on his experience of the art world and his interest in the Soviet Eastern bloc; it was short-listed for the 1988 Booker prize and filmed by George Sluizer. His collection of articles, 'What Am I Doing Here', appeared in 1989, a few months after his death; a selection of his photographs and notebooks, edited by David King and Francis Wyndham, was published in 1993. 
Chatwin was an animated talker, physically and mentally restless, prominently blue-eyed, and hugely enthusiastic. He was a vivid presence, in print and in person: he drew people to him during his lifetime and became the subject of myth-making after his death; he had both male and female lovers. In 1965 he married Elizabeth Margaret, the daughter of Gertrude Laughlin and Hubert Chanler, an American naval officer; there were no children. His wife, a shepherd and trekker, was one of his most stalwart travelling companions. They lived in Gloucestershire and later in the Chilterns; Chatwin, who liked to work away from home, also had a series of London rooms, which were uniformly small, bare, and white. In September 1986 he was diagnosed as having the AIDS virus; he died in Nice, France, on 18 January 1989, of a fungal infection, and his ashes were taken to Greece. 
Susannah Clapp', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39827


Dahl, Roald (1916-1990), writer of fiction, was born on 13 September 1916 at Villa Marie, Fairwater Road, Llandaff, Glamorgan, the son of Harald Dahl, shipbroker, and his second wife, Sofie Magdalene, daughter of Olaf Hesselberg, meteorologist and classical scholar. His parents were prosperous Norwegians. His father had given up farming near Oslo, and settled with his wife and two small children (a son and a daughter) in Wales, where he made a fortune as a shipbroker. When his first wife died suddenly, he married Sofie Hesselberg. She took on the existing family, and had four children of her own. Roald, her only son, was her third child, later nicknamed the Apple. One of his older sisters married the microbiologist Sir Ashley Miles. 
When Dahl was only three another beloved, older sister and his father died within two months of one another. This was the first in a series of catastrophes and mortal disasters that dogged his life, and, he claimed, gave his work a black savagery. His mother, a devoted matriarch, ran the family. In the summers she took them to Norway, where her family fostered Dahl's interest in insects and birds, Nordic trolls, and witches. She gave Dahl his passion for reading -- in particular Galsworthy, Kipling, and Hugh Walpole -- all best-sellers of the day. She was immortalized as the grandmother in 'The Witches' (1983). 
Dahl was an undistinguished rebel at Llandaff Cathedral school, St Peter's in Weston-super-Mare, and Repton School. Those few of his contemporaries who remembered him remarked only on his bullying humour and competitive spirit, and his hatred of authority. His proudest achievement was to invent a mousetrap that plunged its victims into a bowl of water, with the Dahlian logo, 'catch as cats can't'. In his account of his childhood, 'Boy' (1984), he revealed the cruel flogging pleasurably inflicted by Repton's headmaster, G. F. Fisher (later archbishop of Canterbury). Dahl claimed that the hypocrisy of his headmaster's brutal beatings followed by pious sermons in Repton chapel cured him of any inclination towards Christianity. Dahl described his ferocious beatings in clinical detail in his story 'Lucky Break'. 
Resisting the attractions of a university education, at eighteen Dahl joined the Public Schools Exploring Society's expedition to Newfoundland. He joined Shell in 1934, and was sent to Dar es Salaam, Tanganyika. When the Second World War broke out in 1939, he drove to Nairobi, Kenya, to volunteer for the Royal Air Force. Learning to fly over the Kenyan highlands was a master experience, and provided aerial images both magical and nightmarish for his subsequent writing. He served with 80 fighter squadron in the western desert in 1940, and was severely wounded when his Gloster Gladiator biplane ran out of petrol and crash-landed in the Libyan desert. His injuries never left him, and he later converted the pain and frustration of his crash and seven months in hospital into fantasies in the style of Biggles. He declined convalescent leave in Britain, and fought in the hopeless air defences over Athens and then the Peloponnese. Invalided home to London, he was posted to Washington as assistant air attache (1942-3) and worked in security (1943-5). He was appointed flight lieutenant in 1943 -- not wing commander, as he claimed in 'Who's Who'. While Dahl was in Washington, C. S. Forester -- creator of Captain Hornblower and author of many popular novels -- asked him for RAF anecdotes to be used as propaganda. He sent Dahl's romanticized version of his plane crash to the 'Saturday Evening Post', where it appeared in 1942 under the misleading title 'Shot down over Libya: an RAF pilot's factual account'. In it Dahl informed his readers that his Hurricane had been brought down in flames by a burst of machine-gun fire while strafing a column of trucks. His stories in the 'Saturday Evening Post' marked the beginning of Dahl's accidental but prodigious career as a writer. 
Disney tried to make a film of one of Dahl's stories called 'The Gremlins' (1943), which concerned a tribe of goblins who were blamed by the RAF for everything that went wrong with an aircraft. Gremlin stories were rife in the RAF at the time, and several other books about them had already appeared, but Dahl was happy to boast that he had invented them. 'The Gremlins' was such a success that the self-dramatizing RAF hero became a frequent guest of Eleanor and Franklin D. Roosevelt at the White House and their weekend retreat, Hyde Park. This entree was exploited by the British intelligence services, who made him a spy -- on the Americans. Or so Dahl later claimed. 
Dahl's short stories, published in such distinguished notice-boards of the genre as the 'New Yorker' and 'Harper's Magazine', tiptoed along the tightrope between the macabre and the comic in a manner reminiscent of Hector Hugh Munro (Saki). They were horrific, fantastic, and unbelievable. Lapsed vegetarians do not commonly find themselves being slit up for sausage-meat in a homely abattoir, nor do babies fed on royal jelly turn into bees. In a typical Dahl story a woman clubs her husband to death with a frozen leg of lamb and then feeds it to the detectives who have come to search for the murder weapon, or a rich woman goes on a cruise, leaving her husband to perish in an elevator stuck between two floors in an empty house. When the stories were published as collections, 'Someone Like You' (1953, revised 1961) and 'Kiss, Kiss' (1960), Dahl broke through into the best-seller lists and became a celebrity. His popular fame was augmented by the translation of his ripping yarns to the small screen in 'Alfred Hitchcock Presents' from 1965 onwards, and then in 'Roald Dahl's Tales of the Unexpected', which ran on television around the world for many years from 1979 onwards. Preoccupied as they are with greed, revenge, cruelty, and the rest of the dark side of human nature, his stories were both bizarre examples and also trendsetters of the fashionable 1960s genre of black comedy. Not a few critics denounced his work as sadistic, antisocial, and misogynist. But Saki would have recognized his combination of the macabre with fantasy and wit. 
On 2 July 1953 Dahl married the film star Patricia Neal (1926-2010), who was on the rebound from her long affair with Gary Cooper. She was the daughter of William Burdett Neal, manager of the Southern Coal and Coke Company, of Packard, Kentucky. They had one son and four daughters. Their son Theo was brain-damaged at the age of four months when he was tipped out of his pram in New York and fell under a cab. His skull was smashed and he was not expected to live. But working with his consultant and a friend who was an aircraft designer of hydraulic pumps, Dahl pioneered the Wade-Dahl-Till Valve. This non-blocking valve drains fluid from the brain, and has since been used to treat thousands of children with brain injuries. Ultimately, after years of desperate illness, Theo did recover. Meanwhile his older sister Olivia contracted a rare form of measles aged seven and died of encephalitis. 
Dahl now turned to writing books for children -- claiming, implausibly, that he had run out of plots for adult Gothic horror. 'James and the Giant Peach' (1967) was spotted as an instant new planet in the sky of children's fiction. The story begins with James's parents being eaten by a runaway rhino on a crowded shopping street, an opening that Evelyn Waugh would have cheered. The story tells how the orphan James escapes the guardianship of two monstrous aunts, the wicked Aunt Spiker and the dastardly Aunt Sponge. One day 'this disgusting beast', 'this filthy nuisance' (the aunts never call James by his real name) spills a bag of magic worms ('Miserable creature!') near the roots of a peach tree. A peach swells to enormous proportions and James goes to live inside it. With a set of lovable and resourceful insects as crew, James and the giant peach roll, float, and fly from darkest rural England over the Atlantic to a ticker-tape reception in New York, squashing the aunts as flat as pancakes 'en route'. It is rude, naughty, anti-adult, creepy, and sometimes cruel. 'The Giant Peach' had a successful run as an opera at Covent Garden. 

'James and the Giant Peach' was followed in the same year by 'Charlie and the Chocolate Factory' (filmed in 1971 as 'Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory'), the most popular children's book yet. This established the tricks of Dahl's magic trade and attraction. Its hero, Charlie Bucket, is the poorest boy imaginable (one bar of chocolate a year and two helpings of cabbage as a special treat on Sundays). His four grandparents, all over ninety, 'as shrivelled as prunes and as bony as skeletons', lie huddled and hungry in their one bed, 'two at either end dozing away the time with nothing to do'. But Charlie's visit to the mysterious Wonka chocolate factory, a children's utopia of mint grass and chocolate rivers, changes the Bucket family fortunes. Mr Willy Wonka, the imperious chocolate wizard, is looking for a protege he can trust. He disposes of Charlie's rivals (greedy Augustus Gloop, disobedient Violet Beauregarde, spoilt Veruca Salt, brash Mike Teevee) and chooses skinny, wide-eyed Charlie as the heir to his secret recipes -- which include sugar-coated pencils for sucking, luminous lollies for eating in bed, and stickjaw for talkative parents. So the underdog triumphs, as usual with Dahl. His dialogue smacks of Carroll, and his verses of Belloc. A stock topic of Dahl's was to pick on human weaknesses and vices, such as gluttony, bossiness, or untidiness, and invite his young readers to rejoice in the sticky end to which their possessors come. These first children's books also flaunt the cheeky vocabulary, the zany pathos, the funniness, and the undisciplined plotting that were the penprints of Dahl. An eminent American critic called 'Charlie and the Chocolate Factory' 'cheap, tasteless, ugly, sadistic, and for all these reasons, harmful' (Treglown, 188); and an English headmaster doing research into children's reading charged Dahl with 'incipient fascism' (as opposed to the 'paternalist feudalism' of Enid Blyton). Even Margaret Meek, the distinguished authority on children's books, commented primly: 'I do not trust Dahl as implicitly as his young readers do, because I find his view of life seriously flawed by a particular kind of intolerance.' 
Dahl claimed that the secret of his success as a writer for children was that he appealed to their baser instincts: 'When you are born you are a savage, an uncivilised little grub, and if you are going to go into our society by the age of ten, then you have to have good manners and know all the do's and don'ts -- don't eat with your fingers and don't piss on the floor. All that stuff has to be hammered into the savage, who resents it deeply. So subconsciously in the child's mind these giants become the enemy. That goes particularly for parents and teachers. ('The Times', 30 Nov 1990)' Not all teachers, parents, and librarians were as keen as their children on Dahl, especially in the United States. He was accused of violent exaggerations of language and grotesque characterizations. To his detractors Dahl was capricious (most adults are portrayed as cruel monsters); racist (the Oompa-Loompas in 'Charlie and the Chocolate Factory' were black pygmy slaves before Dahl gave them long hair and rosy skin in a prudently revised edition); rude (a whole chapter in 'The BFG' [Big Friendly Giant] is devoted to the joys of farting); and misogynist (James's aunts, Sponge and Spiker, are 'ghastly hags'; Matilda's headmistress, Miss Agatha Trunchbull, treats her pupils with extreme violence and grievous bodily harm). 'Real witches dress in ordinary clothes and look very much like ordinary women. In fact, they look just like your schoolteacher or respectable aunt. But secretly they are bald, their spit is as blue as bilberry, and to them little boys smell of dogs' droppings, FRESH dogs' droppings.' 'The Witches' (1983) was placed on the restricted list in many American schools, after parents complained that it either frightened their children or encouraged them to take an interest in the occult. Beneath Dahl's robust caricature, simple morality, and rich comic invention, critics detected an undercurrent of vengeful sadism and black misanthropy. 
In spite of high-minded disapproval, Dahl's books were hugely popular with children. They were inventive, rich, imaginative, surprising, funny, and full of the bizarre words that please children. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, several of them continually topped the best-seller lists both in the UK and abroad. When the first edition of 'Charlie and the Chocolate Factory' was published in China, it had a print run of two million, the biggest print run of any book to date. By the end of the twentieth century the sales of his eighteen children's titles totalled well over 35 million books. They included 'Fantastic Mr Fox' (1970), 'Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator' (1973), 'Danny, the Champion of the World' (1975), 'The Enormous Crocodile' (1978), 'The Twits' (1980), 'George's Marvellous Medicine' (1981), 'The BFG' (a Big Friendly Giant who kidnaps a girl from an orphanage and deposits her in the queen's bedroom, 'with the Queen herself asleep in there behind the curtain not more than five yards away') and 'Revolting Rhymes' (both 1982), 'The Witches' (1983), 'Matilda' (1988), and 'The Vicar of Nibbleswicke' and 'The Minpins', both published posthumously (1991). 
While pregnant with their fifth child, Patricia Neal suffered a series of massive strokes. Again Dahl refused to accept the grim prognosis. He set about bringing her back into the world with a determination that shocked onlookers by its brutality and ruthlessness. She was helped through her long recovery by Dahl until she was well enough to resume acting. Some said that he humiliated her by treating her like a child, and bullied her back into health with force and even sadism. Dahl not only recreated his wife. He ran his household, adored his children, planned the garden, wrote screenplays (unsuccessfully), and continued to produce stories. Dahl then divorced Neal in 1983 and on 15 December the same year married her best friend and his long-time mistress, Felicity Ann Crosland, former wife of Charles Reginald Hugh Crosland, businessman and farmer, and daughter of Alphonsus Liguori d'Abreu, thoracic surgeon, of Birmingham. They lived with their eight children of previous marriages at Gipsy House, Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire. There Dahl wrote, always in pencil, in a hut in the garden. 
Dahl published two volumes of autobiography, 'Boy: Tales of Childhood' (1984) and 'Going Solo' (1986). He wrote several scripts for films, among them the James Bond adventure 'You Only Live Twice' (1967) and 'Chitty Chitty Bang Bang' (1968). He was as scornful of the men in suits who run Hollywood studios as Scott Fitzgerald and P. G. Wodehouse. He was a publisher's nightmare. The president of Alfred Knopf described his manner as 'unmatched in my experience for overbearingness and utter lack of civility' (Treglown, 215). He refused a request from his editor to tone down 'The Witches' on the grounds that he was 'not as frightened of offending women as you are' (ibid., 225). He denounced Salman Rushdie under sentence of death by the Islamic fatwa as 'a dangerous opportunist' ('The Times', 28 Feb 1989). And he accused the Jews of cowardice in the Second World War for not doing more to resist the Nazis. He told a reporter in 1983 that 'there is a streak in the Jewish character that does provoke animosity' (Treglown, 237), and declared that even a miserable man such as Hitler did not single them out for nothing. Invited to review 'God Cried', an account of the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, he launched a headlong attack on all Israelis, and to many it appeared an attack on Jews. 
By the end of his life Dahl was bitter at not receiving the knighthood that he felt he deserved, and he became increasingly self-important, ordering a Rolls-Royce from his publisher's to collect manuscripts from his home. He was 6 feet 6 inches tall, a chain-smoker, a lover of fine wine, a collector of contemporary painting, a grower of roses and orchids, a picture restorer, and a gambler on horses. He looked after 100 budgerigars that flew wild around his garden. He was a chocaholic. In the garden hut where he wrote he kept a huge silver ball made by packing together the silver paper from all the chocolate bars he ate. He also kept there as a trophy to show visitors one of his arthritic hip bones which had been replaced. 
Dahl's public statements were often intemperate. Some of his stories about himself were as tall as he was, and as fantastical as his fictions. But he had a magical touch for the macabre and the surrealist. The pied piper and lord of misrule of topsy-turvydom was the most popular children's writer of his or any age. Generations of children grew up with Dahl's books, and were able to enjoy reading them to their own children. They were translated into innumerable languages, filmed, and televised. Their saturnine author replied in rhyme to schoolchildren's fan mail: '
Oh wondrous children miles away 

Your letters brightened up my day. 
(Treglown, 294)' He adored children, and they loved the grotesque worlds he created for them. His attachment to his family was the one consistency in a life of contradictions. His first wife remarked cynically that 'he had an enormous appreciation for anything he generated'. His personal tale of the unexpected was that his story-telling talent sprang from tragedy and bile. Shortly before he died, he said: 'I don't think you find many chaps or women in their mid-seventies who think like I do, and joke and fart around. They usually grow pompous, and pomposity is the enemy of children's writing' ('The Times', 30 Nov 1990). The key to his success, he frequently said, was to conspire with children against adults. He died of leukaemia on 23 November 1990 at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, and was buried on 29 November at Great Missenden parish church. He was survived by his wife Felicity, his former wife Patricia Neal, and four of his children. In 2005 the Roald Dahl Museum and Story Centre was opened at 81-3 High Street, Great Missenden. 


@@@@@


doc= 39828


Dennis, Nigel Forbes (1912-1989), writer, was born on 16 January 1912 in Bletchingley, Surrey, the younger child and only son of Lieutenant-Colonel (Michael) Frederick Beauchamp Dennis 
(Fred; died 1918)
and his wife, Louise Marguerite Jermyn, youngest daughter of Theodore and Merelina Bosanquet, whose family were descendants of Huguenots from the Languedoc region of France. His parents lived in north Devon. As a young man Michael Dennis had tried his fortune in South Africa, fought in the South African War, and then settled in Southern Rhodesia, where Nigel's sister, Dorothy, was born. He returned to Britain on the outbreak of the First World War and enlisted in the King's Own Scottish Borderers; he was killed in 1918. In 1920 his widow married his best friend, Fitzroy Griffin, and the whole family returned to Rhodesia. Nigel was sent first to Plumtree School, Southern Rhodesia, and then to St Andrew's, Grahamstown, South Africa, which he had to leave early on account of attacks of epilepsy, an affliction which had struck him at the age of about eleven and against which he bore up courageously for the rest of his life. He had a half-brother and a half-sister. 
From South Africa, Dennis was dispatched to Kitzbuhel in Austria, where an uncle, A. Ernan Forbes Dennis, husband of the novelist Phyllis Bottome and friend of the psychologist Alfred Adler, was running a sort of crammer for would-be entrants to the Foreign Office (Peter and Ian Fleming were fellow pupils in Dennis's time) and also acting as British consul. From there he moved on, at his uncle's suggestion, to the Odenwaldschule in Bavaria, a progressive, co-educational establishment at the opposite pole, educationally speaking, to Plumtree and St Andrew's. Dennis, whose youthful literary ambitions had been expressed in stories contributed to the 'Boy's Own Paper' (until a hot one from the Odenwaldschule caused the editor to disengage), was very soon writing a novel about this experience. Called 'Chalk and Cheese', it was published a few years later, in 1934, under the pseudonym Richard Vaughan. Dennis later chose to disown it. 
After a further unsettled period (more tutoring, this time in Wales; helping his family, by now repatriated, to run a small hotel in Chipping Campden in the Cotswolds called 'The Live and Let Live', where the young Graham Greenes were neighbours; and selling ladies' garments door-to-door) Dennis got his lucky break. A legacy enabled him to travel steerage to New York and a dockers' strike prevented him from returning on the appointed date. He stayed eighteen years, working first as an assiduous freelance, writing stories and articles and helping to translate the writings of Adler, then landing salaried jobs. He became (improbably) secretary of the national board of the 'Review of Motion Pictures' (1935) and was assistant editor and book reviewer of the 'New Republic' (1937-8) and staff reviewer of 'Time' magazine (from 1940). In 1949 he published his first acknowledged novel, 'Boys and Girls Come out to Play' ('A Sea Change' in the USA), which won the Anglo-American novel award for that year (shared with Anthony West). It starts very personally, with a description of a young man having an epileptic fit. 
Dennis returned to England in 1950 and five years later published 'Cards of Identity', the novel which made his name. Its theme -- the ease with which modern man, uncertain of who he is, can be manipulated by charlatans -- was advanced and piquant. At the request of George Devine, of the English Stage Company, Dennis turned it into a play; it was produced in London at the Royal Court Theatre in 1956. A second play, 'The Making of Moo', an anti-religious send-up which caused protests in the stalls, followed a year later and in 1958 both were published in book form as 'Two Plays and Preface' -- the preface being a Voltairean swipe at theologians such as St Augustine and a paean of praise for satirists such as Aristophanes. His last play, 'August for the People', was produced in 1961. 
Dennis's books were few but distinguished: 'Dramatic Essays' (1962), a collection worth pondering for its radical approach; 'Jonathan Swift' (1964), a study of one of his heroes, which won the Royal Society of Literature award under the W. H. Heinemann bequest (1966); and a haunting last novel, 'A House in Order' (1966), which showed the influence of Franz Kafka and the author's passion for gardening. In 1967 he moved to Malta and two final volumes -- 'Exotics' (1970), a book of Mediterranean poems, and the short, quirky, bellicose 'An Essay on Malta' (1972), with illustrations by Osbert Lancaster -- were inspired by this new scene. 
From its launch in February 1961 until his retirement twenty years later Dennis was lead reviewer of the 'Sunday Telegraph'. His admixture of wit, acuteness, and common sense made him an unfailing draw. Between 1963 and 1970 he was drama critic, contributor, and finally co-editor of 'Encounter' magazine, but this association ended in acrimony. He wrote for, and read on, radio. 
Dennis was tall, somewhat sardonic-looking, and with facial corrugations in his later years which rivalled, but could not quite match, those of his admired W. H. Auden. A fine conversationalist when the mood took him, he could also be elusive and tortuous: not for nothing had he fielded in boyhood for B. J. T. Bosanquet, the famous cricketer who invented the googly. He was twice married: first in 1936, to Marie-Madeleine, daughter of Avit (Jean) Massias, a farmer from the Charente in France; the couple had two daughters. The marriage was dissolved in 1956 and in 1959 he married Beatrice Ann Hewart Matthew, a most spirited support and scribe. She was the daughter of William Alexander Matthew, a director of his family's shipping firm in Cardiff. Dennis died on 19 July 1989 in Little Compton, near Moreton in Marsh, Warwickshire, at the home of his elder daughter. 
Rivers Scott', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39829


Du Maurier, Dame Daphne (1907-1989), novelist, was born on 13 May 1907 at 24 Cumberland Terrace, Regent's Park, London, the second of three daughters (there were no sons) of Sir Gerald Hubert Edward Busson Du Maurier (1873-1934), actor-manager, and his wife, Muriel (1881-1957), actress, daughter of Harry Beaumont, solicitor. She was educated mainly at home by governesses (of whom one, Maud Waddell, was highly influential) and afterwards spent three terms at a finishing school near Paris. She began writing stories and poetry in her childhood and was encouraged by her father, with whom she had a very close relationship. He longed for her to emulate her grandfather, George Du Maurier, artist and author of three novels, including the best-selling 'Trilby' (1894). But the circumstances of her upbringing, with its constant emphasis on pleasure and distraction, called for self-discipline of a kind she did not manage to exert until she was twenty-two, when she finally completed several short stories. The first published story was 'And now to God the Father', which appeared in 'The Bystander' (May 1929), a magazine edited by her uncle. It was a cynical view of society as she saw it. Her ambition then was to write a novel, and she settled down to do so in the winter of 1929-30 at Bodinnick by Fowey in Cornwall, where her parents had bought Ferryside to be their country home. Here she wrote 'The Loving Spirit', the story of four generations of a Cornish family, which was published to considerable acclaim by Heinemann in February 1931. She immediately wrote second and third novels which confounded expectations by differing radically from her first, but it was her fourth book, 'Gerald', a frank biography of her father, written when he died in 1934, which made the greatest impact. It was published by Victor Gollancz, with whom she then began a long and fruitful partnership. Gollancz recognized that her strengths lay in narrative drive and the evocation of atmosphere. He encouraged her to develop these and the result was 'Jamaica Inn' (1936), an instant best-seller. At this point in her career she was obliged, as an army wife, to go abroad, to Egypt, with her husband, Major Frederick Arthur Montague (Boy) Browning (1896-1965), the son of Frederick Henry Browning. Boy Browning ran various businesses and also worked for MI5, and had a distinguished army career as well. They had married in 1932 and in 1933 had a daughter, Tessa, who later married, as her second husband, the son of the first Viscount Montgomery of Alamein. 
This was a deeply unhappy period in Daphne Du Maurier's life -- she was an untypical army wife, being very antisocial, and she loathed Egypt and was profoundly homesick -- but it produced 'Rebecca' (1938). This was meant to be a psychological study of jealousy and was based on her own feelings of jealousy towards a former fiancee of her husband's, Jan Ricardo, but it was hailed as a romantic novel in the tradition of 'Jane Eyre'. She was astonished by the success of 'Rebecca' -- hardback copies in Britain alone passed the million mark in 1992 -- and mystified by the readers' interpretation of the novel. In 1941 she produced 'Frenchman's Creek' and in 1943 'Hungry Hill'. 
In 1943, while her husband was away fighting in the war, Daphne Du Maurier went to live in Cornwall with her three children, Tessa, her other daughter, Flavia ('b'. 1937), and her son, Christian ('b'. 1940). She took on the lease of Menabilly, near Par, a house (owned by the Rashleigh family) with which she had become obsessed. The war years affected her marriage deeply and adversely. She felt estranged from her husband, in spite of her love for him, and wrote a play, 'The Years Between' (performed in 1944), about how war affected marriages. After the war her husband became comptroller of the household and treasurer to Princess Elizabeth, which meant that he lived in London while she stayed in Cornwall, with only weekends shared. This led to tensions which heavily influenced her work. Outwardly charming, witty, and light-hearted, she was struggling inwardly with feelings of rejection and uncertainty about her personal life. In 'The Apple Tree' (1952) and 'The Breaking Point' (1959), two collections of short stories of great biographical significance, she expressed the extent of her confusion and frustration. Her career flourished, though not precisely in the way she wished. 'My Cousin Rachel' appeared in 1951. Her novels translated well into films and 'Jamaica Inn' (1939), 'Rebecca' (1940), 'Frenchman's Creek' (1944), and 'Hungry Hill' (1946) were notable successes. Her short story 'The Birds' became famous in the hands of Alfred Hitchcock in 1963. (Hitchcock had also directed Laurence Olivier and Joan Fontaine in 'Rebecca'.) 'Rebecca' had made her a popular, worldwide, best-selling author, but she felt her later, more serious, work was not given its due. In 'The Scapegoat' (1957) she was writing at a deeper level, but the novel was treated as a romantic thriller. She turned to biography, partly in an attempt to show she could do serious work, though it was also true that she had temporarily lost the creative urge to write fiction. 'The Infernal World of Branwell Bronte' (1960) gave her great satisfaction and was well researched, but it did little to alter her image. 
In 1965 Daphne Du Maurier's husband died. Her grief, together with the distress caused by her fear that her imagination was deserting her, made her depressed. The news that she could not renew her lease on Menabilly again added to her misery but in 1969, the year in which she was made a DBE, she moved to Kilmarth in Par, Menabilly's dower house, where she wrote 'The House on the Strand' (1969), which restored her confidence. Her last novel, 'Rule Britannia' (1972), destroyed it again; she was unable to write any more fiction afterwards. In 1977 she wrote a slim volume of autobiography ('Growing Pains'), which she regretted producing. In 1981 she had a nervous breakdown and then a mild coronary. The last eight years of her life were spent mourning her lost talent, without which she felt her days were empty and meaningless. 
Daphne Du Maurier was in her youth an extremely beautiful woman, of medium height, fine-boned and slender, with thick blonde hair and arresting eyes of a startlingly bright, clear blue. She was a very complex person, well aware, through constant self-analysis, that she acted out her life to an extraordinary degree. Her novels were her fantasies and seemed more real to her than her actual life. She needed them, to give expression to what she called, through her fascination with Jungian theory, her 'no. 2' self. This was a darker, violent self which she suppressed in a most determined manner. Part of this suppression was sexual: she believed she should have been born a boy and that she had to keep this masculine side of herself hidden, which she did, except while writing, for most of her life. The problem of her life she herself defined as 'a fear of reality'. Only when she was alone, and especially alone at Menabilly, was she able to still this fear. Her work has been consistently underrated, in spite of critical acknowledgement that 'Rebecca' and 'The Scapegoat', at least, are of literary worth. Her influence on the growth of 'women's writing' as a separate division, and on writing for the cinema (eight of her novels and stories were made into successful films), was significant in the 1930s and 1940s, but it is as a popular novelist that her position remains secure, especially among the young. She died of heart failure at her home in Par, Cornwall, on 19 April 1989. She was cremated and her ashes were scattered at Kilmarth. 
Margaret Forster', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39830


Durrell, Lawrence George (1912-1990), novelist and poet, was born on 27 February 1912 at Jullundur in the Punjab, India, the first of the five children of Lawrence Samuel Durrell (1884-1928), a civil engineer then with the railway system, and his wife, Louisa Florence Dixie (1884-1964), from a family associated with the Thomason College of Civil Engineering at Roorkee. Neither parent had seen England, and many of Durrell's forebears, over half from England, but some protestant Irish on his mother's side, had gone to India before the revolt of 1857-9 as privates or non-commissioned officers in the British army. Durrell emphasized how rooted in India his ancestors were, speaking the local languages and studying Buddhism. Durrell's father became quite successful: his construction firm, Durrell & Co., built much of the Tata iron and steel enterprise in Jamshedpur. This heritage was vital in forming Durrell's outlook: a cosmopolitan, he called himself 'a pure Anglo-Irish-Indian ASH BLOND' ('Durrell-Miller Letters', 50), but could never identify fully with England, Ireland, or even India. 
During Durrell's early life the family followed his father to various postings. The next child born after Lawrence died in infancy, but two brothers and a sister survived to adulthood. His youngest sibling was Gerald Malcolm Durrell (1925-1995), who became a noted zoologist and author. After some tutoring by his Irish governess in Kurseong, Durrell spent the years 1921-2 in the primary school at St Joseph's College in Darjeeling, within sight of the Himalayas, and the vast panorama of snowy peaks remained his lifelong metaphor for unattainable beauty. Although baptized at the chapel of St Luke in the Jullundur cantonment, late in his life Durrell considered himself a Buddhist. 
In 1923 Durrell sailed with his family for England, where he was left by his parents to continue his schooling for two years at St Olave's and St Saviour's in Southwark and then for one year and a term at St Edmund's College in Canterbury. Durrell dropped out of St Edmund's in December 1927, having completed only the fourth form. He then studied with an army crammer at Cambridge, but did not join the army, and claimed -- no corroborating evidence exists -- to have repeatedly failed university entrance examinations. On the death of his father, aged forty-three, at Dalhousie in April 1928, his mother moved to England, living successively in south London and Bournemouth. Durrell demanded his patrimony, and on $150 a year he embarked at about the age of eighteen on a bohemian existence in London, convinced that he would become a poet and spending much of his time in the British Museum reading room, while attempting to supplement his income through various stratagems: as estate agent, jazz pianist, and, with the Slade art student Nancy Isobel Myers (1912-1983), studio photographer. Durrell's first book of poems, 'Quaint Fragment', was printed on a friend's hand press in 1931. A year spent in relative seclusion in a Sussex cottage produced Durrell's first work of fiction, 'Pied Piper of Lovers', written as an entry for a first novel prize offered by Cassell. Durrell did not win, but Cassell published his novel, paying an advance of $50. Early in March 1935, having married Nancy Myers on 22 January, the 5 foot 2 Durrell and his tall, slender bride set off for the island of Corfu, where they were soon joined by his mother and siblings. In 1956 Gerald Durrell published his hilarious version of their Corfu adventures, 'My Family and other Animals'. 
Durrell, who had hated 'Pudding Island', loved Corfu. Inspired by the liberating Greek ambience and an exotic acquaintanceship, he wrote two novels in three years: 'Panic Spring' (1937, published under the pseudonym Charles Norden) and 'The Black Book' (1938); drafted many of the poems that would form his first collection, 'A Private Country'; and initiated a correspondence with Henry Miller that continued until Miller's death in 1980. 'The Black Book', inspired by Miller's 'Tropic of Cancer', but also the novel in which Durrell claimed that he 'first heard the sound of [his] own voice' (preface, 'The Black Book', 1960, 13), attacked both the stultifying 'English death' and Lawrence's 'Lady Chatterley's Lover'. T. S. Eliot wrote that the book was 'the first piece of work by a new English writer to give me any hope for the future of prose fiction', praising especially the 'sense of pattern and of organisation of moods' (flyleaf copy, 'The Black Book', 1938). However, he judged that it could not be published unexpurgated in England, so Durrell gave it to the Obelisk Press in Paris. In the modernist 'Black Book' Durrell displayed the narrative complexity and linguistic virtuosity that characterized his later novels: the multiple points of view, achieved through diary fragments, letters, and dialogue reported by characters turned narrators; an Elizabethan fascination with the language of trades and sciences; and the tendency to describe scenes in lavish painterly terms. 
In 1941 Durrell, Nancy, and their infant daughter, Penelope, fled to Egypt ahead of the German invasion. While in Egypt during the war he composed 'Prospero's Cell', a lyrical account of the life he had lived on Corfu, as well as a teasing suggestion that the island might have been the setting for Shakespeare's 'Tempest'. Durrell's book is not travel literature but a 'foreign residence' account, combining a first-person narration and vividly presented characters and events with a palimpsest of history, botany, and folkways. In 1947 he drafted another book in this genre about Rhodes: 'Reflections on a Marine Venus', eventually published in 1953. 
Durrell's first volume of poetry to be published by a major press, 'A Private Country', appeared in 1943 with Faber and Faber, where Eliot was his editor. Durrell's best poetry captures the spirit of Greek places: '
And the Greek sea's curly head 

Keep its calms like tears unshed. 
('Bitter Lemons', 'Collected Poems', 1974)' He had a fine ear for lyrical utterance, and there is a flower-like perfection to his best short poems: '
... go 

mimic your mother's lovely face 
('Cradle Song', 'Collected Poems', 1974)' he admonishes Sappho, his daughter with his second wife, Eve. His best sustained sequence is 'Cities, Plains and People' (1946), in which his theme is his evolution as an artist. 
Durrell still thought of himself as a poet forced to write novels to support himself, but in 1945 he sketched out for Eliot his master plan for fiction. He would treat, sequentially, the 'agon' (struggle), 'pathos' (suffering), and 'anagnorisis' (recognition). These three main thrusts would present dislocation, uniting, and acceptance and death. In 'The Black Book' Durrell had already described the necessary dislocation of the artist from suffocating England. 'The Book of the Dead' -- Durrell's working title for 'The Alexandria Quartet' -- would show the birth of the artist through suffering and love. The final segment he called provisionally 'The Book of Time', and, true to his plan, 'The Revolt of Aphrodite' and 'The Avignon Quintet' would purport to vanquish time and death. Durrell's sequence, loosely linked by his major themes, love, art, and death, by geography (the Mediterranean world), and by a few recurring characters, eventually comprised twelve volumes in all and took him almost fifty years to complete. Durrell considered his first two novels outside his master plan, and he placed in the potboiler category two later works of fiction, 'The Dark Labyrinth' and 'White Eagles over Serbia'. 
In Egypt Durrell found employment as public information officer attached to the British embassy, first in Cairo and, from 1942, in Alexandria. His familiarity with a broad spectrum of the polyglot society of the Egyptian cities provided him with material for his 'Quartet'. Divorce from Nancy, marriage on 17 February 1947 to the Alexandrian Yvette (Eve) Cohen ('b'. 1918), various press officer jobs in Rhodes, Yugoslavia, and Cyprus, interrupted by a year as director of the British council in Cordoba, Argentina -- where he wrote the monograph 'A Key to Modern Poetry' -- postponed Durrell's start on the 'Quartet' until 1955. He completed 'Justine', the first volume of the 'Quartet', on Cyprus in 1956, after his separation from Eve, and wrote the remaining three volumes in Languedoc, where he lived near Nimes and in Sommieres. 
The concept in the 'Quartet' that perceived truth is relative, dependent on the situation and condition of the observer, was derived by Durrell from Einstein's theory of relativity. Thus, the naive L. G. Darley, bearer of Durrell's initials and principal narrator of 'Justine', tells the story of Darley's love affair with Justine as he perceived it. In the next volume, 'Balthazar', the eponymous commentator reveals that Justine had really loved another and was using Darley as a decoy. 'Mountolive', the third volume, is a straight third-person narrative in which Justine is shown to have been engaged with her husband in a political conspiracy for which her affairs provided cover. Each of the three versions is 'true' within its own parameters. The final volume, 'Clea', moves the story forward in time and shows the emergence of Darley as an artist, thanks to the lessons in love and narrative 'truth' that he has been given. 
The four novels emerged in rapid succession from 1957 to 1960 and elicited wildly divergent but generally favourable reviews, praising or attacking Durrell's luxuriant prose, his highly romantic recreation of Alexandria, and his self-proclaimed use of Einstein. Only with the 'Quartet' sales did Durrell begin to live from his writing, but he never became rich. Despite an excellent cast that included Anouk Aimee, Dirk Bogarde, and Michael York, the film based on the 'Quartet', known as 'Justine' (1969), was mediocre. 
During 1957 Durrell published not only 'Justine', but also 'Bitter Lemons', an analysis of the tragedy of modern Cyprus and his best work in the foreign residence genre; 'Esprit de corps', a series of Wodehousian sketches based on Durrell's days on 'Embassy Row'; and 'White Eagles over Serbia', a thriller directed towards juvenile readers. 'Bitter Lemons' gained Durrell a Duff Cooper award. 
Durrell's fascination with the Elizabethans led to three verse dramas, 'Sappho' (1950), 'An Irish Faustus' (1963), and 'Acte' (1964), which, despite excellent productions in Hamburg and Edinburgh, did not establish the author's stage reputation: his plays are more notable for the quality of their verse than for dramatic verve. 
Durrell's life was darkened by the death on 1 January 1967 of Claude-Marie Forde, 'nee' Vincendon ('c'.1926-1967), like Eve an Alexandrian, a secretary and novelist whom he had married on 27 March 1961, and he took up novels again. 'The Revolt of Aphrodite' was orginally published as two volumes, 'Tunc' (1968) and 'Nunquam' (1970), titles derived from Petronius's phrase 'aut tunc, aut nunquam' ('it was either then or never'). Ostensibly a comic novel, 'Revolt' is Elizabethan and Jacobean in its careful numerological structure and its mix of comic and tragic elements -- contrasting with various farcical sub-plots, the scientist-narrator's son is killed by an elaborate booby trap intended by his father for the head of Merlin's, the multinational firm at the centre of the story. Durrell proved an accurate prophet of the development of the personal computer and of the modern mega-corporations that can exceed nations in wealth and power, but 'Revolt' offended many readers who had expected a rewrite of the romantic 'Quartet'. 
A similar fate befell 'The Avignon Quintet'. Eastern in philosophy, the 'Quintet' demonstrates the breakdown of the 'discrete ego', and characters exchange traits and are reincarnated. More overtly postmodern than the 'Quartet', the 'Quintet' further erodes the distinction between reality and fiction. Characters talk back to their creators, as a pattern of narrators within narrations unfolds. Durrell called his structure a 'gigogne', like the nesting boxes of a Chinese puzzle. A system of fives provides the basic structure: the 'quincunx' pattern employed in medieval arboretums, with trees planted like the dots on a five in dominoes, and the five 'skandas' of Buddhism -- form, sensation, perception, conformation, consciousness. 'Monsieur', the first volume, turns out to be the centre dot on the domino, the 'reality prime' or fiction derived from the 'reality' presented in the other four novels of the 'Quintet'. Fives pervade the 'Quintet', as Durrell attacked the 'five M's' that he believed were destroying western society: monotheism, Messianism, monogamy, materialism, 'merde' -- 'The gold bar is the apotheosis of the human turd', he wrote in 'Monsieur' (p. 142). Fascinated by the Gnostics, and a convinced Manichean, Durrell saw in 'divine entropy' the running down of the universe, against which the artist must valiantly throw the creative act, both in love-making and in literature. 
Durrell's later years were trouble-filled. His marriage to his fourth wife, Ghislaine de Boysson, a model and actress whom he married in 1973, ended in divorce in 1978; and his daughter Sappho committed suicide in 1985. Although he talked about a major novel to follow the 'Quintet', Durrell was barely able to complete 'Caesar's Vast Ghost', his non-fiction tribute to his beloved Languedoc and to Provence. His relationship with his final companion, Francoise Kestsman, a translator and restaurateur, was turbulent; his laboured breathing was diagnosed as due to emphysema; and he tried with varying degrees of success to stave off his heavy drinking with yoga and acupuncture. He died on 7 November 1990 of a cerebral haemorrhage at his home in Sommieres, France, and was buried on 8 November at La Chapelle St Julien, Sommieres. After Durrell's death, Sappho's literary executor accused the author of an incestuous relationship with his daughter, on the uncorroborated revelations of 'recalled memory' induced while Sappho was undergoing psychoanalysis. On the basis of present evidence, this accusation should be regarded as unfounded. 
The final verdict on Durrell's writing is still open. His readership peaked in the 1960s and declined with the negative reaction to his later fiction, falling further because, especially after his death, many of his titles went out of print. His foreign residence books have become accepted as classics, but he remains underrated as a poet. All this may change as the narrative and technical mastery of his later work becomes acknowledged. 'Deus loci', a Durrell newsletter, was founded in 1977, and it was succeeded by an annual Durrell journal of the same title. The creation of the International Lawrence Durrell Society in 1980 has led to an unbroken series of biennial conferences devoted to Durrell, and the growth in size of these meetings (ninety speakers appeared on the programme for the 2000 conference in Corfu), plus a burgeoning French society, Lawrence Durrell en Languedoc, demonstrate that he still has a considerable following. This scholarly and popular interest suggests that he may well achieve status not merely as an intriguing minor experimenter in fictional relativism, but as an important twentieth-century writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 39831


Gibbons, Stella Dorothea (1902-1989), novelist, was born on 5 January 1902 in Malden Crescent, London, the only daughter and eldest of three children of (Charles James Preston) Telford Gibbons, medical doctor, and his wife, Maude Phoebe Standish Williams. She grew up in the dismal environment of Kentish Town where her father had his medical practice in Malden Crescent. Her childhood was unhappy and turbulent. She withdrew into stories and solitary games in her attic room to avoid the constant family rows which revolved around her preposterous father. He was unfaithful with a succession of governesses, against a noisy background of self-dramatizing uncles and aunts. Fortunately her mother was quiet and sensible, so she had some emotional refuge from the storms. 
Gibbons was educated at home and then sent to the North London Collegiate School for Girls. At University College, London, she did a two-year course on journalism (set up for soldiers who had returned from the First World War). Her first job, in 1923, was as a cable decoder for British United Press. For the next decade she worked as a London journalist for various publications, including the 'Evening Standard' and 'The Lady'. Her first published book was a slim volume of poems ('The Mountain Beast', 1930). No one could have guessed that the author of this neo-Georgian verse was about to spring a comic classic upon the world. 'Cold Comfort Farm' (1932) was written as a parody of the novels of D. H. Lawrence and Mary Webb, with asterisks marking all the purple passages for the reader's delectation and mirth. Her characters soon became household names and her heroine Flora Poste a synonym for common sense. Flora goes to stay with her cousins, the Starkadders, on their decrepit farm in Sussex. From dawn to dusk the Starkadders live in a ferment of unruly passion but she manages them with cunning and dispatch, including the seething matriarch in the attic, Aunt Ada Doom. 
Even minor characters like Mr Mybug, who is unable to look at a hill without thinking of women's breasts, are a comic delight, as are the cows, Feckless, Graceless, Pointless, and Aimless, who tend to lose their legs. All over the English-speaking world her fans quoted chunks of the novel to each other, rocking with laughter, and the expression 'something nasty in the woodshed' gained a permanent place in the language. 
After such a towering success so young the rest of Stella Gibbons's professional life was an anticlimax, despite her excessive industry and talent. Her second novel, 'Bassett' (1934), was fuelled by an unhappy affair with a German businessman. In 1933 she met and married Allan Bourne Webb, an actor and singer, the son of the Revd Charles Johnston Bourne Webb. They had one daughter and lived happily ever after (not always grist to a writer's mill). Her subsequent writing (including poetry and short stories) was published at the rate of almost one book a year, until 1970. There were almost thirty of them. Some of the novels, like 'Miss Linsey and Pa' (1936), 'My American' (1939), and 'Here be Dragons' (1956), were reasonably well received. The novel she preferred was 'Ticky' (1943), a satire on army life, which flopped. In 1940 she tried to revive the magic formula with 'Christmas at Cold Comfort Farm', but it lacked the panache of the original, as did 'Conference at Cold Comfort Farm' (short stories, 1949). 
Stella Gibbons took her poetry more seriously than her prose and some of it, about nature and the pollution of the seas, was prophetic. Her 'Collected Poems' was published in 1950. Longman was her main publisher until 1955, when she moved to Hodder and Stoughton. She was a member of the Royal Society of Literature (fellow, 1950) and was awarded the Femina Vie Heureuse prize in 1933 for 'Cold Comfort Farm'. 
After her marriage, Stella Gibbons had moved to 19 Oakeshott Avenue, London, a mock-Tudor house in a Highgate backwater. She remained there after her husband's death in 1959. During their long marriage the only suffering he caused her was his absence in the army during the Second World War. In the last part of her life she held an 'at home' once a month. She was known to expel guests from these tea parties if they were shrill, dramatic, or wrote tragic novels. The irony of her creative life is that the thing she hated most, overheated emotions, had given her the most inspiration. Ordinary life and personal goodness, which she enjoyed writing about, yielded a more pallid harvest. Many of her other novels have been dismissed unfairly, but some have dated. Her great joys were nature, music, and reading. She was an intensely private person, not easy to interview. Her appearance was of the blue-eyed, refined English variety and her beauty endured, as did her upright carriage, typical of Edwardian ladies who were forced as girls to walk around with a book balanced on their heads. She died on 19 December 1989 at home in Oakeshott Avenue, London. 
Jill Neville', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39832


Grigson, (Heather Mabel) Jane (1928-1990), writer on cookery, was born on 13 March 1928 in Gloucester, the elder daughter (there were no sons) of George Shipley McIntire (1897-1990), deputy town clerk of Gloucester, and his wife, Doris Mabel Frampton Berkley 1899-1988, artist. When she was four her father became town clerk of Sunderland, and he bequeathed quietly left-wing politics to his daughters. It was the good fresh fish and the straightforwardness of north country food that first delighted Jane in her lifetime's study. In 1939 Wearside was a target for German bombing, and she and her sister were sent to Casterton School (originally for clergy daughters) in Westmorland, where Jane encountered the outstanding English teaching of a Miss Bevis. In 1946 she went to Cambridge, where she attended Newnham College. She obtained a third class in part one of the English tripos (1948) and a second (division two) in part two (1949). 
Jane McIntire's first job was at Heffer's Art Gallery in Cambridge. In 1953 she went to work for the publisher Rainbird, McLean, who recommended her as research assistant to Geoffrey Edward Harvey Grigson (1905-1985) for his series of separate books 'People, Places, Things, and Ideas' (4 vols., 1954). She had bought his anthology 'Visionary Poems and Passages, or, The Poet's Eye' (1944) when she was fifteen. Grigson was the son of William Shuckforth Grigson, vicar of Pelynt, Cornwall. He was twenty-three years older than Jane, had been married twice before, and had three grown-up or adolescent children. They lived together and in the mid-1950s she changed her name by deed poll to Grigson; twenty years later they were able to marry. They had one daughter, Sophie, who also became a cookery expert. They lived partly at Broad Town Farm House, Broad Town, near Wootton Bassett in Wiltshire, and partly in France, at Troo, in the Loir valley. In both places they absorbed the landscape and history, and gave news of them in different literary forms. 
Jane Grigson's first published writing was for the 'Sunderland Echo', a piece on Bede. She made a new translation (1959) of Carlo Collodi's 'Pinocchio', and one of Cesare Beccaria's 'Dei delitti e delle pene' (as 'Of Crimes and Punishments', 1963), for which she jointly won the John Florio prize. She found her true vocation when a reader of Geoffrey Grigson's book 'Painted Caves' (1957) wrote to him from Troo, asking if he knew of that semi-troglodyte village. They went to see, and soon bought their own habitable cave. Jane Grigson had started as Geoffrey's amanuensis, but in Troo she emerged as her own writer. The variety and excellence of the local raw materials, the skills of their neighbours, and her own developing conviction that because cooking is a central part of life it should be as carefully written about as any other art form, led to the first of her many books: 'Charcuterie and French Pork Cookery' (1967). This was a breakthrough into a new literacy about cooking, and she was immediately recognized as a serious writer. Later landmark books were 'Fish Cookery' (1973, enlarged as 'Jane Grigson's Fish Book', 1993), which restored fish cookery to its rightful place, and 'English Food' (1974). The tiny 'Cooking of Normandy' (1987), written for sale at Sainsbury's, raised that often footling genre to a new level. 
From 1968 until the week of her death Jane Grigson wrote for the 'Observer Magazine', to which Elizabeth David had recommended her. Several of her books were collections of articles. She campaigned against the bad as well as for the good, denouncing the degradation and sometimes danger inflicted on eaters by food adulterators in general. Elizabeth David awoke post-war Britain from its devotion to oversized and overcooked food, and Jane Grigson carried the awakening forward by opening the whole wide history and context of foods, dishes, utensils, and methods. Above all she sought to, and did, convey the reliable pleasures of knowledgeable cooking and eating. She herself put it: 'Cooking something delicious is really much more satisfactory than painting pictures or throwing pots. Food has the tact to disappear, leaving the room and opportunity for masterpieces to come. The mistakes don't hang on the walls or stand on the shelves to reproach you for ever.' Jane Grigson was generous, scholarly, and deeply cheerful, combining outgoingness with equanimity; she was also smoothly and unobtrusively beautiful, with wavy fair hair and green eyes. When already terminally ill, she spoke and raised funds to fight off threats from developers to the great neolithic monument at Avebury near her Wiltshire home. She died of cancer at Broad Town on 12 March 1990 and was buried in Christ Church churchyard there beside her husband, who had died in 1985. Her collection of cookery books became the core of the Jane Grigson Library at the Guildhall Library in the City of London. 
Wayland Kennet', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39833


Isherwood, Christopher William Bradshaw (1904-1986), writer, was born on 26 August 1904 at Wyberslegh Hall, High Lane, Cheshire, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Lieutenant-Colonel Francis Edward Bradshaw-Isherwood (1869-1915), professional soldier in the York and Lancaster regiment, of Marple, Cheshire, and his wife, Kathleen (1868-1960), the only child of Frederick Machell Smith, wine merchant, of Bury St Edmunds. His family followed the regiment to assorted garrison towns in England and Ireland, and this peripatetic childhood inaugurated a lifetime of travelling. Isherwood's sense of rootlessness was increased when his father was killed at the battle of Ypres in May 1915: his mother had no settled home until 1921, when she rented a house in Kensington, London. 
Isherwood was educated at Repton School, where he met Edward Upward, who was to be a lifelong friend and, as he later put it, 'the judge before whom all my work must stand trial' (C. Isherwood, 'Introduction' to 'All the Conspirators', 1976, 9). He followed Upward to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, ostensibly to read history. He spent most of his time, however, inventing a surrealist-Gothic world with Upward, which gradually crystallized around the imaginary village of Mortmere. The few surviving episodes of this constantly evolving saga were eventually published as 'The Mortmere Stories' (1994). 
The First World War, in which the certainties of the Edwardian world were destroyed, affected both Isherwood and his mother deeply, but in very different ways. Kathleen's romantic attachment to the past, a 'paradis perdu' of ordered conservatism embodied by the Isherwood family seat, Marple Hall, increased in intensity. Isherwood reacted strongly against this, and much of his life may be seen as a search for some creed to replace the traditional, public-school, Christian values of his childhood. Determined to become a writer, he left university prematurely, having deliberately failed his tripos by submitting facetious answers to the examination questions. He began earning his living as secretary to the International String Quartet, and found the distinctly bohemian home of its leader, Andre Mangeot, far preferable to what he saw as the stultifyingly bourgeois ambience of his mother's residence. 
In 1925 Isherwood was reintroduced to W. H. Auden (1907-1973), whom he had known at preparatory school, and through him met Stephen Spender: the three men were to form a conspicuous literary, left-wing triumvirate of the 1930s. Auden sought Isherwood's approval for almost all his early work, and dedicated his first two volumes of poetry to him. The two men had a casual affair lasting over a decade, and Auden subsequently listed Isherwood among the 'great emotional milestones of his life' (E. Mendelson, 'Later Auden', 1999, 266). Auden's place in Isherwood's emotional life was less significant, but the two men remained close friends and occasional literary collaborators. Most of Isherwood's juvenilia reflected his obsession with public schools and the opportunities they provided for homosexual romance. His first published novel, 'All the Conspirators' (1928), was an oblique story of family discord, influenced by the work of E. M. Forster and Virginia Woolf. The conflict between mother and son was to be as frequent a motif in his work as it was in his life, and resurfaced in 'The Memorial' (1932), a remarkably acute and assured novel about the pre- and post-war generations, seen from both sides of the divide. 
After a brief and unenthusiastic period studying medicine at King's College, London (October 1928-March 1929), Isherwood followed Auden to Berlin, partly in order to pursue a homosexual life in the unfettered atmosphere of the Weimar republic. He witnessed the rise of Nazism, and wrote two classic novels of the era, 'Mr Norris Changes Trains' (1935) and 'Goodbye to Berlin' (1939). Both were sardonic tragi-comedies, and the latter contains the famous sentence 'I am a camera with its shutter open, quite passive, recording not thinking', which (to Isherwood's increasing irritation) was often quoted as a summation of his fictional method. To this period also belonged the collaborations with Auden: three plays written for the experimental Group Theatre -- 'The Dog Beneath the Skin' (1935), 'The Ascent of F6' (1936), and 'On the Frontier' (1938) -- and 'Journey to a War' (1939), an account of their travels in China during the Sino-Japanese War. 'Lions and Shadows' (1938), subtitled 'An Education in the Twenties', was a sly, self-deprecating, and very funny autobiography in which Isherwood reviewed his youth from the lofty eminence of thirty-four. 
Isherwood spent much of the 1930s travelling in Europe with his young German lover, Heinz Neddermeyer, looking for somewhere they could settle without being harried by immigration officials and the German military authorities. The task of getting Neddermeyer a new passport was unwisely assigned to Gerald Hamilton, a colourful conman who had provided Isherwood with a model for the eponymous Mr Norris. Despite receiving large amounts of money, Hamilton failed to produce any papers and Neddermeyer was finally arrested in 1937. He was tried and imprisoned for draft evasion and sexual offences, after which Isherwood returned alone to London. 
In January 1939 Isherwood and Auden emigrated to the United States of America, a controversial decision seen in some quarters as little short of 'desertion'. Uncertain of his future, Isherwood travelled to California to consult the exiled Irish mystic and pacifist Gerald Heard, who was to be one of several guru figures in his life. He settled in Los Angeles (he became an American citizen in 1946), but wracked by feelings of guilt, 'war-neurosis', and literary impotence, needed something to give order and a spiritual dimension to his life. He found this in Vedantism and became a disciple of Swami Prabhavananda, who had set up a temple in Hollywood. Through the Austrian director Berthold Viertel, with whom he had collaborated in England on the film 'Little Friend' (1934), Isherwood found work as a screenwriter for MGM. His Hollywood career, though remunerative, was undistinguished, and included scripts for 'The Great Sinner' (1949), loosely based on Dostoyevsky, and 'Diane' (1956), a lavish and catastrophically miscast costume drama. 
In 1941 Isherwood went to work in a Quaker-run hostel in Pennsylvania, where he helped refugees fleeing Europe acclimatize themselves to America and find work. When America entered the war, he registered as a conscientious objector and entered a Vedanta monastery, where he collaborated with Prabhavananda on a new translation of the 'Bhagavad-gita' (1944), became co-editor of the movement's magazine, 'Vedanta and the West', and wrote 'Prater Violet' (1945), a cinematic novella about his experiences with Viertel at Gaumont-British. Recognizing that he was unsuited to the monastic life (he found sexual abstinence particularly challenging), he left the monastery in 1945 and set up house with Bill Caskey, an ebullient, argumentative, and hard-drinking Irish-American. Their relationship was extremely volatile, which made it difficult for Isherwood to concentrate on his writing, but it resulted in 'The Condor and the Cows' (1949), a book about their travels in South America, for which Caskey, a gifted photographer, provided the illustrations. 
In April 1953 Isherwood met Don Jess Bachardy ('b'. 1934), a student almost thirty years his junior, who later became a renowned portraitist: they lived together until Isherwood's death. His attempt to write an 'American' novel, 'The World in the Evening' (1954), took Isherwood a great deal of time and effort and pleased the author as little as it did the critics. 'Down there on a Visit' (1962), which consisted of four lightly fictionalized interlinking episodes from Isherwood's past, was far more successful. Isherwood continued to work on film and television projects, sometimes in collaboration with Bachardy, but in 1960 also began teaching English literature at the University of California. An Isherwood-like professor was the protagonist of 'A Single Man' (1964), a profound, witty, and touching book about being an outsider in American society. Its unapologetic, indeed combative, portrait of a homosexual man refusing the customary role of victim displeased many conservative critics, but the novel came to be widely regarded as Isherwood's masterpiece. During the 1960s he wrote further books on Vedanta, including a biography of Ramakrishna (1965), and a novel on related themes, 'A Meeting by the River' (1967), which he subsequently adapted for the stage. 
In 1966 Isherwood published 'Exhumations' (1966), a collection of stories, articles, and verses intended as 'fragments of an autobiography which tells itself indirectly, by means of exhibits' (prefatory note). Other fragments of autobiography included 'Kathleen and Frank' (1971), a detailed portrait of his parents which he felt 'on closer examination' could be seen to be 'chiefly about' its author ('Kathleen and Frank', 363), 'Christopher and his Kind' (1976), which described his life -- in particular his homosexual life -- during the 1930s, and 'My Guru and his Disciple' (1980), a somewhat proselytizing account of his relationship with Prabhavananda. He was an assiduous diarist, and although he destroyed or lost most of the journals covering his pre-war life, those he kept from 1939 onwards survive and run to over 1 million words. They were published posthumously in three volumes. 
Isherwood's principal characteristic, both in his life and his work, was an apparent candour; he was also a professional charmer, and these two qualities offset his considerable vanity. He was of short stature, with a disproportionately large head, a prominent nose, and deep-set, penetrating eyes overhung by bristling eyebrows. Although he maintained a strikingly boyish appearance well into old age, he was a lifelong hypochondriac. He died of prostate cancer on 4 January 1986 at his home, 145 Adelaide Drive, Santa Monica, California. He had no funeral or grave and his body was left to science. He was survived by Don Bachardy. 


@@@@@


doc= 39834


Jameson, Margaret Ethel (1891-1986), novelist, was born on 8 January 1891 in Whitby in the North Riding of Yorkshire, the eldest in the family of three daughters and one son of William Storm Jameson, sea captain, and his wife (who was also his stepsister), Hannah Margaret, daughter of George Gallilee, shipbuilder. As a child she accompanied her parents on several voyages, which marked the beginning of a lifelong passion for travel. Yet despite her self-imposed exile from Whitby, the harbour town remained central to her imagination and to many of her novels. 
Her parents' marriage was unhappy and Storm Jameson's early life was dominated by her high-tempered, bitter mother whom she both feared and loved, and who encouraged her to receive an academic education. After being taught privately and at Scarborough municipal school for a year, she won one of three county scholarships which enabled her to take a place at Leeds University, where she read English for three years, graduating in 1912 with a first-class degree. A research scholarship allowed her to go to London, first to University College, then to King's College. She was awarded her MA in 1914 for a thesis on modern European drama, which was published in 1920 as 'Modern Drama in Europe'. 
On 15 January 1913 Jameson married Charles Dougan Clarke, schoolmaster, whom she had met in her second year at Leeds; he was the son of Charles Granville Clarke, doctor of medicine, an American Quaker. Their son, Charles William Storm, was born on 20 June 1915. The pair were temperamentally ill-matched and the marriage soon foundered, though they did not divorce until 1925. Meanwhile Jameson had begun the extraordinarily prolific career of 'une machine a faire des livres', as she once described herself. The author of forty-five novels, numerous pamphlets, essays, and reviews, she freely admitted that she wrote too much, fuelled by her enormous energy and driven by the need to make money. Generous and spendthrift, constantly moving house and travelling in Europe whenever she could afford it, her career was shaped from the outset by her financial circumstances, which remained precarious throughout her life. 
After refusing a job on 'The Egoist', which went to Rebecca West, Jameson worked successively for an advertising agency, the 'New Commonwealth', and Alfred Knopf, the American publisher, but after 1928 most of her income was derived from writing. Her first novel, 'The Pot Boils' (1919), was widely reviewed and her popularity increased with the publication of the Mary Hervey trilogy, 'The Triumph of Time' (1927-31), which charted the fortunes of the Whitby shipbuilding community between 1841 and 1923. Jameson was by now happy in her personal life, having in 1926 married the historian and novelist Guy Patterson Chapman (1889-1972), the son of George Walter Chapman, official receiver in bankruptcy. Chapman shared her love of France and tolerated her 'mania against domestic life' to the extent of living with her in a hotel for six years when he became professor of modern history at Leeds in 1945. 
In 1930 Jameson began consciously to change her writing style in emulation of Stendhal. The result was three novellas about women, including the remarkably imagined meditations of an elderly prostitute in 'A Day Off' (1933). Shortly afterwards she began a Balzacian quintet, 'The Mirror in Darkness' (1934), which was based on the autobiographical figure of Mary Hervey Russell. Her own dissatisfaction as well as poor reviews caused her to abandon the series in 1936, though the related 'The Journal of Mary Hervey Russell' (1945) and 'The Black Laurel' (1947) are among her best novels, together with those inspired by her knowledge of Europe and love of France: 'Cousin Honore' (1940), 'Europe to Let' (1940), and 'Cloudless May' (1943). 
During the 1930s Jameson became passionately involved in issues of social justice and anti-fascism. Between 1938 and 1944 she was president of the English section of PEN, for which she worked tirelessly on behalf of exiled European writers, earning herself a place on the 'Berlin death list'. After the war, though she continued to write indefatigably, her reputation as a novelist declined and the reprinting of some of her books by Virago Press in the 1980s did little to revive interest in her work. She noted her eclipse without resentment in her autobiography, 'Journey from the North' (2 vols., 1969-70), which contains a memorably honest self-portrait of the author as well as harrowing accounts of bereavement and war. 
Jameson liked to remember that her Nordic ancestors had been peasants of the sea whom she resembled in her restlessness and endurance, as she did in her looks. Her large, long-sighted eyes were grey-blue, set in a round high-cheekboned face. Sensual and physically strong, she experienced a series of romantic and sexual obsessions until the time of her second marriage. She received few public honours, though her honorary DLitt from Leeds University (1943) gave her pleasure, as did her honorary membership of the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters. She died on 30 September 1986 in Cambridge. 
Judith Priestman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39835


Jennings, Paul Francis (1918-1989), humorist, was born in Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, on 20 June 1918, the only son and second of the three children of William Benedict Jennings, musician, and his wife, Mary Gertrude Hewitt, the daughter of a watchmaker. They soon moved to a Coventry Roman Catholic parish, where Paul's father was organist and choirmaster, and Paul became the city's boy soprano, performing solo at the Hippodrome. Music was an absorbing interest from Paul's youth, as was his religion. He won a scholarship to the King Henry VIII School at Coventry, but went on to Douai in France, his parents thinking he might have a vocation for the priesthood. He loved Douai and its admirable headmaster, Father Ignatius Rice, but decided he was not cut out for the priesthood. His grounding in the classics fed his literary imagination and his loving, lifelong, obsessive play with words. 
Jennings's humour was innate, or at least formed very early. He joined the Royal Corps of Signals in the Second World War and, when he was a subaltern in India in 1943, 'Lilliput' published a characteristic piece of his, beginning: 'Have you ever watched a soldier marching, and wondered what he was thinking about? If he's a Young Soldier, I can tell you! He is thinking about a little booklet excitingly titled 'Army Form B51''. 'Punch' took an army piece in 1945. Jennings worked at the central office of information (1946-7) and in advertising (1947-9). His celebrated parody of Jean-Paul Sartre appeared in 'The Spectator' in 1948: 'Resistentialism is a philosophy of tragic grandeur... deriving its name from the thesis that Things resist Men... 'Les choses sont contre nous''. Resistentialism's leading luminary was Pierre-Marie Ventre, who built on the work of his nineteenth-century predecessors, Friedegg and Heidansiecker. Jennings imagined the seminal play 'Puits clos' about three old men endlessly stumbling over bricks in the bottom of a well. (It was used by 'Time' magazine as a news story.) In 1949 he joined the staff of 'The Observer', with a regular column, 'Oddly Enough', which continued for seventeen years. His method was to start with something very familiar and then spin illogical and fantastic speculations around it, creating a brilliant and often subversive parody. 
The 'Observer' years, which lasted until 1966, were years of fulfilment, establishing Jennings, as 'The Times' obituarist adjudged, as 'the most consistently original English comic writer of our century' (29 Dec 1989). In the year he joined 'The Observer' so did Eric Blom, as its music critic, and Jennings met his daughter, Celia. They married in 1952 and later had three sons and three daughters; the marriage was a happy one and ended only with his death. Jennings knew a great deal about music; he sang madrigals with the Oriana Society and enjoyed singing -- as far afield as Istanbul -- with the Philharmonia Chorus and the London Philharmonic Choir. As he noted, 'For members of choirs, there's harmony beyond the heard harmony of music'. 
The family moved from Hampstead to East Bergholt in Suffolk, and Jennings's pieces in 'The Observer' began to reflect his deep love of that county. His wife became involved in the work of the Suffolk Preservation Society. To celebrate its sixtieth anniversary in 1989, she edited a book to which her husband contributed inimitably -- not only the title, 'Suffolk for Ever', but the last word. This was a clever discussion, disguised as a Platonic dialogue, of the complexities and the pitfalls confronting everyone moved to action by the erosions of our environs. In 'The English Difference' (1974) -- the wide-ranging book Jennings edited, and mostly wrote -- he illustrated his speculative inclination: 'You can see on the face of a child, deep in a game, the kind of total absorption observable in the figure of Pythagoras, 'Thinking', carved on a portal at Chartres.... Though children the world over play games, it is the English who, perhaps sensing the Death of God, once did unconsciously try to preserve religion in their untranslatable phrase 'playing the game'.' After 1966 Jennings wrote freelance, and from this period emerged his compilation, 'The Book of Nonsense' (1977). He mourned the loss of anything old-fashioned: steam trains, red telephone kiosks, the Fahrenheit classification of temperature. His prejudices were conservative and patriotic. 
Jennings's 'Observer' (and other) essays were collected and published with such titles as 'Even Oddlier' (1952), 'Next to Oddliness' (1955), 'Golden Oddlies' (1983), and 'The Paul Jennings Reader' (1990). 'The Living Village' (1968) was a picture of the women's institutes of Britain. He also wrote two children's books. He was a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. 
Jennings suffered serious illnesses -- including tuberculosis and a heart attack -- all belied by the laughter of his high, quick, musical voice and by lively, wide-open, grey eyes. He and his wife moved to Orford, on the Suffolk coast, where he died of liver cancer at his home, 25 High Street, on 26 December 1989. 
Norman Scarfe', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39836


Lancaster, Sir Osbert (1908-1986), cartoonist and designer, was born in London on 4 August 1908, the only child of Robert Lancaster (died 1916) and his wife, Clare Bracebridge Manger. His grandfather, Sir William Lancaster, became secretary of the Prudential Assurance Company and his father had a job in the City but enlisted in the army in 1914. He was killed in the battle of the Somme. Lancaster was sent to St Ronan's preparatory school in Worthing, and then to Charterhouse School, an appropriate school for a caricaturist, as John Leech, W. M. Thackeray, and Max Beerbohm had all been there. (In the 1950s Lancaster received Beerbohm's warm compliments when he painted murals in the Randolph Hotel, Oxford, illustrating scenes from 'Zuleika Dobson'.) 
Lancaster did not shine at school (the headmaster's final report pronounced him 'irretrievably gauche') but was admitted to Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1926. Like his friend John Betjeman, Lancaster became a 'figure' at Oxford. He wore loud checks, sported a monocle, and grew a large moustache. He contributed cartoons to 'Cherwell', the university magazine. He and Betjeman were fascinated by the Victorians and their architecture, an interest which began half in a spirit of mockery, but ended in expert championship. Lancaster obtained a fourth-class degree in English (1930) after an extra year of study. Intended for the bar, he failed his bar examinations. 
He then went to the Slade School of Art, where he met his first wife, Karen Elizabeth (died 1964), the second daughter of Sir Austin Harris, vice-chairman of Lloyds Bank. They were married in 1933 and had one son and one daughter. Lancaster found work alongside Betjeman as an assistant editor at the 'Architectural Review'. In 1936 his 'Progress at Pelvis Bay' began the long sequence of his books satirizing architecture and social life. He was appointed cartoonist to the 'Daily Express' in 1939 and on 1 January the first of his pocket cartoons appeared in its William Hickey column. He drew roughly 10,000 cartoons, with only brief interruptions, over the next forty years, many of them appearing on the front page. Lancaster's fusion of topicality and urbane wit was consistent. He depicted the world he knew -- that of Canon Fontwater, Father O'Bubblegum, Mrs Frogmarch (the Tory lady), and, his most enduring creation, Maudie, countess of Littlehampton, and her dim, monocled husband Willy. Lancaster's satire was not splenetic, and, except in the cause of good architecture, he was never a crusader. 
In the Second World War, Lancaster joined the press censorship bureau (1939) and was sent to Greece, with which he fell in love, as a Foreign Office press attache (1944-6). The British ambassador was being too high-handed with the press, and Lancaster effectively smoothed things over. His first book published after the war was 'Classical Landscape with Figures' (1947), a descriptive work based on his Greek experience. 'The Saracen's Head' (1948) and 'Draynflete Revealed' (1949) were in the manner of his pre-war satires, though the former was pitched as a children's book. 
In 1951 Lancaster worked with John Piper on designs for the Festival of Britain. In the same year, on Piper's recommendation, he designed his first stage set, for 'Pineapple Poll' at Sadler's Wells. This and the many stage designs that followed (several for Glyndebourne) released him from the austerity of line and allowed him to indulge in the Mediterranean colour he loved. In 1953 the Lancasters moved to Leicester House, a stucco Regency mansion at Henley-on-Thames. Karen died in 1964 and in 1967 Lancaster married Anne Eleanor Scott-James (1913-2009), journalist and author, the daughter of Rolfe Arnold Scott-James, also journalist and author. 
The 1960s with their fashionable fads and fantasies were perfect fodder for Lancaster's type of social satire. He would come into the 'Express' office after lunching at one of his four clubs and hold court for a while, telling jokes, before settling down with the day's newspapers. George Malcolm Thomson, right-hand man to Lord Beaverbrook, said of Lancaster: 'The annoying thing at the 'Express' was, not only was he the only one who could draw; he could also 'write' better than anyone in the building'. The prose, admittedly, was an acquired taste, and it had to be taken on its own terms. When Betjeman wrote to congratulate Lancaster on 'that deliciously convoluted prose you write', the implied censure was not lost on Lancaster. The prose had to be taken as part of the rich plum-cake fruitiness of the character Lancaster had created for himself. It was often said that he looked like one of his own cartoon characters and, as he aged, he resembled more and more an effigy of the English gentleman on a French carnival float: bulging eyes, bulbous nose, buffalo-horn moustache, bald head, striped shirt, pinstripe suit from Thresher and Glenny, old-fashioned shoes with rounded toes. 
'Osbert, it quickly becomes clear', wrote the architect Sir Hugh Casson, 'was a performance, meticulously practised and hilariously inflated and at times disturbing.' What, he wondered, was behind that 'elaborately woven yashmak of subsidiary clauses, this defensive portcullis of anecdotes, cranked into place at one's approach?' Lancaster was a work of art as memorable as any he created. It was as if he had chosen to be a 'living museum' exhibit, representing not the period of his own life but that of his lost father. 
Lancaster was appointed CBE in 1953 and knighted in 1975, in which year he also received an honorary DLitt at Oxford. He also received honorary degrees from Birmingham (1964), Newcastle upon Tyne (1970), and St Andrews (1974). He was a fellow of University College, London (1967), an honorary fellow of RIBA and of Lincoln College, Oxford (1979), and was made RDI (1979). He died in Chelsea on 27 July 1986 and was buried at West Winch, Norfolk. 
Bevis Hillier', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39837


Laski, Marghanita (1915-1988), writer and broadcaster, was born in Maida Vale, London on 24 October 1915, the eldest child (she had one sister, two brothers, and an adopted brother and sister) of Neville Jonas Laski, barrister (later a crown court judge), and his wife, Seraphina Gaster. Her father called her Marghanita (an affectionate adaptation of the Aramaic word for 'pearl') when she was small and she later adopted it herself. She was educated at Ladybarn House School in Manchester, at St Paul's Girls' School, London, and at Somerville College, Oxford, where she read English language and literature, giving as much time as the syllabus allowed to Old English and Middle English. She obtained a third-class degree in 1936. She also found time at Oxford for socializing and playing croquet and bridge. It was at Oxford that she met John Eldred Howard, whom she married in 1937; he became a publisher and was the founder of the Cresset Press. He was the son of John Howard, stockbroker and farmer. They lived in Oxford during the Second World War, and about 1948 moved to Capo di Monte, a picturesque house on the edge of Hampstead Heath, where they remained for the rest of their lives. About 1965 they acquired a holiday house in the south of France, and it was there that a great deal of her book reviewing and her reading for the 'Oxford English Dictionary' was done. 
A primary influence on Laski's early life in Manchester was her maternal grandfather, Moses Gaster (1856-1939), scholar and chief rabbi of Sephardi Jews in England, 1887-1918, and she found his younger children, her near contemporaries, an intellectually stimulating group. She rarely spoke about her uncle Harold Laski, the political theorist, and it can be assumed that he played little part in shaping her beliefs. In view of the enduring influence of Moses Gaster it is a mark of Marghanita Laski's true independence of mind that, while remaining proud of her Jewishness, she renounced her faith even before she went up to Oxford and declared herself to be an atheist. 
Marghanita Laski's first novel, 'Love on the Supertax', was published in 1944, and this was followed by numerous other works (novels unless otherwise stated), including 'The Patchwork Book' (an anthology, 1946); 'To Bed with Grand Music' (written under the pseudonym Sarah Russell, 1946); 'Stories of Adventure' (which she edited, 1946); 'Victorian Tales' (also as editor, 1947); 'Tory Heaven' (1948); 'Little Boy Lost' (1949); 'The Village' (1952); 'The Victorian Chaise-Longue' (1953); and 'The Offshore Island' (a play, 1959). The film rights of 'Little Boy Lost' were sold to John Mills, and she was furious and hurt when he turned it into a musical starring Bing Crosby (1953). 
In the 1960s Laski turned away from the writing of fiction, and a string of thoughtful and literary works followed, including 'Ecstasy' (1961), an ambitious book subtitled: 'A Study of some Secular and Religious Experiences'; a set of essays on the Victorian novelist Charlotte M. Yonge (with E. G. Battiscombe, 1965); and a series of studies of the work of Jane Austen (1969), George Eliot (1973), and Rudyard Kipling (1974). She also broadcast widely acclaimed radio programmes on the life and work of Kipling (1973, 1983). 
To the general public Laski was best-known as a broadcaster. 'Her clear, immediately recognisable voice with a slight touch of petulance or arrogance always there, was heard in programmes such as 'Any Questions?', 'The Brains Trust', and 'The Critics'' ('Daily Telegraph', 8 Feb 1988) ['see also 'The Brains Trust]. She also enjoyed speaking from pulpits, and her sermons were a demonstration of her profound and continuing interest in religion. 
Laski gave much time and energy from 1974 onwards to the committee of inquiry into the future of broadcasting (1974-7, chaired by Lord Annan); and to the Arts Council (from 1979), serving as its vice-chairman (1982-6) and also as chairman of its literature advisory panel (1980-84). 
Laski's extraordinary contribution as a voluntary reader for the supplement to the 'Oxford English Dictionary' was among her noblest deeds. From 1958 until the publication of the final volume in 1986 she supplied some 250,000 illustrative examples to the project, all copied out in her own hand. For this purpose she dredged numerous bulky Edwardian sales catalogues for the names of domestic articles, she read much of the crime fiction published in the twentieth century, and she scoured the whole rich literary world of twentieth-century (and some older) books and magazines for their unregistered vocabulary. 
At Oxford and throughout her life Laski was renowned for her beauty, her forceful personality, and her obsession with religious and secular beliefs. She died in the Royal Brompton Hospital from a smoking-related lung problem on 6 February 1988; her husband died in 1992. They had a son and a daughter. 
R. W. Burchfield', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39838


Lehmann, (Rudolph) John Frederick (1907-1987), publisher and author, was born on 2 June 1907 at Bourne End, Buckinghamshire, the fourth and youngest child and only son of Rudolph Chambers Lehmann (1856-1929), oarsman, contributor to 'Punch', and Liberal MP, and his wife, Alice Marie (died 1956), daughter of an American, Harrison Davis, and descended on her mother's side from Sir John Wentworth, an eighteenth-century governor of New Hampshire. In the house and garden of Fieldhead, where he was brought up with his sisters, Rosamond Lehmann, Beatrix, and Helen, the profession of letters was powerful as both living presence and lively inheritance. His paternal grandmother belonged to the notable Scottish publishing family Chambers (whence his father's second name), and a great-uncle of his father was W. H. Wills, assistant editor with Charles Dickens of 'Household Words'. 
Lehmann went as a king's scholar to Eton, where he edited 'College Days'. Among his contemporaries were Eric Blair (George Orwell), Henry Yorke (Henry Green), and Cyril Connolly. He read history and modern languages at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained a second class (division one) in both part one of the history tripos (1928) and part two of the modern and medieval languages tripos (1930). There his close friendship with Julian Bell, nephew of Virginia Woolf, plunged him so irresistibly into the Bloomsbury circle that by 1931 he was working as factotum at the Hogarth Press, which also published 'A Garden Revisited' (1931), his first volume of poems. His verse, praised for metrical skill, elegiac tone, and clarity of diction, followed at rare intervals, ending with the 'Collected Poems' of 1963, a self-critically thin volume. 
As Nazism took grip in Germany, Lehmann left publishing to live as a poet in Vienna, a city he monitored as Christopher Isherwood did Berlin. The first of his three volumes of autobiography, 'The Whispering Gallery' (1955), reflects the hardening of his anti-fascist view of that 'pink' decade, while with heartache he faced the dilemma that was to dog him insolubly: whether to be impresario or artist. In 1935 he founded the twice-yearly (often irregular) hard-bound 'New Writing', which abruptly lost its left-wing elitism when in 1940 it burgeoned, as the paperback 'Penguin New Writing', into part of the war effort. This magazine was his masterpiece. Four or six issues a year during the Second World War all sold out their 75,000 or more copies within days. A morale booster of high potency, a documentary record of war by the men fighting it, packed full of poets and story-writers who were his own discoveries, this was the voice of cultural survival. 
In 1938 Lehmann had bought Virginia Woolf's share of the Hogarth Press, but when his partnership -- vigorously described in 'Thrown to the Woolfs' (1978) -- ended in 1946, he launched his own firm, John Lehmann Ltd. His good-looking books -- 225 titles by 1954, when his supportive printers withdrew -- reintroduced British readers to the wider world at a crucial post-war point. Saul Bellow, George Seferis, and Gore Vidal ornamented his list, as did the no less influential Elizabeth David. His services to European letters earned him the Legion d'honneur (1958), the Greek order of George I (1954), and an honorary DLitt at Birmingham (1980). He was appointed FRSL (1951) and CBE (1964). 
Lehmann's subsidy from the 'Daily Mirror' in 1954 to found the 'London Magazine' and maintain the aesthetics of humanism was soon dropped. The magazine tottered on too conservatively for the current 'Zeitgeist' until Alan Ross took it over in 1961. For the remainder of his life Lehmann took visiting professorships in America and engaged in literary journalism and reminiscence of reflective quality, especially in his popular studies 'Lewis Carroll' (1972), 'Virginia Woolf' (1975), and 'Rupert Brooke' (1980). In his books, of which there were many, his writing was always courtly and finished, expressive only between the lines, except in the homosexually libidinous novel 'In the Purely Pagan Sense' (1976), which he predicted would lose him his friends. It did not. 
Lehmann was a tall, broad, and formidable figure, whose guttural voice and avuncular presence filled a room, with eyes, as William Plomer put it, 'like forget-me-nots within a skull'. His gardens (and gardening) he loved. At his frequent parties at his Egerton Crescent home in London, where he had the generosity to confront young writers with their elder peers, his rooms were ablaze with massed flowers from the country. For much of his life he shared homes in London and near Crawley, Sussex, with the dancer Alexis Rassine. 
Lehmann died after a long illness, in which hip operations had interrupted his mobility, in a nursing home at 29 Devonshire Street, Westminster, on 7 April 1987. 
David Hughes', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39839


Lehmann, Rosamond Nina (1901-1990), novelist, was born on 3 February 1901 in Bourne End, Buckinghamshire, the second child and second daughter in the family of three daughters and one son of Rudolph Chambers Lehmann (1856-1929), journalist, Liberal MP, and oarsman, and his wife, Alice Marie, 'nee' Davis (died 1956). The Lehmanns were an affluent and gifted family. Rosamond Lehmann's great-grandfather was Robert Chambers (1802-1871), who co-founded the publishing company Chambers; and her great-uncle was the artist Rudolf Lehmann. Of the four Lehmann children, three grew up to distinguish themselves in the arts -- Lehmann herself; her younger sister Beatrix, who became an actress; and John Lehmann, the poet, editor, and publisher. 'I was bound to write,' Lehmann recalled in old age. 'I never considered anything else as a possibility.' 
Lehmann was educated at the family home, Fieldhead, until she won a scholarship to read English at Girton College, Cambridge, in 1919. At Cambridge she contributed occasional pieces to 'Granta', the magazine founded by her father, and met (Walter) Leslie Runciman, from 1949 second Viscount Runciman of Doxford (1900-1989), son of the nonconformist shipping magnate and Liberal elder statesman Walter Runciman, first Viscount Runciman of Doxford. After graduating with second classes in English (1921) and modern and medieval languages (1922), she and Runciman married in December 1923 and moved to Newcastle. The marriage was brief and unsatisfactory, and it had already broken down when Lehmann's controversial first novel, 'Dusty Answer', was published in 1927. This was both a critical and a popular success, its sales enhanced by the author's reputation as a society beauty. Her second novel was, in contrast, poorly received by the critics, who were disconcerted by the glum northern setting and two unhappy marriages described in 'A Note in Music' (1930). Lehmann's own marriage had been dissolved in 1928 and in the same year she had married the colourful Wogan Philipps (1902-1993), who in 1962 became the second Baron Milford, artist and communist son of Laurence Richard Philipps, first Baron Milford, businessman. A son, Hugo, was born in 1929, and a daughter, Sarah (Sally), in 1934. 
Between 1932 and 1953 Lehmann wrote the four novels by which she will be remembered: 'Invitation to the Waltz' (1932), 'The Weather in the Streets' (1936), 'The Ballad and the Source' (1944), and 'The Echoing Grove' (1953). The books are autobiographical in tone, with certain themes and preoccupations occurring throughout, notably the heroine's experience of compelling but destructive sexuality, and the conflict between intelligence and passion. Modern criticism now stresses Lehmann's role in asserting the centrality of female experience, whereas she was once stigmatized as a writer of 'women's novels'. She has been commended not only for her treatment of particular issues such as homosexuality and abortion, but also for her technical skill, which became fully apparent in her handling of the non-linear chronological and narrative complexities of 'The Echoing Grove'. 
Between 1930 and 1939 Lehmann lived at Ipsden House, Oxfordshire, where she entertained a wide circle of acquaintances, including Leonard and Virginia Woolf, Lytton Strachey, Dora Carrington, W. H. Auden, Christopher Isherwood, and Stephen Spender. By 1939 her second marriage had also failed and in 1941 she began a relationship with the married poet Cecil Day-Lewis (1904-1972), with whom she lived for several years. Her own marriage was dissolved in 1944, but when Day-Lewis was eventually divorced in 1951 he married Jill Balcon. The effect of his desertion was traumatic, although the tragic turning-point of Lehmann's life occurred in 1958 when her daughter, who had recently married the writer P. J. Kavanagh, contracted poliomyelitis in Jakarta and died, aged twenty-four. Lehmann wrote nothing of literary significance for many years afterwards and devoted herself instead to spiritualism. Her impressionistic autobiography, 'The Swan in the Evening' (1967), reiterates her belief in Sally's continuing life, and in her last, confusing, novel, 'A Sea-Grape Tree' (1976), the spirit of Sibyl Jardine, monstrous protagonist of 'The Ballad and the Source', converses telepathically with the heroine. Other publications include translations of Jacques Lemarchand and Jean Cocteau; a play, 'No More Music' (1939); 'The Gipsy's Baby, and other Stories' (1946), and several spiritualist works. 
The reprinting of Lehmann's books by Virago Press in the 1980s brought her a new and appreciative audience. In 1982 she was created CBE and a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. In 1986 she was made an honorary fellow of Girton College. She was also president of the English Centre of International PEN; a member of the council of the Society of Authors, and vice-president of the College of Psychic Studies. 
Rosamond Lehmann was tall and beautiful, with almond-shaped eyes, a firm mouth, and a warm, impulsive manner. She died on 12 March 1990 at her London home, 30 Clareville Grove. 
Judith Priestman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39840


Nicholson, Norman Cornthwaite (1914-1987), poet, was born on 8 January 1914 at 14 St George's Terrace, Millom, Cumberland, the only child of Joseph Nicholson, tailor and draper, of Millom, and his wife, Edith Cornthwaite, the daughter of a butcher. His mother died when he was five, and his father remarried three years later. He was educated at Millom secondary school, but in his adolescence he developed tuberculosis and from 1930 to 1932 was confined to hospital in Hampshire. One of his lungs was removed. This was the only period in his life when he spent any considerable time away from his native and ancestral Millom, the source of much of his inspiration both in verse and prose. 
Nicholson began writing at an early age. He was encouraged in this by a local clergyman, the Revd Samuel Taylor, who put him in touch with Brother George Every, a poet, literary critic, and theologian, and a contributor to 'The Criterion'; through Every, Nicholson was introduced in 1938 to the editor of that journal, T. S. Eliot, who showed an interest in his poems. In the same year, Nicholson began to give lectures on literature to local Workers' Educational Association classes, material from which he used in his first critical book, 'Man and Literature' (1943); but already, in 1942, he had edited a Penguin 'Anthology of Religious Verse', and before that had started to publish poems in periodicals, including some in the United States. 
Nicholson's upbringing was in the Methodist church, to which his stepmother belonged, but in 1940 he was confirmed in the Church of England. His Christian faith was central to him throughout his life. Much of his poetry and his verse-plays drew on this faith, nourished by his devotion to the landscapes, history, people, and stories of Cumberland. All are abundantly present in his first individual volume of poems, 'Five Rivers', which Eliot accepted for Faber and Faber and which was published in 1944. This had been preceded in 1943 by a selection of his work published in one volume alongside selections from Keith Douglas and J. C. Hall. Nicholson went on to publish another ten books and pamphlets of poems, including 'Selected Poems' in 1966, augmented in 1982. All were well received, as authentic and sometimes gently quirky products of a life which, though restricted by Nicholson's fragile health ('My ways are circumscribed', he wrote in the poem 'The Pot Geranium'), had broader visions of a universe of rock, rivers, hills, and the sea. 
In appearance Nicholson was craggy, and he became increasingly bewhiskered with impressive sideburns. He had a fine head, brightly flashing and mischievous eyes, and an engaging and often roguish smile. His voice, as a result of lung operations, was hoarse but also strikingly vigorous: he was a splendid reader not only of his own poems but of other poets too, especially his beloved Wordsworth, parts of whose 'Prelude' he read in a memorable series of BBC Third Programme broadcasts in the early 1960s. He was a much sought-after reader at literary gatherings up and down the country and, though these expeditions often exhausted him, he enjoyed them. 
In 1956 Nicholson married a teacher, Yvonne Edith, daughter of John Oswald Gardner, engineering draughtsman. The partnership was a very happy one until her death in 1982. Her loss left him desolate; and, much though he enjoyed the literary recognition and honours which increasingly came to him in his later years, they could not compensate for her absence. They had lived cheerfully in the small terraced house in Millom which had always been Nicholson's home (indeed, he had been born there, when it was also his father's shop), and he continued to live there after Yvonne's death. They had no children. 
Nicholson was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1945, and that year was given the Heinemann award. In 1967 he shared the Cholmondeley award for poetry with Seamus Heaney and Brian Jones. He received a Society of Authors travelling bursary in 1973 (spent visiting Scandinavia) and an Arts Council bursary in 1977, which was also the year he was awarded the queen's medal for poetry. He received the honorary degree of MA from the University of Manchester in 1959 and another from the Open University in 1975. Manchester Polytechnic conferred on him an honorary fellowship in 1979, and he received a LittD from the universities of Liverpool (1980) and Manchester (1984). One of his most treasured honours, which he delighted in showing to visitors, was the OBE, conferred in 1981. Perhaps even more, he was deeply moved by a volume of poems and prose pieces by many distinguished writers, 'Between Comets' (edited by William Scammell), published and presented to him on his seventieth birthday in 1984. 
Among Nicholson's many other publications were books and anthologies concerned with the history and topography of the Lake District, four verse-plays, two early novels, and a life of William Cowper (1951). The most individual and revealing of all is 'Wednesday Early Closing' (1975), a memoir of his early years, full of the characters, anecdotes, sights, sounds, and smells of his Millom boyhood. He died on 30 May 1987 at Whitehaven, Cumberland. 
Anthony Thwaite', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39841


Reed, Henry (1914-1986), poet and playwright, was born in Birmingham on 22 February 1914, the elder child and only son of Henry Reed, master bricklayer and foreman at Nocks Brickworks, and his wife, Mary Ann Ball. He was educated at King Edward VI Grammar School, Aston, Birmingham, where he specialized in classics. Since Greek was not taught, he taught himself, and went on to win the Temperley Latin prize and a scholarship to Birmingham University, gaining a first-class degree (1934) and an MA for a thesis on the novels of Thomas Hardy (1936). 
Like many other writers of the 1930s, Reed tried teaching and, again like most of them, hated it and left to make his way as a freelance writer and critic. In 1941 he was conscripted into the Royal Army Ordnance Corps, in which he served -- 'or rather 'studied'', as he preferred to put it -- until 1942 when, following a serious bout of pneumonia and a prolonged convalescence, he was transferred to the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley. At first employed as a cryptanalyst in the Italian section, he was subsequently moved to the Japanese section, where he learned the language and worked as a translator. In the evenings he wrote much of his first radio play, 'Moby Dick' (1947), and many of the poems later to be published in 'A Map of Verona' (1946). 
The most famous of these -- indeed, the most famous English poem to emerge from the Second World War -- derived from Reed's experience of basic training in the ordnance corps. A brilliant mimic, he would entertain his friends with a comic imitation of a sergeant instructing his recruits. After a few performances, he noticed that the words of the weapon-training instructor, couched in the style of the military manual, fell into certain rhythmic patterns which fascinated him and eventually provided the structure of 'Naming of Parts'. In this and two subsequent 'Lessons of the War', the military voice is wittily counterpointed by the inner voice -- more civilized and still civilian -- of a listening recruit with his mind on other matters. At approximately the same point in each of the first four stanzas, the recruit's attention wanders from the instructor's lesson in the unnatural art of handling a lethal weapon, back to the natural world: branches, blossom, Edenic life as opposed to death. The dialectical opposition of two voices, two views of a landscape associated with sexual desire, is a strategy refined in two remarkable poems of Reed's middle years: 'The Changeling', a brilliantly condensed (and disguised) autobiography, and 'The Auction Sale', a Forsterian or Hardyesque short story. Both deal with the loss of Eden, for which Reed, an unmarried, unhappy homosexual, would continue to search in vain. He came to associate the Great Good Place with Italy, the setting of some of his later poems, such of his radio plays as 'Return to Naples' and 'The Streets of Pompeii' (published 1971), and two fine verse plays about another poet whose work he was translating and with whom he identified strongly, Giacomo Leopardi. 
In the mid-1950s Reed made a major liberating decision: he abandoned a projected biography of Hardy, which for years had burdened him with guilt like the Ancient Mariner's albatross. That failed quest, perhaps related to the failure of his earlier quest for lasting love, played out a dominant theme of his radio plays: from failure as a biographer, he turned to triumphant success in a radio play about a nervous young biographer, Herbert Reeve, engaged on just such a quest as he had himself abandoned. Reed's hero (whose name owes something to that of Herbert Read, the poet and critic, with whom he was tired of being confused) assembles a mass of conflicting testimony about his author, the novelist Richard Shewin. His witnesses include a waspish brother, his wife, two spinsters of uncertain virtue, and (the finest comic role he was to create for radio) the twelve-tone female composer Hilda Tablet. The success of 'A Very Great Man Indeed' (1953) prompted six sequels, the best of them 'The Private Life of Hilda Tablet' (1954), in which Reeve is browbeaten into switching the subject of his biography from the dumb dead to the exuberantly vocal living female composer. 
The modest income that Reed's work for radio brought him he supplemented with the still more modest rewards of book reviewing and translation. The reviewing was to result in a British Council booklet, 'The Novel since 1939' (1946), and his published translations include Ugo Betti's 'Three Plays' (1956) and 'Crime on Goat Island' (1960), Honore de Balzac's 'Le pere Goriot' (1962) and 'Eugenie Grandet' (1964), and Natalia Ginzburg's 'The Advertisement' (1969). Several of his translations found their way into the theatre, and in the autumn of 1955 there were London premieres of no fewer than three. 
Reed's greatest imaginative investment, however, was in his poems, but as a perfectionist he could not bring himself to release what he must have recognized would be his last book until it was as good as he could make it -- and it never was. Only with the posthumous publication of his 'Collected Poems' (1991) would he take his rightful place 'among the English poets'. In his last years he became increasingly incapacitated and reclusive, but devoted friends never ceased to visit him in the London flat he continued to occupy in Upper Montagu Street, Marylebone, thanks to the generosity of a long-suffering landlady, until, removed to St Charles Hospital, Kensington, he died on 8 December 1986. 
Jon Stallworthy', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39842


Scott, Sir Peter Markham (1909-1989), painter, ornithologist, and broadcaster, was born at 174 Buckingham Palace Road, London, on 14 September 1909, the only child of Captain Robert Falcon Scott (1868-1912), Antarctic explorer, and his wife, (Edith Agnes) Kathleen Scott (1878-1947), sculptor, daughter of Canon Lloyd Stewart Bruce. His father died in 1912 and in 1922 his mother married Edward Hilton Young, who became first Baron Kennet. There was one son of this marriage. In his last message home before he died Scott had urged his wife to make his son interested in natural history, which was better than sport. In the event, Peter Scott came to excel at both. He was an energetic child, with a passion for natural history, who spent much time drawing and painting. He also shone at sports, ice-skating, and sailing in small boats. From his preparatory school, West Downs, he went to Oundle. He then studied at Trinity College, Cambridge, from 1927 to 1930, where he hoped to take the natural sciences tripos, but failed his part one in 1930. He stayed on for an extra term and obtained an ordinary degree in December 1930 (zoology, botany, and history of art). During his Cambridge days he took up wildfowling, and in 1929 'Country Life' magazine printed two articles on the sport written and illustrated by him. 
From Cambridge Scott went to the Akademie der Bildenden Kunste in Munich for a term, and then spent two years at the Royal Academy Schools in London. In 1933 he held his first one-man exhibition, which was a huge success, at Ackermann's Galleries in London. He was able to make his living as a painter of wildfowl, producing his first book (entitled 'Morning Flight' and published by 'Country Life') in 1935. This was followed by 'Wild Chorus' in 1938. Lavishly illustrated with his paintings, both books became very popular and ran to twelve editions. 
Scott excelled at sailing and won a bronze medal in the 1936 Olympic games, for single-handed yachting. He also won the prestigious Prince of Wales cup for international 14 foot dinghies in 1937, 1938, and 1946. In the late 1950s he developed a passion for gliding, and won the British gliding championships in 1963. 
At the outbreak of war in 1939 Scott volunteered for the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. After training he spent two years in destroyers, mainly in HMS 'Broke' in the western approaches, becoming her first lieutenant, and then he served in the coastal forces in steam gunboats. He became senior officer of the flotilla, was awarded a DSC (1943) and bar, and was thrice mentioned in dispatches. He also invented a night camouflage scheme for naval ships. His final appointment was the command of a new frigate, as a lieutenant-commander. With the war coming to a close, Scott was adopted as the Conservative candidate for Wembley North, but he failed to be elected by 435 votes, having had only two weeks to prepare for the election. 
While visiting the River Severn at Slimbridge in Gloucestershire in 1945, in search of a rare lesser white-fronted goose among the wintering greater white-fronted geese, Scott decided to establish a research organization, which he had planned for many years, to study the swans, geese, and ducks of the world. The Severn Wildfowl Trust was set up at Slimbridge in 1946 and soon boasted the largest collection of wildfowl in the world. Later known as the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust, it expanded into nine centres around Britain. Scott remained its honorary director until he died. Scientific research took him to Iceland in 1951 to study pink-footed geese on their breeding grounds, and to the Perry River region of northern Canada, where in 1949 he mapped this unknown area while in search of the breeding grounds of the Ross goose. Scott did more than any British contemporary to save wildlife species from extinction. 
When the BBC founded a television centre in Bristol Scott helped to establish the natural history unit there, planning a programme on natural history called 'Look', which he hosted for seventeen years. Many of the early programmes contained his own film which he shot on his travels. He took part in 'Nature Parliament', a radio programme which ran for twenty-one years, and was the narrator in many other programmes. 
In the early 1950s Scott became involved with the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources. He helped build up the species survival commission of the union and was chairman in 1962-81. With two friends, in 1961 he founded the World Wildlife Fund (later the World Wide Fund for Nature) to raise the money needed to finance nature conservation around the world. As its chairman from 1961, he designed its panda logo and invented the red data books listing endangered species. He travelled abroad extensively on behalf of the fund, establishing national appeals, advising on conservation issues and areas for reserves, lecturing, and fund-raising. He was also involved in numerous other conservation and naturalist societies. He became as much of an expert on coral fish as he was on birds and his records have proved scientifically useful. 
Scott's autobiography, 'The Eye of the Wind', was published in 1961 and was reprinted many times. He was a prolific author and illustrator, his final books being the three volumes of 'Travel Diaries of a Naturalist' (1983-7). 
Scott was elected rector of Aberdeen University, 1960-63, and appointed chancellor of Birmingham University, 1974-83. Appointed MBE in 1942 and CBE in 1953, he was knighted in 1973. In 1987 he became both CH and a fellow of the Royal Society. He had honorary degrees from the universities of Exeter, Aberdeen, Birmingham, Bristol, Liverpool, Bath, Guelph, and Ulster. He was also awarded numerous medals, prizes, and foreign honours. 
Strongly built and of average height, Scott was warm and friendly, tackling everything with enthusiasm. He liked to paint every day. In 1942 he married the novelist Elizabeth Jane Howard (1923-2014), daughter of David Liddon Howard, timber merchant. They had a daughter. This marriage was dissolved in 1951 and in August the same year he married (Felicity) Philippa Talbot-Ponsonby ['see below']. They had a daughter and a son. Peter Scott died from a heart attack in hospital in Bristol on 29 August 1989. His remains were cremated, and the ashes were scattered at the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust reserve at Slimbridge. Memorial services were held in St Paul's Cathedral, London, on 20 November 1989 and at the church of St John the Evangelist, Slimbridge, on 30 November. 
Scott's second wife, (Felicity) Philippa Scott, Lady Scott (1918-2010), photographer and conservationist, was born on 22 November 1918 in Bloemfontein, South Africa, the younger daughter of Commander Frederick William Talbot-Ponsonby (1879-1930), naval officer, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Findlay (1881-1952). Her parents had moved to the Orange Free State to help her father recover from tuberculosis, and she was brought up on a farm there. The family returned frequently to England, and during the Second World War she worked first in the Land Army then at Bletchley Park. For a brief period after the war she worked at the British embassy in Belgrade, in the newly-Communist Yugoslavia. Returning to England in 1947, she saw an advertisement for a job as secretary to Peter Scott, and was duly taken on; she also became assistant secretary to the Severn Wildfowl Trust. She later remarked, with characteristic self-deprecation, that 'I think he appreciated the fact that I was basically a country girl and I knew how to round up ducks and geese without frightening them' (Wild Film History interview). She married Scott while on a bird-ringing expedition to Iceland. As well as becoming stepmother to Nicky Scott and bringing up her own two children with Scott, Dafila and Falcon, she was a constant source of support for her husband, and accompanied him on his many travels. Developing an interest in photography (she later became a fellow of the Royal Photographic Society), she illustrated his books, 'Faraway Look', 2 vols. (1960), 'Animals in Africa' (1962), and the three volumes of 'Travel Diaries of a Naturalist' (1983-7). After his death she saw to publication 'The Art of Peter Scott: Images from a Lifetime' (1991), and published two volumes of memoirs, 'Lucky Me' (1990) and 'So Many Sunlit Hours' (2002). She remained active in the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust as its honorary director until her death and continued to live at Slimbridge. She died at Moreton Hill Farm care centre, in Standish, Gloucestershire, of bronchopneumonia and heart failure on 6 January 2010, and was survived by her daughter, son, and stepdaughter. 
Paul Walkden', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39843


Sitwell, Sir Sacheverell, sixth baronet (1897-1988), writer, was born on 15 November 1897 in his parents' house, Belvoir Terrace, in The Crescent, Scarborough, the third child of Sir George Reresby Sitwell, fourth baronet (1860-1943), genealogist and antiquary, and his wife, Lady Ida Emily Augusta Denison (died 1937), fourth child and third daughter of the first earl of Londesborough. 
Sacheverell Sitwell, like his elder sister, Dame Edith Sitwell, and his elder brother, Sir (Francis) Osbert Sacheverell Sitwell, lived for the arts. One of the most prolific of literary families, their reputations varied from decade to decade. Always the centre of spirited controversy, during the period of the Second World War, Edith found her widest audience, Osbert achieved wide acclaim for his autobiographical volumes, and Sacheverell's cultural studies became standard fare for devotees of art, architecture, and music. 
Sacheverell's childhood, more indulged than Osbert's and more at a remove from Edith's, was idyllic, according to what he wrote years later in 'Splendours and Miseries' (1943). While still in his teens, he carried on extensive correspondence with some of the foremost artists, musicians, and avant-garde figures of the day. When he left Eton College in 1916, he declared himself a bibliophile and dedicated intellectual. 'He set himself', Osbert wrote, 'with an energy and intensity that were remarkable to amass knowledge 'he' wanted to amass' (O. Sitwell, 'The Scarlet Tree', 1946, 273). For dubious reasons he found formal education at Balliol College, Oxford, disappointing and did not pursue a degree. Instead, he joined Osbert in London to mount exhibitions of contemporary French art and hold salons to which they invited luminaries from the literary world. 
Sacheverell Sitwell's first publication, 'The People's Palace' (1918) -- a slight work of fourteen poems -- received a cool reception; nor did his second collection of verse, 'The Hundred and One Harlequins' (1922), impress the critics. Two years later he published 'Southern Baroque Art', his first work of prose; and this study of the painting, architecture, and music of Italy and Spain during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries drew laudations. 'German Baroque Art' (1927), 'The Gothick North' (1929), and 'British Architecture and Craftsmen' (1945) followed in profusion. Other books, such as 'Roumanian Journey' (1938), 'The Netherlands' (1948), and 'Bridge of the Brocard Sash' (1959), took their origins from his travels. 
On 12 October 1925 Sitwell took time from his research and writing to marry Georgia Doble (died 1980), an attractive Canadian from a prominent banking family, in Paris at the Anglican church of St George. They made a handsome pair: he, tall and slim (6 feet 4 inches), with a distinguished look and distinguished carriage; she, stately, slender, dark-haired with light olive skin and widely spaced hazel-green eyes. All things considered, their marriage was a good one, and her death in 1980 was a trying occasion for Sitwell and their two sons, Francis and Reresby. The award in 1981 of the Royal Society of Literature's Benson medal alleviated some of his pain, as did his being made a Companion of Honour in 1984. Succession to the baronetcy in 1969 upon Osbert's death had followed as a matter of course. 
Sitwell's sixteenth volume of poetry, 'An Indian Summer' (1982), was his last book. Although this collection of 100 poems is an interesting brew of wisdom and melancholy, beauty and rapture, it is as a prose writer that he will be remembered. His 'Collected Poems' (1936) and 'Selected Poems' (1948) are worthy of attention, but his strength is to be found in his studies of art and literature. Among his books on music and composers, 'Mozart' (1932), 'Liszt' (1934), and 'Scarlatti' (1935) have the most staying power. 
Prominent among Sacheverell Sitwell's more than sixty books are his autobiographical volumes, 'All Summer in a Day' (1926), 'Dance of the Quick and the Dead' (1936), and 'For Want of a Golden City' (1973), in which he wrote of his family and friends, his responses to what he found most appealing. With something of an existential touch, he dilated upon oral and visual memories, focused upon all he preferred to recollect, and glossed over most troublesome aspects of his days and years. He lived latterly at Weston Hall, Towcester, Northamptonshire. Sacheverell Sitwell died on 1 October 1988. 


@@@@@


doc= 39844


Streatfeild, (Mary) Noel (1895-1986), children's writer, was born on 24 December 1895 in Frant, Sussex, the second child and second daughter in the family of five daughters (the second youngest of whom died at the age of two) and one son of William Champion Streatfeild (1865-1929), an Anglican vicar, and his wife, Janet Mary, daughter of Henry Venn, vicar of Walmer. She grew up in Amberley, St Leonards, and Eastbourne, where her father was vicar (he later became suffragan bishop of Lewes). In the first part of her autobiography she describes overhearing her mother's friends identify her as 'the plain one'. That, and the genteel poverty in which they lived, made her fiercely resentful and in later years it was noticeable what an important part clothes played in her plots and her own life; she was always elegant. She was educated at the Hastings and St Leonard's Ladies' College in St Leonards and Laleham School in Eastbourne. In 1916 she went to work in Woolwich arsenal, but became ill. In 1919 she joined the (Royal) Academy of Dramatic Art in London. She had moderate success as an 'ingenue' playing in repertory, reviews, and pantomime. She also went on tour in South Africa, Rhodesia, New Zealand, and Australia. When her father died in 1929 she returned home and decided to adopt a more stable career, choosing to be a writer. 
Noel Streatfeild's first efforts were three fairy stories published in a children's magazine and a novel, 'The Whicharts' (1931), based on children's misunderstanding of the prayer 'Our Father which art...'. Its success encouraged her to write five other novels, including 'I Ordered a Table for Six' (1942), which anticipated the bomb which destroyed the Cafe Royal a year later. It was about this time, after her agent suggested she try writing for children, that she rather unenthusiastically produced 'Ballet Shoes' (1936), which became a runaway success, and which caused her to have no further worries about money. 
Almost by accident Noel Streatfeild had found the perfect ingredients for a children's book. Into it she had put all her accumulated backstage knowledge of the theatre and of her sister's ballet training, as well as their childhood struggles with hardship and a genuine picture of family life. 'Tennis Shoes' (1937) incorporated the advice given to her by John Galsworthy, in the first fan letter she received, 'always remember to know at least three times as much as you are going to put on paper'. Her third book, 'The Circus is Coming' (1938), was the result of nearly a year spent travelling with a family circus and won her the Library Association's Carnegie medal. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War, Noel Streatfeild trained as an air raid warden and joined the Women's Voluntary Service, running a canteen service in London for people in the Deptford shelters. In her spare time, she prettified London by scattering flower seeds on bomb sites. In 1941 her London flat was bombed and she lost almost everything. She nevertheless wrote four more children's books during the war, including 'Party Frock' (1946). After the war she spent some time in Hollywood, from which came 'The Painted Garden' (1949). In 1951 'White Boots', a story about skating, appeared. She began to share a flat at 51A Elizabeth Street, London, with a friend, Margot Grey. 
Noel Streatfeild believed that every detail in her books should be factually correct and she also developed her characters convincingly. Her writing for young readers had a reassuring warmth, or 'heart' as she described it, and almost all her stories were centred on families. The family background and rules of behaviour between parents and siblings had a warm quality which made them both fascinating and believable. 
In all Noel Streatfeild wrote sixty-four books, all but seventeen for children, always drawing on her own experience to make them as authentic as possible. Many of them were broadcast on radio or television; it was the BBC which introduced her Bell family to radio; the serials were broadcast from 1949 to 1953. 'The Growing Summer' (1966) was a television serial set in Ireland, and 'Thursday's Child' (1970) was also serialized. She wrote her autobiography in three volumes, and a life of another renowned writer of children's books, Edith Nesbit ('Magic and the Magician', 1958). She was generous in encouraging young writers and replied kindly to every child who wrote to her. She was also indefatigable in her response to schools and libraries, never treating this as a duty, but taking the trouble to make her visits as exciting and glamorous as possible. On the days when she visited the yearly exhibition of the Puffin Club (the children's branch of Penguin Books, which published her work), huge queues formed to get her autograph. Mothers came with their daughters, bringing their own battered copies of 'Ballet Shoes' to be signed. She was appointed OBE in 1983. 
Noel Streatfeild was a tall woman, with a fine carriage. She often wore a mink coat, and her lovely hands were regularly manicured with rich red nail polish. She was physically somewhat clumsy, with a rather loud, commanding voice. She never married. She died on 11 September 1986 in a nursing home, Vicarage Gate House, Vicarage Gate, London, after a stroke. Her funeral was held at St Michael's Church, Chester Square, London, on 22 September 1986. 
Kaye Webb', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39845


Sykes, Christopher Hugh (1907-1986), writer and traveller, was born on 17 November 1907 in Sledmere, near Driffield, Yorkshire, the elder of twins and the second son and third child in the family of three sons and three daughters of Sir Mark Sykes, sixth baronet (1879-1919), and his wife, Edith Violet ('c'.1885-1931), third daughter of Sir John Eldon Gorst, solicitor-general. His father was first employed as honorary attache to the British embassy in Constantinople, before helping to found the Arab Bureau with T. E. Lawrence and signing the Sykes-Picot agreement of 1916. Christopher followed an undistinguished academic career at Downside School and Christ Church, Oxford (which he left without a degree), by becoming honorary attache at both the Berlin embassy (1928-9) and the British legation in Tehran (1930-31). 
At Oxford, Sykes was thought of as a boisterous, if congenial, companion given to acts of bravado, rather like his early hero, and close friend of his father, Aubrey Herbert, the model for John Buchan's Greenmantle. Unlike Herbert or his father he was inhibited from embarking on a political career by a stutter, which grew more pronounced whenever the subject matter was such as might inspire disbelief. Since Sykes was chiefly interested in those areas of discussion which lie on the borders between personal experience, artistic embellishment, and fantasy, it was thought that a political career was closed to him. He took a course in Persian studies at the School of Oriental Studies, London, and in 1933 left for two years' travel in Persia and Afghanistan with Robert Byron. He wrote for 'The Times', 'The Spectator', and 'The Observer'. In 1936 he married Camilla Georgiana (1912-1983), daughter of Sir Thomas Wentworth Russell, pasha, chief of police in Cairo from 1917 to 1946, but this did little to improve the parlous financial situation of a younger son. 
Of Sykes's writing before the war little survived after it: 'Wassmus' (1936), a biography of the German Arabist, was followed by two light novels, one of them written under the puzzling pseudonym of Waughburton in collaboration with Robert Byron. The war itself saw him commissioned in the 7th battalion of the Green Howards. Later, as part of Special Operations Executive, he adorned general headquarters in Cairo when the presence of the Duff Coopers and other cronies made it the most elegant place to be, before being posted to Tehran as a spy attached to the British legation. Transferring to the 2nd battalion of the Special Air Service, he worked with the French resistance and was awarded the Croix de Guerre. 
Many of these experiences came together in what will probably be seen as Sykes's masterpiece, 'Four Studies in Loyalty' (1946), incorporating elements of biography and autobiography. It is memorable in particular for its study of a previous Christopher Sykes, his great-uncle. His 'Two Studies in Virtue' (1953), the first part of which was based on the life of Richard Waldo Sibthorp, an Anglican clergyman who twice converted to Roman Catholicism, was less successful. Although Sykes was a cradle Catholic, intermittently devout and, like many Catholics of his class, enraged by the despoliation of the Roman liturgy after the second Vatican Council, his interest in the finer points of high Anglican conscience was limited. 
After some foreign reporting, notably for the 'Daily Mail' during the Azerbaijan campaign in Iran, Sykes joined the BBC in 1948. Following a short spell as deputy controller of the Third Programme he joined the features department (1949-68), where he was suspected of having formed a Catholic mafia. 
Sykes's biography 'Orde Wingate' (1959) may have described the sort of life he would have liked to live, but the life of Adam von Trott ('Troubled Loyalty', 1968), the patriotic anti-Nazi, was closer to the world he eventually inhabited. After a life of Nancy Astor ('Nancy', 1971), generally seen as a bit of a pot-boiler, he came, after some delay, to write the authorized biography of his old friend and boon companion, the novelist Evelyn Waugh (1975). This might have been his best book. He was chosen because he was the only one of Waugh's obituarists who caught something of the gaiety as well as the recklessness of the man. Unfortunately, when he came to set pen to paper six years after his subject's death, the light had dimmed a little. Inhibited, as he said, by respect for Waugh's widow -- she, in fact, had died two years before the book appeared -- he had also suffered a decline in energy, a certain loss of optimism or hope. The book is marred not only by carelessness but also perhaps by a certain resentment at the dying of the light. Sykes's life had been a reasonably successful one, but not so successful as that of his 'arriviste' friend. 
Sykes was a most congenial man to meet, an excellent mimic, well mannered, and witty even in his cups, much loved by the young, to whom he was always pleasant and friendly. In appearance he was tall, with a dark, slightly saturnine countenance. He carried himself well, with a debonair and jaunty manner, which remained with him when age brought a certain heaviness, not to say majesty, to his gait. He spent his last years in a Kent nursing home. He died in the course of an agreeable house party at Sledmere, his childhood home, on 8 December 1986. He was survived by an only son, Mark, publisher and secondhand bookseller. 
Auberon Waugh', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39846


Warner, Reginald Ernest (1905-1986), novelist, classicist, and translator, was born on 9 March 1905 in Amberley, Gloucestershire, the only child of the Revd Frederic Ernest Warner, vicar ('of the modernist persuasion') of Amberley, and his schoolteacher wife Kathleen, daughter of the Revd John James Luce of St Nicholas's Church, Gloucester. He was educated first at St George's School, Harpenden, and then at Wadham College, Oxford, which he entered with an open scholarship in classics in 1923, in spite of having been, according to his tutor, Maurice Bowra, ill taught at school, so that he 'found in Greek and Latin all the charms of novelty'. No doubt better taught at Wadham, he took a first class in classical honour moderations in 1925, but suffered a nervous breakdown in the following year and, after leaving Oxford for a time, returned to take a third class in English in 1928. 
Among his Oxford contemporaries and friends were the poets W. H. Auden and Stephen Spender, and particularly Cecil Day-Lewis, who was at the same college and willing to share in some degree his athletic as well as his literary enthusiasms. Warner -- tall, strongly built, and vigorous -- captained a Wadham rugby team of which Day-Lewis was a member, and always retained his interest in and taste for energetic sporting pursuits. Day-Lewis, in his autobiography 'The Buried Day' (1960), recalls his friend's 'Homeric boisterousness', which did not fade with the passing years. 
Warner's entry on the literary scene was not immediate. On leaving Oxford he took teaching appointments in various schools, including at one stage, from 1932 to 1934, two posts in Egypt. His debut, when it came in 1937, was auspicious. His 'Poems', published in that year, made no great mark, and in later years verse was only a small part of his prolific output. But it was also in 1937 that there appeared his novel 'The Wild Goose Chase', written mainly in England before he left for Egypt, and this strikingly original work made an immediate impression. His tale of three brothers and their quest in an unnamed country for the wild goose, symbol of hope and personal regeneration, was rightly seen as akin to the work of Franz Kafka; but it drew also on elements of classical mythology, and even of fairy tale, in a manner genuinely new in English fiction. 'The Professor' (1938) was a very different work, a touching and almost purely naturalistic apology for traditional liberalism confronted, disastrously, with totalitarian amoralism. In 'The Aerodrome' (1941) he reverted in part to a non-realistic, expressionist technique. Generally regarded as his best novel, this deeply gloomy work also sees human values collapsing before a rising tide of nihilistic materialism. Warner shared the Marxist enthusiasms of his student contemporaries but never joined the Communist Party. After the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact he saw communist dictatorship as scarcely preferable to the fascist variety. His own position is vigorously stated in his book of essays 'The Cult of Power' (1946). 
After a brief spell of service with the Allied Control Commission in Berlin, Warner became director (1945-7) of the British Institute in Athens. Later he held academic appointments in America, chairs at Bowdoin College in 1962-3 and at the University of Connecticut from 1964 to 1974. He was appointed to the Greek royal order of the Phoenix (1963), and awarded an honorary DLitt degree by Rider College (1968) and an honorary fellowship of his Oxford college, Wadham (1973). 
From 1945 Warner's output of fiction, criticism, translations, and particularly retellings of classical legend and history, was unceasing -- some thirty publications in as many years. But, after his rather slight novel 'Escapade' (1953), it mostly took the form of what he himself called 'uncreative writing' -- writing based rather on classical and historical scholarship than on imaginative invention. The quality of the work, however, was unfailingly high. 'Imperial Caesar' (1960) won the Tait memorial prize, and special mention should be made of his version of the 'Confessions' of St Augustine (1963), and of his translations of Aeschylus, Euripides, Thucydides, and Plutarch. 
Warner was married three times, in unusual circumstances. In 1929 he married Frances Chamier Grove (1910-2003), daughter of Frank Grove, civil engineer, who was much employed, before the First World War, in railway construction in China. They had two sons and a daughter. This marriage was dissolved in 1949 and in the same year he married Barbara Judith Rothschild (1911-1989), divorced wife of Victor Rothschild, third Baron Rothschild, and daughter of St John Hutchinson, barrister and recorder of Hastings; they had a daughter. The marriage was dissolved in 1962 and in 1966 he remarried Frances Chamier Warner, his former wife. He died at his home, Anchor House, St Leonard's Lane, Wallingford, on 24 June 1986. 
G. J. Warnock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39847


Williams, Raymond Henry (1921-1988), literary scholar and novelist, was born on 31 August 1921 in Pandy, near Abergavenny, the only child of Henry Joseph Williams, railway signalman, of Pandy, and his wife, (Esther) Gwendolene, daughter of James Bird, farm bailiff. He was educated at King Henry VIII Grammar School in Abergavenny and then went in 1939 on a state scholarship to read English at Trinity College, Cambridge. In part one of the tripos (1941) he gained a second class (division two). He was called up in 1941, commissioned in 1942, and fought with no. 21 anti-tank regiment in the Normandy campaign and on to the Kiel Canal. He attained the rank of captain. 
In October 1945 Williams returned to Cambridge and took first-class honours in part two of the tripos in 1946. Although he briefly considered a research degree Williams entered the world of adult education as a staff tutor of the Oxford University extra-mural delegacy (1946-61). He was based in east Sussex. He had married, in 1942, Joyce (Joy) Mary (died 1991), daughter of Charles Dalling, coal factor, of Barnstaple. They had met at Cambridge when the London School of Economics was evacuated there during the war. They had two sons and one daughter. Joy Williams was a central influence on her husband's life and work. Later she was concerned with direct research for his books but throughout she was intimately involved with the evolution of his ideas and the publication of his numerous books. It was a deep and formidable partnership. 
Although never a pupil of F. R. Leavis, Williams was influenced by Leavis's emphasis on the life-enhancing properties of a close reading of literature. To this end he founded and edited, with Clifford Collins and Leavis's pupil Wolf Mankowitz, 'The Critic' and 'Politics and Letters' (which absorbed the former) in 1947-8. It was an uneasy marriage of socialist politics with cultural perspectives derived from Leavis. Despite severe disappointments with the wider social impact of any such approach, then and later, Williams consistently returned to the themes and principles of these early years. This firmness of purpose and integrity of behaviour, no less than an attractive diffidence and a generosity of spirit, were commented upon by all who met him throughout his lifetime. The public and private persona were all of a piece. 
Williams's first published books were on film and drama, notably 'Drama from Ibsen to Eliot' (1952), and heralded a lifelong concern with the manner in which the form of literary works, no less than their content, was directly affected by the material changes wrought by social history. However, the key aspect of his work in the 1950s was his study of the connection between 'culture' and 'society', which was brought to its first conclusion in his path-breaking 'Culture and Society' (1958). Its dissection of the meaning that British writers, and a wider society, had given to the word 'culture' since industrialization and under the pressures of democratic changes had an immediate impact. It can be seen now as the main progenitor of the cultural studies which would flourish from the late 1960s. Williams followed it up with the important, though very different, volumes, 'The Long Revolution' (1961), a provocative analysis of the interconnection between institutions, education, and ideas in Britain, and 'The Country and the City' (1973), which used wide-ranging literary studies to dispute the notion of accepted boundaries between the rural and urban experience. All his critical writing challenged conventional boundaries of thought and their academic compartmentalization. The techniques of modern technology, advertising, and mass communications were, in a number of suggestive books, analysed as carefully as poems and novels had once been. 
In 1961 Williams moved back to Cambridge as a lecturer in English and a fellow of Jesus College and, from 1967 to 1974, reader in drama. He received a Cambridge LittD in 1969 and was made the university's first professor of drama in 1974, retiring in 1983. Honours and appointments were many: membership of the Arts Council (1976-8), honorary doctorates from the universities of Wales (1980) and Kent (1984), and from the Open University (1975), and visiting professorships in Europe and the USA. He deeply affected a younger generation through weekly book reviews in 'The Guardian' and revealed a keen interest in television, for which he wrote plays and presented documentary films, in a regular column in 'The Listener'. His writing had made him a dominant figure, though slightly distanced in some respects, on the so-called 'new left'. In 1967 he largely edited the 'May Day Manifesto' (a Pelican Special in 1968), a spirited but doomed attempt to redirect the merely pragmatic stance of the contemporary Labour Party by reinvigorating the broader labour movement with a sense of its socialist traditions and potential. Williams was active for a time in that party but more readily committed himself to wider left causes, such as the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. From the 1970s, as in his innovative interview/autobiography, 'Politics and Letters' (1979), he called himself a 'Welsh European', a coupling as neat and as provocative as the phrases he used to signify his work, 'cultural materialism' and 'structure of feeling'. The whole corpus had established him, in his own lifetime, as a major socialist thinker. Steadfastly, 'Towards 2000' (1983) rebutted nostalgia and defeatism. 
Williams insisted that his fiction and better-known non-fiction writing should be seen as a unity. He had made his impressive debut as a novelist with 'Border Country' (1960); the first of a Welsh trilogy, 'Second Generation' (1964); and 'The Fight for Manod' (1979), in which his own individual background and general forces external to it were given shape. 'The Volunteers' (1978) was a political thriller of the near future, and 'Loyalties' (1985) an indictment of political thrill-seekers of the near past. Two volumes of an incomplete historical novel, about the people of his native Black Mountains from the Ice Age to the present, appeared posthumously in 1989 and 1991. Their startling ability to be both realistic and experimental in tone again broke the mould at the very end of a life that had been heroically dedicated to the proposition that 'culture is ordinary'. 
Williams's tall, rather upright figure and long, etched face were instantly recognizable at conferences where, without ever striving for effect, he never failed to hold an audience. He was often said to look 'like a countryman' rather than a don, and certainly the pipe, the rather deliberate drawl which was not quite a burr, and an unpretentious manner of dress and bearing all added to the image. Williams died on 26 January 1988 at his home, 4 Common Hill, Saffron Walden, Essex. 
Dai Smith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39848


Acland, Sir Richard Thomas Dyke, fifteenth baronet (1906-1990), politician and benefactor, was born on 26 November 1906 at Broadclyst, Devon, his ancestral home, the eldest in the family of three sons and one daughter of Sir Francis Dyke Acland, fourteenth baronet (1874-1939), landowner and liberal politician, and his wife, Eleanor Margaret, the outspoken anti-war daughter of Charles James Cropper, of Ellergreen, Westmorland, landowner and grandee. He was educated at Rugby School and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he received a second class in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1927. His career epitomized a family tradition of reformist public service, both nationally and in the west country. 
Acland stood unsuccessfully as a Liberal for Torquay in 1929 and Barnstaple in 1931, capturing the latter seat in 1935. Radical by temperament, he became involved in the efforts of the Left Book Club to create a progressive alliance, and by the beginning of the Second World War he had moved from conventional, secular Liberalism towards a Christian socialist concern for the transformation of the privileged world in which he grew up. His Penguin best-seller of 1940, 'Unser Kampf', eloquently summed up the aspirations of many who saw the war as an opportunity to escape from the disillusionments of the 1920s and 1930s and establish a more egalitarian, less class-ridden society. This message was repeated in 'The Forward March' (1941) and 'What it will be like' (1942), and then elaborated, after the proposals of the social reformer Sir William Beveridge, in 'How it can be done' (1943). Acland married, in 1936, the architect Anne Stella Alford, daughter of Robert Greenwood Alford, of Cheyne Walk, London. They had four sons, the youngest of whom died in 1945 when he was five days old. In 1939 Acland succeeded his father in the baronetcy upon the latter's death. 
Having served briefly as a lieutenant in the Royal North Devon yeomanry, initially as a ranker, Acland returned to politics and brought together Forward March, a loose alliance of the discontented but hopeful, and the dissident intellectuals of the 1941 Committee under the writer J. B. Priestley, to found the Common Wealth Party in July 1942. Sheltered by the electoral truce between the major parties, the Common Wealth Party was active in wartime by-elections, and by 1945 had four MPs. Its appeal was essentially to the more modest, professional middle classes, notably in London and on Merseyside; although its membership was never more than 15,000, the party was organized with panache by R. W. G. Mackay, and the evangelistic Acland proved himself a master of electioneering tactics. For funding they could also rely upon sympathetic businessmen such as Alan Good and Denis Kendall. 
In the general election of 1945 the Common Wealth Party lost all its MPs and the deposits of every candidate, as politics reverted to the familiar two-party pattern. Nevertheless, Acland's creation had helped to prepare the way for Labour's victory, and in this he was the crucial element. Rarely effective in the House of Commons, he was an inspired and tireless propagandist who packed wartime meetings across the country; tall, gangling, and intense, with hawklike features, and always putting his case in a rasping voice in simple, moralistic terms but with a socialist slant, he was seen by many as the true prophet of a better future. As an earnest of his personal commitment to common ownership, he made over his family's vast Killerton estates in Devon to the National Trust in 1943 and always lived frugally if generously. But Labour's first attainment of full power meant that his moment of historical importance had passed. 
Acland returned to the House of Commons in 1947 as MP for Gravesend in Kent under the sponsorship of the Labour politician Herbert Morrison, and he remained committed to Labour for the rest of his life. Increasingly a maverick, divorced from mainstream politics, he resigned his seat in 1955 in protest against the development of the H-bomb and never returned to parliament. More and more his interests had become one-dimensional. A devout Anglican since 1940, he served as a church estates commissioner in 1950-51 and maintained his friendship with left-wing bishops thereafter; but his attention came to centre upon education, a traditional concern of both his father and his grandfather Sir A. H. D. Acland. Abandoning Westminster, he was senior lecturer at St Luke's College of Education, Exeter, from 1959 to 1974. 
In retirement Acland wrote freely on educational matters, the problems of securing world peace, and, in his last years, the difficulties facing the 'third world'. Now that he was a figure of the past, having outlived his period of influence during the Second World War, he had few readers. He continued to cherish his beloved Devon countryside and protect its traditions, including -- somewhat surprisingly -- stag-hunting. Acland died at his home, Broadclyst, on 24 November 1990 and was succeeded in the baronetcy by his eldest son, John Dyke Acland ('b'. 1939). 
A. F. Thompson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39849


Brockway, (Archibald) Fenner, Baron Brockway (1888-1988), politician and campaigner, was born on 1 November 1888 in Calcutta, the only son and eldest of three children of the Revd William George Brockway, London Missionary Society missionary, and his wife, Frances Elizabeth, daughter of William Abbey. His mother died when he was fourteen. Educated at the School for the Sons of Missionaries at Blackheath, he became a journalist. He moved from Liberalism to the Independent Labour Party (ILP) and by 1912 was editor of the ILP newspaper, the 'Labour Leader'. Still in his twenties, he worked closely with leading figures on the British left. 
Brockway played a heroic role in the ILP's opposition to the war of 1914-18, as a journalist, and then through the No-Conscription Fellowship as an opponent of military conscription. On four occasions he was sentenced to gaol -- the last time in July 1917 to two years' hard labour. When released in April 1919, he had served a total of twenty-eight months, the last eight in solitary confinement. His war record increased his status in several sections of the labour movement, and in the election of 1929 he was returned as the Labour member for East Leyton. In 1919 he became editor of 'India' and joint secretary of the British committee of the Indian National Congress. From 1926 to 1929 he was editor of the 'New Leader', the renamed organ of the ILP, of which he had become organizing secretary in 1922. 
Brockway's continuing involvement in the ILP section of the wider Labour Party made him an increasingly controversial figure. From 1926 the ILP moved to the left under the leadership of James Maxton, and called for 'socialism in our time', a radicalization backed enthusiastically by Brockway. With the 1929 Labour government proving helpless in the face of rocketing unemployment, Brockway was prominent among a small group of ILP rebel members. This small section of left-wingers refused to accept the party's disciplinary guidelines, and were denied endorsement for the 1931 election. Like most Labour MPs, Brockway lost his seat. The dispute over discipline was symbolic for many of a much more fundamental division over policy. In July 1932, with Brockway in the chair, the ILP voted to disaffiliate from the Labour Party. 
There followed the most radical period of Brockway's career as he sought to articulate a socialism distinct from the pragmatism of Labour and the Stalinism of the Communist Party. But the ILP's membership dwindled, and it was squeezed between its rivals. The Spanish Civil War modified his pacifism and deepened his suspicion of the Communist Party. In 1937 he visited Spain and observed the repression of the ILP's Spanish equivalent by the Communist Party. During the Second World War, he felt cross-pressured between his distaste for militarism and his thorough antipathy to fascism. In wartime by-elections he argued for socialism as a means of ending the war. After Labour's 1945 electoral success, he decided that the ILP offered no distinctive way forward and rejoined the Labour Party. From 1942 to 1947 he was chairman of the British Centre for Colonial Freedom, and in 1945 he helped establish the Congress of Peoples against Imperialism. 
In February 1950 Brockway returned to the Commons as the member for Eton and Slough. He remained firmly on the left, participating in the faction centred around Aneurin Bevan, but his radicalism was always tempered by a concern not to reproduce what he had come to see as the disastrous split of 1932. His strong anti-militarism was expressed in his involvement with the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. His principal fame came from his championing of anti-colonial movements. His interest in Indian independence had been long-standing, and from 1950 he began to visit Africa regularly. Some called him the member for Africa and he knew several of the first generation post-independence African leaders. From 1954 he was chairman of the Movement for Colonial Freedom. His anti-colonialism was reflected in a thorough opposition to racism in Britain. In nine successive sessions he introduced bills into the Commons aimed at outlawing discrimination. Ironically, when the 1964 Labour government embarked on such legislation, Brockway had just lost his parliamentary seat. The margin was eleven votes and some commentators ascribed his defeat to the race issue. Despite misgivings, he accepted a life peerage (1964), and campaigned for his causes within the traditionalism of the upper house. His radicalism remained vibrant in his new environment. Brockway was a prolific writer, of books, pamphlets, and articles. These included four volumes of autobiography and major studies of two ILP contemporaries, Fred Jowett ('Socialism over Sixty Years', 1946) and Alfred Salter ('Bermondsey Story', 1949). In 1914 he married Lilla, daughter of the Revd William Harvey-Smith. They had four daughters, two of whom predeceased him (1941 and 1974). As Brockway acknowledged later, the marriage was not a success, and he had several, often short-lived, affairs in the inter-war years. After a divorce in 1945, in 1946 he married Edith Violet, daughter of Archibald Herbert King, electrician; they had one son. Both his wives shared many of his political views. 
Many found Brockway to be highly principled and warmly sympathetic. His style inherited something of his missionary background, and his socialist politics owed much to a broader tradition of English radicalism; a statue in London's Red Lion Square (1985) depicts him addressing a crowd, arm aloft. Not an intellectual, he was yet an independent thinker. Born in the age of Gladstone, he died in the age of Thatcher on 28 April 1988, at Watford General Hospital, Hertfordshire. 
David Howell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39850


Keir, Thelma Cazalet- (1899-1989), politician, was born on 28 May 1899 at 4 Whitehall Gardens, London, the third of four children, the eldest of whom was killed in action in 1916, and only daughter of William Marshall Cazalet (1865-1932), a man of hereditary wealth and standing, whose family origins were Huguenot, and his wife, Maud Lucia (died 1952), daughter of Sir John Robert Heron-Maxwell, seventh baronet, of Springkell, Dumfriesshire, who was of modest means. The mother was the dominant parental influence: from her Thelma derived her worldly sophistication and love of the arts; also her feminism and Christian Science, two creeds to which she held firmly throughout her life. In London and at the Cazalets' country house, Fairlawne in Kent, she was introduced as a child to many leading figures in politics and literature, including Rudyard Kipling, J. M. Barrie, the Pankhursts, and Sidney and Beatrice Webb. After being taught at home by governesses, she attended lectures at the London School of Economics. 
The lure of politics was already strong, and in the years immediately following the First World War Thelma Cazalet became an accepted member of the Lloyd George family circle, through her close friendship with the prime minister's youngest child, Megan. She entered politics by way of local government, first in Kent and then as a member of the London county council (LCC) for seven years (1924-31), after which she became an alderman. Despite her radical connections her party allegiance was Conservative, though her outlook was never narrowly partisan. In 1931 she unsuccessfully contested the parliamentary seat of East Islington at a by-election, but in the general election held later in the year she was returned as National Conservative MP for the same constituency with a majority of over 14,000. 
In the House of Commons Thelma Cazalet joined her brother Victor, who was MP for Chippenham. (He was killed in 1943 in an air crash with the Polish general Sikorski.) Her best subject in parliament was education, with which she had been particularly concerned on the LCC. She was a regular speaker on the education estimates, and from 1937 to 1940 was parliamentary private secretary to Kenneth Lindsay, when he was parliamentary secretary to the Board of Education. She married, in August 1939, David Edwin, son of the Revd Thomas Keir. Her husband was lobby correspondent of the 'News Chronicle'. He died in 1969, and there were no children. On her marriage she changed her surname to Cazalet-Keir. 
In March 1944, as a member of the Tory Reform Committee, Thelma Cazalet-Keir proposed an amendment to R. A. Butler's 'Education Bill', providing that there should be equal pay for men and women teachers. When the amendment was carried by the margin of a single vote, Churchill's wartime coalition suffered its only defeat. Greatly angered, Churchill insisted that the clause be deleted, making the issue one of confidence in himself; and she then felt she had no option but to vote against her own amendment. An important point had been made, however, and Churchill announced the setting up of a royal commission to consider the question of equal pay for equal work (1944-6). From 1947 she was chairman of the Equal Pay Campaign Committee, and eventually saw the principle enshrined in legislation in 1970. Meanwhile Churchill had made personal amends by appointing her in May 1945 parliamentary secretary for education in his short-lived caretaker government. The 1945 general election, which swept that government away, also cost her her seat and ended her parliamentary career. 
For some time Thelma Cazalet-Keir remained active in public life outside parliament. From 1946 to 1949 she was a member of the Arts Council, of whose precursor, the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts, she had been a founder member in 1940. She was also on the executive committee of the Contemporary Art Society, and from 1956 served a five-year term as a governor of the BBC. She was a keen supporter of the Fawcett Library, and in 1964 was president of the Fawcett Society. She was appointed CBE in 1952. A friend of most of the prime ministers during her life, she was a special confidante of Edward Heath throughout his premiership, though their relations later cooled when she rebuked him for his attitude to Margaret Thatcher. Rather surprisingly, she was never recommended for a life peerage. 
After losing her parliamentary seat Thelma Cazalet-Keir started market gardening at her home in Kent, Raspit Hill, and for a time ran a flower shop in London. When she sold Raspit Hill, deliberately for much less than its true value, to an old friend, Malcolm MacDonald, she moved to a flat in London. During her last years her sight failed, a particularly sad affliction for one who was, perhaps above all, a visual aesthete. She had a valuable collection of works by modern British artists including Augustus John, who knew her well; his portrait of her in a bright yellow dress, with a piano -- which she played more than adequately -- behind her, is one of his finest. (It was painted in 1936, and is privately owned.) 
In 1967 Thelma Cazalet-Keir published a short volume of memoirs, 'From the Wings', notable especially for its vivid description of Lloyd George. She died on 13 January 1989 at her London flat at 90 Eaton Square. 
John Grigg', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39851


Gaitskell, (Anna) Dora, Baroness Gaitskell (1901-1989), politician, was born on 25 April 1901 near Riga in Latvia, then part of imperial Russia, the eldest in the family of four daughters and one son of Leon Creditor, a Hebrew scholar and writer, and his wife, Tessa Jaffe. Her father emigrated to Britain in 1903 and, when his wife and daughter followed shortly afterwards, they settled in Stepney Green, in the East End of London. Dora Creditor won a scholarship to Coborn High School for Girls, Bow Road. She would have preferred to become a teacher, but was persuaded to study medicine, although she abandoned it when she married on 15 March 1921 Isaac (David) Frost, a lecturer in physiology, the son of Louis Frost, a mechanical engineer. A son, Raymond, was born in 1925, but the marriage ended in divorce in 1937, having continued only because of what she was later to call 'the utterly shameful and disgraceful' state of the divorce laws. 
Dora Creditor joined the Labour Party at sixteen and became politically active. She met Hugh Todd Naylor Gaitskell (1906-1963) at the Fitzroy tavern in Soho, then a popular haunt of artists, writers, journalists, dons, and aspiring politicians. Hugh Gaitskell had recently arrived in London to take up a teaching post at University College and was living a Bohemian social life in and around Fitzrovia, a milieu with which Dora Frost was already familiar. Gaitskell, who was five years younger than Dora, soon made her his confidante and, when he went to Vienna in 1933 on the eve of the climax of the counter-revolution against the Viennese socialists, led by Engelbert Dolfuss, she followed him. They lived together until marrying at Hampstead town hall on 9 April 1937. 
Dora Gaitskell settled easily into domestic life. Her first child by this marriage, a daughter, Julia, was born in 1939, and a second, Cressida, in 1942. She proved an affectionate and caring mother, creating a family life of a fairly traditional kind. She was confident in her husband's love and ultimate loyalty and, in turn, became a devoted wife, a tigress in defending him from his political enemies, and committed and affectionate towards his friends. 
Having been elected as MP for Leeds South East in 1945, Hugh Gaitskell was chosen as leader of the Labour Party ten years later. This was a stormy period in Labour's history, and Gaitskell was frequently the object of bitter personal attacks. His wife was fierce in her defence of her husband and was thought, even by some of his friends, to exacerbate rather than soften his more extreme sentiments. During his lifetime, her political views were not easily distinguishable from his, but after his death she supported the 'yes' campaign in the European referendum of 1975, despite her husband's earlier opposition to Britain's membership of the EEC. But she did not break with the Labour Party when, in 1981, most of the remaining Gaitskellites left to form the Social Democratic Party. 
By that time Dora Gaitskell had enjoyed a substantial career of her own. Shortly after her husband's death, she was made a life peer in 1963, on the recommendation of the prime minister, Harold Macmillan. When Harold Wilson became prime minister in 1964, he arranged for her to become a member of the UK delegation to the general assembly of the United Nations. She became an outspoken champion of human rights, critical of the double standards of some Afro-Asian nations, but strong in her advocacy of the needs of the third world. She caused some anxiety in Foreign Office circles through her firm commitment to the state of Israel -- but she was not an unthinking Zionist and was critical of the policies of right-wing Likud governments. 
Dora Gaitskell was active in the House of Lords, and never afraid of controversy or of crossing swords. Plump of figure, a redhead in her earlier years, and only a little over 5 feet tall, she was spirited in her advocacy of libertarian causes and as direct as ever in personal relationships. At the time of her husband's death, on 18 January 1963, Dora Gaitskell had every reason to believe that she would shortly accompany him to No. 10 Downing Street. It would be easy to see the remaining quarter century of her life as a pianissimo coda to the excitement and expectations of those earlier years. Yet, while continuing to grieve for her lost husband, she established herself as a public figure in her own right and contributed bravely to causes which were both his and her own. She died on 1 July 1989 at her home, 18 Frognal Gardens, Hampstead, London. 
William Rodgers', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39852


King, Horace Maybray, Baron Maybray-King (1901-1986), politician and speaker of the House of Commons, was born on 25 May 1901 at 91 Stapylton Street, Grangetown, near Middlesbrough, the second child in the family of two sons and two daughters of John William King, insurance agent (previously steelworker), and his wife, Margaret Ann Maybray. He was educated at Norton council school and Stockton secondary school. He obtained first-class honours in English at King's College, London University, in 1922 and in the same year was appointed to a teaching post at Taunton's School in Southampton. He became head of English in 1930, and remained there until 1947, when he became headmaster of Regent's Park secondary school in Southampton. He was an inspiring teacher, able to secure respect in a formal environment without heavy use of sanctions. A duodenal ulcer meant that he was not liable for military service in the Second World War. For several years he studied part-time for a PhD on Shakespeare, and his thesis was accepted by King's College in 1940. He published widely on subjects as diverse as Homer, Macaulay, parliament, and Sherlock Holmes. 
On 21 December 1924 King married Victoria Florence (1896/7-1966), daughter of George Harris, bookseller. Born in Southwark, prior to her marriage she was a schoolteacher. Once in Southampton she became a significant political figure. A Labour councillor in 1928-31 and from 1933, she was coronation mayor in 1953 and played a leading role in hospital administration. In political circles Horace King initially tended to be viewed as Mrs King's husband. They had one daughter. 
King joined the socialist society at university and was a Labour Party member from his arrival in Southampton. By the mid-1930s his concern over British foreign policy led to support for a united front. He narrowly escaped expulsion from the Southampton Labour Party after sharing a platform with communists. 
In the Labour landslide of 1945 King unsuccessfully fought the safe Conservative constituency of New Forest and Christchurch. The following year he was elected to Hampshire county council, serving with one three-year break until 1965, and eventually becoming Labour Party group leader. He was elected to the House of Commons in February 1950 as member for the extremely marginal Southampton Test constituency. Prior to the 1955 election King succeeded in transferring his candidacy to the adjacent and much safer Itchen constituency. 
King quickly demonstrated a flair for publicity. He arrived at the House of Commons for the first time wearing a cloth cap in memory of James Keir Hardie, and made the first maiden speech of all the 1950 entrants. He was a very active back-bencher; within the Parliamentary Labour Party he stood with the right. He was a keen supporter of the Anglo-American alliance, making frequent visits to the United States, and he backed Hugh Gaitskell against unilateralism, but he was never a factionalist and attempted to remain on good terms with all sections of the party. 
As early as 1953 King joined the speaker's panel. In November 1964, following Labour's return to office, he became chairman of ways and means and deputy speaker. Almost a year later, with the death of Sir Harry Hylton-Foster in September 1965, he became the first speaker from the Labour benches. At the same time he was sworn of the privy council. 
King assumed the speakership in a context of increasing demands for parliamentary reform. While no procedural die-hard, he was a traditionalist with a generally rosy view of established practices. One innovation, the speeding up of question time, probably reduced further the influence of the back-bencher. His speakership saw changes in parliamentary procedure that could seem significant by comparison with earlier inertia, but in real terms they were modest. Unlike many of his predecessors, he had no legal training but his headmasterly and avuncular style soon established his authority. 
King retired as speaker at the end of 1970. He became a life peer, as Baron Maybray-King, in 1971 and attended the House of Lords regularly for several years, serving as deputy speaker there. His career contained much that was characteristic of Labour politics of the first half of the twentieth century. He was self-improving, cautiously reformist, and respectful of many venerable British practices. Yet there were paradoxes. The traditionalist was a showman; as speaker he turned on the Blackpool illuminations. In Southampton he seemed a proper, somewhat puritanical, figure; at Westminster he was highly clubbable and well known in the bars. He was an accomplished player of the piano and piano accordion and loved entertaining children. The bonhomie masked a more complex and elusive character. Maybray-King had honorary degrees from Southampton (1967), London (1967), Durham (1968), Bath (1969), Ottawa (1969), and Loughborough (1971), and was honorary FRCP. 
King's first wife died in 1966. He then married on 22 July 1967 Una (1906/7-1978), daughter of William Herbert Porter, industrial manager. His second wife was a retired Southampton headmistress and had been King's honorary chauffeur in the last years of his political career. She died in 1978 and Maybray-King married on 30 January 1981 Mrs Ivy Duncan Forster ('b'. 1914/15), a widow from co. Durham. She was the daughter of John Edward Davison, miner. The marriage was dissolved in 1985, and finally, on 29 March 1986, Maybray-King married Sheila Catherine ('b'. 1923/4), retired secretary and daughter of John Atkinson, dental mechanic. There were no children of the last three marriages. Maybray-King died in the Royal Hampshire Hospital, Southampton, on 3 September 1986. 
David Howell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39853


Lee, Janet, Baroness Lee of Asheridge (1904-1988), politician, was born on 3 November 1904 in Lochgelly, Fife, the third of four children (the older two of whom died in infancy) and only daughter of James Lee (died 1951), miner and Independent Labour Party (ILP) activist, and his wife, Euphemia Greig (died 1962), daughter of a commercial hotel-keeper; and granddaughter of Michael Lee, an Irish Catholic miner and Scottish labour leader. The Labour Party in Scotland was largely the ILP. Jennie's father was a friend of James Maxton, her grandfather a friend of Keir Hardie. The ILP, like the Communist Party, fought to overthrow capitalism; unlike the Communist Party, it chose the parliamentary road. The ILP, with its ardent, militant, and uncompromising far-left politics, rooted in the class struggle fought daily in the Scottish coal fields, was woven into every fragment of the Lee family life. 
Jennie, much loved by her parents, unusually was brought up as the son of the family, free of female domestic responsibilities, and free to join her father in his ILP work. (Her easily led younger brother, Tommy, was to emigrate to Australia where after serving in the navy he became dependent on heroin and on Jennie's handouts.) She was educated at Cowdenbeath secondary school, and then obtained local authority and Carnegie grants to train as a teacher at Edinburgh University (one of the few routes to a degree for a working-class girl) where she also studied law, gaining an ordinary MA, her teacher's certificate, and an LLB in 1926. Her first teaching post, at Glencraig School, in the bitter aftermath of the general strike, was unhappy but short-lived. Her upbringing, vividly described in her autobiography 'Tomorrow is a New Day' (1939) -- attending socialist Sunday school, collecting ILP subscriptions, joining great anti-war pacifist rallies, celebrating the 1917 Russian revolution, organizing politically correct lorry deliveries during the general strike -- meant that she was always destined for a political life. She was 'swept into socialism long before the age of consent', said a friend, Benn Levy (Hollis, 10). 
By the time Jennie left university, her vivid good looks and passionate evangelical style made her one of the finest platform orators on the Scottish Labour circuit. In July 1928 she was selected for North Lanark, a miners' seat, which she won for the ILP in a by-election in February 1929 (turning a tory majority of 2028 into a Labour majority of 6578), and held at the general election with a reduced majority of 4204 a few weeks later. She was an MP at the age of twenty-four, before she was old enough to vote. She was the youngest woman MP ever elected: gifted, passionate, and quite lovely. Men were besotted by her dark smoky beauty and her arrogant sexuality; women rather less so. 
At Westminster Jennie was introduced by James Maxton, befriended by Ellen Wilkinson, mentored by Sir Charles Trevelyan, Labour minister for education; and educated in Hobsonian economics by her lover, Frank Wise (1885-1933), MP for Leicester East, and in the folly of sectarian politics by Aneurin (Nye) Bevan (1897-1960), MP for Ebbw Vale -- all of them on the left. Jennie always reduced political issues to class issues, so she was dismissive of feminism, which she thought was a middle-class women's issue, and was reluctant to join the informal all-party group of women MPs led by Nancy Astor. As she told a woman friend (Mrs Suse Saemann), 'You are concerned with the problems of humanity; I am concerned with the needs and greeds of my class' (Hollis, 46). 
Instead, as unemployment sharpened, Jennie savaged the policies of her minority Labour government (1929-31), led by Ramsay MacDonald and Philip Snowden, who, as the depression deepened, sought to balance budgets by cutting benefits to the unemployed. The Parliamentary Labour Party sat unhappily but loyally silent while its ILP members berated them for betraying their own class. The poor, said Jennie, were required to save the rich from ruin; they should be demolishing capitalism, not rebuilding it. Along with 230 Labour MPs who refused to join the coalition National Government, she lost her seat in the general election of 1931 (19,691 to 24,384 votes for the national candidate). When finally in July 1932 the ILP refused to bind themselves to official Labour Party discipline, and disaffiliated, Jennie went with them into the wilderness. Her Scottish roots, her ILP beliefs, and her sectarian instincts made her choose opposition. Nye Bevan tried to hold her in the Labour Party -- 'you Scottish dissenters' would be 'pure, but impotent... My Salvation Army lassie... I tell you, it is the Labour party or nothing' (Hollis, 64). 
For Jennie, it proved to be nothing. She refought North Lanark for the ILP in the 1935 general election but, faced with an official Labour candidate, failed to regain her seat. For thirteen years she marked time, in politics but out of parliament, lecturing, broadcasting, dabbling in the law, campaigning for international revolutionary socialism, writing for the 'New Leader', helping Nye Bevan, Stafford Cripps, William Mellor, and the young Michael Foot to launch 'Tribune' and the Unity campaign (which became the British expression of the Popular Front) in 1937 to fight fascism; until the Spanish Civil War and then the Second World War weaned her from the pacifism of the ILP and brought her back into mainstream Labour. 
In 1940, summoned by Lord Beaverbrook ('You and I were against this bloody war. Now we have to win it for them'), Jennie toured barrage balloon factories ('aerial barbed wire') for his Ministry of Aircraft Production, urging people to keep working even as the bombs fell (Hollis, 93-4). When Hitler attacked the Soviet Union she quickly drafted a pamphlet, 'Our Ally Russia' (1941), demanding greater support for the Russian war effort. Later in 1941 she criss-crossed the USA pressing it to enter the European war. 'Don't come back', said Nye, not entirely joking, 'until you have brought America into the War' (Hollis, 96). In June 1942 she finally resigned from the ILP. She defied the wartime electoral truce (which Nye described as 'political blackout') to stand against the official tory candidate as an independent in the Bristol Central by-election in February 1943, with the backing of Sir Richard Acland's Common Wealth Party and the support of the local vicar, Mervyn Stockwood, and against the bitter opposition of the party she had left, the ILP. She built her campaign around the Beveridge report, published in December 1942, and was expected to win. But on an electoral register depleted by bombing, evacuation, and conscription she lost by 5867 to 4308. In December 1944 she renounced splinter parties and all their works, rejoined the official Labour Party, and in the 1945 general election she won Cannock, a midland mining seat, with a 19,634 majority, a seat she held through many boundary changes until 1970. 
The early 1930s had been hard years for Jennie. She had not only lost her parliamentary life -- she had also lost the love of her life, Frank Wise: a formidable and worldly man, twenty years older than Jennie, who died in his late forties from a brain haemorrhage in November 1933, leaving a widow and children as well as Jennie to mourn him. Nye Bevan, like Jennie from a mining background, had become a firm friend. (One evening, about to vote, Jennie had said, 'You know, Nye, we could be brother and sister.' He: 'Mmm -- with a tendency to incest'; Hollis, 71.) Jennie, in the deepest depression after Frank's death, was consoled by Nye. He nagged her to marry him, which she did, on the rebound, on 24 October 1934. Together, they made a home at Lane End Cottage, Brimpton Common, in Berkshire; they then in 1944 moved to Cliveden Place in Chelsea, and finally to Asheridge Farm in Chesham, Buckinghamshire. Jennie's much-loved parents moved south to cook, keep house, and offer generous hospitality to their friends, both in the arts and in politics. In turn, their friends financially assisted them to live and travel first class. They developed warm and loyal friendships abroad, with Milovan Djilas in Yugoslavia, and with Jawaharlal Nehru and later Indira Gandhi in India. They had no children. 'A litter or none', said Nye, and Jennie chose none. 
Nye was in love with Jennie; Jennie came to love and respect Nye, as during the war and much reviled he maintained a lonely courageous parliamentary opposition to Churchill's politics. The war made their marriage. Following the 1945 election Attlee made Nye minister for health and local government, where he built the National Health Service, the greatest achievement of the Labour government. Although Jennie could expect office on her own behalf, she instead chose to sink her career into Nye's, at considerable personal cost, for she now believed he was Labour's next leader. 'He was doing what I wanted done, infinitely better than I could have done it' (Hollis, 197). Around them clustered the Bevanites (or Tribune group) -- Richard Crossman, Barbara Castle, Michael Foot, Harold Wilson, Ian Mikardo, Tom Driberg -- acting as a party within a party, seeking to keep Labour true to the socialist faith. In Nye's battles with Hugh Gaitskell during the 1950s, Jennie was seen as Nye's 'dark angel', his Lady Macbeth, always pulling him away from compromise and the centre and, true to her ILP roots, into confrontation, resignation -- and opposition. 
Jennie had sound physical health, although occasionally she suffered prolonged spells of depression; Nye was mentally immensely strong but his early years in the pits, together with his hard drinking, physically scarred him. His death from cancer on 6 July 1960 stunned the nation. Jennie was desolate, turned to drink, and withdrew from public life. Her glossy black hair turned silver; her health broke. She was lovingly cared for by her cousin Bettina Stafford, who moved from Scotland with her husband, Bill, and their small boy, Vincent, whom Jennie adopted as her surrogate son. 
Jennie was rescued by Harold Wilson, who on Nye's and then (in January 1963) Gaitskell's premature deaths had become leader of the Labour Party. Following the 1964 general election he offered her a junior job. She refused health -- a 'wreath for Nye' -- so was given a loose responsibility for the arts, and was parked temporarily as a parliamentary secretary at the Ministry of Public Building and Works (1964-5), then moved to Anthony Crosland's Department of Education and Science, before becoming minister of state from 1967 to 1970. Her departmental colleagues and her senior civil servants despaired of her 'grande dame' intransigent style; she in turn was deeply distrustful of the mandarins she thought were out to thwart her. She never learned to be a 'good' minister; but with the help of Arnold Goodman (whom she appointed to chair the Arts Council) she became the first and possibly the finest minister for the arts. All subsequent arts ministers were judged against her, and all failed. 
Before Jennie, the arts were the 'high culture' of the elite -- metropolitan, upper class, the leisure pursuit of the Oxbridge 'cognoscenti' and the male connoisseur. Jennie insisted that the labour movement was entitled to 'bread and roses'. Her February 1965 white paper, 'A Policy for the Arts, the First Steps', stated that the arts could become accessible -- diffused to the regions, to young people, to the trades unions, to the unemployed -- without diluting their excellence. The best for the most. For Jennie it was simple; the arts were life-enhancing. They also represented sound politics and sound business. At a time of stringent government finance, she trebled the Arts Council grant from $3.2 million to $9.4 million in her six years; and while generously funding the great London flagship companies, of opera, theatre, ballet, orchestras, museums, and galleries, and sorting the new South Bank complex, she also supported artists outside London by building their audiences, purchasing their paintings, subsidizing their small poetry magazines, starting a National Film School, and housing the arts in dozens of new theatres and community arts centres across the land. She was much loved. When she went to the theatre, the audience rose to applaud her. 
The other task Wilson entrusted to Jennie reflected his own enthusiasm for educational technology -- to deliver a university of the air (or open university) offering distance learning to those who were immobile, tied by work, marriage, children, or disabilities to studying from home. She faced widespread opposition -- from universities, old and new, who insisted (as with the arts) that open access was incompatible with academic excellence; from the adult education movement who argued that the greater educational need lay with remedial adult education; from the Labour left who wanted a working-class and not an open university (which might attract 'mere housewives'); from her cabinet colleagues who saw it as biting into their budgets; and from the tory right who thought it a costly irrelevance, which they would abolish if they won the next general election. But with Wilson's support, and Goodman's skills, she drove it through. A budget was agreed in July 1967. Walter Perry was appointed its vice-chancellor in May 1968, persuaded Margaret Thatcher in 1970 to back him, and accepted the first students for January 1971. By 1984 it was Britain's largest university, with 100,000 students. Wilson subsequently claimed that the Open University was the greatest achievement of his government. 
On the way Jennie had collected admirers, and distinctions. She was sworn of the privy council in 1966, elected chairman of the Labour Party in 1967, awarded an honorary LLD from Cambridge in 1974, and became an honorary fellow of the Royal Academy in 1981. She republished Nye's 'In Place of Fear' with an elegiac introduction of her own. She helped Michael Foot with his biography of Aneurin Bevan. However, she neglected her Cannock seat, which remained deeply suspicious of her work for the arts (too London, too toff). In the general election of 1970 her Labour majority of 11,000 became a Conservative majority of 1500. The swing against her was 11 per cent, double the national average and the highest in the country. 
Wilson again rescued Jennie from depression and oblivion by appointing her to the Lords later in 1970, where she enjoyed a golden decade, feted in the house and offering generous hospitality in her elegant Chelsea home, 67 Chester Row. In 1980 she completed her memoirs, 'My Life with Nye'. From then on, she aged rapidly. Troubled by bad health -- fractures, cataracts, ulcers, and breast cancer -- she was increasingly confined to her home. She died of pneumonia at her home on 16 November 1988, her faithful cousin Bettina by her side. On 28 November her ashes joined Nye's, scattered on the Welsh hillside above Tredegar, Monmouthshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 39854


Paget, Reginald Thomas Guy Des Voeux, Baron Paget of Northampton (1908-1990), politician, barrister, and master of foxhounds, was born on 2 September 1908 at Sulby Hall, Northamptonshire, the younger son and second of three children of Major Thomas Guy Frederick Paget, sometime independent tory MP for the Bosworth division of Leicestershire, and his wife, (Emma) Bettine, daughter of Sir (George) William Des Voeux, colonial governor. He was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he read law, receiving a third class in part one of the tripos in 1928. He then decided to read for an ordinary degree and passed parts one and two of military studies, which would have enabled him to achieve an ordinary BA, for which, however, he never presented himself. It was while an undergraduate at Cambridge that he joined the Labour Party, a decision not unusual in the political climate of the time but made perhaps more striking in his case by the fact that the previous five generations of his family had all been tory MPs. During the 1930s he practised as a barrister, having been called to the bar in 1934. 
Within the Labour Party, for which Paget fought his first (unsuccessful) parliamentary election at Northampton in 1935, he was always something of an anomaly. Once he reached Westminster in 1945, winning Northampton at his second attempt, he contrived to represent the voice of the squirearchy far more convincingly than anyone on the Conservative benches. His socialism was essentially paternalistic, and it was typical of him that he should have thought nothing of receiving a delegation of trade unionists while still dressed in his full hunting kit. He took silk in 1947. 
Before becoming a life peer in 1974, Paget sat in the House of Commons for twenty-nine years. In all that time he was only briefly the recipient of preferment from his party. From 1960 to 1964 he was a junior opposition spokesman first for the Royal Navy (during the Second World War he had served in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve before being invalided out in 1943) and then for the army; but the death of Hugh Gaitskell in 1963 put paid to any hopes he may have held of progressing to government office. An outspoken critic of Harold Wilson during the leadership election which followed Gaitskell's death, he never relented in his belief that Wilson was quite the wrong man to lead the Labour Party or, indeed, to be prime minister. 
In appearance and diction more like a whig grandee from an earlier age, Paget was nevertheless a man of parts. Said to be the slowest speaker in the house, Paget had a long chin and beetling brows. An intrepid yachtsman, a fearless rider to hounds (he must have been the only Labour MP ever to become master of the Pytchley, a position he held from 1968 to 1971), he was also a competent amateur painter (he held his first exhibition at the Fine Arts Gallery at Ebury Street, London, in 1988), as well as being the author of three books. The first, 'Manstein, his Campaigns and his Trial' (1951), commemorated his spirited defence of Field Marshal Fritz Erich von Manstein, for which he waived his normal barrister's fees, before one of the last war crimes tribunals in 1949; the second, co-authored with his fellow Labour MP Sydney Silverman, arose in part out of the Christopher Craig and Derek Bentley murder case of 1953 and conveyed its message in its title 'Hanged -- and Innocent?' (1953); while the third, and far the most ambitious, 'The Human Journey', published in 1979 well after his retirement from the Commons, represented an attempt to tell the whole story of the human race. 
Courage, sometimes leading to recklessness, was in fact the hallmark of Paget's career. In 1963, after a row in the Commons over the extradition of Chief Enahoro of Nigeria who, he argued, should properly have been regarded as a political refugee, he insisted on reporting the attorney-general of the day, Sir John Hobson, to the inn (the Inner Temple) to which they both belonged, almost certainly the first time a queen's counsel (and fellow bencher) had taken such action against a law officer of the crown. But then no one was ever less a respecter of rank, station, or person, and it was this total lack of deference in his otherwise patrician character which clinched Paget's claim to be considered a genuine radical. 
In 1931 Paget married Sybil Helen (Nancy), daughter of Sills Clifford Gibbons, of Scaynes Hill, Sussex, widow of Sir John Bridger Shiffner, sixth baronet, and former wife of Sir Victor Basil John Seely, fourth baronet. They had no children of their own. In London Paget tended to lead a faintly eighteenth-century bachelor life. But his roots were in the country and in particular at his family home, Lubenham Lodge, Market Harborough, where he and his wife brought up four adopted children, two boys and two girls. They were the offspring of an RAF pilot, whose wife died when the children were young. Paget adopted them because the father did not want them split up, and, when the father retired from the RAF, gave him a job and took him into the household too. He separated from his wife before his death and entered into a relationship with Diana Spearman (formerly of the Conservative Research Department), the widow of Sir Alexander (Alec) Spearman, Conservative MP for Scarborough and Whitby, which caused some embarrassment to his country friends. He died on 2 January 1990, at his London home, 9 Grosvenor Cottages. 
Anthony Howard', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39855


Peart, (Thomas) Frederick, Baron Peart (1914-1988), politician, was born in Durham on 30 April 1914, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Emerson Featherstone Peart, a Weardale schoolmaster, and his wife, Florence Maud Hopper. The harsh realities of life for the families whose children his father taught gave Peart a lifelong commitment to the labour movement. Starting his education at Crook council school, he went on to Wolsingham grammar school and Henry Smith's school in Hartlepool. He read science at the College of the Venerable Bede (Durham University), becoming president of the Labour Club and of the university union. Excelling at boxing, he also represented his university at rugby and football. 
Unusually for a science graduate Peart began studying at the Inner Temple. He was not called to the bar, opting instead to return to his roots in Durham as a schoolteacher and a lecturer in economics, campaigning with characteristic vigour to improve educational opportunities in its mining communities. After serving from 1937 for three years on Easington rural district council he enlisted in the Royal Artillery as a gunner in 1940. After distinguished war service in north Africa and Italy he returned home as a captain in 1945 and was elected Labour MP for Workington, which he served for thirty-one years. In that year he married Sarah Elizabeth (Bette), daughter of Thomas Lewis, mining engineer in South America. They had one son. Welsh, articulate, highly principled, a history graduate and teacher, Bette shared her husband's passion for equality of educational opportunity. From 1945 to 1951 Peart was parliamentary private secretary to Thomas Williams, minister of agriculture in the newly elected Labour government. They worked in total harmony; indeed, so identified was he with Tom Williams that he was the natural choice for the Ministry of Agriculture after Labour's return to office in 1964 under the leadership of Harold Wilson. At the same time he was sworn of the privy council. 
Cabinet pressure led Peart to reduce farm subsidies in his first (1965) farm price review, which provoked farmers to civil disobedience, but he emerged from this baptism of fire a widely respected minister. His reputation was further enhanced by courageous and decisive handling of Britain's worst ever epidemic of foot and mouth disease. In the countryside he was ever more warmly received by farmers and farmworkers alike. 
Peart's reservations at that time about European Economic Community membership ran deep, echoing those in most farming communities. He opposed in cabinet the Labour government's 1967 application for EEC membership because he was convinced that the common agricultural policy would deprive British farmers of secure incomes and make consumers worse off by excluding cheap food imports from the traditional suppliers, and he was concerned also about harmful effects of the policy on the Commonwealth's poorer developing countries. 
In 1968 he became leader of the Commons, first as lord privy seal (April-October) and then lord president of the council. His courtesy, friendliness, generosity, and good humour made him as popular as leader of the house as he had been as minister of agriculture. With Labour's defeat in 1970, he became opposition spokesman on parliamentary affairs (1970-71), agriculture (1971-2), and defence (1972-4). He also served as leader of Labour's delegation to the Council of Europe, of which he was vice-president in 1973-4. In February 1974, with Labour back in office, he became minister of agriculture again. By then, exploitation by Commonwealth beef and sugar producers of rising world prices for their products led him reluctantly to come to terms with Britain's EEC membership, to which British farmers were now more favourably inclined. 
In 1976, with James Callaghan as prime minister, Peart received a life barony and, as lord privy seal, became leader of the House of Lords. Following Labour's defeat in 1979 he led the opposition peers until 1982. He was also chairman of the Advisory Council for Applied Research and Development (1976-80) and the Retail Consortium (1979-81). He was an honorary DSc of Cranfield Institute of Technology (1977), honorary FRCVS (1969), and a freeman of the City of London (1968). 
Peart was one of the best-liked parliamentarians of his generation. Tall, gentlemanly, with patrician good looks and a naturally straightforward manner, he was always enjoyable company. In 1984 he was savagely attacked by two armed robbers who had broken into his home. His health was shattered and he never fully recovered. He died on 26 August 1988 in hospital in Tooting, London. He was survived by his wife. 
Alfred Morris', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39856


Ross, William, Baron Ross of Marnock (1911-1988), politician, was born in Ayr on 7 April 1911, the third of four children and only son of William Henry Ross, locomotive driver, of 7 Kirkholm Avenue, Ayr, who became senior bailie of Ayr town council. For the whole of his life his home was in Ayr, where his schooldays were at Ayr Academy. From there he went on to Glasgow University on a Carnegie scholarship and graduated MA in 1932. He then became a primary schoolteacher in Glasgow. The general strike of 1926, when his father was unemployed, and the depression of the 1930s intensified the political ideas he imbibed from his parents. 
In 1936 Ross was selected as Labour candidate for Ayr constituency. He continued teaching until 1940, when he enlisted in the Highland light infantry, training in the Shetlands and Wales. He served in the north-west frontier of India until seconded to signals general headquarters India in Delhi. In 1944 he became cipher officer to Lord Louis Mountbatten, supreme commander, south-east Asia, in Ceylon and accompanied him on flights to Burma and Singapore for the signing of the peace treaty with the Japanese. He was appointed MBE (military) in 1945 and demobilized in the rank of major. 
At the 1945 election Ross unsuccessfully contested the Ayr burghs constituency, but at a by-election in 1946 he was elected Labour member for Kilmarnock, Ayr, and Bute, which he continued to represent until he retired in 1979. His first government appointment was as parliamentary private secretary to Hector McNeil, secretary of state for Scotland, a post he held until the defeat of the Labour government in 1951. From the back benches he worked as an aide to Douglas Houghton on pensions, insurance, and health. In 1962 he became shadow secretary of state for Scotland, and his energies were directed to changing public policy and narrowing the gap between the Scottish economy and that of the south of England. 
In 1964 Ross became secretary of state for Scotland, the office he most desired. Carrying as it did responsibility for functions which in England are exercised by ministers for the Home department, education, health, agriculture, electricity, and local government, it gave great scope to his boundless energy and gave him the opportunity to put into practice the policies for which he had fought with such zeal in opposition. Openly at Westminster and in Scotland, but also behind the scenes, he campaigned vigorously to achieve his aim of shifting industry from the south to Scotland and, under the auspices of the Scottish development department, he had much success in this. His creation of the Highlands and Islands Development Board changed for the better many aspects of life and work in the highlands. He gave full support to the activities of the Scottish new towns, which were particularly successful in attracting new enterprises both from England and the USA. Relinquishing his position at the fall of the Labour government in 1970, Ross resumed as secretary of state for Scotland in the following Labour government elected in 1974. However, when Harold Wilson resigned in 1976, Ross lost the Scottish Office because he was not in favour of devolution, which was then in vogue. He accepted a life barony in 1979. 
In 1978-80 Ross was lord high commissioner to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, an appointment for which his strong religious beliefs and lifelong membership of the church made him highly suitable. He was fiercely loyal to everything he loved and believed in -- family, friends, the Labour Party, the church, and Scotland. He was of medium height, with light red hair, strong features, cleft chin, and piercing grey eyes. He was unsympathetic to the ideals of the 'permissive society'. He was passionately fond of the works of Robert Burns, of which he had an extensive knowledge. His rich Ayrshire voice made him a welcome speaker at numerous Burns suppers, where his proposal of the 'immortal memory' was unforgettable. In his speeches, both in parliament and elsewhere, he made some of his most telling points by an apt quotation from Burns. His main leisure interest was watching association football, and he was very proud when the Scottish Football Association made him honorary president in 1978. 
Ross became an honorary LLD of the universities of St Andrews (1967), Strathclyde (1969), and Glasgow (1978), and a fellow of the Educational Institute of Scotland (1971). In 1948 he married Elizabeth Jane Elma, daughter of John Aitkenhead, marine engineer and hotel owner. They had two daughters. Ross had a happy marriage and family life, and was a kind and loving husband and father. He died at home at 10 Chapelpark Road, Ayr, of cancer, on 10 June 1988. 
William Hughes', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39857


O'Neill, Terence Marne, Baron O'Neill of the Maine (1914-1990), prime minister of Northern Ireland, was born on 10 September 1914 at 29 Ennismore Gardens, Hyde Park, London, the third son and youngest of the five children of Captain Arthur Edward Bruce O'Neill (1876-1914), of Shane's Castle, Randalstown, co. Antrim, Unionist MP for Mid-Antrim, and his wife, Lady Annabel Hungerford Crewe-Milnes (1881-1948), the eldest daughter of Robert Offley Ashburton Crewe-Milnes, marquess of Crewe, politician. His maternal grandfather was of Liberal stock, and was appointed viceroy of Ireland in 1892 by Gladstone's pro-home rule administration. His paternal grandfather, Edward Chichester, later O'Neill, second Baron O'Neill, was Conservative MP for co. Antrim from 1863 to 1880. O'Neill was less than two months old when his father became the first MP to be killed in action in the First World War, on 6 November 1914. His mother married, second, on 9 February 1922, Major James Hugh Hamilton Dodds, later Crewe (died 1956), a consular official. 
After quitting active politics, O'Neill made much of his Gaelic heritage, both out of pride in lineage and to indicate a special rapport with Northern Ireland's Catholics. Indeed, the dynasty of O'Neill could be traced back to a Tyrone prince killed in battle in 1283, and by tradition the line included Niall of the Nine Hostages, high king of Ireland from 'c'.379 to 'c'.409. O'Neill, however, was descended through an heiress from a protestant branch of O'Neills which had retained its estates and found a place in plantation Ulster after the 'flight of the earls' in 1607; furthermore, in the male line he was descended from the settler family of Chichester. 
O'Neill spent his youth in London and the British consulate in Addis Ababa. He was educated at West Downs School, in Winchester, and at Eton College. Thereafter he spent a year in France and Germany, and then found work in the City of London and, briefly, South Australia. Only summer holidays were spent in Shane's Castle, the family home in Ulster. In May 1940 O'Neill received his commission at Sandhurst and joined the 2nd battalion of the Irish Guards. While waiting for the invasion of Europe, on 4 February 1944 he married (Katharine) Jean Whitaker ['see below']. They had one son, Patrick ('b'. 1945), and one daughter, Penelope ('b'. 1947). Once in Europe O'Neill served as intelligence officer of the 2nd battalion. In September 1944, near Nijmegen in the Netherlands, he was injured during shelling and evacuated back to England. Friends close to him died in action, including David Peel, best man at his wedding, as well as both his brothers, Shane Edward Robert O'Neill, third Baron O'Neill (1907-1944), and Brian Arthur O'Neill (1911-1940). 
At the end of 1945 O'Neill and his family finally went to live in Northern Ireland, in Glebe House, a converted Regency rectory near Ahoghill, co. Antrim. He would have preferred a Westminster seat, but settled for the Stormont constituency of Bannside, to which he was returned unopposed in October 1946. In February 1948 the prime minister, Lord Brookeborough, appointed him parliamentary secretary to the minister of health. In 1953 he was moved to the post of chairman of ways and means (leader of the house), then in 1955 he became a joint parliamentary secretary to the minister of home affairs and dealt with a controversial rent de-restriction bill. He showed his facility in negotiating the timetable of the bill with his opposite number at Westminster, Enoch Powell. Following a ministerial reshuffle in 1956 he finally reached cabinet level as minister of home affairs and was sworn of the privy council (Northern Ireland). Six months later he took on the finance portfolio, and shortly afterwards he divested himself of home affairs. 
O'Neill's tenure as minister of finance coincided with a severe economic crisis. Employment in the Belfast shipyards, for example, contracted by 40 per cent between 1961 and 1964. This was reflected in a swing towards the Northern Ireland Labour Party (NILP), particularly in Belfast. The government's policy was to seek support from Britain for the traditional, though declining, industries of textiles and heavy engineering. However, a joint exchequer working party, chaired by Sir Robert Hall, published a report in October 1962 that seemed decisively to reject throwing good money after bad. O'Neill at first had little idea how to approach the crisis. However, the Northern Ireland civil service autonomously developed a scheme of infrastructural development, concentrating on road building and the promotion of new towns. The Matthew plan, published in February 1963, thus made a more positive case for British subvention. O'Neill was quick to realize the significance of this new approach. It chimed in with his familiar refrain, at first born of Treasury cheese-paring, that Northern Ireland should rely upon self-help. Now he argued, notably in a speech to the Pottinger Unionist Association, Belfast, in February 1963, for generous pump-priming with British funds. 
When Lord Brookeborough, by now seen as excessively rigid in his approach to the economy, retired in March 1963, O'Neill was well placed to don the mantle of technocratic modernization. His support, however, was not overwhelming in the parliamentary Unionist Party at Stormont. There was discontentment that he was not elected prime minister by the party, but appointed by the governor. He immediately set about modernizing the administration of devolution in Northern Ireland with some vigour. A series of schemes to rationalize railways, build motorways, encourage growth points, clear slums, reorganize ministries, establish a new university, create a new city, and reach a concordat with the trade unions to facilitate quasi-corporate planning were all designed to wring funds from Britain. Public investment per head of population doubled between 1958 and 1969, with particularly large increases in housing stock, roads, education, and training. Per capita public expenditure in Northern Ireland rose from 88 to 118 per cent of per capita public expenditure in England in the same period. Nevertheless, the economy continued to suffer from the pressures of chronic dependence on declining industries, and resumed a pattern of crisis in the 1970s. 
O'Neill's stated ambition to change the face of Ulster had the effect of stealing the thunder of the NILP. Though economic planning was largely cosmetic, it was sufficient to secure a swing to the Unionist Party in the Stormont general election of 1965, and the NILP lost two of its four seats in Belfast. Nevertheless, modernization brought its own political problems, notably by making the economy seem amenable to government manipulation, and thereby convincing Catholics that their relative socio-economic disadvantage was a consequence of deliberate government discrimination. Indeed, there is something to this. A cabal of Unionist leaders in Londonderry, the second city of Northern Ireland, with a Catholic majority but a Unionist corporation, lobbied against the new university coming to the city for fear of upsetting delicately gerrymandered constituencies. Instead it went to the town of Coleraine. Similarly, the new city of Craigavon was planned with an eye to maintaining the integrity of Unionist electorates. The Labour government in Britain, led by Harold Wilson since 1964 and increasingly conscious of the cost of the rising economic subsidy to the province, was anxious to see such abuses reformed. 
O'Neill, however, feared that substantive reform would serve only to provoke the ultra-loyalists, who possessed an able leader in waiting in the clerical politician Ian Paisley, and was well aware of the potential for disorder. During the Westminster general election of October 1964 there were three days of rioting on the Falls Road in Belfast, the worst disorder since 1935. O'Neill preferred carefully symbolic gestures. These included visiting Catholic schools and, more dramatically, meeting with the taoiseach of the Irish Republic, Sean Lemass, at Stormont on 14 January 1965. By such a dramatic gesture, made in his own name since he had not consulted his cabinet, O'Neill hoped not only to encourage Catholic acceptance of the state, but also to outflank ambitious rivals within the Unionist Party. Brian Faulkner, the able minister of commerce, was chief of these. O'Neill's poor interpersonal skills and evident distaste for his colleagues, however, meant that his every move tended to aggravate factional opposition within the parliamentary Unionist Party. 
Republican commemorations in 1966 of the fiftieth anniversary of the Easter 1916 rising were handled deftly; though illegal, they were allowed to go ahead under the watchful eyes of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC). However, an increasingly large protestant constituency was concerned that O'Neill was weak on the constitution. The very grandeur of his modernization of the economic infrastructure further generated tensions from those who felt excluded from government largess. In September 1966 it emerged that at least twelve out of thirty-six Unionist back-bench MPs at Stormont had signed a petition demanding his removal as prime minister. It was testimony to his political skills that he rode out this conspiracy. He did this by accentuating his already presidential status and appealing to moderate opinion outside the party. The Ulster Unionists, traditionally assertive in the middle ranks, felt ill-handled. 
1967 appeared to be a lull before the storm, though O'Neill himself was notably weary of the burdens of office and ill at ease with his party. Catholic demands for full civil rights were increasingly heard, and, though O'Neill did his best to keep his counsel, gently pushing for mild reform behind the scenes, the issue became increasingly politicized. He hoped to generate local pride to divert attention from polarizing issues of state, and thus encouraged civic weeks. 
When, on 5 October 1968, a civil-rights march was attacked by the RUC in Londonderry, a mass movement erupted, primarily of Catholics, demanding civil rights. Under pressure from the British government, O'Neill rushed to convince his cabinet colleagues of the need for concessions, even in the face of street demonstrations. On 22 November he unveiled a programme of reforms, notably the closing down of the gerrymandered Londonderry corporation. However, the local government rate-based franchise was for the time untouched. In a famous television broadcast on the night of 9 December 1968 O'Neill warned that Northern Ireland stood at the crossroads. He condemned those Unionists who would defy the pro-reform British government and demanded an end to street demonstrations. Subsequently he sacked his right-wing minister of home affairs, William Craig. O'Neill enjoyed a massive surge of public support, but the fragile peace was broken by a radical civil-rights march from Belfast to Londonderry, attacked by loyalists at Burntollet Bridge on 4 January 1969. In the following week a civil-rights march in Newry degenerated into violence. 
The seeming inability of O'Neill to maintain Unionist authority led to ministerial resignations, most significantly that of Brian Faulkner on 24 January 1969. A coterie of hard-line Unionist MPs was increasingly vocal for O'Neill's resignation. To bolster his position he called an election for 24 February. Dramatically, he refused to campaign for official Unionist candidates opposed to his leadership and lent his support to independent candidates undertaking to support him personally. For the first time, a Unionist leader explicitly called for Catholic votes, to be deployed to overwhelm protestant ultras. This gambit produced confused results, but no clear-cut victory for O'Neill. Most significantly, there was little evidence of Catholics voting in great number for pro-O'Neill Unionists. This fatally undermined the promise of O'Neillism: that economic progress and ameliorative rhetoric would win Catholics from their traditional nationalist loyalties. O'Neill soldiered on as prime minister until, amid a renewal of street violence and a campaign of bombing by loyalist 'agents provocateurs', he announced his resignation on 28 April 1969. He employed the last of his political capital in securing one person, one vote, in place of the ratepayers' franchise in local elections. His casting vote ensured that he was succeeded by the relatively loyal, though hardly adequate, James Chichester-Clark rather than Brian Faulkner. 
O'Neill rapidly faded from political view. He was made a life peer, as Baron O'Neill of the Maine, in 1970 and moved to Lisle Court, Lymington, Hampshire, though he continued to speak on the problems of Northern Ireland in the House of Lords, where he sat as a cross-bencher. He was also a trustee of the Winston Churchill Memorial Trust. He died at his home, Lisle Court, of cancer on 12 June 1990. 
O'Neill worked better with civil servants, notably James Malley and Sir Kenneth Bloomfield, than with politicians. His attempts to reform Northern Irish politics depended upon administrative reform and quasi-presidential rhetoric rather than refashioning the party he led. Himself distinctly Anglo-Irish, he underestimated the fierce identity politics of both Catholic and protestant communities. He viewed popular protestant opinion warily, suspecting it of atavistic sectarianism, and regarded Catholics patronizingly as degraded with a slave mentality. He assumed that his natural supporters were the middle classes and thought them capable of pioneering enlightened public opinion. His final, disillusioned, conclusion was that the 'good men' of politics preferred 'playing golf' to confronting the 'wild men'. His efforts to subsume ethnic passions within a constructive civic society were gratingly patrician, though decent in motivation and sincere. 
O'Neill's wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 39858


Sandys, (Edwin) Duncan, Baron Duncan-Sandys (1908-1987), politician, was born on 24 January 1908 at the Manor House, Sandford Orcas, Dorset, the only child of Captain George John Sandys (1875-1937), army officer and politician, and his wife, Mildred Helen, 'nee' Cameron, daughter of Duncan Cameron, of Canterbury, New Zealand. His father served with the second Life Guards in the South African War, and again with the British expeditionary force in France in 1914, when he was wounded at Ypres. He was Conservative MP for Wells from 1910 to 1918. 
Sandys was educated at Eton College and Magdalen College, Oxford, where he served in the Oxford cavalry Officers' Training Corps and the Oxford University air squadron. After graduating with a second-class degree in modern history in 1929, he was called to the bar by the Inner Temple, but decided in 1930 to join the Foreign Office. He served briefly in Berlin before returning in 1933 to London. He represented the Foreign Office in negotiations for commercial treaties with the Scandinavian countries, and was a member of the British delegation to the abortive world economic conference of 1933. 
Sandys's political career began in 1935: in March that year he was elected Conservative MP for Norwood at a by-election, and on 16 September he married Diana Bailey (1909-1963), former wife of Sir John Milner Bailey, second baronet, and eldest daughter of Sir Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill, politician. They had one son and two daughters. Sandys's political fortunes during the 1930s were very tied up with those of his father-in-law. Although Sandys's reputation as a critic of appeasement was sometimes later overstated, he did use the knowledge gained as a member of the Territorial Army to attack the poor state of readiness of UK air defences -- a tactic which in 1938 saw him threatened with a court martial but exonerated by the parliamentary select committee of privileges. 
Sandys's wartime roles fell into two main phases. In 1940-41 he was in active service, first in Norway and then in Wales as commander of an anti-aircraft regiment. This second posting was cut short by a serious car crash which left him with injuries to both feet that continued to trouble him for the rest of his life. Then from 1941 onwards he resumed his full-time political career and began his rise into ministerial ranks. His appointment as financial secretary to the War Office in July 1941 was initially criticized by the 1922 committee as an example of nepotism. His subsequent effectiveness in office, however, suggested that this complaint was largely unjust. In February 1943 he was made parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Supply and asked to chair the cabinet committee responsible for devising countermeasures to the V-weapons. In this capacity he displayed the activism and attention to detail for which he became renowned, holding his own with the service chiefs in their discussions of how to stop the German weapons, reportedly suggesting the extremely effective step of moving many anti-aircraft batteries to the south coast, where V1s were easier to shoot down, and persisting despite strong cabinet opposition, notably from Herbert Morrison, with a disinformation campaign towards the Germans about where their rockets had landed. He was also responsible for co-ordinating the intelligence effort which identified Peenemunde as the launch site for the unstoppable V2s and opened the way for the base to be bombed. He was sworn of the privy council in 1944. 
In November 1944 the dire state of Britain's house rebuilding effort persuaded Churchill to move his son-in-law to the Ministry of Works. Here Sandys proved able to revitalize the reconstruction drive, once more demonstrating a remarkable ability both to push forward policy despite bureaucratic and logistical obstacles and to immerse himself in the details of his brief. It is claimed that Sandys himself came up with the idea of producing prefabricated houses in 'left-hand' and 'right-hand' models, designed to ensure that the living-room would receive afternoon sunlight regardless of the building's exact location. 
Given the political importance of the house-rebuilding effort such success might have been expected to produce a rapid political reward. Instead, Sandys's rising ministerial career was brutally interrupted by the general election of 1945 at which he, like so many other prominent Conservatives, lost his seat. Churchill would have liked to have placed him in charge of the Conservative Research Department -- a role to which Sandys's capacity to think radically would have been well suited, but which might have led the Conservatives' post-war policy rethink in a much more right-wing direction than was actually the case under Rab Butler's guidance -- but this was blocked. As a result, Sandys channelled his considerable energies into the organization of Churchill's post-war campaign for European unity. 
Sandys's impact as an organizer of pro-European activity was considerable. He and Churchill had been discussing ideas for European co-operation since the final stages of the war. But it was Sandys who persuaded the leader of the opposition to voice these ideas publicly and to use a speech which he was due to give in Zurich in September 1946 as an occasion to launch an inspirational call to the nations of Europe, and to France and Germany in particular, to unite. This rhetorical appeal was followed up, again as a result of Sandys's prompting, by the establishment of an organized campaign. The 'United Europe Committee' was formally established in January 1947 with Churchill as the figurehead and Sandys as the general secretary and driving force. It was the latter who drafted most of Churchill's April 1947 Albert Hall speech, which marked the UK launch of the campaign. Likewise it was to Sandys that the tasks fell of recruiting support within the Conservative Party -- Robert Boothby, Harold Macmillan, Lord Cranborne, and others were soon signed up -- and of forging those trans-European links without which the campaign could not hope to succeed. To this end Sandys attended the Gstaad and Montreux meetings of European federalists and then, in concert with Joseph Retinger, decided to organize a large-scale 'congress of Europe', a plan which culminated in the 1948 meeting in The Hague attended by a stellar roll-call of European politicians. He also became chairman of the international executive of the European movement, a role which allowed him to ensure that pressure for European unity did not fall away after delegates had left The Hague. 
Britain's rather ambivalent attitude towards European unity soon began to undermine Sandys's efforts, however. Already at The Hague representatives of the Labour government had been notable by their absence. But Sandys's difficulties were not confined to the opposite side of the House of Commons; within his own party, too, several prominent front-benchers -- Anthony Eden and Butler, for instance -- and probably the majority of back-benchers, regarded Churchill's and Sandys's Europeanism with suspicion and mistrust. Continental hopes that Britain's aloof attitude and its self-willed exclusion from such early integration efforts as the 1950 Schuman plan were attributable to Labour and would end once the Conservatives returned to power, were therefore dashed in 1951 when the peacetime Churchill government adopted an attitude of benevolent neutrality towards the efforts under way on the continent -- an attitude which differed little from that of Ernest Bevin and the post-war Labour cabinet. The self-styled 'Europeans' such as Macmillan, Boothby, and Sandys himself, who had returned to parliament as MP for Streatham in 1950, could do no more than watch in frustration as the tone and substance of British European policy was shaped by Eden's views and attitudes rather than their own. 
In personal terms Sandys's disappointment was tempered by the resumption of his own ministerial career. His first post-war portfolio, held between October 1951 and October 1954, was as minister of supply. Here his most pressing task was to undo Labour's nationalization of the steel industry, a step which he carried out with a degree of moderation. He also had a first opportunity to think about the way of adapting Britain's world role (and more specifically its military role) to its economic capacity, a question that was central to his later stint as secretary of state for defence. Then between October 1954 and January 1957 he became minister for housing and local government, planning a modernization of local government (which became the 1958 'Local Government Act'), overseeing a reform of the rental system, introducing slum clearance allowances, and championing pedestrianized city centres. 
The apogee of Sandys's political career was reached under Harold Macmillan. Eden's successor did not have an easy personal relationship with Sandys -- he spoke often of his 'cassant' manner -- but he appreciated Sandys's forcefulness, hard work, and capacity to get things done. As Macmillan later put it to his official biographer, Sandys was 'a very tough man -- he wouldn't have any nonsense... and was -- quite simply -- good at any job you gave him to do' (Horne, 2.48). He therefore employed Churchill's son-in-law in a succession of demanding posts where an abrasive and forthright hatchet man was seen as being necessary. 
The first of these was as secretary of state for defence. Britain had inherited armed services still bloated from the Second World War -- a nonsense at a time of steady decolonization and the recasting, if not the disappearance, of Britain's global role. Sandys was thus entrusted by Macmillan with the job of radically pruning Britain's military capacity and adopting a defence posture more in keeping with a medium-size power. This was something the need for which Macmillan had become aware of during his own brief tenure of the defence portfolio in 1954-5. It was also a task, however, which had to be carried out in the face of strong opposition from the armed forces themselves and from many within the Conservative Party, not least Anthony Head, Sandys's immediate predecessor. Sandys threw himself at the challenge with his customary vigour. Both the nature of his mission and the manner in which he approached it quickly won him enemies -- he is said to have literally come to blows with Sir Gerald Templar, chief of the Imperial General Staff -- but he was able to strike up a surprisingly effective working relationship with Lord Mountbatten, the first sea lord, and produced a wide-ranging and radical defence white paper in 1957 which mapped out a defence strategy for the following decade and cut back much of the UK's surplus military capacity. In order to reach agreement with the service chiefs, Sandys had to drop some of his more radical ideas: his plan to replace all fighters with missiles was abandoned, while Mountbatten was able to win a reprieve for the notion of a navy with global reach. His proposed reorganization of the decision-making structures of British defence policy -- with the institution of a powerful Ministry of Defence in place of the multiple service ministries -- generated such opposition that it was temporarily disowned by Macmillan (although it was revived later on in Macmillan's premiership). But to have achieved as much as he did, given the entrenched opposition of the military and the emotive nature of the subject, was a tribute to his combative character and an achievement of lasting significance. 
In October 1959 Sandys was shifted back to Supply, this time with the brief of breaking up the ministry and forming a new Ministry of Aviation. This bureaucratic reorganization was accomplished, although the second aspect of the job, that of revitalizing Britain's ailing aircraft industry, had barely begun when the minister was once more on the move, this time to the Commonwealth Relations Office. Macmillan had two reasons for moving Sandys. The first was that he was already planning his application to the EEC and used the July 1960 reshuffle to move reliable pro-Europeans into those posts which would be most sensitive during an EEC membership bid. Relations with the Commonwealth clearly fell into this category. The second was that, at a time during which the 'winds of change' were blowing strongly through Britain's empire and Africa in particular, the prime minister wanted to counter-balance the liberal instincts of the colonial secretary, Iain Macleod, with someone whose views were less difficult for the bulk of the Conservative Party to swallow. As John Ramsden put it, Sandys was to 'act as brake to Macleod's accelerator in Africa' (Ramsden, 'Winds of Change', 147). 
Macmillan's complicated calculations worked in part. On the EEC front Sandys proved an effective operator, listening to Commonwealth grievances during the months before the July 1961 application but then playing them down during cabinet debates, and contributing to the skilful management of the September 1962 Marlborough House conference, in the course of which grudging Commonwealth acquiescence was obtained in the entry terms so far agreed in Brussels. But on Africa his partnership with Macleod was a stormy affair, especially over Roy Welensky and the planned Central African Federation. The colonial secretary threatened to resign over the issue on several occasions and for over a year co-operation between the two ministers was only sustained by dint of frequent intervention by the premier. By October 1961 it had all become too much and Macleod was replaced by Reginald Maudling. This partnership worked no better -- Maudling shared his predecessor's liberalism -- and in March 1962 the whole central African issue was taken from the two ministers and given to Butler, the deputy prime minister. The most difficult issue of the period had proved beyond Sandys, although his lack of success had much to do both with Macmillan's over-clever attempt to divide responsibility for Africa between two incompatible ministers and the inherent difficulties of an affair which would continue to torment successive British governments until 1979. Central Africa apart, Sandys retained responsibility for Commonwealth issues until October 1964, when the Conservatives lost office. His offer to resign in 1963, when his name became entangled with the Profumo affair, was rejected by Macmillan. 
Despite his seniority, Sandys did not follow ministerial responsibility with a lengthy stint as a shadow spokesman. In 1965 he did help shape the opposition's European policy -- an easy task given the similarity between his instincts and those of the new party leader, Edward Heath -- but in 1966, after Labour's new electoral triumph, he was dismissed. Quite why is unclear. Heath's ostensible reason was that he wanted fresh faces after the election defeat; others speculate that Sandys was either too right-wing, or somewhat tainted in Heath's eyes by his colourful private life. 
Controversy continued to dog Sandys even after 1966. Two years later he became involved in a very public row with Macleod over whether or not the Kenyan Asians, increasingly discriminated against in east Africa, should be able to settle in Britain. In keeping with his very strong views on the subject, Sandys was strongly against immigration being allowed and supported the restrictive measures taken by the home secretary, James Callaghan. And in 1973, the year before Sandys ended his lengthy Commons career and accepted a peerage, as Baron Duncan-Sandys, and the year in which he was made CH, he faced renewed criticism from Heath for the way in which he had been given a very large tax-free payment in the Cayman Islands as chairman of Lonrho at a time when British residents were not allowed to hold overseas accounts. The affair was famously denounced by the prime minister in parliament as 'the unpleasant and unacceptable face of capitalism' (Heath, 418). Sandys's first marriage broke down in the late 1950s, and the divorce was finalized in 1960. (His former wife resumed her maiden name, Diana Churchill, by deed poll in 1962, and committed suicide in 1963.) On 19 April 1962 Sandys married Marie-Claire Hudson ('b'. 1928/9), daughter of Adrien Schmitt, industrialist, of Paris, and former wife of Robert William Hudson, second Viscount Hudson. The marriage was happy, and they had one daughter. Marie-Claire nursed her husband through a long final illness, which necessitated a move from their house in Vincent Square, London, to a flat at 12 Warwick Square. It was there that Sandys died on 26 November 1987, of cancer. He was survived by his wife, their daughter, and the three children of his first marriage. A memorial service was held on 10 February 1988 at St Margaret's, Westminster. 
Despite a somewhat tawdry end to his career, Sandys was a remarkable politician. A man of immense energy, he showed himself to have both a creative mind and great doggedness in overcoming obstacles. Lord Orr-Ewing summed up his characteristics well: 'the man was a steam-roller -- he would grind away in first gear and nothing could stand in his path' (Onslow, 18). Both Churchill and Macmillan made good use of this tenacity. He was also an effective parliamentary speaker, if a little prone to excessive detail, and a conscientious minister whose civil servants came to respect his sheer hard work and attention to the minutiae of policy making. The 1957 defence white paper, perhaps his most significant peacetime achievement, was typical in being substantially drafted by Sandys himself. But while these characteristics made him a very able lieutenant to a political master who knew where he wanted to go, Sandys himself at times lacked the judgement, the tact, and the political flair to rise to the highest office. 


@@@@@


doc= 39859


Shinwell, Emanuel, Baron Shinwell (1884-1986), politician, was born on 18 October 1884 in Spitalfields, London, the eldest in a family of thirteen children of Samuel Shinwell, a clothing manufacturer of Polish-Jewish origin, and his Dutch wife, Rose Konigswinter. The family moved to Glasgow but Shinwell left school at the age of eleven to be apprenticed to the tailoring trade. He joined his first trade union, the Amalgamated Society of Clothing Operatives, at the age of seventeen and was elected to Glasgow Trades Council in 1906. He was to serve twice as its president. He became an early member of the Independent Labour Party and was an active socialist crusader. In 1911 he was prominent on the Clyde during the national dock strike. 
Shinwell continued his militant union activities during the war and was wrongly alleged to have been involved in the disturbances in George Square, Glasgow, between striking workers and the police on Red Friday (31 January 1919). As a result, he spent over five months in Calton gaol, Edinburgh. He was now turning to thoughts of a political career. In the 1918 general election, he stood unsuccessfully as Labour candidate for Linlithgow (West Lothian); in 1922 he was elected to parliament there. 
Shinwell served as parliamentary secretary to the mines department in the first Labour government of Ramsay MacDonald in 1924. Defeated in the 1924 general election, he was re-elected in a by-election in 1928 and served in junior offices in the second Labour government, as financial secretary to the War Office in 1929-30, and again in the mines department in 1930-31. He had an immense admiration for MacDonald and tried in vain to persuade him not to head the National Government in August 1931. In the subsequent general election, Shinwell was defeated again. 
Shinwell now decided to challenge MacDonald directly and in the 1935 general election handsomely defeated his old leader at Seaham Harbour. After a redistribution of seats, the constituency was later renamed Easington. Shinwell was always a pugnacious member of parliament. In 1938 he caused a sensation by striking a Conservative, Commander Robert Bower (as it happened, a former naval boxing champion), when the latter made a hostile interjection in debate. During the war years Shinwell was a vigorous, though always patriotic, critic of Winston Churchill's coalition government. He and the tory sixth Earl Winterton were popularly christened Arsenic and Old Lace. Shinwell was also prominent in Labour's policy making committees, notably those dealing with coal and energy. 
When Labour won the 1945 general election, Attlee appointed Shinwell to the cabinet as minister of fuel and power. Here he achieved the nationalization of coal in 1946 and also negotiated the so-called miners' charter with the National Union of Mineworkers. He caused much controversy by declaring that the middle class was 'not worth a tinker's cuss'. He served as chairman of the Labour Party in 1947-8. However, his reputation slumped during the acute fuel crisis of January-March 1947, at a time of an exceptionally severe winter. He was accused of complacency and failing to plan to deal with basic problems of coal production. That October, much to his chagrin, Shinwell was demoted by Attlee to the War Office, outside the cabinet. Hugh Gaitskell took his place and thereby earned Shinwell's undying enmity, reinforced by Gaitskell's public-school background. Shinwell was also attacked by younger men such as James Callaghan for being less than ardent over nationalization. However, Shinwell proved to be a vigorous war minister, in tune with army sentiment, and Attlee reappointed him to the cabinet in March 1950 as minister of defence. Here Shinwell dealt energetically with the emergency in Malaya and war in Korea. In the summer of 1951 he urged the cabinet to send British troops to protect the oil refineries at Abadan, which the Persian government had nationalized, but he was successfully resisted by other ministers. 
After Labour fell from office in 1951, Shinwell lost ground. He was defeated in elections for the party national executive in 1952 and left the shadow cabinet in 1955. Gaitskell was elected party leader that year; Shinwell had backed his fellow veteran, Herbert Morrison. However, despite being in his seventies, he continued to play a lively role in politics. He changed his stance on nuclear weapons and campaigned against the stationing of American Polaris submarines at Holy Loch. The election of Harold Wilson as party leader after Gaitskell's death gave Shinwell new opportunities. Although now eighty, he was appointed by Wilson as chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party in October 1964, and worked hard to secure support for a government whose initial majority was only four. However, he came into conflict with ministers from 1966, especially with the equally aggressive foreign secretary, George Brown, since Shinwell was a vehement enemy of British entry into the European Common Market. He resigned as party chairman in 1967; in 1970 he became a life peer. 
Shinwell's career was still far from over. He became chairman of the all-party Lords' defence study group. He voted against his own Labour government in 1976 and in March 1982 resigned the party whip in protest against left-wing militancy, though he remained a Labour Party member. He was now a legendary figure, and his hundredth birthday was celebrated in the House of Lords in 1984 (during a national miners' strike) with considerable enthusiasm. 
With his stocky figure and Glaswegian accent, Manny Shinwell was pugnacious in parliament and on the platform. Appropriately, his enthusiasms included professional boxing. Though not religious, he was also much involved with the Jewish community. His performance in office was marred by the 1947 fuel crisis, while as a service minister he showed a jingoism some thought inappropriate. However, he had the gift of striking up friendships across the spectrum, including with the first Viscount Montgomery of Alamein and the editor of the 'Sunday Express', Sir John Junor. He was kindly towards the young. He was a major personality over sixty years, and a notable pioneer in Labour's long march to power in 1945. He wrote several autobiographical works, of which 'Conflict without Malice' (1955) is the most important. He was married (and widowed) three times. In 1903 he married Fay (Fanny) Freeman (died 1954); they had two sons and a daughter. In 1956 he married Dinah (died 1971), daughter of Carol Ludwig Meyer, of Denmark. In 1972 he married Sarah, former wife of Alfred Hurst and daughter of Solomon Stungo. She died in 1977. Shinwell himself died on 8 May 1986 at the age of 101, at his St John's Wood flat in London, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. 
Kenneth O. Morgan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39860


Silkin, John Ernest (1923-1987), lawyer and politician, was born on 18 March 1923 in London, the third and youngest son (there were no daughters) of Lewis Silkin, later first Baron Silkin (1889-1972), solicitor, who became minister of town and country planning in the Labour government of 1945-51, and his wife, Rosa Neft (1889/90-1947). It was a Jewish, intellectual, Labour family, and his brother Samuel Charles Silkin (later Baron Silkin of Dulwich), the second son, became a somewhat controversial attorney-general in the Labour governments of 1974-9. John Silkin was educated at Dulwich College and for a short period at the University College of Wales, Cardiff, before going to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he obtained a second class (division one) in part two of the law tripos in 1942. He was then called up for the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. He became a lieutenant-commander in the intelligence branch and saw service in the Far East. On demobilization he entered the family firm of solicitors. He was admitted a solicitor in 1950. In that year he married an actress, Rosamund John (1913-1998), formerly the wife of Lieutenant-Commander (Hugh) Russell Lloyd, of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, and daughter of Frederick Henry Jones. They had one son. 
Silkin's first attempt to enter parliament in the Labour interest was in the general election of 1950 for the London constituency of Marylebone. It was a hopeless seat for any Labour candidate. Having unsuccessfully contested West Woolwich in 1951 and South Nottingham in 1959, Silkin finally entered the House of Commons in July 1963 for the south London constituency of Deptford, and very soon began to move upwards within the Parliamentary Labour Party. In 1966 he became chief whip in the government of Harold Wilson, a position which he filled with an agreeable competence until 1969, at a time when Labour had a majority of only three. He was deputy leader of the House of Commons in 1968-9 and minister of public building and works in 1969-70. It was in this period that he became close to Richard Crossman, whose diaries for these years offer a favourable commentary on Silkin's personality and political skills. 
In the last Wilson government of 1974-6 Silkin was given the office of minister for planning and local government. It was not a very happy appointment and in 1976 he was moved to the Ministry of Agriculture, where he was much more successful. During the years to 1979 he became well known through extensive press coverage of his disputes with the Brussels officials of the European Community. Silkin's own personal politics were now directly involved. He belonged to the left of the Parliamentary Labour Party, which clustered around the journal 'Tribune'. In foreign affairs he was a unilateralist on the issue of the atomic bomb, and a vigorous opponent of Britain's entry into the European Community. His tenure at the Ministry of Agriculture was notable for the tough stance he took on European matters, using a strongly nationalist approach to the much debated issues of fishing rights, and agricultural policies in general. His public quarrels with Brussels greatly extended his political image among the British electorate. His general opposition to the European Economic Community was based upon his acceptance of what was known at the time as 'the alternative economic policy': import controls and the protection of Britain's industrial base, a withdrawal from Europe, and a renegotiation of the terms for a possible future entry. 
The Labour Party lost the general election of 1979 and a year later, after James Callaghan had resigned from the leadership of the party, there was an election for his successor. For reasons which are difficult to justify, John Silkin confidently believed that he was a serious candidate as a compromise between Denis Healey on the right of the party and Michael Foot on the left. Barbara Castle wrote in her diary in 1976 that Silkin was 'the kindest chap, but has not yet proved himself a political heavyweight'; it must have been his success against the Brussels officials that warped his judgement. In the first round of the leadership election he received 38 votes against Healey's 112, Foot's 83, and Peter Shore's 32. Nor did Silkin succeed in the election for deputy leader. This serious miscalculation concerning his own position weakened his general standing in the Parliamentary Labour Party. 
In the years that followed, although he was on the Labour opposition's front bench, Silkin became involved in various disputes that he was to find very wearing. His own constituency Labour Party was much to the left of his own position and there were serious attempts to replace him as the candidate for the next election. They failed for the general election of 1983, but the continued friction helped to push Silkin into deciding in 1985 that he would not stand again. He was also much involved in a bitter internal quarrel over the control of 'Tribune', the organ of the moderate left. 
Silkin had been brought up in an affluent family and he added to his inherited wealth during his own lifetime. His parliamentary salary was augmented by his continued practice as a solicitor. Among his clients was Robert Maxwell, which meant that Silkin had a place on the board of Pergamon Press. Silkin died before Maxwell was exposed as a fraudulent swindler on a very large scale. Silkin also benefited financially from property deals, one of which -- a family affair involving his father in earlier years -- prompted discussion in the national press in 1974. John Silkin publicly, and vigorously, defended his position. 
Slightly taller than average, Silkin was well built. He died suddenly, of a heart attack, at his London home, 4 Dean's Yard, Westminster, on 26 April 1987. A memorial service was held at St Paul's, Deptford, on 23 June 1987. 
John Saville', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39861


Soames, (Arthur) Christopher John, Baron Soames (1920-1987), politician, was born on 12 October 1920 in Penn, Buckinghamshire, the only son and youngest of three children of Captain Arthur Granville Soames OBE of the Coldstream Guards and Ashwell Manor, Penn, and his wife, Hope Mary Woodbyne, the daughter of Charles Woodbyne Parish. He was educated at Eton College and the Royal Military College at Sandhurst, and commissioned in 1939 as a second lieutenant in the Coldstream Guards. He served in the Middle East, Italy, and France during the Second World War, winning the Croix de Guerre (1942) while on attachment to the Free French brigade in the western desert, where his right leg was shattered by a mine explosion. In 1946 he was appointed assistant military attache at the British embassy in Paris. In the following year he married Mary (1922-2014), youngest daughter of Winston Churchill, former prime minister. 
In 1950 Soames entered parliament as the Conservative member for Bedford. During Churchill's second premiership (1952-5) Soames acted as his parliamentary private secretary. He did much to keep the government going, masking the seriousness of his father-in-law's illness, when Churchill suffered a stroke in 1953. He went through the ranks of junior ministerial office before becoming secretary of state for war in 1958 (when he was sworn of the privy council) and serving in the cabinet in 1960-64 as minister of agriculture. 
Having lost his seat in the 1966 election, Soames was an inspired choice by the government led by Harold Wilson as British ambassador to France (1968-72). Soames took up his post at a difficult time, with President Charles de Gaulle continuing to obstruct British accession to the EC. His term in Paris began inauspiciously with the leaking by the Foreign Office of the contents of a private conversation between him and de Gaulle ('l' affaire Soames'). A year later de Gaulle was gone and Soames was able to establish a much warmer relationship with his successor, Georges Pompidou. This was the crucial period leading to the successful completion of negotiations for Britain's entry into the EC and Soames, himself a convinced European, played a major part in persuading the French government no longer to impede the negotiations. His excellent colloquial French, splendid hospitality, and ebullient personality endeared him to the Parisians. 
Immediately following British entry into the EC Soames was the first British vice-president of the European Commission and commissioner for external affairs, from 1973 to January 1977. He was a most effective commissioner. He played a major role in international trade negotiations and in establishing British influence in Brussels. 
After a brief return to private life Soames was invited to join Margaret Thatcher's government in 1979 as lord president of the council and leader of the House of Lords. Later that year he was given his most difficult task, being appointed governor of Southern Rhodesia to oversee the ceasefire and elections leading to the independence of Zimbabwe. When he set off from London the ceasefire had still not been agreed, much less brought into effect, and the prospects for the success of his mission were generally discounted by the press. Following the successful conclusion of the Lancaster House negotiations a ceasefire was implemented under the supervision of the largely British Commonwealth monitoring force. Soames had the greatest difficulty with the Rhodesian military commanders on the one hand and sections of the Patriotic Front on the other throughout the period leading up to the elections, which were held in February 1980. He had to exercise responsibility with no more real power than he could win by bargaining with the contending parties. He set out to establish a personal relationship with the black political leaders, assuring Robert Mugabe that, if he won the elections, Soames would take the lead in helping the new government establish itself in a still uncertain, tense, and dangerous situation. When Mugabe did win he invited Soames to continue to serve as governor. In the ensuing period major steps were taken towards bringing together and forming into a single military command elements of the Rhodesian forces and those of the Patriotic Front, which itself was split into two warring factions. Soames left Rhodesia having helped to bring an end to the war and to launch Zimbabwe as an independent nation, amid near-universal plaudits. 
On his return to Britain he had to deal with matters far less congenial to him, including a civil service strike. He found himself out of sympathy with the new economic strategy being pursued by Thatcher and with her style of government. In 1981 he was dropped from the government. He remained thereafter very active in business, holding a number of important directorships until his death, including those of N. M. Rothschilds and the National Westminster Bank, and the chairmanship of ICL (UK). 
Soames was a figure very much larger than life. His conversation could usually be heard in the next room. His convivial but forthright personality inspired strong loyalties among his friends and some resistance on the part of more sensitive souls. His hospitality and enjoyment of life were legendary. As ambassador in Paris, commissioner in Brussels, and governor of Rhodesia he put up performances which could scarcely have been matched by anyone else. His success in all these capacities owed much to his wife, Mary. They had three sons, one of whom, Nicholas, also became a Conservative MP and minister, and two daughters. 
The academic distinctions Soames received included honorary doctorates from Oxford (1981) and St Andrews (1974). He was awarded the Robert Schuman prize in 1976. He was appointed CBE (1955) and GCMG and GCVO (1972), created a life peer as Baron Soames in 1978, and appointed CH in 1980. He also was awarded, on his departure from Paris, the cross of grand officer of the Legion d'honneur. He died from cancer on 16 September 1987, at his home in Odiham, Hampshire. 
Robin Renwick', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39862


Stewart, (Robert) Michael Maitland, Baron Stewart of Fulham (1906-1990), politician, was born on 6 November 1906 at 20 Minster Road, Bromley, the only son and youngest of three children of Robert Wallace Stewart DSc, lecturer and author of scientific textbooks, and his wife, Eva, daughter of Samuel Blaxley. In 1910 his father died and his mother, for whom Stewart had a deep affection, went to work in a mixed school. Stewart used to complain that she was paid four-fifths of the salary of her male colleagues, some of them bachelors. He gave this as one explanation for his passionate advocacy of equal pay and conditions for women teachers when he became secretary of state for education. After attending Brownhill Road elementary school in Catford during the First World War, in 1918 Stewart went by scholarship to Christ's Hospital, Horsham, which was unique among public schools for closing its doors to the sons of the rich, or even of moderately well-off parents. In 1925 Stewart won an open scholarship to St John's College, Oxford, where he obtained first classes in classical honour moderations (1927) and philosophy, politics, and economics (1929). Stewart spent a formative summer vacation in Dresden in 1927, which accounted for the complaints from intelligence corps superiors during the Second World War that he had a Saxon accent. He was elected president of the Oxford Union in 1929, an unusual post for a Labour supporter. 
After Oxford Stewart became a teacher at Merchant Taylors' School (1930-31) and Coopers' Company School (1931-42), which gave him the opportunity to contest, unsuccessfully, the parliamentary seat of West Lewisham for the Labour Party in 1931 and 1935. He joined the army intelligence corps in 1942, transferred to the Army Educational Corps in 1943, and was commissioned and promoted to captain in 1944. In 1945 he was elected as Labour MP for Fulham East. He went into the government whips' office and took to parliamentary life with the greatest of ease. He was comptroller of the royal household in 1946-7 and was then appointed under-secretary of state for war (1947-51), where his performance led R. H. S. Crossman, for whom he had a mutual antipathy, to brand him 'an inveterate cold warrior'. Stewart's parliamentary seat from 1955 to 1974 was Fulham and from 1974 to 1979 Hammersmith and Fulham. 
In thirteen years of Labour opposition (1951-64), Stewart was one of the workhorses of the opposition front bench, specializing in housing and local government. Appointed education secretary in 1964 by Harold Wilson, he became secretary of state for foreign affairs in January 1965, remaining in this post until August 1966, when George Brown had to be accommodated. Deeply resentful, Stewart was appointed first secretary for economic affairs (1966-7), a post in which it was thought that his clarity of mind would ease the government's difficulties over its prices and incomes policy. Such hopes were unfulfilled, partly because trade union leaders, whose co-operation was essential, regarded Stewart as a 'cold fish'. 
In March 1968 Stewart returned to the Foreign Office, which was now linked with Commonwealth Affairs, after the resignation of George Brown. Vietnam apart, the main issues were Rhodesia, where Stewart was anathema to the white population, and Nigeria. He returned to the back benches in 1970, when the Labour government fell, after suffering a crushing defeat in the elections in the Parliamentary Labour Party for the shadow cabinet. Stewart was an excellent choice as leader of Labour's first delegation to the indirectly elected European parliament (1976), where he enjoyed an Indian summer. The obvious quality of his mind and his dignity impressed European politicians. In the words of a Conservative, Sir James Spicer, 'he was a steady hand on the tiller at a time when Labour was deeply divided over EEC membership'. 
Stewart's two stints as foreign secretary involved him in bitter controversy. He infuriated the left by his unswerving support of the American position in the Vietnam war. Then he outraged a wider section of opinion by stridently supporting the federal government's crushing of the secessionist Biafrans in the ferocious Nigerian civil war. During his first stint, his relations with back-bench MPs were safeguarded by his parliamentary private secretary and friend Laurence Pavitt, the popular MP for Willesden. When Pavitt, a committed member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, withdrew from Stewart's service on grounds of policy differences, the foreign secretary became curiously estranged from the Parliamentary Labour Party. On the other hand, he was, according to Sir Nicholas Henderson, who was once his private secretary, 'an unsung foreign secretary'. Henderson argued that, by strength of reason and integrity, Stewart prevented many possible disasters, such as a serious deterioration in British relations with the USA as a result of the Vietnam war, or the setting of a dangerous precedent for Africa, if he had equivocated over Biafra. Yet it was Russia that dominated Stewart's thinking. 
When he retired from parliament in 1979 Stewart accepted a life peerage. He also became president of the trade union committee for transatlantic understanding and of the H. G. Wells Society (from 1982). St John's College, Oxford, elected him to an honorary fellowship in 1965, and he became a freeman of Hammersmith in 1967. He had honorary degrees from Leeds (1966) and Benin (1972). He was sworn of the privy council in 1964 and appointed CH in 1969. 
Stewart was no orator but a good debater, in his nasal, flat, toneless voice. He made a memorable return to the Oxford Union in 1968 in a televised debate in which he put the American case for intervention in Vietnam better than the Americans. His capacity to speak from brief notes was remarkable, and yet he was not a good conversationalist. He tended to display his knowledge of the classics too readily, acting in a patient and expository manner which he probably acquired as a schoolmaster. He was inclined to be prim and austere. He was dapper, with soulful serious eyes; because of his dark hair, in his younger days some of his friends called him Black Michael. Spare of frame, he became grey and distinguished in later years. He wrote five books on political subjects, as well as an autobiography. 
In 1941 Stewart married Mary Elizabeth Henderson Goodyear, teacher, daughter of Herbert Birkinshaw, commercial traveller. There were no children of the marriage. A pillar of the Fabian Society, his wife was created a life peer in her own right in 1974, as Baroness Stewart of Alvechurch. When she died on 28 December 1984, Stewart was stricken with grief, but contrived to speak fluently and logically in the Lords until he died in a London hospital on 10 March 1990. A memorial service was held at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 17 May 1990. 
Tam Dalyell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39863


Stonehouse, John Thomson (1925-1988), politician and confidence trickster, was born on 28 July 1925 in Southampton, the youngest of four children and second son of William Mitchell Stonehouse, Post Office engineer and later dockyard engine-fitter, and his wife, Rosina Marie, formerly a scullery maid in Cowes, Isle of Wight, daughter of Henry George Taylor, boilermaker. The family was active in the local labour movement, the father becoming a trade union official and the mother being an alderman (1936-70) and later mayor (1959) of Southampton. Stonehouse was educated at Tauntons School, Southampton, which he left at the age of sixteen to work in the Southampton probation department as a clerk and typist (1941-4). In 1944 he joined the Royal Air Force, training as a pilot in the USA. From 1947 to 1951 he studied at the London School of Economics, where he obtained a BSc (Econ) degree in 1951. 
In the early 1950s Stonehouse gained experience by working in the co-operative movement both at home and abroad. In 1952 he established valuable African credentials by taking his wife and young family to Uganda, where they stayed until 1954, while he helped to organize the co-operative movement among the African population. Some of his contemporaries said that his work in Uganda was not as pioneering as he subsequently claimed. Nevertheless, it gave him powerful authority in the political debate about decolonization, which was gathering strength in Britain and Africa. Stonehouse was certainly not out of step with his own party's developing policy on Africa. 
In February 1957, at a by-election, Stonehouse entered parliament as Labour co-operative member for Wednesbury, whose MP he remained until 1974. In March 1959 he was declared 'persona non grata' by the government of the federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. The cause of this heavy-handed treatment was a speech to an African audience in which he had urged the black people of Rhodesia to 'lift your heads high and behave as though the country belongs to you'. However, spats with minority regimes in Africa did no harm to Stonehouse's reputation as a coming man. He wrote a book about his experiences, 'Prohibited Immigrant' (1960). 
Stonehouse also established a reputation on the domestic front when he became a director of the London Co-operative Society (1956-62, president 1962-4). The society was one of the jewels in the crown of the co-operative movement and Stonehouse's role kept him in the public eye as a tough, if not always popular, political infighter and administrator. It was no surprise that Harold Wilson sent him to the Ministry of Aviation as parliamentary under-secretary when Labour returned to power in October 1964. He held several subsequent posts in the 1964-70 Labour government: parliamentary under-secretary of state for the colonies (1966-7), minister of aviation (1967), minister of state for technology (1967-8), postmaster-general (1968-9), and minister of post and telecommunications (1969-70). However, he never made the cabinet and was dropped from the government shortly before Labour lost office in 1970. 
In the early 1970s Stonehouse turned his energies to a variety of fund-raising and money-making activities, many associated with the new country of Bangladesh. He created a lattice-work of companies, in which he manipulated funds to conceal mismanagement and fraud. On 21 November 1974 he went missing, presumed dead, while supposedly swimming in the sea off Miami. Five weeks later he was discovered in Australia by Australian police, who thought he might be the missing Lord Lucan. The Stonehouse story then took on aspects of cheap fiction rather than real life. He had obtained two passports in the names of husbands of widows in his constituency. A beautiful mistress, his House of Commons secretary, Sheila Buckley, was identified as having conspired with him to fake the disappearance to enable them both to start a new life together in Australia with money salted away from the Stonehouse companies. At his trial the Stonehouse defences ranged from international conspiracy to mental breakdown. That he had not lived up to high expectations, his own and those of others, had caused him to retreat into a world of deceit and fraud. In 1976 he resigned his privy councillorship, to which he had been appointed in 1968, and applied for the Chiltern Hundreds, thus ceasing to be an MP (he had represented Walsall North from 1974). 
His behaviour would have condemned most men to oblivion, but Stonehouse did not shun the public eye. He served three and a half years in prison and was released in 1979, when, after a brief period of charity work, he turned his hand to writing. Between 1982 and 1987 he had three novels published: 'Ralph' (1982), 'The Baring Fault' (1986), and 'Oil on the Rift' (1987). A posthumous publication, in 1989, was 'Who Sold Australia?' Earlier he had written an autobiography, 'Death of an Idealist' (1975). Three years before his death he started a company which manufactured electronic safes. 
Stonehouse was tall, handsome, and charming. In 1948 he married Barbara Joan, stenographer, daughter of Robert Charles Smith, insurance agent; they had one son and two daughters. The marriage was dissolved in 1978 and in 1981 he married Sheila Elizabeth Buckley, daughter of Leslie William Black, master butcher; her previous marriage had ended in divorce. They had one son. Stonehouse, who had suffered a series of heart attacks and undergone heart surgery during his prison term, collapsed during the night of 15 April 1988 at his home in Totton, near Southampton, and was dead on arrival at Southampton General Hospital. 
C. S. Nicholls Tom McNally', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39864


Basnett, David, Baron Basnett (1924-1989), trade unionist, was born on 9 February 1924 at 1 Ivy Leigh, Liverpool, the son of Andrew Basnett, a collector with a gas company and regional secretary of the National Union of General and Municipal Workers (NUGMW), and his wife, (Mary) Charlotte Kerr. His mother died when he was six. After attending a local elementary school he won a scholarship to Quarry Bank high school in Liverpool. His first job after leaving school was as a bank clerk. During the Second World War he served as a pilot in the Royal Air Force, in Sunderland flying boats involved in reconnaissance missions over the Atlantic. 
Basnett joined the NUGMW as a regional official for Liverpool in 1948 and was appointed as the union's first national education officer in 1955. Five years later he was promoted to the post of national industrial officer, with responsibility for negotiations in the chemicals and glass industries. He gained a reputation as one of the most intelligent and progressive of the new generation of union officials, not least through his active participation in the innovative phase of productivity bargaining at ICI and elsewhere in the chemicals industry. He was a tall, thin, and quietly spoken man, whose demeanour was more like that of an academic or civil servant than of a manual workers' trade union official. In 1956 he married Kathleen Joan Molyneaux, the daughter of John Joseph Molyneaux, general practitioner. 
Basnett achieved wider public recognition during the dramatic seven-week strike at the Pilkington Glass Company in St Helens, Lancashire, in 1970. The dispute exposed chronic weaknesses in union organization and in union-management relations. The closed-shop agreement covering nearly 8000 workers had produced complacency on the part of local union officials and management, the virtual collapse of union membership participation, and the absence of effective joint procedures. Within a few days the strike became a national 'cause celebre', and Basnett was subjected to intense public scrutiny as he struggled to defeat a putative 'breakaway union', to negotiate an end to the bitter dispute, and thereafter to reconstruct the credibility of the NUGMW in St Helens. 
The courage and expertise shown by Basnett at Pilkington undoubtedly contributed to his success in the election for the post of NUGMW general secretary in 1973. The dispute confirmed also that the union required substantial reorganization and improved services in order to encourage growth and effective membership participation. Basnett was not wholly successful in his attempts to reform the NUGMW (which in 1976 became the General and Municipal Workers' Union, or GMWU). In the thirteen years before he retired in 1986, he was able to conclude mergers with several unions, most notably with the Boilermakers to form the General, Municipal, Boilermakers and Allied Trades Union in 1982. The tradition and practices of regional autonomy, however, impeded the implementation of other reforms that might have allowed the union to benefit more from the growth of overall union membership in the 1970s and strengthen it for the more difficult challenges of the 1980s. 
Basnett was appointed to the general council of the Trades Union Congress (TUC) in 1966 and became one of its most prominent members during the following twenty years. He served as chairman of the finance and general purposes committee and the economic committee. He represented the TUC on the National Economic Development Council from 1973 to 1986, as a founder member of the National Enterprise Board (1975-9) and as a member of several committees of inquiry and three royal commissions -- most notably the 1974-7 royal commission on the press, for which he co-authored a minority report. 
Basnett's contribution to the trade union movement can be divided into two distinct periods, separated by the year in which he was chairman of the TUC (1977-8). Throughout the 1970s he worked closely with Jack Jones of the Transport and General Workers' Union in the 'inner cabinet' of the TUC, negotiating with the Heath, Wilson, and Callaghan governments on a wide range of economic, industrial, and social policies. In his 1978 presidential address to the congress, Basnett outlined his strong commitment to the view that union leaders had a right and a duty to participate with government in developing policies designed to improve economic performance and reduce social inequality. A few days later, Callaghan astonished the TUC by his decision to delay the expected general election. Over the following six months the widespread industrial disruption of the 'winter of discontent' buried what was left of the 'social contract' with the Labour government, contributed to its electoral defeat in the spring of 1979, and ended the first, most successful, phase of Basnett's career. 
The Conservative governments of the 1980s were determined to weaken the power of trade unions and to exclude their leaders from any involvement in policy making. The focus of Basnett's activity therefore shifted to the relationship between unions and the Labour Party; he helped to create a new organization in 1979, Trade Unionists for a Labour Victory, promoted conferences between union and Labour Party leaders, and pressed for reforms in the party's structure and organization. The failure of many of these initiatives and the weakness of trade unions throughout the 1980s may have contributed to his decision to retire early in 1986. More important, one of his two sons, Ian, a doctor, had suffered serious neck and spinal injuries on a rugby field in 1984. Basnett chose to strengthen further the close family life that he shared with his wife, Kathleen, Ian, and his other son, Paul. Basnett was made a life peer in 1987 and derived considerable satisfaction from his contributions to the House of Lords. He died of cancer at his home, Windrush, St John's Avenue, Leatherhead, Surrey, on 25 January 1989. 
David Winchester', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39865


Boyd, Sir John McFarlane (1917-1989), trade unionist and Salvationist, was born on 8 October 1917 in Motherwell, Lanarkshire, the only child of James Boyd, butcher, who died in the influenza epidemic of the following year, and his wife, Mary Marshall, who in 1920 married John Burns, collier, with whom she had two further sons. John was welcomed by his stepfather as his own son, but John Burns's earnings were irregular, and after the 1926 general strike he had no work until the outbreak of the Second World War. Boyd was therefore brought up in considerable poverty, and later recalled that until he was fourteen the only boots he possessed were supplied by the parish. He attended Hamilton Street elementary school and Motherwell and Glencairn secondary school, earning money for the family by delivering newspapers and milk. In 1932 he left school early to take up one of the few engineering apprenticeships at the Lanarkshire Steel Company and at the same time joined the apprentices' section of the Amalgamated Engineering Union (AEU). He thus added a second element to his future career, for he had at the age of ten joined the Salvation Army. In 1932 he signed the Salvationist articles of war, was sworn in as a senior soldier, and graduated to a BBb bass in the Motherwell corps; his tuba, he noted, was 'easy to play but heavy'. 
It was with a reputation as an open-air boy preacher that in 1937 Boyd took up the cause of junior workers at the Lanarkshire mill, on the claim of the AEU for the right to negotiate on their behalf. He found himself as one of the youthful leaders of a strike, which spread countrywide and achieved the union's objective on the apprenticeship question. After nine years as a craftsman and shop steward he was elected assistant divisional organizer in 1946, divisional organizer in 1949, and executive councillor for division one (Scotland) in 1953, the youngest member of the union ever to attain that office. He retained this post until 1975 when, following the untimely death of Jim Conway in an aeroplane crash, he was elected general secretary of the AEU until his retirement in 1982. During almost three decades of working from AEU headquarters in London, Boyd held almost every post in the labour movement available to him: president of the Confederation of Shipbuilding and Engineering Unions in 1964; member of the general council of the Trades Union Congress in 1967-75 and 1978-82; and chairman of the Labour Party in 1967. He was also his union's chief negotiator in a number of industries including shipbuilding, atomic energy, electricity supply, paper making, iron and steel, and aluminium. He was a member of the council of the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (1978-82); a director of the British Steel Corporation (1981-6), of the UK Atomic Energy Authority (1980-85), of Industrial Training Services Ltd from 1980, and of International Computers Ltd (UK) from 1984; and a governor of the BBC (1982-7). He was appointed CBE in 1974, knighted in 1979, elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts in 1982, and in 1981, perhaps to his greatest satisfaction, received the Salvation Army's order of the Founder. 
Boyd was a tall, well-built, kindly man, craggy of face and rich in the intonations of the Clydesider. His devotion to the Salvation Army never faltered, nor his sincerity in combining this with his role as a trade unionist. To him they both were aspects of his mission of service. 'Yours, in the Joys of Service', the words with which he ended his address to members urging them to elect him as general secretary of the AEU in 1974, was to him no cant phrase. It was the expression of a form of Christian socialism pursued at a time when this had ceased to be fashionable, but recognizable as a creed which had inspired many of his forebears in the trade union movement. 
Much of Boyd's time within the AEU was spent weaning it away from communist and extreme left-wing influence. When he retired in 1982 the committed left had only two seats on the seven-man AEU executive. His hand was behind the introduction of the secret postal ballot for the election of AEU full-time officials, which was regarded with disfavour by many unions at the time, but later universally accepted. He was a doughty negotiator, persistent, fair, but sometimes tetchy, who sought to update his own organization. In this he did not wholly succeed before his retirement, and he left much still to be done. His efforts to absorb the draughtsmen into the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers (AUEW) (as it was then called) proved, for both organizational and political reasons, to be an exercise in sentiment rather than reality. But he did much to leave his union in better condition than he found it. Above all, Boyd laid great emphasis on decency and trust; 'ye canna', he commented in disgust with an employers' representative who had abused his confidence, 'negotiate with liars'. 
In 1940 Boyd married a fellow Salvationist, Elizabeth, daughter of James McIntyre, steelworker. They had two daughters. Boyd died on 30 April 1989 at his home at 24 Pearl Court, Cornfield Terrace, Eastbourne, Sussex. 
Arthur Marsh', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39866


Cousins, Frank (1904-1986), trade unionist, was born on 8 September 1904 at 28 Minerva Street, Bulwell, Nottinghamshire, the eldest son in a family of ten (five sons and five daughters) of Charles Fox Cousins, miner, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Smith, the daughter of a miner from Bulwell. He was educated at Beckett Road School in Wheatley, Doncaster, and King Edward elementary school, Doncaster, which he left at the age of fourteen in 1918 shortly before the end of the First World War. He immediately started work alongside his father, as a trainee at Brodsworth colliery in Doncaster, where he worked underground and joined the mineworkers' union (then the Yorkshire Miners' Association, which was part of the Miners' Federation of Great Britain, the forerunner of the National Union of Mineworkers). After working in the colliery for more than five years Cousins left to become a truck driver, first delivering coal locally and then, in 1931, as a long-distance road haulage driver -- by which time he had joined the Transport and General Workers' Union (TGWU), led by Ernest Bevin. Meanwhile, on 26 December 1930 he married Annie Elizabeth 
(Nance; 'b'. 1907)
, daughter of Percy Judd, railway clerk, of Doncaster. There were two sons and two daughters of the marriage. 
Cousins mostly ferried meat between Scotland and London until July 1938, when he became a full-time official of the TGWU, as an organizer in the Doncaster district. In one sense he was born into trade unionism as were so many of his generation -- men of great natural ability but without extended education or social opportunities open to the more prosperous groups in society. Becoming a trade union activist was a calling, quite the equal of similarly dedicated work for a political party. At this time Cousins first met Ernest Bevin, clashing with him over organizing road haulage workers into the union. It was a brotherly clash, but one which both men remembered, and especially Cousins, since he felt it may have been a turning point in his own career, demonstrating as it did his characteristic style as a fearless, stubborn, awkward, and rebellious negotiator. His physical stature helped to accentuate these characteristics: he was 6 feet 4 inches tall, powerfully built, and immensely strong. He spoke with a sharp rasping tone, especially when excited by events. His loyalty to his principles and political beliefs was absolute. 
Cousins's development as a full-time official for the TGWU took him from Doncaster to Sheffield during the Second World War. In 1944 he was appointed to his first national trade union post, as national officer for the road haulage section of the TGWU, based in London. In October 1948 he was appointed national secretary for the group, a substantial achievement in view of his difficult relationship with the TGWU general secretary, Arthur Deakin, with whom he had frequently clashed, on industrial as well as political policy. Deakin, a rock of the established right-wing authority of the trade union movement, sought to keep Cousins firmly under control and, where possible, deny him advancement in the union. But a series of remarkable circumstances thrust Cousins into the top ranks of the TGWU. 
Deakin died in 1955 before he could secure his preferred successor. The job of general secretary of the TGWU, arguably the most important power-broking role in the British labour movement, then went to Deakin's number two, Arthur Tiffin, and to everyone's surprise Cousins was appointed by the union's executive as Tiffin's deputy. Tiffin died unexpectedly within six months of taking over and on 2 January 1956 Cousins was appointed 'acting' general secretary. Later, on 11 May 1956, after a union ballot, he was confirmed as general secretary by 503,560 votes to 77,916 -- which was the largest ballot return in the history of any British trade union. At that time the union ran membership ballots only for the general secretary's post. 
The whole affair was an extraordinary sequence of events, which was to have far-reaching consequences for the entire labour movement -- especially for the Labour Party, then under the leadership of Hugh Gaitskell. The largest union in the country had a left-wing radical at the helm for the first time in its history. Cousins immediately made an impact on the industrial front, first in the motor industry, where he inherited a difficult and tense climate of industrial relations as automation was being introduced, and then in London buses, where he led a strike lasting nearly two months. At the same time he quickly sought to switch the TGWU's traditional political stance from staunchly pro-Gaitskell to the support of Aneurin Bevan and the Bevanite left. In fact he went beyond this and personally associated himself and his family with the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. In 1960 Cousins led the campaign to 'ban the bomb' at the Labour Party conference at which Gaitskell was defeated on defence policy. The defeat precipitated Gaitskell's famous 'fight and fight, and fight again' speech. 
After Gaitskell's death in 1963 Cousins played a prominent part in helping to secure Harold Wilson as leader of the Labour Party. In October 1964, when Wilson won the general election, Cousins was invited into the Labour cabinet as the first minister of technology. At the same time he was sworn of the privy council. Yet the rebellious instinct refused to desert him even in the cabinet. He quickly found himself at odds with Wilson, as he opposed all moves by the Wilson government to establish a statutory incomes policy. When, in the end, he failed to persuade his cabinet colleagues, he resigned from the Wilson government in July 1966. Shortly afterwards he also resigned his parliamentary seat at Nuneaton -- a seat that had been found for him in a by-election in 1964 and which he assumed in January 1965. 
Cousins consistently resisted any form of state control over pay, carrying this opposition back with him to the TGWU where, after resigning from the government, he resumed as general secretary in 1966. Yet he never again quite recaptured the force of his earlier years. However, during the three years which remained before he retired from the TGWU in September 1969, he ensured the succession of his chosen 'crown prince', Jack Jones. 
Cousins's final role was as the founding chairman of the Community Relations Commission, set up in 1968 by the Wilson government, and charged with improving race relations in Britain. It was a cause close to Cousins's heart -- so much so that he remained in the post for a short while even after the election of a Conservative government under Edward Heath in 1970. Indeed, he was persuaded to do so by the home secretary, Reginald Maudling. In November 1970 he finally resigned his chairmanship of the commission and went into retirement in the village of Wrington near Bristol, curiously enough only a few miles from where the founder of the TGWU, Ernest Bevin, was born. He refused several invitations to return to public life and declined a seat in the House of Lords. He died at the Royal Hospital, Chesterfield, Derbyshire, on 11 June 1986, of heart failure. He was survived by his wife and four children. His ashes were scattered across moorland near Chesterfield, and a memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 9 July 1986. 
Cousins was the most forceful of all trade union leaders to emerge in the post-war years: he had a remarkable and galvanizing effect on the rank and file of the entire labour movement. He shifted the Labour Party and the trade union movement to the left and turned the Transport and General Workers' Union -- then the largest union in the country -- from a pillar of the Labour right-wing establishment into a driving force for radical left-wing reform. 
The reasons behind Cousins's remarkable, albeit temporary, success went beyond his own forceful, commanding personality -- he emerged on the trade union and political scene at a psychologically important moment in the post-war development of organized labour. By the mid-1950s a good deal of disillusion had set in to dampen the idealism of the immediate post-war years. The Attlee government's loss of office in 1951 led to a widespread conflict of ideas as to what kind of socialist programme should be adopted to appeal to the British voters. The split inside the Labour Party between right and left wing was sharper than ever, with the Gaitskellites and the Bevanites engaged in ideological warfare. Before Cousins the trade union majority within the TUC was solidly Gaitskellite. Cousins changed that balance and in the process began an ideological debate within the entire labour movement about the direction of a future Labour government. His eventual alliance with Harold Wilson -- whom he decisively helped into the leadership of the party -- was expected to be similar to the kind of alliance that Bevin had with Attlee in the 1945 Labour government. But that did not happen. The realities were conditioned by Labour's extremely narrow majority in the 1964 election, by disagreement within the Wilson cabinet, and by Cousins's own impatience. He wanted to push ahead with radical policies, not only in his own new Ministry of Technology, but also for the government as a whole. One example was his deep disagreement with Wilson's foreign policy, especially Britain's political support for the Americans in Vietnam. These factors, along with his refusal to accept a policy of wage restraint, led to his resignation from the government. 
As a cabinet minister, at the pioneering technology department, Cousins was a failure -- like so many 'imports' from industry. He did succeed in launching a number of important developments at the new ministry but his style in the Commons was too abrasive. He privately confessed to feeling ill at ease in the parliamentary ambience. The launching and development of a completely new department of state is, by definition, a formidable task; it requires experienced political skills which Cousins, the combative trade union leader, did not possess. Nor did he get the response he had hoped for from his cabinet colleagues -- some of whom still resented the thrust of his political ideas. 


@@@@@


doc= 39867


Fisher, Alan Wainwright (1922-1988), trade unionist, was born in Birmingham on 20 June 1922, the fourth of five sons (there were no daughters) of Thomas Wainwright Fisher, accountant, and his wife, Ethel Agnes Guest. He was educated at Sparkhill Commercial College, Birmingham. He went to work at the National Union of Public Employees (NUPE), becoming a junior clerk in 1939. On the outbreak of the Second World War that year, he began to serve in the Fleet Air Arm. After demobilization in 1945, he returned to NUPE. 
By 1953 Fisher had become the midlands divisional officer, and in 1962 he was appointed assistant general secretary. NUPE was the fastest-growing trade union at the time, its development assisted by Fisher in three main ways. First, as assistant general secretary in the early 1960s, he saw more clearly than most that NUPE needed to break with the organizational principles and oppositional ideology of the previous general secretary, the 'Welsh fire-eater', Bryn Jones. Jones was an old-time centralist-socialist, never so happy as when denouncing other Trades Union Congress leaders who refused to take seriously his version of militant industrial unionism. Fisher saw that NUPE must make its peace with the leaders of the 'general unions' within the general council of the TUC, seeking for allies in a common struggle against public sector employers and hostile governments. 
Second, after involvement in his first major national dispute, the 'dirty jobs' strike of 1970, Fisher, who had become general secretary in 1968, sensed that NUPE itself was in need of radical reform. As he saw it, the key lay in the development and training of lay activists, integrated into union government as accredited shop stewards. He even came to argue that membership growth was a function of organizational effectiveness, and that this probably involved a process of constant change and adaptation. To this end he sponsored, and sought to implement, the findings of the 1974 Warwick report, a radical plan for constitutional change written by three friendly sociologists. Most members of the general council would not have dared to commission and publish such an investigation into the working of their union. Nobody but Fisher would have handed the job to students of the subject. 
Fisher's third major contribution was double-edged and ill-timed. He decided NUPE needed a rallying cry, to help to achieve real progress for its lowest paid members and attract further recruits. This took the form of a campaign for a national minimum wage, high enough to benefit the union's membership, and potential membership, in the National Health Service and local government. It was to be achieved partly by militant wage bargaining and partly by legislation. Unfortunately he converted the TUC to this policy just before Labour's prime minister, James Callaghan, committed his government to a pay limit of 5 per cent in 1978. 
In the mythology of the labour movement, the difference between Fisher's aspirations and Callaghan's inflexibility led inevitably to the series of disputes known as the 'winter of discontent'. This was the prelude to the return of a Conservative government in April 1979. Of course the truth was more complex. The 5 per cent limit was unacceptable to many employers as well as to all other unions. Once into the dispute Fisher did his best to secure a settlement that would avoid a total government defeat. All the same, he could not quite escape some blame. He enjoyed his moment of history, until he realized the cost. 
Fisher remained as NUPE's general secretary until 1982. He was a member of the TUC's general council from 1968 to 1982, and chairman of the TUC (1980-81). He was also a member of the board of the British Overseas Airways Corporation (1970-72), British Airways (1972-82), and the London Electricity Board (1970-80). He was a director of Harland and Wolff, shipbuilders (1975-83), a governor of Henley Administrative Staff College (1977-83), and a member of the board of the Council for Educational Development Overseas (governor from 1970). 
Fisher was a modest and extremely funny man, with the best line in trade-union repartee of any union leader of his generation. He had an effortless fluency, and his high-speed loquacity added to his charm. He was of average height, and until his long and fatal illness he looked younger than his years. Despite his illness, his high spirits and good nature did not desert him. He was married three times. In 1946 he married Peggy, daughter of Oscar Kinipple, technical representative. There were no children. Peggy died in 1956, and in 1958 he married Joyce Tinniswood, whose father was a farmer. They had two sons and one daughter. The marriage was dissolved in 1976, and in 1978 he married Ruth, formerly Woollerton, the daughter of Walter Henry Olliver, bank courier. There were no children of the third marriage. Fisher died of leukaemia on 20 March 1988 in Maelor Hospital, Wrexham. 
William McCarthy C. S. Nicholls', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39868


Keys, William Herbert (1923-1990), trade unionist, was born on 1 January 1923 at Elliotts Row, Elephant and Castle, London, the third child and second son in the family of four sons and one daughter of George William Keys, printer, and his wife, Jessie Powell. His elder brother and sister died before he was born. He spent his childhood in the Elephant and Castle and was educated at Archbishop Temple Grammar School there. He joined the army in 1939 and served in the rifle brigade throughout the Second World War, until 1946. He had a distinguished war record, becoming one of the youngest sergeant-majors. At one period in the war, cut off near the Nijmegen Bridge, he was behind enemy lines for several days with a handful of his men. He was among the first allied troops to enter Belsen concentration camp. This and his other wartime experiences confirmed his profound dedication to world peace, his total rejection of fascism, and his passionate support for nuclear disarmament. 
Bill Keys started his career in the printing works of the Amalgamated Press, Summer Street, London, but in 1953 he became a full-time official of the National Union of Printing, Bookbinding, and Paperworkers when he was appointed national organizer. From 1961 to 1970 he was the secretary of the union's London central branch, while from 1970 to 1974 he was the general president of the Society of Graphical and Allied Trades (SOGAT). On 1 January 1975 he became general secretary of SOGAT, a post he held until he retired in 1985. He served on the general council of the Trades Union Congress for eleven years from 1974. 
Keys was a highly successful general secretary of SOGAT and its constituent unions and became one of the foremost leaders in the wider trade union movement. On becoming general secretary, he changed SOGAT from being an inward-looking organization to one which became involved in mainstream issues. He believed strongly that it had a role and responsibility to be active within the Trades Union Congress, the Labour Party, and society at large. He was always an internationalist and forged links with unions throughout the world, not only in the printing sphere but on a much broader basis. His stamina and tenacity made him a formidable negotiator, with the ability to take apart the most complex wage structure and put forward a solution to disputes. He was especially renowned for his habit of kicking off his shoes during the hard negotiating sessions with employers. 
Of Keys's many achievements, two stand out. He won a great victory for the continuation of his union's political fund, threatened by the 'Trade Union Act' of 1984, which enforced periodic ballots on the issue. He spearheaded and co-ordinated the political fund ballots in trade unions -- one of the few successes of the trade union movement in the years of the government of Margaret Thatcher. SOGAT was the first union to go to ballot and other unions followed. The other was his commitment to the creation of one union for the printing industry. He achieved a number of steps along this way with the merger in 1975 of the Scottish Graphical Association and SOGAT and then in 1982 of NATSOPA and SOGAT. Although his ultimate goal of one union evaded him before his retirement and death, he had put in place the basis of the SOGAT/NGA amalgamation, which took place in October 1991. 
For all his successes, Keys's biggest disappointment was his failure to persuade his old London central branch members in Fleet Street to accept modernization and new technology. If the 'programme of action' which he devised in 1977 had been accepted, the move of newspapers to Wapping and the demise of Fleet Street would not have happened in the brutal way it did. He foresaw what would ensue and wanted to avoid it. 
On the wider trade union scene Keys made a significant contribution to TUC policy making at a national level, particularly in the role of chairman of the employment policy committee (1976-85) and of the printing industries committee (1974-85). He also presided over the TUC media committee (1977-85) and the equal rights committee (1974-85), and served on the race relations committee (1974-85) and the finance and general purposes committee (1982-5), which is regarded as the TUC's 'inner cabinet'. As one of the elder statesmen of the TUC, he was the trade union nominee for the committee of inquiry which resolved the national steel strike (1980) and the national water strike (1983). He was one of the seven senior TUC leaders who tried to resolve the miners' strike of 1984-5. He was also the TUC nominee on the Commission for Racial Equality (1977-81), the Manpower Services Commission (1979-85), and the Central Arbitration Committee (from 1972). From 1981 to 1985 he was on the TUC-Labour Party liaison committee, and he was a leading light in the trades unions for a Labour victory organization. 
Keys was warm, generous, and compassionate. He was well built, 6 feet in height, and some 13 stone in weight. In 1941 he married Enid, daughter of William Gleadhill, who travelled all over the world doing many jobs, including work in the oilfields of the Persian Gulf. They had two sons, Ian and Keith. He died of heart trouble on 19 May 1990 at his home, 242 Maplin Way, North Thorpe Bay, Essex. 
John Gennard', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39869


Plant, Cyril Thomas Howe, Baron Plant (1910-1986), trade union official, was born on 27 August 1910 in Leek, Staffordshire, the only son and elder child of Sidney Plant, manager of a Co-operative Society shop, and his wife, Rosina Edna Thomas, who previously ran a grocer's shop. He was educated at Leek high school, where he was head boy and captain of the cricket team. In 1927 he began work as a sorting clerk in the post office in Leek, where his interest in trade unions began. In these early years he was a keen local amateur association football player, and later became a referee, developing an interest in football that he retained throughout his life. 
In 1934 Plant was successful in the limited competition for entry to the civil service clerical class. He joined the Inland Revenue in the collection service as an assistant collector. He quickly became a delegate to the conference of the newly formed Inland Revenue Staff Federation. He was elected to the executive committee of the federation, and in 1937 became honorary secretary of the collection section. At this time the federation was still an unsettled alliance of former collection, inspectorate, and valuation divisions. Plant developed, and later finely tuned, his skills as a mediator and conciliator, helping to bind the union together. Later his skills as a 'fixer' were to be of great service to the international trade union movement. He was appointed in 1944 to a full-time federation post as assistant secretary and then deputy general secretary. In 1960 he succeeded Douglas Houghton as its general secretary. There were by then relatively few opportunities for the federation, through Plant, to obtain improvements significantly in advance of the rest of the civil service and he directed much of his energies and abilities into broader areas of trade union and related activities. 
Plant was a member of the Trades Union Congress general council from 1964 to 1976 and served on its economic and international committees. His expertise on fiscal and economic subjects gave him far greater authority and respect than usual for someone from such a small union, and this was buttressed by his willingness to offer his colleagues good advice on income tax matters and frequent tips, some good and some less good, on horse-racing, which was a passionate interest of his. He was chairman of the TUC in 1975-6. He also fulfilled many TUC duties, including membership of public bodies such as the Community Relations Commission (1974-7), the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (1975-8), and the departmental committee of inquiry into police pay chaired by Lord Edmund-Davies (1977-8). After retirement in 1977 he became parliamentary adviser to the Police Federation and assiduously defended its interests in the House of Lords. A police band played at his funeral. 
Plant was active at International Labour Office (ILO) conferences from 1965 onwards, and the ILO gave him a major platform to press for the development of trade union rights and improvements in working conditions, particularly of public service employees, throughout the world. He was a member of the governing body of the ILO from 1969 to 1977. He played a powerful role in the programme, financial, and administrative committee, a body which exerted great authority over finance and allocation of resources during the difficult period when the USA withdrew membership and subscriptions. In the international context Plant displayed the many virtues of British trade union leaders in international settings. He grasped the importance of obtaining agreement and consensus from delegates, and his mastery of the complexities of procedural provisions allowed him to produce solutions that were acceptable to all. He spoke with eloquence, wit, and authority, earning respect from employers and government delegates alike. 
Plant had a deep commitment to further education and was treasurer of the Workers' Educational Association from 1969 to 1981. He was a member of the governing body of Ruskin College, Oxford, and chairman of the governors from 1967 to 1979, helping to raise funds for one of the new buildings, which was named after him. 
Plant's interest in the Post Office and Civil Service Sanatorium Society began with his first job, and he was chairman of the committee of management from 1950 to 1975. It was his initiative which led to the queen mother becoming patron of the society, and under his guidance it developed into a large vocational health service, with a hospital not only to provide treatment for its members but also to encourage research. When Plant was made a life peer in 1978 he gave Benenden, the location of the hospital, as that of his title. This was the greatest of Plant's non-professional interests. He was appointed OBE in 1965 in recognition of his work for the society and CBE in 1975. 
Plant was a firm believer in the virtues of the British civil service, with its concepts of duty and responsibilities, combined with a total commitment to the benefits of strong independent trade unions to protect the rights of public service employees. At the ILO he spoke in defence of the interests of the ILO employees and in particular sought to protect their pension rights. 
Plant was a large, well-built man, 6 feet 1 inch tall, and broad shouldered. In 1931 he married Gladys Sampson, daughter of Sampson Mayers, textile manufacturer. They had two sons and one daughter. Plant died from a burst aorta in hospital in Tours, France, on 9 August 1986, while on holiday with his wife. 
Derek Robinson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39870


Aves, Dame Geraldine Maitland (1898-1986), civil servant and social reformer, was born on 22 August 1898 at Jay's Hatch, a gamekeeper's cottage in a wood near the village of Bovenden, Hertfordshire, because her mother wanted her first child to be born in the depths of the country. She was the elder daughter (there were no sons) of Ernest Harry Aves (1857-1917), social investigator (and collaborator of Charles Booth), who later, as an expert on minimum wage rates and working conditions, became first chairman of the trades boards set up in 1909. His wife, Eva Mary, was the youngest of the six children of Frederick Maitland, of the East India Company, and Emma Knox Maitland, nee Rees, who was herself a remarkable woman and, until her death in 1923, an important figure in Geraldine's youth. A suffragist, Emma Knox Maitland was one of the first women members (elected 1894) of the London school board. Geraldine and her sister attended Frognal, a small private school in Hampstead, London. In April 1917 their father unexpectedly died. It was a blow that Geraldine Aves described, even in old age, as 'the worst of my life'. 
Geraldine Aves went to Newnham College, Cambridge (1917-20), and graduated third class in both parts of the economics tripos (1919 and 1920). While at Cambridge she became president of the Women's University Settlement Society and this helped her to decide that 'doing something with and for people was how I should spend my days'. She was appointed in early 1924 as a 'temporary assistant organizer' in the care committee service of the London county council's education department. By 1938, under the threat of the Second World War, she was engaged at county hall in the complex plans for the evacuation of London schoolchildren. In 1941 she was seconded to the Ministry of Health as chief welfare officer responsible for the general co-ordination of evacuation and wartime welfare services, including the recruitment of social workers. Drawn into the plans for post-war reconstruction, in June 1945 she served as the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration's chief child-care consultant in Europe, returning to the ministry in 1946 to become the established head of a permanent welfare division, where, apart from undertaking various short-term assignments to the United Nations, she remained until retiring in 1963. She played a key part in developing the post-war reforms in welfare services, the subsequent development of personal social services, and social work training. 
Geraldine Aves's retirement from the Ministry of Health was the beginning of a second career in the voluntary sector. She was fully occupied in promoting, enabling, and chairing (at which she excelled) numerous projects and organizations that were eager for her support. She served on the National Institute of Social Work Training (board of governors, 1961-71), the Council for Training in Social Work (member, 1962-72), the London diocesan synod and bishop's council (member, 1971-9), the London diocesan board for social responsibility (vice-chair, 1979-84), the National Corporation for the Care of Old People (vice-president, 1981-4), the North London Hospice (founder president, 1986), the Harington scheme (a horticultural training scheme for young people with learning difficulties, of which she became chair in 1980 and later vice-president in 1984), and many other organizations. Among the achievements in which she took most pride in this second career was that of chairing the independent committee of inquiry into the place of and scope for voluntary workers in the social services, which was set up in 1966. Following vigorous campaigning under her leadership, the committee's report, 'The Voluntary Worker in the Social Services' (1969), led to the creation of the Volunteer Centre (later the National Centre for Volunteering), a national organization which aimed to promote and encourage volunteering at all levels and in all spheres of society. She became a founder member of its board of governors and, from 1974, vice-president. It was this work that led to her appointment as DBE in 1977 -- an honour she had long coveted and, rightly, felt she deserved. She had been appointed OBE in 1946 for her contribution to wartime social services, and CBE in 1963. All through her working life she maintained close links with Newnham College. In 1956 she was elected associate, in 1962 associate fellow, and in 1981 honorary fellow. 
Geraldine Aves was one of that band of educated single women who, following the First World War, looked for personal fulfilment in a professional career. She found it in a lifetime devoted to the common good. A handsome woman, of regal appearance, she charmed many and overawed -- on occasion bullied -- some others, though her authoritarian manner softened in later years. From the age of thirty-four, when she was baptized, her Christian faith meant a great deal to her. She never married, but enjoyed a rich private life of travels and companionship with close friends and relatives. It was while visiting, in Swanage, Dorset, a former colleague, Sibyl Clement Brown (who in 1927 became Britain's first qualified psychiatric social worker), that she was taken ill. She entered a nursing home, and died on 23 June 1986. 
Phyllis Willmott', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39871


Booth, Catherine Bramwell- (1883-1987), Salvation Army officer, was born on 20 July 1883 at Hadley Wood, Middlesex, the eldest in the family of two sons and five daughters of (William) Bramwell Booth (1856-1929), Salvation Army general, and his wife, Florence Eleanor Booth, nee Soper (1861-1957) ['see under 'Booth, (William) Bramwell]. Bramwell was the eldest son of Catherine Booth and General William Booth (1829-1912), the founder of the Salvation Army, and both he and his wife became Salvation Army leaders. Catherine spent all her childhood at Hadley Wood, which was 'so perfect that I have never written about it, as no-one would believe me'. Her mother disapproved of outside influences acting on the tender minds of her children and taught them all herself for two hours every morning. 
At the age of eighteen Catherine Booth left her idyllic family life to become a full-time Salvation Army officer, an occupation she never left until her retirement. She added her father's forename to her surname. Following a period of study at the Salvation Army Training College, her first posting, in 1904, was as a captain in Bath. The pay was 7's'. 6died a week and the duties, which started at 6 a.m., meant providing some counter-attraction to the pubs and gin houses every night of the week. She then held appointments in a number of important provincial centres, in charge of the Salvation Army's evangelical work, before commencing, in 1907, a period of ten years assisting with the training of women officers at the army's International Training College in Clapton, London. In 1913 she preached in tsarist Russia and in 1917 made headlines when she led a rescue team into the area devastated by the Silvertown munitions factory explosion in West Ham, London, in which sixty people were killed. Later she was involved with relief work in Europe after both world wars. She vacated her post at the International Training College in 1917 to assume responsibility as international secretary for Salvation Army work in Europe, attached to the international headquarters in London. She was subsequently (1926-46) in charge of the movement's social work among women in Great Britain. In 1927 she was appointed a commissioner, concerned with all the Salvation Army's social welfare activities, meeting the needs of all types of people, from orphaned children to the elderly residents of Salvation Army eventide homes. From 1946 she was international secretary for Europe until she retired in 1948. 
Catherine Bramwell-Booth was nominated three times for the generalship of the Salvation Army. On each occasion, in 1934, 1939, and 1946, the election resulted in one of the other candidates assuming the mantle of international leader. Possibly it was felt that the movement, at that stage, should not appear to be dependent on the Booth 'dynasty'. Certainly Commissioner Catherine, as she became affectionately known, was firmly in the Booth mould of charismatic leadership. Throughout her life she remained true to the evangelical driving force of her parents and grandparents. Everyone confronted by her, from local tradesmen to distinguished national journalists, could expect a fearless cross-examination of their spiritual state and a presentation of the claims of her beloved Jesus Christ. She was a Salvation Army officer who never strayed from her roots and never lost her pioneering zeal. She had a keen analytical mind and a fund of knowledge which made her public addresses dynamic and inspiring, as well as informative. 
Catherine Bramwell-Booth wrote several books, her best being a biography of her grandmother, 'Catherine Booth: the Story of her Loves' (1970). This book brought her public recognition late in life, which resulted in her becoming something of a media personality, with a chirpy, engaging manner. During the last decade of her life she made frequent appearances as a stimulating guest on many radio and television programmes. In 1971 she was appointed CBE. Six years later, at the age of ninety-three, she received the Guild of Professional Toastmasters best speaker award -- to her own amusement, because she was a lifelong teetotaller. In 1983 she was honoured with the Salvation Army's order of the Founder. She died, unmarried, at the age of 104 on 4 October 1987 at her home, North Court, in Finchampstead, Berkshire, where she lived with two of her sisters. 
Eva Burrows', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39872


Kirkley, Sir (Howard) Leslie (1911-1989), charity director, was born on 13 March 1911 in Manchester, the youngest in the family of two sons and one daughter of Albert Kirkley, a Manchester schoolmaster, and his wife, Elizabeth Winifred Harris. He matriculated from Manchester Central High School, qualified in Manchester's local government examinations, and became an associate of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries. His early career in local government stirred a growing interest in politics which was reinforced by his staunchly Liberal father and by visits to the Rhondda, which was then suffering from the depression. His consequent involvement with social welfare issues at home was matched by concern for peace abroad. An active organizer for the Peace Pledge Union, he registered as a conscientious objector with unconditional exemption. In 1940 Manchester council decided to sack registered conscientious objectors and Kirkley lost his job. It was a moment of truth which revealed his commitment, courage, and unyielding refusal to compromise on matters of principle. 
A number of jobs followed before Kirkley's appointment in 1942 as regional secretary for the Fellowship of Reconciliation based in Leeds. Here he became a founder member and honorary secretary to the Leeds European relief committee, sending food to war-torn Greece and, following the war, clothing to Germany and Austria. After the war came his first direct and successful experience of running a business, for the Quaker painting and decorating firm of Harry Seel. A secure future seemed assured when, in 1951, recruited by Cecil Jackson-Cole, he moved to Oxford to become general secretary to the Oxford Committee for Famine Relief, one of whose founders was T. R. Milford. Over the next twenty-four years he transformed this small local committee into a leading national and international organization. 
The transformation began with the committee's involvement in disaster relief after the Greek earthquake in 1953. There followed help to refugees: victims of the Korean war, the Chinese civil war, the Hungarian uprising, and the Algerian war, and displaced Palestinians. Kirkley's personal visits to disaster areas, and the committee's high-profile role, together with the pioneering use of professional fund-raising methods, achieved rapid growth. As chairman of the World Refugee Year's public relations and publicity committee, Kirkley visited Congo (1961), and the huge public response which the plight of the starving refugees invoked catapulted his organization -- which in 1961 became Oxfam, with Kirkley as its first director -- into the role of a major medium for prompt disaster relief. 
The 1960s saw Oxfam move into long-term development work with a network of field staff. Kirkley played a key role within the freedom from hunger campaign (1960-65) and consequently became interested in the causes of poverty. He began to campaign for a new interpretation of charity to include the examination of the causes of hunger and poverty as well as their relief. This soon brought complaints from the Charity Commission. Kirkley doggedly stood firm and successfully moved the frontier forward with his skilful and non-confrontational approach. His leadership also achieved a growing network of Oxfam shops, establishment of Oxfam Trading, encouragement of independent Oxfams overseas, provision of development education for schools, and establishment of the World Development Movement to campaign on issues which charity law prevented Oxfam from pursuing. Kirkley had succeeded handsomely in his aim 'to professionalize the whole business of charity without losing its soul in the process'. When he left Oxfam in 1974 it was a high-profile and flourishing organization of international renown and in the United Kingdom the antiquated concept of charity had been challenged. 
Departure from Oxfam did not mean retirement. A further decade of involvement with voluntary and public organizations was to follow: as a member of the Board of Crown Agents (1974-80), chairman of the standing conference on refugees and the British Refugee Council (1974-81), chairman of the disasters' emergency committee (1977-81), and chief executive of the Voluntary and Christian Service Trust, the parent body of Help the Aged and Action Aid (1979-84). Here Kirkley's organizational talents provided a cost-effective management structure which enabled Help the Aged to become a mainstream charity and to encourage an international network of similar indigenous organizations: Help the Aged International. 
Colleagues from all stages of his working life remembered Kirkley for his particular blend of warmth, optimism, energy, obstinacy, grit, and practical business sense. His efficient administrative skills were self-evident, but he was never a bureaucrat, disliking committees and preferring to work through personal contact. His were political skills. His management strengths lay in his ability to pick people of talent and commitment and motivate them to give of their best, allowing them freedom to operate creatively while, with his quiet style of leadership, he retained ultimate control. 
Kirkley became a knight commander of the order of St Sylvester in 1963, and in 1974 was given the Victor Gollancz humanity award. He was appointed CBE in 1966 and knighted in 1977. Honorary MAs came from the universities of Oxford (1969), Leeds (1970), and Bradford (1974), and an honorary fellowship from Manchester Polytechnic (1971). He was also head shepherd of the Greek village of Livaderon. 
Stocky in build, informal in dress and manner, with straightforward northern bluntness and a quizzical smile, Kirkley was outwardly easy-going, with a Quaker preference for compromise over confrontation. But the relaxed manner masked a steely determination, and his courage and tenacity could appear as obstinacy to frustrated colleagues. He had been raised an Anglican but his pacifism during the war led him to join the Quakers, and the deep sense of service which motivated him sprang from his Christian socialist commitment. 
A lover of music, theatre, and country walks, Kirkley drew rich pleasure from life. Devoted to his dogs and to his family -- who had none the less to take their place -- he was twice married, first in 1936 to Elsie May (died 1956), daughter of John Rothwell, accountant, and second to (Constance Nina) Mary, daughter of Thomas Bannister-Jones, clergyman. His family comprised three sons and two daughters, one daughter and one son being from the first marriage. Despite a serious heart attack in 1986 he continued to work for the things in which he believed. He died in the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 9 January 1989. 
Frank Judd', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39873


Lacey, Janet (1903-1988), charity director, was born in Sunderland on 25 October 1903, the younger child and younger daughter of Joseph Lacey, property agent, who had been born within the sound of Bow Bells, and his wife, Elizabeth Smurthwaite, from the north of England. Her father died when Janet was ten, and her sister, Sadie, died of cancer in mid-life. She went to various schools in Sunderland before going to drama school in Durham. Her family were fairly narrow Methodists, mostly teetotal, though her father 'drank whisky like water'. It may have been her father's death that caused Janet's mother to send her to live with an aunt in Durham. 
Although she toured in the theatre world for three years, Janet Lacey found it hard to make a living. At the age of twenty-two she applied to the Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA) for work, and in 1926 was sent to the YWCA at Kendal to train as a youth leader. She stayed there for six years. Her skills in drama were fully used, and she received her first introduction to theology. Later she became an Anglican. During the general strike of 1926 she saw much poverty in Durham pit villages and became a Labour supporter. In 1932 she moved to Dagenham, London, to a job which used many of her gifts, in a mixed YMCA-YWCA community centre at the heart of a vast new housing estate which provided activities 'from the cradle to the grave'. 
In 1945 Lacey became YMCA education secretary to the British army of the Rhine, which was slowly being demobilized. It was typical of her that she used the post to bring young British soldiers together with young Germans and with refugees. She learned much about running programmes of social aid and made her first contacts with ecumenical church leaders such as Bishop Hans Lilje and Bishop George Bell. She said she would go about whispering to herself: 'I must not get used to this devastation.' Her capacity for compassion shaped her career. 
Lacey was appointed youth secretary of the British Council of Churches in 1947, a job which introduced her to the World Council of Churches. She was a significant presence at its four assemblies: at Amsterdam, Evanston, New Delhi, and Uppsala. For the second assembly she wrote and produced a dramatic presentation, 'By the Waters of Babylon' (1956). She got to know intimately many of the leaders of the world church, such as Visser't Hooft. In Britain the peak of her work was the Bangor youth conference in 1951. 
By 1952 Lacey needed a task which would use her full talents. In December that year she was appointed secretary (the term 'director' was only used later) of Inter-Church Aid (from 1960 Christian Aid), a post she held until 1968. She worked from both Geneva and London, helping to establish many other important bodies such as Voluntary Service Overseas and World Refugee Year, but her greatest contribution was to conceive Christian Aid Week. This was wholly her idea and she executed it with characteristic flair. The first week raised only $25,000 but by the time she retired it was raising $2 million a year. 'Need not creed' was her slogan as she stumped not only Britain but the world. 
Lacey was tough and stocky; without being tall she confronted others as being a tower of strength. She was a formidable, autocratic leader, often infuriating, but her compassion in action caused even her critics to admire her. She was blunt to a fault. She was a skilled manager, but not as humane in her management as the really good manager needs to be, so that after she retired from Christian Aid, her years as director of the Family Welfare Association (1969-73) were not a total success. She more successfully reorganized the Churches' Council for Health and Healing (1973-7). Although she could run huge organizations, she could not boil an egg: nevertheless she loved entertaining her friends -- at restaurants. She adored the theatre, music, and sculpture. 
After her great contribution to World Refugee Year, she was appointed CBE in 1960. In 1967 she became the first woman to preach in St Paul's Cathedral. In 1970 her autobiographical volume, 'A Cup of Water', was published. Late in life she was prepared for confirmation by Father St John Groser, the socialist East End priest. She was awarded an honorary DD from Lambeth in 1975. Her retirement in her Westminster flat was happy -- she would welcome her many friends from all corners of the globe -- until she became a victim of Alzheimer's disease. She died, unmarried, in a nursing home at 11-13 Ladbroke Terrace, Kensington, on 11 July 1988, after having spent several years living there. 
Eric James', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39874


Fox, Felicity Lane-, Baroness Lane-Fox (1918-1988), philanthropist, was born on 22 June 1918 in Newton Kyme, near Tadcaster, Yorkshire, the youngest child in the family of one son and three daughters of Captain Edward Lane-Fox JP and his wife, Enid Maud Bethell, herself later appointed MBE in 1967 for work for hospitals. Both her parents came from old Yorkshire families, her mother being the daughter of Alfred James Bethell, of Rise, and her father being the younger brother of George Richard Lane-Fox, the first and last Baron Bingley, of Bramham. At the age of two, Felicity developed periostitis, which left her with a permanently weak right arm. In 1930, at the age of twelve, on a summer holiday on the Yorkshire coast at Filey, she contracted poliomyelitis in a vicious form, which left her totally paralysed. Two years passed before she was able to sit up or to hold a cup or pencil. During this period she was living at home in the family house near Wetherby. Deprived of any formal education, she acquired knowledge by her own efforts supported by her mother's wide-ranging enthusiasms. Her mother, who lived until 1986, devoted the next fifty-five years of her life to the daily care of her disabled daughter. After her mother became incapable of looking after her, she was cared for by her sister. 
When war came in 1939, Felicity Lane-Fox took on a job with the billeting officer in Wetherby. After the end of hostilities in 1945 she went into local politics as a councillor for the Wetherby division of the West Riding county council and became chairman of the local Conservative association. Her interest in politics took her from there in 1960 to an appointment as assistant at the Conservative Research Department and in 1963 she became a member of the executive of the National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations. Through these links with the party, she became known to Margaret Thatcher, who, on becoming prime minister, offered her in 1981 a life peerage, which she was only persuaded to accept after her mother convinced her that the House of Lords would give her a forum for speaking on behalf of the disabled. This she assiduously did during the next seven years, making her maiden speech, a fortnight after taking her seat, on the integration of disabled children into ordinary schools. She was absent from the house on only three working days during her first year as a member. 
Felicity Lane-Fox's work for the disabled had already won her an OBE in 1976, for in spite of her own disability, and with the indefatigable help of her mother, who combined the roles of nurse, chauffeur, and counsellor, she travelled widely, spoke frequently, and carried on a large correspondence on behalf of a number of societies and projects connected with disabled people. Among these were the Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre at Oxford, where she was a member of the house committee, and the national fund-raising committee of the Disablement Income Group, of which she was chair. In 1978 she became patron of the Handicapped Adventure Playground Association. To all these activities she paid full attention, regularly attending their meetings, to which she was driven in a specially adapted minicar into which she could be winched through the back window by her mother, who in spite of increasing age managed to propel her in the vehicle or on the ground with unflagging energy. For having learned to walk with the aid of a calliper and some human support, Felicity in 1966 slipped on an icy patch of roadway, broke her pelvis, and was never able to walk again. 
After becoming a baroness Felicity Lane-Fox accepted several further appointments to societies for the disabled, in particular becoming a member of the prince of Wales's advisory group on disability and of the committee of inquiry into arts and disabled people. But the project which was closest to her heart was the Phipps Respiratory Unit Patients' Association (PRUPA). This unit, originally established in Clapham by Dr Geoffrey Spencer to provide relief and therapy for patients suffering from breathing maladies, was, thanks to her fund-raising efforts, later moved to become part of St Thomas's Hospital in Lambeth Palace Road, where it was renamed the Lane-Fox Respiratory Unit, and is a fitting memorial to her. 
Felicity Lane-Fox leavened her arduous work for the disabled by a variety of other interests. She enjoyed watching cricket, tennis, racing, drama, and documentaries on television or listening to them on the radio, as well as a game of bridge and perhaps, most of all, social intercourse and conversation with her many friends. Her life was an example of how to overcome crippling physical infirmity and use the experience of it to alleviate the plight of fellow sufferers. 
The fact that Felicity Lane-Fox was chair-bound, and also possessed a mane of thick brown hair, made it appear that her head was unusually large. With a high forehead, mischievous grey eyes, a classical nose, and a magnolia complexion, which never showed signs of ageing, her face gave an impression of being poised for laughter, into which it readily dissolved. She died, unmarried, in St Thomas's Hospital on 17 April 1988; a memorial service was held at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 7 June 1988. 
Edward Ford', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39875


Seebohm, Frederic, Baron Seebohm (1909-1990), banker and philanthropist, was born on 18 January 1909 at Poynder's End, Hitchin, Hertfordshire, the second in the family of three sons and one daughter of Hugh Exton Seebohm, banker, of Poynder's End, and his wife, Leslie, daughter of George James Gribble. He was the grandson of the historian Frederic Seebohm. The Seebohm family had emigrated from Germany to Yorkshire in the mid-nineteenth century, and subsequently had been for three generations Quakers and bankers at Hitchin; their bank had been one of the constituents of Barclays Bank on its formation in 1896. Seebohm was educated at the Dragon School, Oxford, at Leighton Park School in Reading, and then at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he read economics but left after two years (having achieved a third class in part one in 1929) to enter Barclays Bank, Cambridge, in 1929. He spent most of the next twenty-five years first in Sheffield, where he was posted in 1932, and after the war in York and Birmingham, as a local director. During this time he developed his interest in social services as treasurer of the Sheffield Council of Social Service, chairman of the community council in York, and a member of the Joseph Rowntree Memorial Trust. The Seebohms were related to the Rowntree family. 
In 1938 Seebohm joined the Territorial Army and in 1939 was commissioned in the Royal Artillery. After attending the Staff College in 1944, he was posted to Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force, as a lieutenant-colonel (GSO1). In 1945 he was mentioned in dispatches and awarded the bronze star of America. 
Seebohm was appointed a director of Barclays Bank Ltd in 1947 and in 1951 of Barclays Bank (Dominion, Colonial and Overseas -- DCO). In 1957 he moved to London in a full-time executive position in Barclays Bank DCO, becoming a deputy chairman in 1959 and chairman in 1965. Seebohm developed DCO from a federation of retail banks in the former colonies and South Africa into an international bank operating on a worldwide basis. 
In spite of constant travelling overseas Seebohm continued to extend his interests in the City as chairman of Friends' Provident Life Office (1962-8), the Export Guarantees Advisory Council (1967-72), and Barclays Bank Ltd, where he became deputy chairman in 1968. In 1966-8 he was president of the Institute of Bankers. He was knighted in 1970. In 1972 he retired as chairman of DCO, which, as part of his international strategy, had been taken over by Barclays Bank Ltd in 1971 and renamed Barclays Bank International. He remained deputy chairman of Barclays until 1974 but, although he remained on the board until 1979, his interests were increasingly elsewhere. From 1974 to 1979 he was chairman of Finance for Industry, which had been set up by the banks in the aftermath of the Second World War to assist in the development of industry, a subject close to his heart. 
Seebohm's wider reputation came from his other great interest, social service. His earlier experience made him a natural choice to head the government's inquiry (1965-8) into local authority and allied personal social services, which led to the Seebohm report (1968). The far-reaching conclusions, most of which were embodied in the 'Local Authority (Social Services) Act' of 1970, owed much to his strong personal convictions, skilled chairmanship, and vigorous advocacy. He was made a life peer in 1972. From the House of Lords, where he sat as an independent, he maintained a close interest in subsequent developments in the social services, as well as in financial matters, and served as chairman of the Joseph Rowntree Memorial Trust, and president of Age Concern, the National Institute of Social Work, the Royal Africa Society, and the Overseas Development Institute. He was asked by the government to report on naval welfare (1974) and the British Council (1980). He was high sheriff of Hertfordshire in 1970-71. He received honorary degrees of LLD from Nottingham in 1970 and DSc from Aston in 1976. 
Seebohm's rather military bearing, conciseness of speech, and formidable powers of chairmanship, combined with a very direct approach and strong, sometimes unconventional, views, won him respect and affection in the many fields to which he contributed. In later years he became a member of the Society of Friends, which his father had left on 'marrying out'. He was a keen shot, played real tennis, and was later a skilled gardener and competent watercolour painter. He became an honorary member of the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours. 
In 1932 he married Evangeline, daughter of Sir Gerald Hurst QC; they had two daughters (one of them the writer Victoria Glendinning) and one son. Lady Seebohm died thirteen days after her husband as a result of a motor accident near Sutton Scotney in Hampshire. Seebohm died in the accident, on 15 December 1990. A memorial service was held in St Margaret's, Westminster, London, on 13 March 1991. 
Peter Leslie', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39876


Wootton, Barbara Frances, Baroness Wootton of Abinger (1897-1988), economist and social scientist, was born on 14 April 1897 in Cambridge, the only daughter and youngest of three children of James Adam (1860-1907), tutor at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and his wife, Adela Marion Kensington, classicist and a fellow of Girton. Her father had been born into the family of a farm worker in Aberdeenshire, whence he made his way by scholarship from village school to Cambridge University and a degree in classics. 
Barbara herself was healthy, good-looking, and precocious. Her father died when she was ten and he only forty-seven. Her best schoolfriend died at school, and her brother Arthur in war. She was then widowed by war. Her husband, John Wesley (Jack) Wootton, a research student at Trinity College, Cambridge, and the son of Arthur Wootton, from a nonconformist manufacturing family in Nottingham, was a friend of her elder brother Neil. They were married on 5 September 1917 and had thirty-six hours together before she saw him off to France at Victoria Station. He died of wounds on 11 October 1917 and in due course the War Office returned to her his bloodstained uniform. It is reasonable to speculate that the phobias and obsessions which plagued her had their origins in these adversities. Yet she herself remained resolutely pre-Freudian in her attitudes towards responsibility in the face of disaster. Utter self-reliance was her creed. 'We would do better', she thought, 'to encourage children from the earliest possible age, however wretched their backgrounds, to believe that they are, or at least soon will be, masters of their fates.' 
Though Barbara prayed earnestly to be sent away to school like her brothers, she did not escape the home nursery until at thirteen she was allowed to enter the Perse High School for Girls in Cambridge as a day pupil. Her mother wanted her to study classics at Girton College, and she was dutifully successful in the entrance examinations, becoming a candidate for the first part of the tripos, even though her strong personal inclination was to abandon dead languages for Alfred Marshall and modern economics. As her final examinations approached she succumbed, apparently psychosomatically, to virulent tonsillitis. Her illness caused her to get an 'aegrotat' degree (1918). Liberation from the well intentioned matriarchal dominion of her childhood began with part two of the tripos. She put aside the Greek and Latin texts and turned to read economics with determined enthusiasm. She gained a first class in 1919. Yet, ironically, as a woman she was prevented from appending BA to her name. 
After leaving Cambridge Wootton took up a research studentship at the London School of Economics. In 1920 Girton recalled her to a fellowship and the directorship of social studies in the college, and the board of economics invited her to lecture on economics and the state. The University of Cambridge at this time did not officially allow the admission of women and therefore could not license lectures by a non-member. Hubert Henderson intervened gallantly, offering himself as the advertised lecturer but on the understanding that the university would add in brackets that the lectures would be delivered by Mrs Wootton. 
Wootton married again in 1935, her second husband being George Percival Wright, the son of Thomas Wright, of 29 Prothero Road, London. He was her colleague in adult education and London government, and was temporarily a cab driver. There was no permanent peace, for Wright turned out to be a 'natural polygamist', who kept a succession of 'secondary wives' round the corner, though making it clear to each that his loyalty to Barbara was paramount. She nursed him through a long illness until he died of cancer in 1964. There were no children of the marriage. 
Wootton forsook not only the classics but also conventional scholarship and institutional religion. Her circumstances and her temperament gradually formed her into a rationalist, an agnostic, and a socialist -- a method, a philosophy, and a commitment which lent steady consistency to a long professional and public life. Her rationalism evolved, no doubt, in part from sheer intellectual power but also from the experience of bereavement and the illogicality of a gifted woman's place in her society. Her agnosticism was nurtured by deep scepticism about the benevolence of any conceivable deity or principle of cosmic order in the First World War. Her socialism was rooted in the same experiences which convinced her that, given sympathy for others, critical reason was the only road to salvation on this earth. 
Wootton worked for the research department of the Labour Party and the Trades Union Congress from 1922, as principal of Morley College from 1926, and as director of studies for tutorial classes at London University from 1927 until she took up a readership at Bedford College in 1944. In that year she was disappointed in a competition for the chair and headship of the department of social science at the London School of Economics, which went to T. H. Marshall. Within academe her preoccupation was always with practical problems. She was promoted to the rank of professor in 1948. She became an acknowledged expert in criminology, penology, and social work, writing many books on those subjects. Her 'Social Science and Social Pathology' (with V. G. Seal and R. Chambers, 1959) remains a classic in the application of utilitarian philosophy and empirical sociology to the enlightened management of society. From 1952 to 1957 she was Nuffield research fellow at Bedford College. 
Wootton became an outstandingly vigorous public figure. She was a governor of the BBC from 1950 to 1956 and served on four royal commissions (workmen's compensation, 1938-44; the press, 1947-9; the civil service, 1953-5; and the penal system, 1964-6). She was also chairman of the Countryside Commission (1968-70). Created a life peer in 1958, she was the first woman to sit on the woolsack in the House of Lords, as deputy speaker from 1967. Her ambivalence to the upper chamber surprised some democratic socialists. She recognized that it was 'totally indefensible in a democracy'. 'No one in his senses would invent the present house if it did not already exist... but... ancient monuments are not light-heartedly to be destroyed.' More generally she made the best of the institutions she found and was unwilling to see her country pay the price in misery to ordinary people that revolution along Stalinist lines would entail. She preferred to work piecemeal, and her service as a justice of the peace for London, to which she was appointed in 1926 at the age of twenty-nine, that is, before she was entitled as a woman to vote, is a long record of humane public effort. She held thirteen honorary doctorates and was made a CH in 1977. She died on 11 July 1988 at her house, Holmesdale Park, Coopers Hill Road, Nutfield, Surrey, admired by those who knew her, honoured by a Festschrift, and widely revered as a woman whose steadfast faith was in argument and persuasion towards a socialist commonwealth. 
A. H. Halsey', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39877


Winner, Dame Albertine Louisa (1907-1988), physician and medical administrator, was born on 4 March 1907 in Coulsdon, Surrey, the only child of Isidore Winner (who had changed his name from Isidor Wiener on leaving the Netherlands some years previously), hide merchant, and his wife, Annie Stonex. She was brought up in London, which she always thought of as essentially composed of villages, and lived there all her life. She was educated at the Francis Holland School, Clarence Gate, and from there she went to University College, London, where she took a BSc with honours in physiology. She went on to study medicine at University College medical school, qualifying MB BS in 1933 and winning the gold medal. An outstanding physician, she also became MD (1934), MRCP (1935), and FRCP (1959). 
In Winner's early career she worked with, and was much influenced by, Sir Thomas Lewis and Francis Walshe. From the latter she gained her interest and skill in neurology, which she maintained throughout her life, culminating in the work of St Christopher's Hospice with patients in the terminal stages of motor neurone disease. She was appointed physician to the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital and the Mothers' Hospital (1937) but in 1940 she joined the Royal Army Medical Corps, becoming a lieutenant-colonel and later consultant to the women's services (1946-70). 
Having acquired a taste for administration Winner decided to become a medical administrator and joined the Ministry of Health, where she worked from 1947 to 1967. She saw the introduction of the National Health Service in 1948 and, with her intense interest in each individual patient, was especially concerned with the development of services for the long-term sick and disabled. She was the first woman to become deputy chief medical officer of health (1962). She brought a very human touch to the detailed implementation of administrative developments. At this time she was also a visiting lecturer at the London School of Economics (1951-63). Her interest was aroused both by the aims for the disabled of Group Captain Leonard Cheshire and Cicely Saunders's plans for a research and teaching hospice for the terminally ill. Her background support and her encouragement to potential supporters of the projected plans for St Christopher's Hospice in south-east London, the first in the modern movement, was invaluable. When she retired in 1967 she went on a clinical refresher course and became the first deputy medical director at St Christopher's. She was later chairman (1973) and finally president (1985). Her clinical and administrative skills did much to establish the ensuing hospice movement on a sound footing. 
Winner became Linacre fellow at the Royal College of Physicians from 1967 to 1978, being responsible for postgraduate education in medicine. Her experience of administration was greatly valued as a vice-president of the Medical Defence Union and within the Disabled Living Foundation. She was president of the Medical Women's Federation in 1971-2 and editor of its newsletter from 1973 to 1981. She was appointed OBE in 1945 and DBE in 1967. 
Dame Albertine reckoned that she had enjoyed at least five careers, to all of which she brought her vital interest and concern for people, whether they were patients or fellow workers. She never married but had time for many friends, to whom she gave unstinting support in any need. In her early years she was a keen sportswoman and she drove a Jaguar. She had a knowledgeable love of opera and a capacity for adventurous travelling holidays. Among her varied acquisitions was a valuable collection of Japanese prints. With all this she had her lonely and vulnerable side, although she could appear formidable. Of average height and robust figure, she gave the impression of being larger than she really was but this was offset by her warm smile. From her integrity stemmed her capacity for the attentive and skilful kindness that constitutes the very best moral support, which she gave so generously. For many years she affirmed her agnosticism while holding a great regard for the faith of others, but in her later years she became committed to Judaism, the faith of her father. After a long illness she died on 13 May 1988 at Lancaster Lodge, a Wimbledon nursing home, where she was kindly and skilfully cared for, and where she was given a grand party for her eightieth birthday. 
Cicely Saunders', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39878


Colville, Sir John Rupert (1915-1987), diplomatist and civil servant, was born in London on 28 January 1915, the youngest of three sons (there were no daughters) of the Hon. George Charles Colville (1867-1943), barrister, and his wife, Lady (Helen) Cynthia Colville (1884-1968), daughter of Robert Offley Ashburton Crewe-Milnes, marquess of Crewe. He was educated at West Downs School and Harrow School, and continued on a senior scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained a first class in part one of the history tripos and a second class (division one) in part two (1936). In 1937 he joined the diplomatic service and after only two years was seconded to 10 Downing Street to act as assistant private secretary to Neville Chamberlain. He liked and admired Chamberlain and would have favoured Viscount Halifax to succeed him in May 1940 -- 'I am afraid it must be Winston', he wrote regretfully in his diary -- but even then he conceded the drive and determination of Winston Churchill, and he was quickly converted into one of the most devoted of his supporters. Exciting and congenial though he found the work in no. 10, after the outbreak of the Second World War Colville resolved to enter the armed forces, and in October 1941 he overcame the opposition of the Foreign Office and the handicap of bad eyesight and joined the Royal Air Force volunteer reserve. After training in South Africa he was commissioned as a pilot officer and joined 268 squadron of the second Tactical Air Force, flying Mustang fighters. In spite of periodic efforts by Churchill to recapture him, he remained with the air force until the end of 1943 and was allowed to rejoin his unit for the invasion of France; he returned to Whitehall for good in August 1944. 
Although in spirit a Conservative, who had contemplated standing as such in 1945, Colville greatly admired C. R. Attlee's honesty, efficiency, and common sense, and found no difficulty in serving under him when Labour came to power. However, his career was still diplomacy and in October 1945 he returned to the Foreign Office to work in the southern department. After the dramas of no. 10 the work lacked savour, and within two years he had moved away again to become private secretary to the twenty-year-old Princess Elizabeth, a post he held until 1949. It was a natural appointment for a former page of honour to George V, whose mother was a woman of the bedchamber to Queen Mary. No one would have been surprised if he had remained in royal service, but after two years he returned to diplomacy and was posted to Lisbon (1947-51) as first secretary. 
It was not for long; when Churchill became prime minister in October 1951, Colville was invited -- commanded, almost -- to rejoin him as principal private secretary. When Churchill suffered a severe stroke in June 1953 but refused to allow his powers to be delegated, Colville and the prime minister's son-in-law and parliamentary private secretary, Christopher Soames, found themselves called on to make decisions on matters about which they would normally never have been consulted. For almost a month, with the encouragement and support of the secretary of the cabinet, Sir Norman Brook, they dealt with government departments which had no conception of the gravity of the prime minister's condition, acting in his name and articulating what they believed would have been his views. They handled their duties with tact and discretion, but the experience fortified Colville's resolve not to return yet again to diplomacy after Churchill's resignation in April 1955. 
Instead, Colville embarked on two new careers. He joined Hill Samuel and became a director of the National and Grindlay, Ottoman, and Coutts's banks, and chairman of Eucalyptus Pulp Mills. He also took to writing. His first book, a biography of the sixth Viscount Gort, 'Man of Valour' (1972), was well received and encouraged him to follow it with, among others, a study of Churchill's entourage, 'The Churchillians' (1981), and an autobiographical volume, 'Footprints in Time' (1976). His best-known work, however, was his edition of the diaries that he had kept while at no. 10, 'The Fringes of Power' (1985), a colourful, informative, and admirably honest account of the years he spent working for Churchill. He also served as treasurer of the National Association of Boys' Clubs, and president of the New Victoria Hospital in Kingston. Colville was appointed CVO (1949) and CB (1955), and was knighted in 1974. He was an officer of the Legion d'honneur, and an honorary fellow of Churchill College, Cambridge (1971), in whose foundation he played a role. 
By birth, upbringing, and career, Colville seemed a quintessential establishment figure, but any tendency to pomposity or undue conventionality was curbed by his keen eye for the ridiculous. His tact, charm, good judgement, and readiness always to tell the truth when necessary, made him an ideal private secretary. He was stocky and of medium height, very dark, with a roundish face and slightly Latin appearance -- 'Who is that foreigner with an English wife?' people would sometimes ask when he was abroad. His hair went grey when he was in his forties, which gave him a more distinguished air: this concerned him little; he took no particular trouble over his appearance and, without being scruffy, was rarely smart. He married in 1948 Lady Margaret (Meg) Egerton (1918-2004), lady-in-waiting to Princess Elizabeth and daughter of John Francis Granville Scrope Egerton, fourth earl of Ellesmere. They had two sons and a daughter. He was still leading and enjoying an active life when on 19 November 1987 he suffered a heart attack while at Winchester Station, and died almost immediately. 
Philip Ziegler', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39879


Cook, Sir William Richard Joseph (1905-1987), scientist and civil servant, was born on 10 April 1905 in Trowbridge, Wiltshire, the elder son and eldest of three children of John Cook, railway inspector, and his wife, Eva Boobyer. A successful scholar at Trowbridge high school, he went on to Bristol University and graduated BSc in 1925 with first-class honours in mathematics (specializing in applied maths). He took a diploma in education in 1926 and an MSc in 1927. Success as a part-time lecturer almost persuaded him to become a teacher, but he settled for the civil service, and joined the research department at Woolwich arsenal in 1928, as librarian. 
After working for a time on the external ballistics of guns, Cook joined the new rocket programme in 1935, and by 1940 had become deputy controller of projectile development, where he was responsible for many successful military applications of rockets. At the end of the Second World War he became first director of a new rocket establishment at Westcott, but uncertainty and disagreement about the future of the work unsettled him so much that in 1947 he moved to become director of physical research at the Admiralty, where, although the field was new to him, he was instrumental in pioneering major advances in underwater warfare technology. He became deputy chief scientific adviser, Ministry of Defence, in 1950, as well as chief of the Royal Naval Scientific Service. In 1954 the government decided to develop thermonuclear weapons and Cook, an ideal choice, was appointed to lead the programme, as deputy director at Aldermaston. The essence of his work was to test the bomb before a possible test ban treaty could be imposed. A crash programme, driven by Cook, culminated in a successful test series based on Christmas Island in 1957. He himself went to the island to play a vital role as directing scientist. Following this demonstration of British thermonuclear capability, he played a leading role in the successful negotiations to re-establish co-operation with the United States. Cook left Aldermaston early in 1958 to become member for engineering and development in the Atomic Energy Authority and took over the newly formed reactor group in 1961. Here he achieved a great deal, resolving problems in the advanced gas-cooled reactor, bringing the fast reactor to full power, and recommending the construction of a heavy-water steam-generating reactor. 
Cook returned to the Ministry of Defence in 1964 where, as a deputy chief scientific adviser, he took responsibility for operational requirements and projects. His immediate problem was the disorganization that followed the cancellation of the fighter bomber TSR2. An Anglo-French project for a fighter aircraft quickly failed when the French withdrew, and was replaced by a joint British-German-Italian effort. After much difficult negotiation, in which Cook played a prominent part, the successful Tornado fighter was specified and produced. In 1968 he became chief adviser, projects and research, and set up a number of important international projects intended to reduce defence costs. He also initiated the studies which led eventually to the Chevaline system to improve the defence penetration of the Polaris missile. He retired in 1970 but soon became involved in commercial directorships, which kept him very busy for another fifteen years. Nationally the most important of these was Rolls-Royce, which had gone bankrupt in 1971. He was appointed to chair a committee to decide very quickly whether the RB211 engine should be continued, and it is largely to his credit that the engine eventually became the backbone of Rolls-Royce's civil programme. He was appointed a director when the new government-owned company was set up later in 1971. In addition to his directorships, he continued to chair, very effectively, the nuclear safety committees for another ten years. He was appointed CB in 1951, and KCB in 1970, having been knighted in 1968. He held honorary degrees from Strathclyde (1967) and Bath (1975). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1962. 
Cook, known as Bill to his friends and colleagues, was slightly built and always neatly dressed. A man of great charm and ready wit, fond of his pipe and of a Scotch, he was known for his meticulous preparation for meetings, his ability to find and probe the weaknesses in a technical case, and his forceful but good-humoured pressure on all to give of their best. In 1929 he married Grace, daughter of Frederick Arthur Purnell, treasurer for Burton upon Trent council; they had one daughter. They were divorced in 1939, and in the same year he married Gladys, librarian at the Woolwich arsenal department, the daughter of Sydney Edward Allen, postman. They had one son and one daughter. When Gladys's health began to fail he looked after her devotedly. He died on 16 September 1987 in Westminster Hospital, London, following a massive stroke. 
John Challens', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39880


Zulueta, Sir Philip Francis de (1925-1989), civil servant and businessman, was born in Oxford on 2 January 1925, the only child of Francis (Francisco Maria Jose) de Zulueta (1878-1958), regius professor of civil law and fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, and his wife, Marie Louise (died 1970), daughter of Henry Alexander Lyne Stephens. His childhood was spent in Oxford, where his parents had a house in Norham Road. His father was of distinguished Spanish descent and a cousin of Cardinal Merry de Val, secretary of state at the Vatican, but took British nationality in order to fight in the First World War. De Zulueta was educated at the Dragon School, Oxford, and at the Roman Catholic Beaumont College, from where he won a scholarship to New College, Oxford. After taking a wartime second class in modern history in 1943 he joined the Welsh Guards in the same year and served with the regiment in north-west Europe until 1947, participating in the liberation of Brussels with the guards armoured division; he attained the rank of captain. Thus did he gain early experience of two institutions to which he was to remain loyal throughout his life: the brigade of guards and the Roman Catholic church. 
Having returned to New College in 1947 de Zulueta studied jurisprudence but found it hard to settle down to study after the war, and in 1948 he left with a third-class degree. After Oxford he read for the bar with the encouragement of his father, who was a strong influence on him. However, he decided not to proceed with his legal studies and joined the foreign service in 1949, serving in Moscow from 1950 to 1952 as private secretary to the ambassador, Sir David Kelly. On his return to London he became resident clerk at the Foreign Office; then in 1955 he began his long association with three prime ministers, when Sir Anthony Eden took him to 10 Downing Street as one of his two private secretaries for foreign affairs. Also in 1955 he married Marie-Louise, daughter of James Bryan George Hennessy, second Baron Windlesham (1903-1962); they had a daughter and a son. 
De Zulueta soon showed great aptitude for this work for Eden, and after Harold Macmillan became prime minister in 1957 he was the only representative of the Foreign Office among the private secretaries. He stayed on with Sir Alec Douglas-Home from October 1963 to October 1964 but of all his masters it was Macmillan with whom he built up the greatest rapport, admiring his style of government, intellect, and wit and accompanying him often on foreign tours. Macmillan came to depend upon de Zulueta's loyalty, calm in a crisis, knowledge of the main foreign-policy issues of the time, and linguistic ability, and used him as an interpreter at several of his meetings with Charles de Gaulle. 'Philip knows my mind', he observed, and he remarked teasingly on de Zulueta's gravitas, determination, and strength of personality, for with the intelligence and fundamental kindness came a tendency to be impatient with the foolish or the slow. In Macmillan's resignation honours list of 1963 de Zulueta was given a knighthood. 
In 1964, having always been interested in financial affairs and feeling that a diplomatic posting might be an anticlimax after his years in 10 Downing Street, de Zulueta left the Foreign Office for the City. There he spent a six-month training period before joining Philip Hill-Higginson Erlangers. He was a director of the newly merged Hill Samuel from 1965 to 1972. In 1973 he joined Antony Gibbs Holdings, serving as chief executive from 1973 to 1976 and as chairman from 1976 to 1981. He was made chairman of Tanks Consolidated Investments in 1983 and a director of the Belgian Societe Generale when that company took over Tanks in 1982. In 1984 he became a director of Abbott Laboratories of Chicago. Among his outside interests were the Franco-British Council, the Institute of Directors, and the Trilateral Commission. Increasingly he suffered from serious heart trouble. 
De Zulueta was extremely hard-working and energetic, deriving much self-confidence from an exceptionally happy family life. Tall, dark-haired, thickset, always immaculately dressed, quiet of voice, and often leaning forward slightly in a rather courtly way to catch every nuance of the conversation, he also had an urbane, formidable presence and high standards; the morality and certainty of his strong religious faith never left him. Beneath this exterior, however, lay humour and sympathy, qualities particularly evident at his homes in London and later at Eastergate House in Sussex, where he was a relaxed and generous host. In 1984 he became an officer of the Legion d'honneur. 
De Zulueta died on 15 April 1989 on board a British Airways flight, when returning from a business trip to the United States; he had a fatal coronary thrombosis as the aeroplane was coming in to land at London. A thanksgiving mass was celebrated at the Guards' Chapel, Wellington Barracks, London, on 22 May 1989. 
Max Egremont', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39881


Hall, Robert Lowe, Baron Roberthall (1901-1988), economist, was born on 6 March 1901 in Tenterfield, New South Wales, Australia, the second of the three sons (the eldest of whom was killed in action in 1917 in the First World War) and third of the five children of Edgar Hall, lecturer at the University of Sydney and later a mining engineer, who had emigrated to Australia, and his wife, Rose Helen, daughter of Archibald Kennedy Cullen, of Undercliffe Station, New South Wales. His parents moved to Silverspur in Queensland when he was a baby and, after attending the local school there, he won a state scholarship to the grammar school in Ipswich, near Brisbane. He studied civil engineering at the University of Queensland in Brisbane, graduating BEng in 1922 and going the following year to Magdalen College, Oxford, as a Rhodes scholar. He obtained first-class honours in philosophy, politics, and economics (1926) and was appointed to a college lectureship at Trinity College, Oxford. He was a fellow of Trinity from 1927 to 1950 and of Nuffield College, Oxford, from 1938 to 1947 (visiting fellow in 1961-4). 
In the 1930s Hall became a prominent member of the Economists' Research Group, joining some younger Oxford dons who were sceptical of current economic doctrine, and undertook empirical research on how business actually behaved -- for example, in fixing prices or reacting to price signals. His contribution to this research included an article in 1939, 'Price theory and business behaviour', written in collaboration with the American Charles J. Hitch, which first introduced the idea of the kinked demand curve. (The article was reprinted in 'Oxford Studies in the Price Mechanism', 1951, edited by Thomas Wilson and Philip Andrews.) 
On the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 Hall joined the Ministry of Supply (raw materials department) and, after America's entry into the war, served for two years in 1942-4 with the British raw materials mission in Washington, DC. In 1947 he succeeded James Meade as director of the economic section of the Cabinet Office, having meanwhile divided his time between Oxford and the Board of Trade, and continued as director for nearly fourteen years until April 1961. He was in charge of the only substantial group of professional economists in Whitehall, and although he was not given the title of economic adviser to the government until 1953, when he moved to the Treasury, that accurately describes his role. He retained this post until 1961, serving under eight chancellors of the exchequer and exercising more influence on economic policy than any other official. Among the matters in which he took a prominent part were the devaluation of 1949, rearmament in 1950-51, the Robot proposal to float the pound in 1952, the introduction of the investment allowance in 1953, the credit squeeze which began in 1955, and the Treasury's evidence to the committee of 1957-9 chaired by Cyril Radcliffe. During his years in the economic section he kept a diary, contrary to the rules; it provides both a picture of the writer and a unique insight into the way in which economic policy took shape in the post-war years. 
On leaving the Treasury, Hall returned to Oxford and in 1964 was elected principal of Hertford College, spending much of his three years there as a member of the commission of inquiry into Oxford University (1964-6), chaired by Baron Franks. He continued to maintain contact with Whitehall, for a short time as an adviser to the Ministry of Transport, and for six years as a member of the Commonwealth Economic Committee (1961-7). He also accepted two business appointments, one as an advisory director of Unilever (1961-71), and the second, at the invitation of Baron Plowden, as adviser to Tube Investments (1961-76). He took an active interest in the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, whose role as economic commentators and forecasters he had earlier done much to encourage, and served as chairman of the executive committee from 1962 to 1970. 
In 1969 Hall was made a life baron and changed his name by deed poll to become Lord Roberthall. For the next two decades he was an active member of the House of Lords, latterly as a member of the Social Democratic Party. He spoke in debates and served on many standing committees, taking the chair of a select committee on commodity prices in 1976-7. He received many honours. Appointed CB in 1950 and KCMG in 1954, he was an honorary fellow of both Trinity College (1958) and Hertford College (1969), Oxford, and was created an honorary DSc at the University of Queensland. He was president of the Royal Economic Society in 1958-60 and of the Society of Business Economists from 1968 to 1973. Earlier he had been chairman of an international group of experts at the Organization of European Economic Co-operation (OEEC) which was the forerunner of working party 3 of the OECD. He delivered the Sidney Ball lecture in Oxford in 1954 and the Rede lecture in Cambridge in 1962 ('Planning', 1962). 
Hall was not at his best as a theoretician and published relatively little: several articles and two books, of which the more substantial is 'The Economic System in a Social State' (1937), based on lectures delivered in 1934. As is clear from his diaries, his gifts were those of a highly successful economic adviser. He had a remarkable feel for the state of the economy and could outdo his staff as a forecaster. He was outstanding as a draftsman, but a man of few words in committee. He was a realist, endowed with great common sense, appreciating the limits of what was feasible, and a good judge of men. He took great pains over recruitment of staff and initiated a scheme for borrowing economists from their universities for a two-year spell. His unaffected modesty, good humour, and thoughtfulness won him the affection, as his abilities won the respect, of his colleagues. 
Hall married twice. His first marriage in 1932 was to (Laura) Margaret Linfoot (died 1995), daughter of George Edward Linfoot, musician, of Nottingham. She became a well-known economist in her own right and a fellow of Somerville College, Oxford. They had two daughters. When the marriage was dissolved in 1968 he married Perilla Thyme, daughter of Sir Richard Vynne Southwell, aeronautical engineer, and the former wife of Patrick Horace Nowell-Smith, philosopher and fellow of Trinity College, Oxford. The two spent much of the next twenty years in their house, Quarry, Trenance, near Newquay in north Cornwall. Hall was a passionate gardener, working on his Oxford allotment at weekends even when in the Treasury and winning prizes with his sweetcorn from the Treasury Horticultural Society. After a stroke in 1987 Lord Roberthall never fully recovered; he died by his Cornwall garden next to the sea at Quarry on 17 September 1988. He was survived by his second wife. 
Alec Cairncross', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39882


Laithwaite, Sir (John) Gilbert (1894-1986), civil servant and diplomatist, was born on 5 July 1894 in Dublin, the eldest in the family of two sons and two daughters of John Gilbert Laithwaite, of the Post Office survey, of Dublin, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Bernard Kearney, of Clooncoose House, Castlerea, co. Roscommon. He was educated at Clongowes, whence he won a scholarship to Trinity College, Oxford, of which he became an honorary fellow in 1955. He obtained a second class in both classical honour moderations (1914) and 'literae humaniores' (1916). 
During the First World War, Laithwaite served in the front line in France in 1917-18, as a second lieutenant with the 10th Lancashire Fusiliers, and was wounded. In 1971 he published (privately printed in Lahore) a record of part of this service in 'The 21st March 1918: Memories of an Infantry Officer', which includes a lively, detailed account of the German attack at Havrincourt, near Cambrai, on 21 March 1918. 
In 1919 Laithwaite was appointed to the India Office, and thus started a long career involved with the subcontinent. He became a principal in 1924 and in 1931 he was specially attached to the prime minister, J. Ramsay MacDonald, for the second Indian round-table conference in London. Two important secretaryships followed, of the Indian franchise (Lothian) committee under R. A. Butler, which toured the subcontinent in 1932, and of the Indian delimitation committee from August 1935 to February 1936. From 1936 to 1943 he was principal private secretary to the viceroy of India, the second marquess of Linlithgow. It was a time of growing political tension following the 'India Act' of 1935 and with provincial autonomy in 1937 imminent. The strains and stresses were greatly increased by the approach of war. Laithwaite gave staunch support to the viceroy and his policies and deserves to share with Linlithgow the credit for ensuring that India's vital role as supply centre for the war effort, as well as a source of military manpower, was quickly and efficiently organized and maintained. 
In 1943 Laithwaite returned to England with Linlithgow and was appointed assistant under-secretary of state for India. He was then appointed an under-secretary (civil) of the war cabinet (1944-5) and secretary to the Commonwealth ministerial meeting in London in 1945. As deputy under-secretary of state for Burma in 1945-7, he twice visited Rangoon and had a formative share in the negotiations leading to Burmese independence early in 1948. He was deputy under-secretary of state for India in 1947 and for Commonwealth relations in 1948-9, and he acted as one of the official secretaries of the conference of Commonwealth prime ministers in 1948. 
In 1949 Laithwaite became the United Kingdom representative to the Republic of Ireland, a post upgraded to ambassador in 1950. In 1951 he was sent as high commissioner to Pakistan, where he already had friendly relations with members of the government, officials, and other leaders. He steadfastly promoted the British policy of friendship with both India and Pakistan in their disputes over the future of Kashmir and the distribution of the canal waters of the Punjab, and supported the efforts of the United Nations to reconcile the two countries. He left Pakistan in 1954 to be permanent under-secretary of state for Commonwealth relations from 1955 to 1959, first visiting Australia and New Zealand. From 1963 to 1966 he was vice-chairman of the Commonwealth Institute. 
Laithwaite was also a governor of Queen Mary College, London, from 1959; president of the Hakluyt Society, 1964-9; vice-president of the Royal Central Asian Society in 1967; president of the Royal Geographical Society, 1966-9; and a member of the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries from 1959 to 1971. After retirement in 1959 he played an active part in the life of the City as a director of Inchcape and of insurance companies. He was admitted a freeman of the City of London in 1960 and was master of the Tallow Chandlers' Company in 1972-3. 
Laithwaite was an industrious and efficient worker, with an impressive grasp of problems and a reputation for fairness. He was rather tall and solidly built, dignified and precise in manner, but exceptionally friendly in a social context, even on first acquaintance, though still with a trace of formality. His outstanding qualities and affability, together with his sense of humour, made him many friends both at home and abroad. His diverse interests included a strong appreciation of fine artefacts and while in India and Pakistan he collected carpets and rugs with discrimination. 
Laithwaite came from a Lancastrian Roman Catholic family and adhered devoutly to that faith, which contributed to his success in the embassy in Dublin. In 1960 he was appointed a knight of Malta. He was appointed CIE (1935), CSI (1938), KCIE (1941), KCMG (1948), GCMG (1953), and KCB (1956). Laithwaite was a homosexual and unmarried. He died in London on 21 December 1986. 
Michael Maclagan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39883


Marre, Sir Alan Samuel (1914-1990), civil servant and ombudsman, was born on 25 February 1914 in Bow, London, the fourth child and second son in the family of three sons and three daughters of Joseph Moshinsky, who ran a tobacconist's shop near Aldgate East Station, and his wife, Rebecca. His parents were Russian Jews who had settled in England in 1907. Marre (who, in 1941, like his elder brother, changed his name by deed poll) won a scholarship to St Olave's and St Saviour's Grammar School, Southwark, and an open scholarship to Trinity Hall, Cambridge. There he won the John Stewart of Rannoch scholarship and secured first-class honours in both parts of the classical tripos (1934 and 1935). 
Marre entered the Ministry of Health in 1936, as an assistant principal. Though in a reserved occupation, he tried to volunteer for the Royal Air Force when the Second World War began, but he was rejected because of his very short sight. He worked in a variety of departmental posts, and helped to launch the National Health Service. He became a principal in 1941, assistant secretary in 1946, and under-secretary in 1952. Eleven years later he moved to the Ministry of Labour, where he handled policy on industrial relations. He returned to the Ministry of Health as deputy secretary in 1964, spent a further two years in the Department of Employment and Productivity, then went back to his home department in 1968 as second permanent under-secretary. This was a time of adjustment to the creation of the composite Department of Health and Social Security, of which Richard Crossman was the first secretary of state. Crossman's personality was not well adapted to the role of departmental minister, and he was notoriously difficult to work with. It was not an easy or comfortable period for Marre; but he managed to establish and maintain a satisfactory relationship with Crossman, who in his diary referred to him as 'a charming sweet man'. 
In 1971 Marre became parliamentary commissioner for administration (parliamentary ombudsman), the second holder of the post. In 1973 he additionally became the first health service commissioner, carrying both responsibilities until his retirement in 1976. He was subsequently requested by the government to carry out two difficult and sensitive inquiries, one into the position of those children disabled because of the drug thalidomide who had not benefited from an earlier overall settlement, the other into a $130 million discrepancy in the report on teachers' pay by the standing commission on pay comparability, chaired by Hugh Clegg (seventh report, 1980). From 1979 to 1985 he was vice-chairman of the advisory committee on distinction awards for NHS consultants, and from 1983 to 1987 chairman of the newly established committee on rural dispensing, when he did much to defuse a bitter and long-standing dispute between the medical and pharmaceutical professions. He also devoted time and energy to a range of voluntary organizations, being chairman of Age Concern England in 1977-80. He was appointed CB in 1955 and KCB in 1970. 
Marre, with his horn-rimmed spectacles and bald dome, was friendly and approachable, though cool and restrained. His gifts were not so much originality and imagination as excellent judgement and analytical ability, and he was also a good negotiator. His specific strengths included precision in thought and expression, thoroughness, respect for the facts, detachment, and a sense of justice. In his official work he maintained a scrupulous political neutrality, and the tradition of civil service anonymity was thoroughly congenial to him. There were some (including Crossman) who criticized his appointment as ombudsman, doubting whether, despite the strengths which had served him so well as a departmental civil servant, he had the public relations skills and the radically questioning, even aggressive, attitudes which the post required. In fact, he managed to come to terms with the public aspects of his task and, though unabrasive and disinclined to attack the general ethos of contemporary government, proved himself just, persistent, and firmly independent. He gained public credit for his handling of some of the difficult cases which came his way. His career is of particular interest because in its later years it reflects the transition from a civil service imbued with the traditions of neutrality and anonymity, begun in 1853 as a result of the Northcote-Trevelyan report, to one where senior officials appear in the public arena and are held personally accountable. For Marre, this change was against his personal grain, but he had the adaptability to adjust to it successfully. 
Marre had a happy domestic life. On 24 December 1943 he married Mary Gilling ['see 'Marre, (Romola) Mary (1920-2005)], daughter of Aubrey John Gilling, bank manager. She herself had a distinguished career of public service, particularly on the London Voluntary Service Council, being appointed CBE in 1979. They had one son and one daughter. Marre died of cancer on 20 March 1990, at his home, 44 The Vale, Golders Green, London. 
Patrick Benner', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39884


Part, Sir Antony Alexander (1916-1990), civil servant, was born on 28 June 1916 in Chelsea, London, the only son of Alexander Francis Part, barrister and company director, from a Lancashire family, and his second wife, Una Margaret Reynolds Snowdon, from Yorkshire. He had a younger sister, an older half-brother and half-sister, and a younger half-brother. His early childhood years were spent in happy and prosperous family surroundings in Chelsea, but his adolescence was overshadowed by his parents' divorce. After a good grounding in classics at a preparatory school he entered Harrow School with a scholarship at the age of twelve and later specialized in French and German. He won a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he achieved first-class honours in both parts of the modern and medieval languages tripos (1935 and 1937). 
Part entered the Board of Education in 1937 through the competitive examination for the administrative class of the home civil service. Though he was soon lent to the newly created Ministry of Supply, a keen interest in education and training motivated the greater part of his civil service career. In 1940 he married a ballet dancer, Isabella (Ella), daughter of Maurice Bennett, businessman. His marriage was happy and although they had no children he and his wife maintained a close relationship with his siblings and their children. 
Part joined the Royal Ulster Rifles in 1940, but his knowledge of German quickly led to a commission in the intelligence corps, where by 1943 he had gained rapid promotion to lieutenant-colonel, serving in the western desert campaign and later in the twenty-first army group headquarters preparing for the invasion of France. His personality was changing. At school he had been shy and retiring. University had built his self-confidence. Finding in the army that he was thought somewhat over-assertive, he learned an important lesson about leadership which he never forgot. 
Recalled to the Ministry of Education at the end of 1944, Part became principal private secretary to three successive ministers. His first major opportunity came in 1946 when he and the chief architect of the department as joint heads set up a new branch to assist education authorities to build the new schools needed to meet the demands of the rising birth rate and the raising of the school leaving age. The programme they developed was so effective in enabling good schools to be built quickly at acceptable cost that it earned international reputation. As a Commonwealth Fund fellow in the USA in 1950-51, Part found leading American experts in school building eager to learn from him about these British methods. He contracted tuberculosis in America and did not return to work until spring 1953. 
Promoted to under-secretary in 1954 as head of the schools branch and later of the further education branch, Part was active in the initiatives to improve and expand technical training at all levels through technical colleges and colleges of advanced technology. He became deputy secretary in 1960, covering teacher training and further education, served as a departmental assessor on the committee on higher education (1961-4) chaired by Lord Robbins, and seemed well positioned by ability and experience to achieve his growing ambition to become permanent secretary of the Ministry of Education. 
There were, however, other plans for Part. In March 1963 he was moved to the Ministry of Works to organize a merger of departments into the Ministry of Public Building and Works, of which he became permanent secretary in 1965. It was as permanent secretary of the Board of Trade in 1968, of the newly created Department of Trade and Industry in 1970, and of the Department of Industry from 1974 to 1976 that he had the greatest scope for the exercise of his talents and experience. He worked hard to establish an industrial department as a major force in Whitehall and was greatly upset by the decision of the Labour government to split the Department of Trade and Industry into three in 1974. His strengths were his vision, his genuine interest in manufacturing industry, his ability to work constructively with most businessmen, trade unionists, and politicians, and his flair for public speaking. He exhibited great energy and determination in everything he undertook, whether in the fields of education or trade and industry. He put into practice his strong conviction that public administration should be efficient and financially prudent. 
After retiring from the civil service in 1976, Part took up a new career as a non-executive director of a number of firms, including chairmanship of Orion Insurance Company. He continued his active interest in education as deputy chairman of the court of governors of the London School of Economics. Part was appointed MBE (1943), CB (1959), KCB (1966), and GCB (1974). He received honorary degrees from Brunel (1966), Aston (1974), and Cranfield (1976), and an honorary fellowship of the London School of Economics (1984). In his prime he was tall and dark with a confident bearing. However, he had poor health all his life and this greatly affected his appearance in his last years in the civil service and thereafter, major heart surgery causing him to have a pronounced stoop and to move very slowly. He enjoyed the performing arts, but his main interests were in his work in both public and private sectors, which despite his ready wit he took very seriously. Part, who lived latterly at Flat 5, 71 Elm Park Gardens, London, died of heart failure in Westminster Hospital, London, on 11 January 1990. A memorial service was held at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 22 February 1990. He was survived by his wife. 
Douglas Croham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39885


Sylvester, Albert James (1889-1989), political and private secretary, was born on 24 November 1889 in Harlaston, Staffordshire, the eldest of three children and only son of Albert Sylvester, a tenant farmer reduced to the role of farmworker by the agricultural depression, and his wife, Edith, daughter of James Redfern, also from Staffordshire but of no traceable address. He was educated at Guild Street School, Burton upon Trent, and while there studied Pitman's shorthand. After leaving school at fourteen to become a brewery clerk he devoted most of his leisure to perfecting his shorthand and typing, achieving the champion speeds of, respectively, 210 and 80 words a minute. As a young man he moved as a freelance typist to London, where his talents were soon in demand and he became a member, in 1911 and 1912, of the British international typewriting team, which competed (unsuccessfully) with the Americans. 
In 1912, on the recommendation of a stranger whom he met on the underground after a concert at the Albert Hall, Sylvester was appointed to the secretarial staff of the royal commission on Indian public services. This took him to the subcontinent and introduced him to work in the official sphere. After the outbreak of war in 1914 he joined the staff of Colonel (later first Baron) M. P. A. Hankey, secretary of the committee of imperial defence. The following year he became the first shorthand writer to record the proceedings of a cabinet committee. 
When, in December 1916, David Lloyd George succeeded H. H. Asquith as prime minister, he at once established a war cabinet secretariat under Hankey, who chose Sylvester as his private secretary. In this capacity he showed such diligence, discretion, and efficiency that at the end of the war he was given the status of a higher-grade civil servant, without having to sit the examination. Immediately after the war he accompanied Hankey to the Paris peace conference, where he continued to work under intense pressure. In 1917 he married Evelyn Annie (died 1962), daughter of William Welman, draper and Baptist lay preacher, of Norbiton. They had one daughter. 
Sylvester's work for Hankey brought him into frequent contact with the prime minister, and in 1921 Lloyd George recruited him to the secretariat at 10 Downing Street. With Lloyd George he attended the Cannes and Genoa conferences, and he was also involved in the tortuous processes leading to the Anglo-Irish treaty in 1921. When, eleven months later, the Lloyd George coalition was brought down, Sylvester stayed on for a time under two Conservative prime ministers, Andrew Bonar Law and Stanley Baldwin. But in 1923 he left the civil service and rejoined Lloyd George. 
Though Sylvester's chief motive for doing so was that he admired Lloyd George and found working for him exciting, Lloyd George facilitated the move by paying him a higher salary, and also a substantial sum to compensate him for the loss of civil service pension rights. He was given the title of principal private secretary, though in reality that role belonged to Lloyd George's mistress (later his second wife), Frances Stevenson (later Countess Lloyd George of Dwyfor). 
Nevertheless, Sylvester accompanied Lloyd George on most of his travels abroad, including his controversial visit to Adolf Hitler in 1936, and at home ran the office at Thames House, Westminster, which at the height of Lloyd George's activity as an opposition politician had a staff of more than twenty. Sylvester dealt with his master's enormous correspondence and, when he was working on his 'War Memoirs' (6 vols., 1933-6), carried out much archival research and interviewing of former colleagues on his behalf. His services were indispensable, and he stayed at his post until Lloyd George's death in 1945. 
Any hopes Sylvester may have had that Lloyd George's widow would invite him to be, as it were, joint guardian of the shrine, and to collaborate in work based on the papers that had been left to her, were soon dashed. In 1947 he published a book of his own, 'The Real Lloyd George', which has its good points but is on the whole disappointing. In 1975 a selection from his diary appeared, edited by Colin Cross and entitled 'Life with Lloyd George', and this is a far more valuable publication. The diary, kept in shorthand, gives a vivid impression of Lloyd George and a detailed account of his life, though unfortunately it covers only the last phase, from 1931 to the end. The full text of the diary is now in the National Library of Wales. 
Always at heart a countryman, Sylvester bought during the Second World War 150 acres of farmland in Wiltshire. In 1949 he moved from his London home in Putney to another Wiltshire property, Rudloe Cottage near Corsham, where he cultivated a smallholding, his larger holding being let to a tenant. He spent the rest of his life at Rudloe, becoming a JP (1953) and, in 1962, chairman of the local bench. In old age he took to ballroom dancing for which, at eighty-five, he received the top amateur award, thereby earning himself a place in 'The Guinness Book of Records'. 
Sylvester was well above medium height, clean-shaven, with a high forehead, longish nose, and fresh complexion. His vigorous and humorous temperament came across most effectively in the many radio and television interviews that he gave in his later years. Even when very old and infirm his resilience was remarkable. A visitor to Rudloe would find him slumped in an armchair before a fire that was nearly out, and his first words would be a plaintive 'I am very, very ill.' But soon he would be standing erect, throwing logs on the fire and reliving past experiences with strong voice and eloquent gesture. No doubt it was his personality as much as his great professional competence that appealed to Lloyd George. 
Sylvester died at St Andrews Hospital, Chippenham, Wiltshire, on 27 October 1989, a month short of his 100th birthday. 
John Grigg', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39887


Trend, Burke Frederick St John, Baron Trend (1914-1987), civil servant, was born on 2 January 1914 in Greenwich, London, the only child of Walter David St John Trend, journalist, and his wife, Marian Gertrude Tyers. He was educated at Whitgift School and at Merton College, Oxford. He obtained first classes in both classical honour moderations (1934) and 'literae humaniores' (1936). 
In 1936 Trend passed into the civil service and was appointed to the Ministry of Education. A year later he was transferred to the Treasury, where he remained, with a brief interruption, for twenty-five years. His first years at the Treasury were spent on work relating to defence. In 1939, shortly after the outbreak of war, he became assistant private secretary to the chancellor of the exchequer, under Sir John Simon and Sir Kingsley Wood. In 1941, on promotion, Trend returned to dealing with the problems of defence equipment. After the war he again served the chancellor of the exchequer's private office as principal private secretary (1945-9), first to Hugh Dalton and later to Sir Stafford Cripps. During this time the Treasury had the tasks of returning to peacetime levels of expenditure, carrying the reorganization of the civil service, and handling the Labour government's economic policies of Keynesianism and nationalization. 
In 1949 Trend became an under-secretary at the Treasury and assumed responsibility for the home finance division, and in 1953 he moved to the central economic planning staff. His Treasury service was interrupted in 1955 for a year in the office of the lord privy seal, then R. A. Butler, followed by three years (1956-9) as deputy secretary to the cabinet, the secretary to the cabinet then being Sir Norman Brook. Much of the day-to-day running of the affairs of the cabinet secretariat was Trend's responsibility. He returned to the Treasury in 1959 as third secretary and became second secretary a year later. On Brook's retirement at the end of 1962, he became secretary to the cabinet. 
In this capacity Trend served under four prime ministers, Harold Macmillan, Alec Douglas-Home, Harold Wilson, and Edward Heath, and proved himself a civil servant who ably gave an independent, balanced brief to his political masters regardless of their party colour. In particular he accepted responsibility for keeping them informed and advised on all nuclear matters, both civil and military, and maintained contacts on their behalf at the highest level with other governments involved. He also played a major part in organizing the Commonwealth conferences in conjunction with the cabinet secretaries of other member countries. His activities reflected Britain's position in the Commonwealth. He retired in 1973. 
An interesting side to Trend's service in the Treasury is that from his early days he undertook the work of the accounting office for the secret vote. His responsibility was to secure value for money in expenditure on MI5 and MI6, but at the same time to ensure the safeguarding of these services. This experience was put to good use in 1974-5, when Trend carried out an official investigation into allegations that Sir Roger Hollis had been an agent for the Soviet Union. He was unable to reach a definite decision. 
In 1974 Trend became a life peer. Between 1973 and 1983 he was rector of Lincoln College, Oxford, and from 1975 to 1983 a pro-vice-chancellor of the university. He served as chairman of the trustees of the British Museum from 1979 to 1986 and was a member of the Advisory Council on Public Records (1974-82). He died holding three other prominent offices: chairman of the managing trustees of the Nuffield Foundation (from 1980), president of the Royal Commonwealth Society (from 1982), and high bailiff of Westminster Abbey and searcher of the sanctuary (from 1983), where during the Second World War he had been a fire-watcher. 
Trend had a formidable intellect which he used to penetrate at once to the heart of any problem. At the same time he possessed a constructive and positive approach, which could set out with absolute clarity the possible alternative courses of action in any given situation. His minutes of meetings recorded the proceedings and conclusions with precision and accuracy. He never gave the least indication to those present, either by word or by facial expression, of his personal views or feelings. Tall and serious, he responded to the humour of others but seldom followed it up with his own. Everyone who dealt with him knew that in all circumstances his conduct would undeniably be correct. If to some outsiders he may have appeared somewhat strait-laced in Whitehall, at Oxford it was apparent to everyone that he was thoroughly enjoying himself. With an unchallengeable academic record from his undergraduate years he could hold his own in any assembly. At the same time he was completely relaxed in the company of young people, stimulating them with his conversation and sharing his views with theirs. If in Whitehall it was sometimes said that Trend tended to be academic in his approach, at Oxford he was regarded as very much a man of the world. 
Trend was appointed CVO (1953), CB (1955), KCB (1962), and GCB (1968). He was sworn of the privy council in 1972 and became an honorary fellow of Merton College in 1964. He was given honorary degrees by Oxford (DCL, 1969), St Andrews (LLD, 1974), and Loughborough (DLitt, 1984). 
In 1949 Trend married Patricia Charlotte, daughter of the Revd Gilbert Shaw, by profession a barrister and later a priest. They had a daughter and two sons, one of whom, Michael, was elected MP for Windsor and Maidenhead at the general election of 1992. Trend died on 21 July 1987 at his London home, 102 Rochester Row. A memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 20 October 1987. 
Edward Heath', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39888


Berthoud, Sir Eric Alfred (1900-1989), oil industrialist and diplomatist, was born on 10 December 1900 in Kensington, London, the second son and third child in a family of four sons and two daughters of Alfred Edward Berthoud, of the private merchant bank Coulon, Berthoud & Co., and his wife, Helene Christ, who came from a Swiss-Alsatian banking family. As a boy at Gresham's School, Holt, Norfolk, Berthoud was greatly helped by his headmaster, G. W. S. Howson, who in 1914 found ways to keep him at the school when his father's bank collapsed and his relatives proposed moving him to Switzerland. In 1918 he went up to Magdalen College, Oxford, where he played hockey for the university, did well at other sports, and took his degree in chemistry in 1922, paying his way with tutoring during vacation and further help from Howson. His father, an alcoholic, died in 1920. 
After four years with the Anglo-Austrian Bank in Vienna and Milan (1922-6), Berthoud joined the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (later BP), serving in Paris (1926-9). In 1927 he married Ruth Tilston (died 1988), daughter of Sir Charles Bright, electrical engineer and fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and granddaughter of Sir Charles Tilston Bright, also an electrical engineer. They had a son who died in infancy, and two more sons and two daughters. Berthoud then moved with the Anglo-Persian Oil Company to Berlin (1929-35) and back to Paris (1935-8). On leaving Germany he sent a detailed memorandum to the director of military intelligence in London on Hitler's military build-up. When war began he joined the petroleum division of the Ministry of Fuel and Power, and by November 1939 he was installed at the British legation in Bucharest. His colleagues included the eccentric Edmund Hall-Patch, who was later helpful to his career. Berthoud's instructions were to impede the supply of Romanian oil to Germany by non-violent means such as diplomatic pressure, pre-emptive buying, manipulating prices, and cornering railcars, barges, and tankers on the Danube. These and other British activities in Romania worried the Germans for a time, but both German vulnerability and British ability to exploit it were exaggerated in London; Berthoud himself was in agreement with the policy, but realistic as to its effectiveness, compared with other factors outside British control. In January 1941, by which time Romania had effectively thrown in its lot with Germany, Britain broke off relations and the legation in Bucharest was closed. Berthoud spent the next four years in a variety of countries undertaking various tasks, all related to the objective of securing oil for the allies and denying it to the axis powers. One sensitive mission was to the USSR, to which he travelled three times by adventurous routes in 1941-2. He soon became convinced of the need to support the USSR by all possible means -- this at a time when many in London were disinclined to spend scarce resources on what they saw as a hopeless cause. 
In 1945 Berthoud was in charge of the economic division of the British element of the Allied Control Commission for Austria. He then worked on east European peace treaties, on problems affecting the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, and finally on the Marshall plan, where his superiors valued his hard work and negotiating skill. After a long spell as assistant under-secretary in the Foreign Office (1948-52), he could have moved up to the deputy under-secretary's seat, but preferred to go as ambassador to Denmark (1952-6), where he made many friends. As ambassador in Warsaw (1956-60) he sympathized with the strivings of the ordinary Polish people, while unconditionally condemning the regime. He was appointed CMG in 1945 and KCMG in 1954, and retired in May 1960. From 1969 he was deputy lieutenant of Essex. In retirement BP made him a non-executive director on certain of its regional boards. Among other things he was deeply involved in the United World colleges, the new University of Essex, and the Anglo-Polish round-table conferences. 
With his athletic build, countryman's face, and ready smile, Berthoud was a more complex character than he looked. Only one-quarter British by blood, he was as proud of his continental connections as of his own compensating 'Britishness'. As an ambassador he exacted a degree of deference (and punctuality) which some found excessive. He could be thick-skinned and overbearing, but there was a vein of sensitivity in him too, nourished by a protestant faith which strengthened as he grew older. He and his family lived in a series of houses in Essex and finally in Suffolk, where he enjoyed cricket and country sports to the full. Berthoud died in Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 29 April 1989, his wife having predeceased him by a year. 
Julian Bullard', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39889


Caccia, Harold Anthony, Baron Caccia (1905-1990), diplomatist, was born on 21 December 1905 in Pachmarhi, India, the only child of Anthony Mario Felix Caccia, of the Indian forest service, and his wife, Fanny Theodora, daughter of Azim Salvador Birch, of Erewhon and Oruamatua, New Zealand. Caccia's great-grandfather had fled to England from Lombardy as a political refugee in 1826. Caccia went to Eton College, where he was a popular all-rounder, and then to Trinity College, Oxford, where he gained a rugby blue and second-class honours in philosophy, politics, and economics (1927). In 1928 he won a Laming travelling fellowship from Queen's College, Oxford. 
Caccia entered the Foreign Office in 1929 and was appointed third secretary at Peking (Beijing) in 1932. Also in that year he married Anne Catherine (Nancy), daughter of Sir George Lewis Barstow, civil servant. He returned to London in 1935 as a second secretary and, from 1936, as assistant private secretary to the secretary of state until, in 1939, he was transferred to Athens. Driven from Athens in 1941, the Caccias with the embassy wives and children and some commandos, including Oliver Barstow, his wife's brother, had a perilous journey. Their ship was bombed 'en route' to Crete, and Barstow was killed. They reached Crete in another small craft and a destroyer took them to Cairo. Caccia was appointed in 1943 to the staff of the resident minister in north Africa, Harold Macmillan, at Algiers. He soon moved to Italy as vice-president of the Allied Control Commission, and political adviser to General Harold Alexander. In 1944 he became the political adviser to the general officer commanding British land forces in Greece, and was in the embassy during the communist uprising in Athens in December 1944. Caccia was in his element in a military environment, and got on well with the allied commanders. In 1945 he became minister at the Athens embassy, before returning to the Foreign Office as chief clerk in 1949. In this post he was instrumental in putting into effect the administrative reforms which Anthony Eden had announced in 1943. 
In 1950 Caccia went to Austria, then still under four-power administration, first as minister, then as British high commissioner, and finally as ambassador from 1951 to 1954. He was again in his element in Austria, 'persona grata' to the allied military commanders and popular with the Austrian authorities. For relaxation he pursued chamois in the mountains. In 1956 he became British ambassador in Washington. After the Suez debacle, communications between the two governments were virtually suspended. In spite of his earlier relationship with the US president, Caccia received a frosty reception. However, after Harold Macmillan became prime minister normal relations were rapidly restored, and there were no further crises during his mission. A major success was the resumption of full co-operation on atomic energy in 1958, and the relationship was further enhanced by an official visit by the queen. Caccia soon got back on excellent terms with the administration and became a respected and popular figure in the United States. 
In 1962 Caccia became permanent under-secretary of state, and in 1964 head of the diplomatic service until his retirement in 1965. He was appointed CMG (1945), KCMG (1950), GCMG (1959), and GCVO (1961). In 1965 he was created a life peer as Baron Caccia. He took the arms of his Florentine ancestors. 
From 1965 to 1977 Caccia was provost of Eton, and he also accepted many outside appointments in banking, finance, industry, and insurance. He was director of the National Westminster Bank, chairman of the Orion Bank, a director of the Foreign and Colonial Investment and European trusts, director of the Prudential, chairman of Standard Telephones and Cables and of ITT (UK) Ltd, and a member of the advisory council of Foseco Minsep plc. He was chairman of the Gabbitas Thring educational trust, a member of the advisory committee on public records, and chairman of the Marylebone Cricket Club. In 1969 he became first chancellor and then lord prior of the order of St John of Jerusalem. He was a regular attender at the House of Lords, where he sat on the cross benches, speaking mainly on foreign affairs. He was chairman of the Anglo-Austrian Society and became an honorary fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, in 1963, and of Queen's College, Oxford, in 1974. 
In appearance Caccia was short, stocky, and bald with a fair complexion. He was forthright in speech and energetic in action, and he retained throughout his life a cheerful and light-hearted, almost boyish, manner, which concealed a serious and thoughtful disposition. He was a good administrator and universally popular in all that he undertook. He ended as he had begun, as a great all-rounder. 
Caccia was happy in his family life and he and his wife were a devoted couple. They had two daughters and one son. But his latter years were saddened by the untimely death of his son, David, in 1983. Caccia died of cancer at his home, Aber-nant, Builth Wells, Brecknockshire, on 31 October 1990. 
Sherfield', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39890


Figgures, Sir Frank Edward (1910-1990), civil servant, was born on 5 March 1910 in Merton, London, the only son and elder child of Frank Thomas Figgures, an administrative assistant with the crown agents, and his wife, Alice Biggin. He passed from Rutlish School, Merton, to New College, Oxford, where he took a first class in modern history (1931), became a Harmsworth senior scholar at Merton College (1931), and received a much coveted Henry fellowship to Yale, where he attended the law school in 1933. After being called to the bar (Lincoln's Inn) in 1936, he practised up to the outbreak of the Second World War. There followed military service in the Royal Artillery from 1940 to 1946, where he attained the rank of lieutenant-colonel. His public service began in 1946 with entry to the Treasury. He had a particularly happy start, not only because of the overriding importance of that department, but also because the Treasury was called upon to face quite new policy challenges at home and abroad. This, and the Treasury's traditional tolerance of individualism, was propitious for the exercise of Figgures's special talents and inclinations. He was concerned at once with overseas matters and was seconded to the recently created Organization for European Economic Co-operation (to which was later added 'and Development'), the heir of the Marshall plan, in the important post of director of trade and finance (1948-51). There he acquired an abiding skill in multilateral, international negotiation, and the ability to work harmoniously with a group of international public servants and politicians despite the clash of national interests. 
In 1951 Figgures returned to the Treasury and was promoted to under-secretary, a post he held from 1955 to 1960. This was the period when the British government had to decide how to deal with the movement for European integration, which would culminate in the treaty of Rome and the creation, by six countries, of the European Economic Community (EEC). Figgures was chosen as the chief developer and first director-general (1960-65) of the British government's European alternative, the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), set up in May 1960. In 1964 he branded the British import surcharge policy as 'illegal'. To his relief (he had suffered two near-breakdowns), he returned in 1965 to the Treasury as third secretary. He was promoted in 1968 to second permanent secretary, a new post. He retired in 1971. 
After his retirement from the civil service Figgures became director-general of the National Economic Development Office (1971-3), at a time when it was hoped that this institution might make a decisive difference to the country's well-being, through developments such as an incomes policy. In 1973 Figgures was chosen to be chairman of the Pay Board, which, however, had no better success in these matters and was wound up after one year. This also marked his definite retirement from the public domain, with the exception of his membership of the BBC General Advisory Council (1978-82), but he continued to be active in the private sector as director and chairman of a number of companies. 
Figgures had great abilities, particularly evident in the area of negotiation, especially in international matters. A large and affable man, he had an attractive personality, with a lively, amusing, kind, and understanding disposition. He knew much about music and his slight embonpoint, twinkling eyes, and widely cultured mind made him an agreeable companion. He was appointed CMG in 1959, CB in 1966, and KCB in 1970. He was an honorary DSc of Aston University (1975). 
In December 1941 Figgures married Aline Martina, daughter of Professor Hugo Frey, an eminent Viennese laryngologist; they had a son and a daughter. His wife died in 1975, and in the same year he married a friend of the family and a matron at Uppingham School, Ismea, daughter of George Napier Magill, a rubber planter in Malaysia who had died in a Japanese prisoner-of-war camp, and widow of John Stanley Barker, a bandleader and entertainment manager. Figgures died on 27 November 1990 in Glaston, Rutland. 
Eric Roll', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39891


James, (John) Morrice Cairns, Baron Saint Brides (1916-1989), diplomatist, was born on 30 April 1916 in Finchley, Middlesex, the only son and younger child of Lewis Cairns James, professor of drama and elocution at the Royal College of Music, and his second wife, Catherine Mary, daughter of John Maitland Marshall, of Dulwich, London. He was educated at Bradfield College, Berkshire, and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he obtained second classes in classical honour moderations (1936) and 'literae humaniores' (1938). He entered the Dominions Office as an assistant principal in 1939. After war broke out he joined the Royal Navy as an ordinary seaman in 1940, before being commissioned into the Royal Marines in 1941. He subsequently saw action in the Middle East and Sicily, for which he was appointed MBE (military) in 1944, and he was demobilized in the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the following year to return to the Dominions Office (soon to become the Commonwealth Relations Office). 
James was a born diplomatist and an outstanding negotiator, whose qualities were made full use of by ministers of both parties, though his easy manner and ready smile concealed a toughness and ambition which did not always endear him to his subordinates. Entries in successive editions of 'Who's Who' after his retirement describe his main recreation first as 'exploring the fallibility of contemporary statesmen' and later as 'meeting new and intelligent people'. He appears to have made few lifelong friends among his immediate colleagues, but his new friends invariably found him congenial and sympathetic. 
Having joined the civil service before the war, James's promotion when he rejoined it was rapid. After a brief period as first secretary in the high commission in South Africa (1946-7), he became in quick succession head of the Commonwealth Relations Office defence department (1949-51) and then of the establishment department (1951-2). In 1952 he was posted as deputy high commissioner to Lahore, so beginning a unique series of postings to the Indian subcontinent where, with a few breaks, he served successively as deputy and high commissioner in both Karachi and New Delhi. During one of these breaks he accompanied Harold Macmillan on his tour of Asia and the Far East in 1958, and in another made a series of visits to Rhodesia to set up what proved to be the abortive talks between Harold Wilson and Ian Smith in HMS 'Tiger' in 1966 and HMS 'Fearless' in 1968. Smith's duplicity (or weakness of character) was underlined by the fact that he assured James before the 'Tiger' talks that he had 'full and unequivocal powers to settle', but allowed his agreement to be overruled by his cabinet colleagues on his return to Salisbury. 
In the Indian subcontinent James initially tended to be identified with Pakistan, where he served as deputy high commissioner in 1955-6 and high commissioner from 1961 to 1966. With his opposite number in India, John Freeman, he was closely involved in the negotiations to settle the Rann of Cutch affair which preceded the outbreak of war between India and Pakistan in 1965, in which the Wilson government gave some evidence of favouring Pakistan. As a result, when James was posted to Delhi as high commissioner in 1968, he faced some initial hostility, though with characteristic aplomb he quickly gained the confidence of Indian ministers. 
James's appointment to Delhi came as the culmination of a curious sequence of events. Having been deputy under-secretary of state for two years, he had been appointed permanent under-secretary of state at the Commonwealth Office (formed two years earlier from the amalgamation of the Colonial Office with the Commonwealth Relations Office) in early 1968, but within ten days of his appointment the cup was dashed from his lips by Harold Wilson's announcement that the Commonwealth Office itself was to be amalgamated with the Foreign Office. He thus served as permanent under-secretary of state for only six months, but in compensation was awarded the rare honour for a civil servant of being sworn of the privy council (1968). He ended his career in the diplomatic service as high commissioner to Australia (1971-6). While in the post he had to deal with Australian apprehension over Britain's entry into the European Common Market and with the affair of John Stonehouse, the runaway MP. 
James was appointed CMG (1957), CVO (1961), KCMG (1962), and GCMG (1975). In 1977 he received a life peerage, taking the title of Baron Saint Brides and accepting the ceremonial post of king of arms of the Order of St Michael and St George. After his retirement he took up a succession of academic appointments at American universities, including Harvard, the Foreign Policy Research Institute at Philadelphia, and finally the Center for International Security and Arms Control at Stanford, California, where he was remembered with affection and admiration for his work on the Asian-Pacific region and for his encouragement of the younger students. 
James was a big man in every way, who in his earlier years waged a cheerful, but not wholly successful, battle with corpulence by swimming whenever he could during his lunch break. He was married twice. His first marriage in 1948, to Elizabeth Margaret Roper Piesse, daughter of Francis Charles Roper Piesse, solicitor and, later, hotelier, came as something of a surprise, many of his colleagues having been under the impression that he had been courting her mother. Of this marriage two daughters and a son were born. Following Elizabeth's death in 1966, he married in 1968 Genevieve Christiane (Jenny) Sarasin, daughter of Robert Henri Houdin, company director. On their return from Australia he moved with her to live in France at La Plotte, Cap St Pierre, St Tropez; he died at St Tropez on 26 November 1989. 
David Scott', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39892


O'Neill, Sir Con Douglas Walter (1912-1988), diplomatist, was born in London on 3 June 1912, the second of the three surviving sons (there were no daughters) of Sir (Robert William) Hugh O'Neill (later first Baron Rathcavan), privy councillor and politician, and his wife, Sylvia Irene, daughter of Walter Albert Sandeman, of Morden House, Royston. He attended Eton College and achieved early academic distinction with a scholarship from Eton to Balliol College, Oxford, a first class in English in 1934, and a law fellowship of All Souls College, Oxford, the following year (held until 1946). In 1936 he was called to the bar (Inner Temple) and in the same year entered the diplomatic service. 
O'Neill was posted to Berlin as third secretary in 1938; he resigned in 1939 because he disagreed with Neville Chamberlain's policy of appeasement. He served in the army intelligence corps from 1940 to 1943 and was then employed in the Foreign Office. In 1946 he left to become a leader writer on 'The Times' but returned to the Foreign Office the following year. From then on he rose steadily in the hierarchy; posts in Frankfurt am Main and Bonn were followed by a period as head of the news department in 1954-5, charge d'affaires in Beijing (1955-7), a return to the Foreign Office as assistant under-secretary in 1957, and posts as ambassador to Finland (1961-3) and ambassador to the European Communities in Brussels (1963-5). He returned to the Foreign Office as deputy under-secretary, and hoped in 1968 to go to Bonn as ambassador. Germany had been his first post; his German was impeccable and he would have carried considerable weight. But the foreign secretary, George Brown, vetoed this proposal; it was a question of temperamental incompatibility. O'Neill did not dispute his right to do so but resigned to start a career in the City with Hill Samuel. 
In 1969 O'Neill was recalled to the Foreign Office to head the team which would negotiate Britain's entry into the European Community. This task successfully accomplished, he left the Foreign Office for the last time in 1972, after writing the official history of the negotiations. From 1972 to 1974 he was chairman of the Intervention Board for Agricultural Produce; and he was a director of Unigate from 1974 to 1983. In 1974 and in 1975, the year of the referendum, he performed a last service to the European cause as director of the Britain in Europe campaign. 
O'Neill was one of the outstanding diplomats of his generation. His intellect was impressive, his reasoning always a masterpiece of logic, and his analysis of any situation penetrating and accurate. To this he brought a lucidity of expression which served him well as a leader writer on 'The Times'; some felt that he could have edited the newspaper with distinction. In appearance he resembled one of Anthony Trollope's elders of the church: bald, bespectacled, with an air of measured dignity, and with a voice distinctly canonical. His manner had something of the formality of a previous generation, but those who dealt with him rapidly found that underneath there lurked a delightful sense of humour and a seemingly inexhaustible fund of Irish stories. 
O'Neill was also a man of unbending principle. If he thought a policy was wrong he said so in clear and measured terms without any thought of the consequences for his career. It was most unusual for a diplomat to leave the Foreign Office three times before retirement and yet rise to posts of the highest distinction. His greatest accomplishment was the British entry into the European Community. On this the country was bitterly divided and the complexities of the negotiation vast. In addition he had to carry with him the senior officials on the team who vigorously defended the interests of their departments. Through all these hazards he steered his team with imperturbable patience and skill, gaining the confidence and respect of all he dealt with, whether among Britain's European partners or in Whitehall. The success of the negotiations was one of the great achievements in the history of British diplomacy; it owed much to his efforts. 
O'Neill was appointed CMG in 1953, KCMG in 1962, and GCMG in 1972. He was married three times, first in 1940 to Rosemary Margaret, daughter of Harold Pritchard MD. They had a son, and a daughter, Onora, who became principal of Newnham College, Cambridge. The marriage was dissolved in 1954 (his wife subsequently became Lady Garvey) and in that year he married Baroness Carola Hertha Adolphine Emma Harriet Luise (Mady) Marschall von Bieberstein, a widow, and the daughter of Baron Max Reinhard August von Holzing-Berstett. She died in 1960 and in 1961 he married Anne-Marie Lindberg of Helsinki, daughter of Bertil Jungstrom, civil engineer, of Stockholm. O'Neill died on 11 January 1988 at St Stephen's Hospital, London. 
Roy Denman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39893


Pilcher, Sir John Arthur (1912-1990), diplomatist, was born on 16 May 1912 in Quetta, India, the only child of Lieutenant-Colonel Arthur John Pilcher and his wife, Edith Blair. Both his parents shared a tradition of service in the Indian subcontinent in both the military and scholarly spheres, dating back to the eighteenth century. He was educated at Shrewsbury School and Clare College, Cambridge. In 1932 he gained a second class (division I) in part one of the modern and medieval languages tripos and in 1935 a third class in part two. His formal studies were supplemented by travel in Europe. 
In 1936 Pilcher was accepted as a student interpreter in the Japan consular service and was sent to Japan to learn the language. After one year in the embassy in Tokyo he went to study in the old capital of Kyoto, a city he grew to love. He lived for two years in the temple of Sokokuji and developed an appreciation of Japanese Buddhism. He also learned to speak the Kyoto dialect and got to know Kanjiro Kawai and other potters and artists. 
In 1939 Pilcher was transferred to Tsingtao (Qingdao), a consular post in Japanese-occupied China. While there he was received into the Roman Catholic church. He returned to London in 1941 and worked mainly on Japanese affairs in the Ministry of Information and the Foreign Office. In 1942 he married Delia Margaret, daughter of Patrick Kirwan Taylor, a retired army officer who had been wounded in the First World War. They had one daughter. 
In 1948 Pilcher was appointed first secretary (information) in the British embassy in Rome. He was sorry to return to London in 1951 on promotion to counsellor. He became head of the Japan and Pacific department of the Foreign Office, where he saw through the ratification of the peace treaty, the Korean war, and the rather difficult period in Anglo-Japanese relations which followed the peace treaty. In 1954 he was appointed counsellor in Madrid and in 1959 received his first ambassadorial appointment in Manila, in the Philippines. 
Pilcher returned to London in 1963 to become assistant under-secretary in charge of information and cultural work. In 1965 he was appointed ambassador to Austria, which proved to be a very happy posting. In addition to his knowledge and understanding of European culture he was an enthusiastic student of the Austro-German musical tradition. An accomplished pianist, he delighted in chamber music and accompanying singers and instrumentalists. In 1966 he was awarded the Austrian Grand Cross (gold) decoration of honour. 
Pilcher was promoted to become ambassador in Tokyo in 1967. Having kept in touch with many of his pre-war Japanese friends, he was able to entertain widely on his return to Tokyo. He was assiduous in his contacts with the Japanese imperial family and accompanied the Showa emperor on the first Japanese state visit to London in 1971. On this occasion he was awarded the first class of the Japanese order of the Rising Sun. His period in Japan coincided with the successful British week in Tokyo in 1969, attended by Princess Margaret, and the Expo in Osaka in 1970, visited by the prince of Wales. Pilcher retired in 1972. 
He had been brought up in the old school of diplomacy where the first priority was to cultivate influential people in the country to which an ambassador was accredited. He did this very well. He was also a knowledgeable and wise observer, his dispatches being well written and to the point. He disliked having to be a tough negotiator and protector of narrow British interests and also found modern commercial diplomacy rather distasteful. However, he invariably supported fully his staff in their endeavours to promote British exports and threw himself enthusiastically into the task of educating hard-headed British businessmen about the realities of modern Japan, recognizing that for this purpose they needed a modicum of understanding of Japanese culture and history. 
Pilcher was an accomplished raconteur and wit. He had a fund of stories, many with a Rabelaisian twist, and could keep an audience enthralled for a long time. He was a short, tubby man, with a round, partly bald, head and a twinkle in his eyes. He was appointed CMG (1957), KCMG (1966), and GCMG (1973). In his retirement he became a director of the Foreign and Colonial Investment Trust (1973-82), chairman of the Brazil Fund (1975-82) and of the Fleming Japan Fund (1976-85), and adviser on Far Eastern affairs to Robert Fleming & Co. (1973-85). Of great interest to him personally were his membership of the Museums and Galleries Commission (1973-83) and of the committee of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings (1974-82), which he represented on the council of the National Trust. He was also president of the Institute of Linguists (1982-4) and served twice (a total of six years) as chairman of the council of the Japan Society in Britain. He died on 10 February 1990 in Barnes, London, after a protracted illness. He was survived by his wife. 
Hugh Cortazzi', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39894


Abell, Sir George Edmond Brackenbury (1904-1989), administrator in India, was born on 22 June 1904 in Sanderstead, Surrey, the eldest in the family of two sons and two daughters of George Foster Abell, director of Lloyds Bank, and his wife, Jessie Elizabeth Brackenbury. His brother, Sir Anthony Abell, became governor of Sarawak. He was a scholar and senior prefect of Marlborough College, and scholar of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he obtained a first class in classical honour moderations (1925) and a second in 'literae humaniores' (1927). A triple blue, in rugby, cricket, and hockey, he captained the Oxford rugby fifteen in 1926, and played cricket for Worcestershire. In 1928 he married Susan (died 1992), daughter of Frank Norman-Butler, inspector of schools, and they were close companions throughout the rest of his life. They had two sons and a daughter. 
Abell joined the Indian Civil Service as a district officer in the Punjab in 1928, becoming deputy registrar of co-operative societies and a settlement officer. He enjoyed the work, and coped effectively with crises, quelling a riot in Dera Ghazi Khan gaol by walking into the middle of it while the warders were taking refuge on the roof. In 1941 the governor of the Punjab appointed him as his private secretary, and in 1943 he was promoted deputy secretary to the viceroy, the second marquess of Linlithgow. In 1945 he took over as private secretary to the viceroy, by then Viscount Wavell, and he continued to hold this post under Louis Mountbatten until the end of the raj, thereafter serving as Mountbatten's secretary when he became governor-general of India. 
Abell's role in government during the critical years leading up to the partition and transfer of power in India was of central importance. Although the Hindus regarded his Punjab background with suspicion, Wavell, whom he liked and admired, used him to coax M. K. Gandhi, describing him as 'diplomatic and persuasive'. He wrote the first draft of the handover scheme to be presented to the new Labour government, and he was on the small committee used by Wavell to work out the details of his 'breakdown plan'. He tended to moderate Wavell's tougher telegrams but respected his soldierly directness. However, he came to feel that the British position in India was untenable, that partition was inevitable, and that the British should extricate themselves quickly. Although less comfortable with Mountbatten's personality, he therefore worked happily to implement his policy. He drafted the partition plan for the viceroy with General Hastings Ismay, and he helped to keep him from some of the mistakes inevitably made in the rush to meet the deadline. 'The Lord needs George or Ismay to steady him', commented a diarist close to the scene. 
On his return to England in 1948 Abell joined the Bank of England as an adviser, serving as a director from 1952 until 1964. He was responsible for all matters connected with staff, and for the buildings. He developed the new graduate entry, organizing a career structure which made proper use of graduates' talents. He also ended the old division between men and women, and integrated them into one staff. He had directorial responsibility for three major new Bank of England buildings, including the New Change office block at the top of Cheapside. 
Abell was first civil service commissioner from 1964 until 1967, chairman of the Rhodes trustees from 1969 until 1974 (having been a trustee from 1949), and chairman of the governors of Marlborough College from 1974 until 1977. He was also president of the council of Reading University between 1970 and 1974. This was at a time of rapidly increasing numbers and general student restlessness. That Reading did not suffer the disruption of many other universities had much to do with the confidence which Abell engendered in dons and students. They respected his mind, and his sense of humour defused many difficult situations. 
Abell enjoyed the outdoor life, shot well, and tied his own fishing flies. He remained the all-rounder throughout his life, and he brought his common sense and his clear mind to a wide range of problems. He retained the discretion of the civil servant, and his response to biographers and journalists who wanted to get behind the scenes of the closing years of the raj was that he continued to regard his role as that of a private secretary. 
Abell was appointed OBE (1943), CIE (1946), and KCIE (1947). He received an honorary LLD from Aberdeen University in 1947, and became an honorary fellow of Corpus Christi College in 1971. He died at his home, Whittonditch House, Ramsbury, near Marlborough, Wiltshire, on 11 January 1989 and was buried at Ramsbury church. 
Roger Ellis', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39895


Gibbs, Sir Humphrey Vicary (1902-1990), farmer and colonial administrator, was born on 22 November 1902 at 9 Portman Square, London, the third son and sixth and youngest child of Herbert Cokayne Gibbs, first Baron Hunsdon of Hunsdon (1854-1935), merchant banker, and his wife, Anna Maria (1862-1938), fourth daughter of Richard Durant, of High Canons, Hertfordshire. The Gibbs family was wealthy and well connected in the City of London, which at various times his grandfather Henry Hucks Gibbs, first Baron Aldenham, and his uncle Alban George Henry Gibbs, second Baron Aldenham, represented in parliament. His brothers Walter Durant Gibbs, fourth Baron Aldenham, and Sir Geoffrey Cokayne Gibbs were notable bankers in the City. 
Gibbs was educated at Ludgrove preparatory school, Eton College (where he was head of Pop), and Trinity College, Cambridge, which he left after a year to pursue training courses in various branches of agriculture. In 1928 he emigrated to Southern Rhodesia, where he purchased a 6000 acre farm near Bulawayo. He gained a reputation for progressive farming and formed the Rhodesia National Farmers' Union. Regarding soil and wildlife conservation as a matter of great urgency, he successfully campaigned for a national resources board. On 17 January 1934 he married Molly Peel Nelson (1912-1997), second daughter of John Peel Nelson, businessman, of Bulawayo. They had five sons. 
In 1947 Gibbs was invited to stand for parliament as a member of Sir Godfrey Huggins's ruling United Party and was elected as member for Wankie. He was not a natural parliamentarian: Huggins remarked that he was 'far too honest' ('DNB'). Although he later quipped that his only parliamentary contributions had been to say 'Hear, hear', he spoke significantly on the creation of national parks and a maize levy on European farmers to assist in developing African agriculture. He retired from parliament in 1953, but retained the chairmanship of the United Party until 1959. He refused to become involved in a plot to make him leader of the Liberal Party, choosing farming and several directorships in leading Rhodesian firms over party politics. Strongly involved in supporting the development of the Anglican church in Central Africa, and of European and African education, he helped in 1939 to found the Cyrene mission near Bulawayo, which became famous as a centre for African arts and crafts. He played a leading role in founding Peterhouse and Mizeki College, and developed an enthusiastic interest in multiracial schooling. For many years he chaired the Beit Trust, which provided funds to causes throughout the federation. 
In 1959 Gibbs accepted the post of governor of Southern Rhodesia, the first 'Rhodesian' so appointed. Tall, charming, strikingly handsome, and regarded as 'above party', he was thought of as ideal for the post. The governorship of Southern Rhodesia, a self-governing colony, was largely ceremonial, resembling the role of a dominion governor-general, rather than the governorship of a dependency, even if its prerogatives were theoretically extensive. Invariably the governor acted on the advice of his prime minister. Gibbs felt constitutionally bound, for example, to authorize Sir Edgar Whitehead's controversial 'Law and Order Maintenance Act' (1960). Following the Rhodesian Front's electoral victory in 1962, his speeches from the throne reflected the growing cabinet hostility towards what it regarded as British duplicity in withholding independence. In May 1963 he also became acting governor-general of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, overseeing the final details of its dissolution. He exercised his constitutional right to warn when he attempted unsuccessfully to persuade his prime minister, Winston Field, to face down his extremist critics within the Rhodesian Front. Ian Smith, who succeeded as prime minister, however, pledged to gain independence under white minority rule, if necessary through an illegal unilateral declaration of independence (UDI). 
From the outset Gibbs seemed somewhat unassertive in his dealings with Smith. In April 1965, on the qualified advice of the chief justice, he granted Smith a dissolution even though parliament had two years to run. This was one area where he had more authority than a dominion governor-general. The British government, moreover, reaffirmed its policy of non-intervention in the colony, so that he had no alternative advice on which to rely. Unconventionally, when he met the opposition leader, David Butler, to ascertain whether he could form a government in the event of Smith resigning, both the chief justice and Smith were present at the interview. The Rhodesian Front went on to a crushing election victory. UDI now seemed certain, a crisis for which Gibbs was politically ill equipped. While legality lasted, he felt constitutionally obliged to follow Smith's advice by authorizing a state of emergency on 5 November 1965, even though it presaged UDI, which followed on 11 November. The British government immediately reaffirmed Gibbs's position as the only lawful authority in the rebel colony, although he himself would have preferred to retire to his farm. He dismissed the cabinet, which cut off his salary, household utilities, telephone, official car, and police escort. He refused a salary from Britain, used a public telephone box to contact Whitehall, and continued to hold court at Government House in defiance of Smith. The regime denounced him as a fellow traveller of the British Labour Party, because his loyalty to the sovereign was now effectively routed through the Commonwealth relations secretary and Wilson. Gibbs's influence was minimal, since civil servants and the security forces were encouraged to remain at their posts. The regime installed a rival officer administering the government, claiming to continue to govern in the name of the queen of Rhodesia, whom it distinguished from Wilson's constitutional instrument. Gibbs's peculiar position was encapsulated in his advice to Sam Putterill, the army commander, in 1966: 'Sam, you had better open Parliament, for not to do so would be a confrontation. But don't appear as if you are enjoying it!' (Flower, 82). 
Gibbs accompanied Smith to the abortive negotiations on board 'Tiger' in 1966 and 'Fearless' in 1968, and in 1969, following Smith's decision to declare a republic, he was allowed to retire to his farm. Having been appointed OBE in 1959, KCMG in 1960, and KCVO in 1965, he was promoted GCVO and sworn a privy councillor on retirement. Parliament later awarded him $66,000 compensation for some of the costs incurred following UDI. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Birmingham and East Anglia, both in 1969. As a founder of the multiracial organization People against Racial Discrimination he campaigned unsuccessfully for accepting the Anglo-Rhodesian settlement proposals of 1971. Although vindicated by the lawful independence of Zimbabwe in 1980, as a traditional monarchist he had no natural enthusiasm for a republic which now denied the queen the allegiance he had championed. In 1983, following a gun attack on his wife's car by a deranged employee, and with widening government repression in Matabeleland, he decided to retire to Borrowdale, Harare, where he died on 5 November 1990, after a short illness. He was survived by his wife, Molly, who had been made DBE in 1969 in recognition of her charitable work, and by their five sons. A memorial service was held in the chapel of the Order of the British Empire, St Paul's Cathedral, on 15 January 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 39896


Johnston, Sir Charles Hepburn (1912-1986), diplomatist and writer, was born on 11 March 1912 in Hampstead, London, the eldest in the family of four sons and two daughters of Ernest Johnston, an underwriter at Lloyd's, and his wife, Emma Florence Hepburn. (The family later moved to a larger house in Reigate, Surrey.) Studious and competitive, he won scholarships to Winchester College and then to Balliol College, Oxford, where at first he was lonely and unhappy. He took first classes in both classical honour moderations (1932) and 'literae humaniores' (1934) and taught for a term at his old school before choosing the diplomatic service, which he entered at the second attempt (1936). 
For twenty years Johnston's career followed a conventional course, except that in Tokyo he and the rest of the embassy staff were interned for several months when Japan entered the war. Later, as first secretary in Cairo, he tried but was not allowed to transfer to the armed forces; he felt this keenly, especially after his brother Duncan was killed in action. He became first secretary in Madrid (1948), and counsellor at the Foreign Office (1951) and the embassy in Bonn (1955). 
In 1956, aged only forty-four, Johnston was picked to be ambassador to Jordan. His first task was to wind up the outdated Anglo-Jordan treaty, which he accomplished with skill and tact (1957). A year later, when King Hussein's position was threatened, it was his advocacy, backed by the prime minister, Harold Macmillan, which overcame the doubts felt elsewhere in London and led to the brief but successful deployment of British troops to Jordan. He was appointed KCMG in 1959. These events are described in his book 'The Brink of Jordan' (1972), for which Macmillan wrote a preface awarding him 'a secure place in the list of great envoys who have represented Britain overseas'. 
Johnston's next appointment, unusual for a non-member of the colonial service, was as (the last) governor of Aden. He worked to merge the colony of Aden with the Federation of South Arabia, promoting constitutional advance but keeping the British military base. So long as he was there (1960-63) this line was maintained, with some difficulty but on the whole with success, as he related in 'The View from Steamer Point' (1964). 
After Aden, Johnston might have risen higher but for Labour's victory in the general election of 1964. As it was, the top posts to which he aspired went to others, and those offered to him did not match his own estimate of his abilities. Finally, in 1965 he agreed to go as high commissioner to Australia, where he was more effective and more popular than many had expected. He continued to reject offers of other posts and retired with a GCMG in 1971, a year earlier than normal, with the idea of entering politics. 
Johnston's last years brought some disappointments. He was judged too old to stand for the House of Commons. A peerage was mentioned but not offered. A company chairmanship lapsed when the plan to build an airport in the Thames estuary was dropped. Despite his hopes he became neither chairman of the BBC nor poet laureate. A book of reminiscences built round the character of his long-serving Egyptian butler, 'Mo and other Originals' (1971), had a brief success, but his other prose and poetry found little market outside magazines. 
Two things consoled Johnston: his social work at Toynbee Hall, for which he showed an unexpected talent; and the world opened to him by his marriage. In Cairo he had met Princess Natasha Bagration, daughter of Prince Konstantin Bagration-Mukhransky and of Princess Tatyana Konstantinovna, descended respectively from the royal house of Georgia and from Tsar Nicholas I of Russia. They were married in London in 1944. Though childless, it was a strange but successful union until her death in 1984 after several years of intermittent illness. Arrestingly tall, possessed of magnetic charm, and connected with royal families all over Europe, she vastly enlarged his mental and especially social horizons. From their flat in Knightsbridge they continued, almost to the last, to sustain their parts in the social round which he called 'the Belgraveyard'. 
In collaboration with his wife Johnston had produced in 1948 what is perhaps still the best English translation of Turgenev's 'Sportsman's Notebook'. But his masterpiece is his rendering of 'Eugene Onegin' into English verse preserving Pushkin's metre and rhyme scheme (1977). This received unqualified critical acclaim. His success as a translator did not help, and perhaps even hindered, the fortunes of his other work, though he continued to write, print, publish, and circulate it to his friends, convinced that posterity would be kinder. 'Poems and Journeys' (1979) contains much of his best work. 
Johnston developed a boisterous manner for social purposes, but remained shy and reserved at heart. The strong emotions reflected in his poetry, together with his deep vein of self-doubt, were well concealed. Physically tall, energetic but somewhat awkward, he was a good sailor and a keen shot. He managed his savings astutely and generously, and was a good judge of a painting. He died in his sleep on 23 April 1986 at his home in London, 32 Kingston House, South Ennismore Gardens. 
Julian Bullard', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39897


Moon, Sir (Edward) Penderel (1905-1987), administrator in India and writer, was born on 13 November 1905 in Green Street, Mayfair, London, the only son and second of five children of Robert Oswald Moon, consultant cardiologist, and his wife, Ethel Rose Grant Waddington. Dr Moon wrote about philosophy and Greek medicine as well as diseases of the heart; he stood several times as a Liberal candidate for parliament. 
Penderel Moon followed his father to Winchester College and to New College, Oxford, was placed in the first class in 'literae humaniores' (1927), and in the same year was elected to a fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford, which he held until 1935. In 1929 he was appointed to the Indian Civil Service, arriving in India on 29 November. He was posted to the Punjab and attached for instruction to Gurdaspur district under Evan Jenkins, later private secretary to the viceroy and governor of the Punjab, who formed very early a high opinion of his administrative ability. By the time he had charge of the difficult district of Multan, it was known that Moon decided quickly and acted firmly but was not notably tolerant of the opinions of others, even his elders. None the less, he was appointed in 1938 private secretary to the governor of the Punjab, Sir Henry Craik; he was young for this key position and was also unusual in winning races on the governor's horses. 
After his spell as private secretary, Moon was posted in 1941 as deputy commissioner to Amritsar, the focal point of the Sikh religion and of special importance in war in view of the Sikh contribution to the Indian army. Like many young British officers in the Indian Civil Service, Moon considered that the government of the second marquess of Linlithgow was dragging its feet about Indian advance towards self-government. In November 1942 he addressed to the Punjab government a letter arguing that those imprisoned for preaching civil disobedience should receive better treatment; this was in order, but when he received an unsympathetic reply, explaining the critical war situation, Moon's reaction was not. He sent a copy of the government's letter, with his own acid comments, to a brother of Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, secretary to M. K. Gandhi. He was at the time in gaol. This letter was intercepted and Moon was in serious trouble. Eventually the new governor, Sir Bertrand Glancy, persuaded him not to insist on dismissal, but to resign; he refused the suggestion of a proportionate pension. 
Moon returned to England in April 1943, on six months' leave pending retirement, but in 1946 Viscount Wavell, now viceroy, on the advice of his private secretary, Sir Evan Jenkins, invited him to return, on contract, as secretary to the boards of development and planning. In April 1947 he became revenue minister of the state of Bahawalpur and stayed on after India's independence, serving as chief commissioner of Himachal Pradesh, as chief commissioner of Manipur state, and as adviser to the planning commission. The tone of an address to the Indian Administrative Staff College suggests that he was sometimes as critical of the new rulers of India as of the old. 
During the Second World War Moon had published 'Strangers in India' (1944), in which he argued that the ills of India could not be solved by a foreign government; it was followed by 'Warren Hastings' (1947), brilliantly written in a simple, lucid style and notable for its sympathy with Hastings. 
Moon's last appointment in India ended in 1961. He was knighted in 1962 for services to good relations between Britain and India, to which indeed he had notably contributed. After his return to England he held brief appointments with the World Bank and as adviser to the government of Thailand but soon put the main thrust of his life into scholarly work on India. In 1961 he published 'Divide and quit', which he later believed the most likely to survive of any of his books. It contains a lucid account of the events leading up to the partition of India and Pakistan, and an unflinching assessment of responsibility together with a day-by-day account of his own actions and observations as revenue minister and district magistrate in the border state of Bahawalpur during the months immediately following the division of the Punjab and the slaughter that followed. There can be no doubt that his power of swift decision, and his application of common sense amounting to brilliance, saved many lives; his account constitutes first-hand historical evidence of a high order. His 'Gandhi and Modern India' is an admirable counterpoise to his 'Warren Hastings'. 
From 1965 to 1972 Moon was a fellow of All Souls, being the college's estates bursar from 1966 to 1969, and from 1972 to 1982 he was at the India Office Library and Records, preparing for publication, with Nicholas Mansergh, the India Office documents on 'The Transfer of Power 1942-7' (12 volumes). He found time also to edit 'Wavell: the Viceroy's Journal' (1973), a labour of love carried out with his usual clarity and distinction. When he died his last and most substantial book, 'The British Conquest and Dominion of India' (1989), was still in proof. It was written, as always, with clarity, detachment, and mastery of complex material. In 1966 he married Pauline Marion, daughter of the Revd William Everard Cecil Barns; the marriage was not a success and was soon dissolved; there were no children. 
Moon's life was not all spent toiling at a desk. Before retiring from All Souls he bought a mixed farm near Aylesbury, which he later enlarged. He employed a manager, but took pleasure not only in the business of the farm but in the physical work of haymaking and harvest; he was a generous employer. He was a good horseman and enjoyed both hunting and racing. He sang in Oxford in the Bach Choir and had a particular admiration for the music of Handel. 
Penderel Moon resembled in many ways an aristocrat of the Enlightenment. In appearance he was trim and slight; in personal habit, ascetic. In scholarship, as in farming, he combined the confident mastery of the professional with the detachment of the amateur of independent means. He was decisive in his opinions and often autocratic, a champion of the peasant but no egalitarian. In youth, he liked to surprise and even to shock, but he never took up a position merely for effect. He died on 2 June 1987 at home at Manor Farm, Wotton Underwood, Buckinghamshire. 
Philip Mason', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39898


Blowitz, Henri Georges Stephan Adolphe Opper de (1825-1903), journalist, was born at Blovice in the Plzen district of Bohemia, on 28 December 1825, the elder son of Marc Opper or Oppert, a tradesman, and Anne Hartmann. The exact circumstances of his early life are uncertain; the account that he dictated for his posthumously published 'Memoirs' (1903) was deliberately designed to hide his humble origins. Government records confirm that in 1847 he was living in France where, for twelve years, he taught German at various lycees. He did not become a naturalized French citizen until 1870. In 1859 he married a rich widow, Anne-Amelie Bethfort (1814-1893), daughter of a naval paymaster, distantly related through her mother to the royal house of Bourbon. To make himself appear more acceptable to his wife's family, Blowitz abandoned Judaism for Roman Catholicism and added his birthplace to his surname. His wife was tall and handsome; Blowitz was extremely short and corpulent. His large, bald head he complemented with extravagant thickets of side-whiskers and moustaches; his singular appearance was further exaggerated by an ostentatious taste in clothes. 'Tout ensemble', Blowitz inspired humour more readily than thoughts of romance, yet he enjoyed a considerable reputation as a 'coureur'. He admitted, in his fractured English: 'All women fell to me for love' (Giles, 27), but he never wavered in his admiration for his 'madonna', Anne-Amelie. They made an incongruous-looking couple, but theirs was a remarkably happy marriage; their only child, Stephan Lauzanne, was adopted. 
Blowitz's first essay into journalism was in the local 'Gazette de Midi' in 1866. The permanent change from idle 'rentier' to journalist was prompted by events in the winter of 1870-71. How exactly he became a friend of Louis Thiers remains a mystery, but it was the politician probably who recommended Blowitz as an assistant to 'The Times''s Paris correspondent. Within four years, the diminutive, audacious opportunist had succeeded to 'The Times''s most prestigious foreign posting. Reservations about Blowitz's suitability had been totally disarmed by his interview of Alfonso XII of Spain, described by J. T. Delane, the editor, as a 'really masterly stroke' (Blowitz, 99). Blowitz gathered news assiduously, always with an eye to his readers' pleasure. This delighted J. C. MacDonald, manager of 'The Times', who particularly valued the little man's talent for blurring the distinction between authorized and unauthorized, real and fictitious, and the glittering style that converted the dullest official communique into the stuff of Ruritanian romance. Blowitz became part of the history he chronicled with inexhaustible fluency. As a contemporary 'apercu' acknowledged: 'Il n'y a decidement que deux hommes en Europe, Bismarck et Blowitz'. 
In his 'Memoirs' Blowitz stated that, in 1875, he had prevented war between Germany and France. This is an example of his imagination overtaking accuracy. He liked to place himself at the centre of important events, a foible so widely recognized that 'Punch' dubbed him 'Blowitz-own-Trumpet'. The 1878 Berlin Congress was, however, an undoubted personal triumph. To London he sent a stream of stories about the personalities and the progress of events, and by an amazing coup succeeded in telegraphing the exact terms of the treaty to 'The Times' to appear on the day it was signed in Berlin. For services rendered, Blowitz received from France advancement in the Legion d'honneur from chevalier to officier; from Germany, a decoration, third class. But the honour Blowitz valued most was an interview with Bismarck; thereafter he referred frequently to his supposed intimacy with the Iron Chancellor. Often reminiscing in print: 'Let me recall what Prince Bismarck said to me...', Blowitz was denigrated in the controlled German press as a troublemaker, and his reports dismissed as 'Munchausen stories', the 'crazy inventions of a scandal monger'. Blowitz did nothing to dissuade Bismarck that 'Herr Oppert aus Blowitz' was entirely responsible for how 'The Times' viewed European affairs. Indeed, throughout the 1880s Blowitz effectively was a one-man foreign department. His regular European-wide surveys he based on information supplied by friends and contacts in every European capital. His privilege was to write when and what he pleased knowing that he would always have the support of his editor. 
Blowitz was a generous host. His Paris apartment was invariably crowded with distinguished guests drawn from all walks of life. An informed, brilliant conversationalist, he was welcomed in every leading Paris salon. A polished 'boulevardier', he was the essential constituent of any significant social, literary, or theatrical gathering. No important private view, premiere, or reception was complete without the 'ambassadeur du Times'. Blowitz insisted that the endless whirl of his social life was essential grist to his journalistic mill. To profession and employers alike, he always showed the highest degree of fidelity. He was not without faults as a journalist; he could be touchy, impudent, vulgar, and pushing. But he was never a moral coward, and any cause in which he believed, no matter how unpopular, he advocated fearlessly and consistently. He was a doughty Dreyfusard and a tireless, lifelong supporter of the house of Orleans. He was obliged to write his dispatches in French, but if his grasp of English was always uncertain, no one was a greater Anglophile. 
From J. C. MacDonald's death in 1889, Blowitz's influence at 'The Times' slowly declined, a process hastened by Sir Donald Mackenzie Wallace's appointment to lead a newly constituted foreign department. Wallace, sober of demeanour and conservative of taste, a diplomat rather than a journalist, intensely disliked Blowitz's sensationalism. In September 1895 he wrote to the Paris correspondent: 'Your great journalistic talent... unfortunately... does not easily accommodate itself to... the style of 'The Times'... in which each worker strives to sink his own personality in the collective personality of the paper' ('History of The Times', 3.139). Wallace might as well have expected a peacock to masquerade as a sparrow as to suppose that Blowitz might modify his style. Instead, copy from Blowitz was altered, reduced, even ignored, without reference to the author. His coups were dismissed variously as 'too credulous', 'indiscreet', or, ''jeux d'esprit' of questionable taste' (ibid., 3.136). Wallace's all-important ally in muzzling Blowitz was C. F. Moberly Bell. Both men were convinced that the Blowitz style of journalism was outdated. Nevertheless, the old man stubbornly clung to his post until increasing frailty finally undermined his resolve and, most unwillingly, he accepted retirement at the end of 1902. Blowitz was spared the final indignity of seeing William Lavino replace him as Paris correspondent, that post for which he still supposed himself uniquely best fitted. On 18 January 1903, he died from peritonitis, at 2 rue Greuze, Paris; he was buried at Boulogne-sur-Seine. No journalist had been more written about in his lifetime by fellow journalists. His coups inspired awe, but also spite and professional jealousy. At his death, the world's press united to compliment the little correspondent who had towered over his profession. 'The Times' declared him 'unique'; 'Punch' extolled him as 'a prince of correspondents' who was 'without peer'. 'The king of interviewers', pronounced the 'Journal de Bruxelles'; and none disagreed with the 'New York Evening Post''s accolade that Blowitz had been 'the last of the great correspondents of the old school' (Giles, preface). Blowitz was all these things, and more. He was a legend in his own lifetime. 


@@@@@


doc= 39899


Higginbottom, Frederick James (1859-1943), journalist, was born on 21 October 1859 at Accrington, Lancashire, the son of Matthew Fielding Higginbottom, a mathematics tutor, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Sykes. After a private education in Liverpool, Higginbottom began his career in journalism with the 'Southport Daily News', at the age of fifteen. He had learned enough by 1879 to take up the editorship of the 'Southport Visiter', described in his memoirs as a 'social paper' but offering scope to develop his skills as a political reporter. By 1881 Higginbottom's enterprise had attracted the attention of the Press Association; the London-based news agency sent him to Dublin in 1882, where he remained as its special correspondent for almost ten years. His reporting during an especially troubled phase of Anglo-Irish relations established the Press Association as the principal supplier of Irish news for the London and provincial press. In 1884 Higginbottom married Ann Elizabeth (died 1922), daughter of Edwin H. Neville. 
On returning to London, Higginbottom served briefly as a parliamentary correspondent for a Dublin paper and, in 1892, founded the London Press Exchange, which flourished as an advertising-cum-news agency servicing the requirements of provincial newspapers. He also began his long association with the 'Pall Mall Gazette', the London evening newspaper made famous by W. T. Stead in the 1880s but by Higginbottom's time rather past its prime in terms of influence and circulation. It is clear from his memoirs that he felt most comfortable as a member of the parliamentary press lobby; he stayed there as the 'Pall Mall Gazette's' political correspondent until 1900. After a short stay at the 'Daily Chronicle', Higginbottom returned to the 'Gazette', succeeding Sir Douglas Straight as editor in April 1909. His two years in the post represent the pinnacle of his career. He maintained the paper's 'independent Conservative' stance, backing resistance to the 'Parliament Bill' in 1911. Though this earned the gratitude of the Conservative faction, who opposed 'wobbling and scuttling', it did not arrest the decline of the 'Gazette', which was reported to be losing about $20,000 a year, with sales dipping below 10,000. Under Higginbottom's editorship, the paper was, according to one description, 'undistinguished but workmanlike' (Scott, 392-3). 
By the end of 1911 Waldorf Astor, owner of the 'Pall Mall Gazette', was seeking an editor who could offer more than a safe pair of hands. Higginbottom moved aside for J. L. Garvin, whose work at the 'Observer' he had recommended to Astor; the transition appears to have been without acrimony. Higginbottom was re-employed as parliamentary correspondent at the same salary. Apart from an interlude as director of press intelligence for the Ministry of National Service in 1917-18, he remained a parliamentary correspondent for the rest of his career, which concluded with an attachment to the 'Daily Chronicle' from 1919 to 1930. He died suddenly at his home, The Lawn, Briston, Norfolk, on 12 May 1943. 
Higginbottom took pride in being a working journalist. His connection with the Institute of Journalists, dating from its foundation in 1890, allowed him to campaign for appropriate professional standards and, through stewardship of the institute's provident fund, to show a concern for the welfare of journalists who had fallen on hard times. Even after his retirement Higginbottom continued to contribute to the institute's 'Journal'. At the end of his life he was engaged in debate with those who favoured an academic training for journalists; characteristically, Higginbottom preferred a more practical apprenticeship beginning 'in a provincial newspaper office, where the pupil learns something of all departments and a good deal of some' ('Journal', March 1943). 


@@@@@


doc= 39900


Abraham, Gerald Ernest Heal (1904-1988), musicologist, was born on 9 March 1904 in Newport, Isle of Wight, the only child of Ernest Abraham, manufacturer, and his wife, Dorothy Mary Heal, a jeweller's daughter. In spite of his strong musical interests, he planned a naval career, attending a naval crammer in Portsmouth. Ill health forced him to abandon this, though he retained a lifelong interest in naval history, and after studying for a year in Cologne he published his first book on music, a study of Aleksandr Borodin (1927), an autodidact like himself. Apart from some piano lessons in early life, he was self-taught, but during the following years he contributed widely to musical periodicals and also published monographs on Nietzsche (1933), Tolstoy (1935), and Dostoyevsky (1936), as well as an introduction to contemporary music, 'This Modern Stuff' (1933; renamed 'This Modern Music' in later reprints). He taught himself Russian and published two collections of his primarily analytical essays, 'Studies in Russian Music' (1935) and 'On Russian Music' (1939). In collaboration with M. D. Calvocoressi, he wrote 'Masters of Russian Music' (1936). In 1935 he joined the BBC as assistant editor of 'Radio Times' and subsequently served as deputy editor of 'The Listener' (1939-42), remaining its music editor until 1962. In 1936 he married (Isobel) Patsy, daughter of Stanley John Robinson, a pharmacist; they had one daughter. 
During the Second World War, when interest in Russian music was at fever pitch, he published 'Eight Soviet Composers' (1943) and made a valuable behind-the-scenes contribution to broadcasting as director of gramophone programmes (1942-7), helping to lay the foundations of the Third Programme in 1946. He returned to the BBC in 1962, as assistant controller of music, after having spent the intervening years (1947-62) as the first professor of music at Liverpool University. He spent a further year as chief music critic of the 'Daily Telegraph' (1967-8) before becoming the Ernest Bloch professor of music at the University of California at Berkeley (1968-9). His lectures there were subsequently published under the title 'The Tradition of Western Music' (1974). Although the public tended to associate him with Slavonic and Romantic music, his scholarship was of quite unusual breadth and depth. He edited symposia on Tchaikovsky (1945), Schubert (1946), Sibelius (1947), Grieg (1948), Schumann (1952), and Handel (1954). He set in motion 'The History of Music in Sound' (gramophone records and handbooks) and the 'New Oxford History of Music'. The latter occupied him for the best part of three decades; he edited three of its ten volumes personally -- the third, 'Ars nova and the Renaissance, 1300-1450', in collaboration with Dom Anselm Hughes (1960); the fourth, 'The Age of Humanism, 1540-1630' (1968); and the eighth, 'The Age of Beethoven, 1790-1830' (1982). During this time he also brought out his magisterial, synoptic overview of Western music, 'The Concise Oxford History of Music' (1979). He was closely involved in 'The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians' (1980). His selfless work as an editor is nowhere better exemplified than in his completion of Calvocoressi's 'Master Musicians' study of Mussorgsky (1946) and his work on seeing Calvocoressi's larger study through the press in 1955 (published in 1956). 
Abraham was of medium height, with a genial and warm personality. His writings are exceptional in the field of musicology not only for their scholarship, which was always worn lightly, but also for their freshness, originality, and readability. He had the rare ability to stimulate the interest and engage the sympathies of the less informed as well as the specialist reader, and he commanded a ready wit with the gift for a felicitous and memorable phrase. Although he wrote widely on Russian music and literature, he was also the author of 'Chopin's Musical Style' (1939), a penetrating study which was a model of lucidity, economy, and good style. Always a Wagnerian, Abraham long planned a book on Wagner's musical language. In the 1940s he even made a conjectural reconstruction of a quartet movement that was published by Oxford University Press. He also made a conjectural completion of Schubert's 'Unfinished' symphony in 1971. 
Abraham held honorary doctorates from the universities of Durham, Liverpool, and Southampton, and Berkeley, and was a fellow of the British Academy (1972), and president of the Royal Musical Association (1969-74). He was appointed CBE in 1974. From 1973 to 1980 he was chairman of the British Academy's early English church music committee. Some of his finest and most absorbing writing is to be found in 'Slavonic and Romantic Music: Essays and Studies' (1968). Whether as a lecturer or broadcaster, his erudition was always tempered by a keen sense of humour. The publication of 'Slavonic and Western Music: Essays for Gerald Abraham' (1985), edited by Malcolm Hamrick Brown and Roland John Wiley, paid him fitting and timely tribute. Abraham had an abiding love of the English countryside and the music of Sir Edward Elgar, and from the early 1960s he lived in the Old School House, Ebernoe, near Petworth, Sussex, until his death at the King Edward VII Hospital, Midhurst, on 18 March 1988. 
Robert Layton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39901


Arnold, Denis Midgley (1926-1986), musicologist, was born on 15 December 1926 in Sheffield, the only son and younger child of Charles Arnold, company director, and his wife, Bertha Ball. He was educated at High Storrs grammar school in Sheffield, and at Sheffield University. He graduated BA in 1947 and BMus in 1948, and received an MA in 1950 for a dissertation on the early seventeenth-century musician Thomas Weelkes, partly written during service in the Royal Air Force. In 1951 he married Elsie Millicent, a trained musicologist, daughter of John William Dawrant, schoolmaster, of Liverpool. They had two sons. 
The orientation of Arnold's life's work as a musicologist was determined by the award in 1950 of an Italian government scholarship enabling him to go to Bologna to study Italian music of the years about 1600. In 1951 he was appointed lecturer in music (reader in 1960) in the department of adult education at the Queen's University, Belfast; he also worked for the music department. Arnold's experience in adult education confirmed another of his conspicuous qualities: his powers as an educator and communicator, addressing widely varying audiences in plain language and with engaging enthusiasm. This stance, moreover, informs all his writings, even the most specialized. It was during his years in Belfast that he began publishing the stream of articles in learned journals that continued up to his death. Through them he quickly made a name as a major scholar on the music (mainly secular vocal) of late Renaissance and early baroque Italy, and as one of Britain's leading musicologists -- a reputation reinforced by his many editions of the music itself. 
In 1964 Arnold moved as senior lecturer in music to the University of Hull at about the time he published his first book, the 'Master Musicians' volume on Monteverdi (1963). He was joint editor of, and a contributor to, the 'Monteverdi Companion' (1968; new edn as 'The New Monteverdi Companion', 1985) and, perhaps surprisingly, the 'Beethoven Companion' (1971). It was natural that he should welcome the chance to communicate with a potentially larger readership through a series of short studies of composers with whom he was particularly identified: 'Marenzio' (1965), 'Monteverdi Madrigals' (1967), 'Giovanni Gabrieli' (1974), 'Monteverdi Church Music' (1982), and 'Gesualdo' (1984), as well as 'Bach' (1984). 
In 1969 Arnold became professor of music at the University of Nottingham and from 1975 until his death in 1986 was Heather professor of music at the University of Oxford. He had always been a keen conductor, and he threw himself into performance at both universities with renewed zeal. He increasingly became a public figure on a wider scale too. For many years he toiled as editor of, and contributor to, the 'New Oxford Companion to Music' (2 vols., 1983); he was president of the Royal Musical Association (1978-83) and British representative on the directorium of the International Musicological Society (IMS) from 1978 until his death; and he served as chairman of the Oxford Playhouse and the music panel of Southern Arts. Amid this activity he wrote his largest study, 'Giovanni Gabrieli and the Music of the Venetian High Renaissance' (1979), and, with his wife, 'The Oratorio in Venice' (1986), the fruit of an increasing interest in his later years in Italian -- especially Venetian -- music of the century and a half after the period on which he concentrated for much of his career. 
Arnold was short of stature but in every other respect a 'big' man: ebullient, generous, and gregarious, as well as informal and unpretentious; an industrious scholar who produced eminently approachable books and practical editions which helped transform the general view of music and its contexts in Italy in the age of Gabrieli and Monteverdi. All were based on solid research: a public figure in his element as lecturer, conductor, or conference-goer, he was perhaps never happier than when working in libraries and archives, especially in his beloved Venice. 
Arnold was an honorary fellow of the Royal Academy of Music (1971) and Royal College of Music (1981). He became an FBA and an honorary foreign member of the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, Rome (both 1976), and in 1977 he was awarded the Premio Internazionale Galileo Galilei dei Rotary Italiani at Pisa University for services to the study of Italian music. In 1980 the honorary degree of DMus was conferred on him by two universities, Sheffield and Queen's, Belfast, and in 1983 he was appointed CBE. Arnold died suddenly of a heart attack on 28 April 1986 in Budapest while representing Britain at a meeting of the directorium of the IMS. 
Nigel Fortune', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39902


Berkeley, Sir Lennox Randal Francis (1903-1989), composer, was born on 12 May 1903 at Melford Cottage, Boars Hill, near Oxford, the younger child and only son of Captain Hastings George FitzHardinge Berkeley RN (1855-1934) (the eldest son of George Lennox Rawdon Berkeley, seventh earl of Berkeley) and his wife, Aline Carla (1863-1935), daughter of Sir James Charles Harris, former British consul in Monaco. His father did not succeed as eighth earl of Berkeley because Captain Berkeley's parents were unmarried until prior to the birth of their third son, who succeeded to the earldom. After early schooling in Oxford, Lennox Berkeley was educated at Gresham's School in Holt, Norfolk, St George's School in Harpenden, Hertfordshire, and Merton College, Oxford, where he coxed the college rowing eight and took a fourth class in French (1926). He became an honorary fellow of Merton in 1974. 
Berkeley had shown no outstanding musical abilities at school (though a contemporary remembers him playing the piano with much flourishing of hands), but while at Oxford he had several of his compositions performed and eventually made up his mind to be a composer. In this he was supported by the young British conductor Anthony Bernard, who later conducted first performances of a number of Berkeley's early works. 
On advice from Maurice Ravel, Berkeley went to Paris in the autumn of 1926 to study with Nadia Boulanger, and stayed with her for six years. For the first of these she allowed him to do nothing but counterpoint exercises, a discipline which often reduced him to tears at the time, but for which he was to remain grateful all his life. He had works performed in Paris and London, and his 'Polka for Two Pianos' (1934) was a notable success, inaugurating his ties with the publishers J. and W. Chester. But the BBC broadcast of his oratorio 'Jonah' (1935) in 1936 and the Leeds festival performance of it the following year led many critics to look at him askance as a purveyor of modernism. From 1932 to 1934 he lived on the Riviera with his invalid mother. 
In 1936 Berkeley met Benjamin Britten and the two became close friends, sharing a house in Snape, Suffolk, just before the Second World War. Although rather daunted by what he felt to be Britten's superior talent, Berkeley was able to find a distinctive voice in the 'Serenade for Strings' (1939), the first symphony (1940), and the 'Divertimento' (1943). From 1942 to 1945 he worked for the BBC, first in Bedford and then in London, as an orchestral programme planner. The authorities noted with dismay that when he was labouring on a commission his BBC work suffered, and he was happy to accept an appointment as professor of composition at the Royal Academy of Music in 1946. He remained in the post until 1968 and numbered many of the country's best composers among his pupils, including David Bedford, Peter Dickinson, William Mathias, Nicholas Maw, and John Tavener. On 14 December 1946 he married Elizabeth Freda, daughter of Isaac Bernstein, a retired shopkeeper. They had three sons, of whom the eldest, Michael Berkeley, became a composer. 
Until he succumbed to Alzheimer's disease in the early 1980s, Berkeley produced a succession of works which made him many friends and earned him admirers in the musical community, even if he never became famous outside it. He wrote for performers such as the pianist Colin Horsley, the oboist Janet Craxton, and the guitarist Julian Bream, and he produced a considerable body of fine chamber music. He was particularly at home with the voice, and his vocal and choral works, such as 'Four Poems of St Teresa of Avila' (1947), the 'Stabat mater' (1947), and 'The Hill of the Graces' (1975), show a love and understanding of words at least equal to Britten's. His four operas -- 'A Dinner Engagement' (1954), 'Nelson' (1954), 'Ruth' (1956), and 'Castaway' (1967) -- display at times an individual view of what constitutes opera, and one which critics and impresarios have not always shared; certainly he was not always fortunate with his librettists. But 'Nelson' suffered from less than adequate performances in London and deserves to be revived. From the late 1960s Berkeley, like many composers, experimented with serial techniques and, though they never took over his music, he admitted that thanks to them his musical language had expanded. The third symphony (1969) is perhaps his most impressive exercise in this new vein. In the 1970s he still remained true to his principles of writing, with performance in mind and never 'in vacuo'. When his last illness struck he was working on a fifth opera, 'Faldon Park'. 
In 1959 Berkeley said: 'I know quite well I'm a minor composer, and I don't mind that'. It is true that he was not an Arnold Schoenberg or an Igor Stravinsky. His music made no revolutionary claims, partly because revolutionaries have to be destroyers and Berkeley was too respectful of tradition to set about it with a hatchet. If his studies with Boulanger taught him to be at ease with counterpoint, they also inculcated a love of 'la grande ligne', which Boulanger had inherited from Gabriel Faure. His music, like Faure's, eschews surprises and, for the most part, grand gestures (though, again, 'Nelson' showed what he could achieve in this more public, extrovert manner). His colleague Edmund Rubbra referred to his work as offering 'so much in sanity and honesty of purpose'. These attributes were in general misprized in the twentieth century, and Berkeley's refusal to jettison them meant that his reputation likewise matured without sudden surprises. He was notable for attending to the needs of the amateur: it is unusual, for example, to come across a flautist who has not at some time played his sonatina. But his larger works, though always expertly written, demand patience and close attention to be fully appreciated. Even if his music always remains basically tonal, it can sometimes be fierce and gritty, very often as a result of his essentially linear thinking. Perhaps too much has been made of the Frenchness of his music, and too often critics have used this as an excuse to deny his work profundity, but at the very least he managed to avoid the vapid pastoral meanderings of some of his English predecessors. The history of twentieth-century music may not have been greatly changed by his passing across it, but without him it would have been immeasurably the poorer. He was a man dedicated, as his pupil Peter Dickinson has said, to 'passing on the love of music as a spiritual imperative in a foreign, material age'. He was appointed CBE in 1957 and knighted in 1974. Among many other honours were the papal knighthood of St Gregory (1973), honorary membership of the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters (1980), honorary doctorates of music from Oxford University (1970) and City University in London (1983), and an honorary fellowship of the Royal Northern College of Music, Manchester (1976). He also served as president of the Performing Right Society (1975-83), the Composers' Guild of Great Britain (from 1975), and the Cheltenham festival (1977-83). 
Berkeley was, above all, graceful: he had been a good tennis player in his youth and remained all his life a tireless walker. As with his music, there was no hint of otiose flesh, but rather of a strength which he was careful to hide beneath beautiful manners. As well as being a kind and approachable man, he was always quick to see the funny side of things. During his time with Boulanger, he and Igor Markevich were members of a mildly disruptive 'back row', while in later life an eye would twinkle in response to persons on committees who treated 'criteria' as a singular noun or interposed with, 'Mr Chairman, I have a trepidation about that one'. Although determined to do what he saw as his civic duty, he never courted public notice unless forced by the strength of his own opinions. He had become a Roman Catholic in 1928 (when he took the name Francis) and, in the wake of the Second Vatican Council, wrote in the press urging the retention of the Tridentine mass, since he believed the authorities were ignoring a legitimate desire expressed by a large body of the Roman Catholic laity. In private he wrote of those 'for whom the overthrow of the old tradition appears to be an end in itself', an end which, in religion as in music, he was unable to approve. Berkeley died in St Charles's Hospital, Ladbroke Grove, London, on 26 December 1989. His ashes were scattered at Cap Ferrat, France. A memorial service was held on 20 March 1990 at Westminster Cathedral. 
Roger Nichols', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39903


Coke, Gerald Edward (1907-1990), merchant banker and patron of the arts, was born on 25 October 1907 at Bruton Street, London, the only son and eldest of three children of Sir John Spencer Coke, major in the Scots Guards and royal equerry (seventh son of Thomas William Coke, second earl of Leicester, of Holkham Hall, Norfolk), and his wife, Dorothy Olive, only child of Sir Harry Lawson Webster Levy-Lawson, Lord Burnham (1862-1933). Coke was educated at Eton College and at New College, Oxford, where he obtained a third class in modern history (1929). 
During the 1930s Coke worked at Barrow in Furness in a firm connected with haematite iron-ore mining. He served throughout the Second World War in the Scots Guards and attained the rank of lieutenant-colonel. From 1945 to 1975 he was a director of the merchant bank S. G. Warburg & Co., and rose to be vice-chairman. He also served as a director of the Rio Tinto-Zinc Corporation (1947-75), and as chairman (1956-62). His success in these enterprises owed as much to his charm, patent sincerity, and integrity as it did to his commercial acumen. He was a JP from 1952, and deputy lieutenant of Hampshire from 1974. He was appointed CBE in 1967 and became an honorary fellow of the Royal Academy of Music in 1968. The financial success of his work in commerce and banking allowed him to acquire his home, Jenkyn Place, Bentley, Hampshire, which he and his wife transformed into a residence of great beauty and refined taste, filled with libraries, precious porcelain, the great Handel collection, and many 'objets d'art'. Both partners devoted long hours almost daily to the creation of the large and choice gardens surrounding their property, which were intermittently open, chiefly to connoisseurs and garden societies, and formed the subject of television programmes. 
Coke's character obliged him to share the fruits of his wealth and accomplishments with many in the fields of music, scholarship, and similar concerns. His influence contributed much to the success of Glyndebourne, run by John Christie and Sir George Christie, of whose arts trust he was chairman (1955-75). He also served as a director of the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden (1958-64), and of the Royal Academy of Music (1957-74). He was a governor of the BBC (1961-6). Particularly close to his heart was his long association, as treasurer and benefactor, with Bridewell Royal Hospital, and King Edward's School, Witley, where there is a portrait of him by Sir William Coldstream. When Coke took over as treasurer, King Edward's School was a relatively small boys' school, which he made into a co-educational boarding-school of some importance. 
The 'piece de resistance' of his life as a scholar and collector was the Coke Handel collection, which embraced important musical manuscripts, librettos, and autographs. Coke also enabled Handel scholars, such as O. E. Deutsch and W. C. Smith, to persevere with and complete their studies. Towards the end of his life he was instrumental in arranging for the publication of a Handel iconography, and for the creation of the Gerald Coke Handel Foundation, to manage the Coke Handel collection both before and after its transfer to the Foundling Museum, London. His 'In Search of James Giles' (1983) was the culmination of his other great enthusiasm, his porcelain collection. 
If Coke was an amateur, then this term can only be understood in the sense that music, opera, porcelain, or the art of garden cultivation were not the source of his income but the objects of his expenditure. His knowledge and expertise in so many disparate fields were prodigious, but they were always imparted to others with that modesty and self-effacement which characterized him, and which perhaps led to his failure to receive higher official honours. 
In appearance Coke was tall and slender, with an upright bearing. On 2 September 1939 Coke married Patricia (died 1995), daughter of Sir Alexander George Montagu Cadogan, the diplomatist. The marriage was one of exceptional happiness and harmony, and of shared interests in gardening, music, and collecting. They had a daughter and three sons, the third of whom died of meningitis suddenly in 1972, a day after his successful final degree examination at London University. Coke died at Jenkyn Place, Bentley, of heart failure, on 9 January 1990. A concert in his memory was given at Glyndebourne on 5 August 1990, at which it was disclosed that Coke had persuaded his shipping heiress friend, the countess of Munster, to sell one of her ships, and with the proceeds endow a trust for education in music. 
Edward Ullendorff', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39904


Du Pre, Jacqueline Mary (1945-1987), cellist, was born at 165 Banbury Road, Oxford, on 26 January 1945, the younger daughter and the second of the three children of Derek du Pre, a financial writer and editor, and Iris Maud, 'nee' Greep, a pianist and composer of music for children, who taught at the Royal Academy of Music. The family name has Jersey origins. Jacqueline's precocious musical gifts were quickly recognized by her mother. She received her first cello at four, after hearing the instrument on a BBC 'Children's Hour' programme, and at five began to have lessons with Alison Dalrymple at Herbert Walenn's London Cello School. Iris du Pre further stimulated her daughter's passion for the cello by composing little pieces for her, later published as a collection under the title 'Songs for my Cello and me'. By the age of six, when she first played in public, Jacqueline was acknowledged as the school's star pupil, combining an extraordinarily acute musical ear with an innate power of communication. 
In 1955, when she was ten, Jacqueline was accepted as a pupil by the famous cellist and teacher William Pleeth, with whom she remained for the next seven years. In the following year she won the first Suggia gift, an international cello prize financed by the legacy of the Portuguese cellist Guilhermina Suggia. In his letter of recommendation to the adjudicating panel, chaired by John Barbirolli, Pleeth wrote that his pupil was 'the most outstanding cellistic and musical talent that I have met so far, to which she adds incredible maturity of mind. I am of the opinion that she will have a great career' (Easton, 42). Barbirolli later said that he recognized Jacqueline as the winner from the moment she started playing. She was offered $175 a year to finance her tuition, with the proviso that she did four hours' practice a day. This in turn entailed a special arrangement with her school, Croydon high school, whereby she was excused from certain subjects. Three years later, just before her fifteenth birthday, her parents removed her from school and continued her education at home. By then a career as a cellist looked assured. 
In January 1958 Jacqueline made her first appearance on television in a 'young people's concert', playing the first movement of the Lalo concerto. In April that year she again performed on television, this time in the company of her sister Hilary, a talented flautist. As Pleeth's pupil she had become a student at the Guildhall School of Music in London, where she swept up all the available prizes, including the 1960 gold medal. In that same year she also won the Queen's prize, open to British instrumentalists under the age of thirty. Yehudi Menuhin, the chairman of the jury, an important figure in Jacqueline's artistic life over the next few years, later recalled the elation she created 'with the excitement of her own joy and intoxication with the music' ('Daily Telegraph', 2 March 1960). 
In the summer of 1960 Jacqueline took part in Pablo Casals's masterclasses in Zermatt, performing Saint-Saens's A minor cello concerto at the final students' concert. Then, on 1 March 1961, shortly after receiving her first Stradivarius cello as a gift from a godmother, she gave her debut recital at the Wigmore Hall in London -- a traditional rite of passage for an aspiring professional soloist. The critics were virtually unanimous in their enthusiasm. Martin Cooper, in the 'Daily Telegraph', praised her 'ability to carry through a phrase to its very end' and 'the vigorous strength of her rhythms'. 'Here is a young player', he wrote, 'whose technical accomplishments have not prevented her from being wholly committed to whatever she plays -- this is one of the first essentials of a great player' ('Daily Telegraph', 2 March 1961). 
Her Wigmore Hall debut effectively launched Jacqueline's career. She was immediately signed up by London's most prestigious agency, Ibbs and Tillett, and received numerous offers of concerts and broadcasts. She made her first radio recording in March 1961, performing pieces by Handel, de Falla, and Mendelssohn. Her first major orchestral date followed a year later, when she appeared with the BBC Symphony Orchestra at London's Royal Festival Hall in the work with which she was to become most closely identified: the Elgar cello concerto, which she had studied since the age of thirteen and had already performed with the Ernest Read senior orchestra in December 1959. In August 1962 she sealed her association with the Elgar when she played it at her Promenade Concerts debut. By popular demand she returned to the Proms for four seasons in succession to play the same concerto, each time with Sir Malcolm Sargent. At this period she also formed a sonata duo with George Malcolm and played in chamber recitals with Yehudi and Hephzibah Menuhin. Jacqueline spent the autumn and winter of 1962-3 in Paris, studying with Paul Tortelier; and although the experience was a mixed success (their forceful artistic personalities were not ideally compatible), the French cellist described her as a phenomenon 'who stands out not only for the radiance of her playing, but for her personal radiance as well' (P. Tortelier and D. Blum, 'Paul Tortelier: a Self-Portrait', 1984, 213). 
By now a star, Jacqueline formed another duo, with the pianist Stephen Bishop (later Kovacevich), in October 1964; the fruits of their collaboration include a memorable recording of Beethoven's A major and D major cello sonatas. In 1965 she toured the USA and Canada with the BBC Symphony Orchestra, scoring triumphs with her performances of the Elgar concerto in the Carnegie Hall, New York, and elsewhere. The critic in the 'New York Herald Tribune' (15 May 1965) compared her to Casals and Mstislav Rostropovich, and wondered at the variety and quality of tone 'that could be likened to a hand moving alternately from velvet to silk to damask'. By the end of the tour she had sealed her reputation in North America. 
The years from 1965 to 1970 marked the zenith of Jacqueline du Pre's career as one of the most exciting and charismatic performers of the day. No contemporary cellist, save perhaps Rostropovich, possessed a more opulent tone, or played with such impassioned, elemental force -- an impression enhanced by her trademark swaying and hair-tossing on the concert platform. During these years she recorded much of her repertory, most famously the Elgar concerto with Barbirolli, which became an instant best-seller on its release in December 1965 and has remained so ever since. However, her rapid rise to fame had taken its toll; and amid intensive, joyous activity there were periods when she felt listless and dispirited. In January 1966 she took time off from public performance to study in Moscow with Rostropovich, who introduced her to the Britten cello sonata and works by Shostakovich and Prokofiev. From Moscow she wrote to Yehudi Menuhin: 'Over the past two years I have felt extremely lost with my work and generally fatigued by it. Now, under Rostropovich's tuition, I am finding a new freshness in it, and the old desire to go ahead with what I love so deeply is returning. ('DNB')' At the end of 1966 Jacqueline was introduced to the Argentine-born Israeli pianist and conductor Daniel Barenboim ('b'. 1942). Their mutual attraction was immediate, and in April 1967 news broke of their engagement. Jacqueline (who had converted to Judaism) and Daniel were married in Jerusalem on 15 June, during the Six Day War. For the next four years the most glamorous couple in the classical music world often performed and recorded together, either as a duo (notably in the Beethoven and Brahms cello sonatas) or with Jacqueline as soloist and Daniel as conductor. The exuberance and spontaneity of their performances, their uncanny intuitive understanding, and their palpable joy in making music together made a profound impression on audiences wherever they played. They were also frequently joined in concert by the young American violinist Pinchas Zukerman, with whom they recorded the complete Beethoven piano trios. In April 1968 Jacqueline premiered Alexander Goehr's 'Romanza' for cello and orchestra, which had been written for her. Otherwise her repertory, while extensive, was essentially conservative, stretching from Bach and Haydn (whose concertos she played with unapologetic subjective expressiveness) to Elgar, Delius, and, on rare occasions, Prokofiev and Shostakovich. 
In March 1969, in the midst of an intensive international touring schedule, Jacqueline suffered from a strange bout of numbness which, with hindsight, can be seen as an early manifestation of multiple sclerosis. From this period onwards her playing, while often brilliant and moving, became less reliable. During a tour of the USA in the autumn of 1969, for instance, critics complained of mannerism, distortion, and faulty intonation. Attacks of numbness recurred, and she began to suffer increasingly from fatigue. At the end of 1970, after a demanding tour of the USA, it was clear that Jacqueline was suffering from physical and emotional exhaustion. By now her marriage, too, was under strain. On the brink of a nervous breakdown, she spent several months early in 1971 with her sister Hilary and her husband Christopher (Kiffer) Finzi, first at their farmhouse in Berkshire, then at their mountain home in southern France. Jacqueline became increasingly dependent on her brother-in-law, and during the French holiday they became lovers -- an episode made notorious in Amand Tucker's film 'Hilary and Jackie' of 1998, based on the book 'A Genius in the Family' (1997) by Hilary and her brother Piers du Pre. This revealed the vibrant, sunny Jacqueline of popular perception to have been an altogether more complex figure: depressive, intensely vulnerable, and often unable to cope with the burden of celebrity. Hilary later justified her husband's behaviour as a means of helping her sister through a profound crisis -- almost as a form of therapy. Within a year, though, Jacqueline had come to regard her brother-in-law as a man 'who wielded his authority in a manipulative way and who had taken advantage of a woman in a distraught state' (Wilson, 382). 
Further alarming signs of Jacqueline's encroaching illness appeared in May 1971 when she cancelled the remainder of a tour of the USA after a performance of the Dvorak B minor cello concerto in California. The official reason was that she was suffering from tenosynovitis, an inflammation of the wrist tendon. She recovered sufficiently by the end of the year to record the Chopin and Franck cello sonatas with Barenboim -- her last appearance in a recording studio. By now reconciled with her husband, she gave chamber concerts with Zukerman and Barenboim in Israel and Edinburgh during the summer of 1972, arousing hopes of a permanent recovery. Then in February 1973 she made her concerto 'comeback', playing the Elgar at two concerts in the Royal Festival Hall. Some musicians in the audience noted her problems with bow control, and a tendency to exaggeration, as if to compensate for her technical difficulties. But her vision and powers of communication were, if anything, more intense than ever. The violinist Rodney Friend wrote of her performance: 'I have never before or since experienced such absolute giving in music, without any trace of artificiality or superficiality. The pain and suffering in her playing were almost tangible, and it is something for which there is no explanation' (Wilson, 397). 
Immediately after what were to be her last London concerts, Jacqueline embarked on her final tour of the USA. With increasing difficulty she managed three performances of the Brahms 'double' concerto (with Zukerman) in New York, but had to cancel a fourth. As Zukerman put it, 'she simply didn't have the energy to play any more'. The press reported that the sudden cancellation was due to a disorder of the nerve endings. After extensive tests multiple sclerosis was finally diagnosed in October 1973. 
At first Jacqueline hoped to return to a normal life and even resume her concert career. But it soon became obvious that she would never play in public again. After a period of lethargy and acute depression, her spirits revived, and she started to play again at home with friends (including her one-time teacher William Pleeth), teach, and attend concerts. Though largely confined to a wheelchair from 1976, she gave acclaimed public masterclasses, two of which were televised in 1979. In the same year she was the narrator in Barenboim's recording of 'Peter and the Wolf'. After her enforced withdrawal from the concert platform she was appointed OBE (1976) and received numerous honours, including the 'musician of the year' award of the Incorporated Society of Musicians (1980) and honorary doctorates from several British universities. From 1981 her condition deteriorated rapidly; one of the few pleasures of her last years was listening to her own recordings. She died at her home, Flat 28, 36-8 Chepstow Villas, Kensington, London, on 19 October 1987, and was buried at the Jewish cemetery in Golders Green two days later. Her husband survived her. In his funeral address Rabbi Friedlander recalled Jacqueline's courageous words after the onset of her illness: 'I was so fortunate to have achieved everything while I was young. I have recorded the full repertoire... I have no regrets' ('The Times', 22 Oct 1987). 
Among all the many tributes paid to Jacqueline du Pre's art, it was perhaps Christopher Nupen, director of the television film 'Jacqueline' (1967), who most movingly and truthfully encapsulated her genius: 'The confidence and sure-footedness in her phrasing which gave her such freedom; her ability to respond to the moment and her apparent total lack of inhibition; these are the qualities that she seems to share more with musicians of the past than the present. And there is something else, a miraculous combination of apparently contradictory qualities. She had the ability to phrase with such natural conviction as to give you the impression that it really should not be done in any other way, and at the same time to make you catch your breath with surprise and delight at an unexpected sound or turn in the phrase. All so natural that it could not be otherwise and yet so surprising that life could suddenly take on a new dimension for a few seconds. (Wordsworth, 111-12)' 



@@@@@


doc= 39905


Fricker, Peter Racine (1920-1990), composer and music teacher, was born on 5 September 1920 in Ealing, London, the elder child and only son of Edward Racine Fricker (died 1935/6), civil servant, and his wife, Deborah Alice Parr, nurse. His middle name came from his great-grandmother, who was a direct descendant of the French dramatist. He was educated at St Paul's School, London. His father died when Peter was fifteen and about to enter the merchant navy, but this plan was prevented by his poor eyesight. He began studying organ as a schoolboy with Henry Wilson, then entered the Royal College of Music in 1937, where he continued his organ studies with Ernest Bullock, and piano with Henry Wilson. He was assistant organist to Wilson while continuing his studies. Before the Second World War, he also attended classes at Morley College. An early distinction was his election as a fellow of the Royal College of Organists at the age of nineteen. He studied theory and composition with R. O. Morris. 
In 1940 Fricker's studies were interrupted by the war, during which he served as a radio operator in the Royal Air Force, in signals and intelligence. It was at the Royal College of Music that he had met (Audrey) Helen, a pianist, the daughter of Raymonde William Lee Clench, chartered accountant. They married in 1943, the same year he was posted to India to serve as an intelligence officer. There were no children of the marriage. 
After the war years Fricker resumed his composition studies with Matyas Seiber, who became a strong influence and a close friend and colleague at Morley College, in London. During his years there he conducted, acted as rehearsal pianist for the choir, and, together with his wife, made a living copying and arranging music. From 1952 to 1964 he held a dual post as director of music at Morley College, where he succeeded Michael Tippett, and also as professor of composition at the Royal College of Music. His career as a composer was launched when he won the A. J. Clements prize for his wind quintet in 1947, which was quickly followed by the Koussevitzky prize for his first symphony in 1949, and by winning the Arts Council Festival of Britain competition for young composers prize for his violin concerto in 1951. These distinctions made him one of the most prominent British composers of his generation. 
Fricker's music represented a departure from the nationalistic pastoralism coined by Ralph Vaughan Williams, for he was one of the first in England to assimilate the contributions of Bela Bartok, Arnold Schoenberg, and Igor Stravinsky, and to synthesize these influences with an expressively dissonant style of his own. During the 1950s he composed seven film scores and six works for radio. Other important works during this highly prolific period include two more symphonies (nos. 2 and 3), 'Dance Scene' (1954), 'Litany' (1955), and the large oratorio 'The Vision of Judgement' (1956-8). 
In 1964 Fricker was invited to the University of California at Santa Barbara, as visiting professor. He became enamoured of the school and its surroundings, and excited about the possibility of establishing a centre for compositional study at the university. In 1965 he was appointed professor. His wife joined him in Santa Barbara, and they lived in nearby Goleta for the rest of his life. He held the Dorothy and Sherill C. Corwin chair in music, and had a joint appointment in the university's innovative College of Creative Studies. He was a dedicated, patient teacher, and provided guidance to many composition students over the years. He was a tall, imposing figure of a man, but gentle and rather shy and reserved. His interests included bird-watching, word puzzles, mystery novels, travel, and cats. 
His compositional output was extensive, and Fricker was steadily prolific throughout his entire career. His oeuvre included five symphonies, three string quartets, a ballet, an oratorio, concerti, various choral works, numerous chamber works, and others in all genres except staged opera, comprising a total of more than 160 works in all. His reputation was international, and he composed works for important performers and ensembles such as Julian Bream, Dennis Brain, Henryk Szering, the Amadeus Quartet, and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra. In 1976 his symphony no. 5 was given its premiere by the BBC Symphony Orchestra to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Royal Festival Hall. 
Fricker's honours and awards included an honorary fellowship of the Royal Academy of Music (1966), an honorary doctorate in music from the University of Leeds (1958), the freedom of the City of London, and the order of merit of West Germany (1965). He was an honorary professorial fellow and research professor in the Institute of Creative Arts of University College, Cardiff, as well as an active member of the International Society for Contemporary Music, the Society of Composers International, and the Composers' Guild of Great Britain (of which he was elected vice-president in 1986). During the summers from 1984 to 1986 he served as president of the Cheltenham international festival. 
In 1989 Fricker was appointed composer-in-residence of the Santa Barbara Symphony Orchestra, for which he had composed an orchestral work, 'Walk by Quiet Waters' (1988). It was while he was working on a second work for them, and looking forward to retirement, that he died on 1 February 1990 in Santa Barbara, of cancer of the throat and larynx. 
John J. Carbon', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39906


Goodall, Sir Reginald (1901-1990), conductor, was born in Lincoln on 13 July 1901, the elder son of Albert Edward Goodall, solicitor's clerk, and his wife, Adelaide Jones. There was also a half-sister from Albert Goodall's previous marriage. Reginald went to Lincoln Cathedral choir school from 1910 to 1914, after which his education continued at Springfield, Massachusetts, USA, and in Burlington, Ontario, Canada, following the breakdown of his parents' marriage and their decision to emigrate, his mother to the United States and his father to Canada. He left school at fifteen and undertook a variety of work, as a messenger for the railways, a clerk in an engineering works, and in a bank in Burlington. His earnings enabled him to study at the Hamilton Conservatory of Music, which led to his appointment as organist of St Alban the Martyr Cathedral, Toronto, and as a music master at Upper Canada College. As the result of meeting Sir Hugh Allen in Canada, he became a student at the Royal College of Music, London, in 1925. In 1932 he married Eleanor Katherine Edith (died 1979), schoolteacher, daughter of Montagu Gipps, of independent means; they had no children. 
It was not until 1935 that Goodall conducted his first opera, 'Carmen', with a semi-professional company in London. In the meantime he had established himself as organist and choirmaster of St Alban the Martyr, Holborn, and he gave the first performances in England of Bruckner's F minor mass and other works. Each year he travelled on the continent as piano accompanist for the teacher and lieder singer Reinhold von Warlich. He was thus able to hear some of the world's great conductors, such as Wilhelm Furtwangler and Hans Knappertsbusch. In 1936 Goodall was engaged by Covent Garden to train the chorus for 'Boris Godunov', conducted by Albert Coates. He did this so well that he was asked to remain for the winter season. An invitation for the 1937 summer season followed, but he declined this in favour of other artistically less rewarding but financially more secure work. The 1930s were difficult for Goodall and the prospect of war filled him with gloom, as he envisaged the collapse of the German culture which he had come to know and love. Politically naive, but at heart a serious pacifist, he supported Sir Oswald Mosley and his demand for negotiations with Hitler. 
Apart from a brief spell of military service, in the Royal Army Ordnance Corps from April to September 1943, Goodall spent the war conducting, first the Wessex Philharmonic Orchestra and then the Sadler's Wells Opera. The latter introduced him to a repertory with which he was not familiar and much of which he did not admire. However, he conducted the premiere of 'Peter Grimes' by Benjamin Britten, at the reopening of the Sadler's Wells theatre on 7 June 1945. So impressed was the composer that he invited Goodall to conduct the premiere of 'The Rape of Lucretia' at Glyndebourne's first post-war season the following year, although he shared the conducting with Ernest Ansermet. In 1947 Goodall became second conductor with the newly formed opera company at Covent Garden. This was a low period for him, with much of his time devoted to conducting Verdi, a composer he despised. In 1951 his contract as conductor was terminated and he continued as a coach. He was an invaluable teacher to the many singers who passed through his hands. There were occasional excursions into conducting for Covent Garden. In 1968 Goodall conducted 'Die Meistersinger' at Sadler's Wells and again revealed his understanding of Richard Wagner. Following this success, Sadler's Wells invited him to conduct the four 'Ring' operas at the Coliseum. These were nothing short of triumphant. He then went on to conduct 'Tristan und Isolde' with the Welsh National Opera in 1979, and 'Parsifal' with the English National Opera. Critical and public response was ecstatic, and both these performances were recorded. 
A small, dishevelled, and sometimes cantankerous man, Goodall gave at first sight little indication of the strong inspirational force that he undoubtedly had as a conductor and coach. His conducting technique in a conventional sense was sketchy, but given time for preparation and rehearsal with singers and orchestra, which not every opera company could provide, the resulting performances were astonishing and profoundly moving in their revelations. He had a rare understanding of the architecture of Wagner's music. The long, slowly unfolding spans were wonderfully shaped and realized with unforced sonority. Goodall allowed the music to flow naturally and at the same time to give singers the greatest support without drowning them. He was appointed CBE in 1975 and knighted in 1985. He had honorary degrees from Leeds (1974), Newcastle (1974), and Oxford (1986). Goodall died on 5 May 1990 in a nursing home at Bridge, near Canterbury. 
John Tooley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39907


Goossens, Leon Jean (1897-1988), oboist, was born on 12 June 1897 in Liverpool, the third of three sons and the fourth of five children of the conductor Eugene Goossens (1867-1958), himself the son of Eugene Goossens (1845-1906), conductor of the Carl Rosa Opera Company. His mother was Annie (1860-1946), an opera singer, and daughter of the operatic bass singer Aynsley Cook. Of Belgian origin, the family had settled in England in the 1870s and 1880s; Leon's siblings were the conductor Sir Eugene Goossens, the horn player Adolphe (who was killed in the First World War), and the harpists Marie and (Annie) Sidonie Goossens. He was educated at the Christian Brothers Catholic Institute in Liverpool and Liverpool College of Music. After some study of the piano, he began learning the oboe with Charles Reynolds at the age of eight, and by the time he was ten had played professionally. After further study with William Malsch at the Royal College of Music (1911-14), he was appointed principal oboe of the Queen's Hall Orchestra at the age of seventeen. Throughout his career (apart from a brief period when it was stolen) he played the same oboe, made for him by Loree of Paris. During the First World War Goossens volunteered in the Middlesex yeomanry and subsequently served in the 8th Royal Fusiliers before being commissioned into the Sherwood Foresters. On leaving for France in 1915 he was given a silver cigarette case as a keepsake by his brother Eugene, who had been given it by Ethel Smyth after a performance of one of her operas; it deflected a high-velocity bullet from the region of his heart, still wounding him sufficiently for him to be invalided home. He decided to accept an offer to join a friend on an Argentinian ranch; but, needing capital of $100, he began earning it by freelance oboe playing, which quickly brought so many engagements that the Argentinian plan was cancelled. 
Goossens rejoined the Queen's Hall Orchestra in 1918, and moved to Covent Garden in 1924. In the same year he became professor of oboe at the Royal Academy of Music (until 1935) and at the Royal College of Music (until 1939). He also played in the Royal Philharmonic Society's orchestra and, on its foundation by Sir Thomas Beecham in 1932, the London Philharmonic Orchestra. His playing with Beecham lent added distinction to a fine orchestra, as can be heard on records, and was heard with admiration in an early broadcast of his music by the aged Frederick Delius. Fritz Kreisler declared that among his greatest musical pleasures was listening to Goossens playing the solo in the adagio of Brahms's violin concerto before his own entry. This, too, has been recorded. Goossens was, in his own right, one of the most popular and prolific recording artists in the 1920s and 1930s. Recording companies were inexplicably slow to take him up again with the advent of the long-playing record, but he was making a comeback with a recording of J. S. Bach's violin and oboe concerto, with Yehudi Menuhin, when an accident interrupted his career. 
Goossens had by now acquired a world reputation (he frequently toured abroad) second to that of no other oboist. More, he had given the oboe a new standing as a solo instrument. He refined the sound from the conventional German breadth and reediness, while enriching the French slenderness but elegance of tone, to a warmth and sweetness hitherto unknown. By this, and by the highly personal elegance of his phrasing, he drew attention to lyrical possibilities that quickly excited the attention of composers, while his brilliant finger technique opened up a new range of virtuosity. Almost every English composer of note was drawn to write music for him: works which he inspired and first performed included concertos by Ralph Vaughan Williams and Rutland Boughton, chamber pieces by Sir Arnold Bax, Sir Arthur Bliss, and Benjamin Britten and an uncompleted suite by Sir Edward Elgar. He was appointed CBE (1950) and FRCM (1962). He also became honorary RAM (1932). 
In 1962, still at the height of his powers, Goossens suffered a car accident that severely damaged his teeth and lips, rendering him incapable of playing. After many operations, borne with great physical courage, and the no less courageous confrontation of the apparent end of his career, he began practising again with a newly learned lip technique. He played in film and recording orchestras away from the public view, always with the affectionate support of his colleagues. He was able to resume his professional life, though he privately insisted that the standard of his playing was not what it had been. He continued playing into his eighties, sometimes with small ensembles and modest orchestras to whom he felt an old loyalty. 
In his prime, Goossens had earned himself a reputation as something of a prima donna among orchestral players. He would demand his own microphone in recording sessions, on the grounds that the oboe's tone needed special consideration. Colleagues in the wind section would feel obliged to fit in with phrasing that was always personal and at times mannered and unstylish. But with this awareness of his own worth, seen in his gracious platform manner in concertos, went an essential musical humility and a high degree of personal kindness. Self-disciplined in his personal life, in the interests of a musical professionalism inherited from his strict father, he enjoyed physical activities, including yachting and farming. He was always generous with his time to younger oboists, while sometimes resisting those who represented a newer stylistic wave. His charm and humour, among friends, were unaffected and engaging. He was a tall, well-built man, with a deep chest that helped his phenomenal breath control. Like his conductor brother Eugene, he went bald early and had the family's characteristic slightly hooded eyes and charming smile. 
In 1926 Goossens married Frances Alice, daughter of Harry Oswald Yeatman, a port shipper who worked in London for Taylor, Fladgate, and Yeatman. They had one daughter. This marriage was dissolved in 1932 and in 1933 he married the dancer Leslie Burrowes (died 1985), daughter of Brigadier-General Arnold Robinson Burrowes, of the Royal Irish Fusiliers. There were two daughters of this marriage. Goossens died on 13 February 1988 in Tunbridge Wells. 
John Warrack', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39908


Kentner, Louis Philip (1905-1987), pianist, was born Lajos Kentner on 19 July 1905 in Karwin, Silesia, Austria-Hungary, the only son and elder child of Julius Kentner, stationmaster, and his wife, Gisela Buchsbaum. He was educated at the 'Gymnasium' in Budapest and the Royal Franz Liszt Academy of Music, also in Budapest. This was a remarkable beginning: he was only six years old, and simultaneously a school pupil and an academician. He studied the piano with Arnold Szekely and composition with Hans Koessler, Leo Weiner, and Zoltan Kodaly. Both Weiner and Kodaly were lifetime influences. He gained a diploma in musical composition. 
Composition was Kentner's first ambition. Three sonatinas were published (by Oxford University Press) in the 1930s, and there were later performances of a string quartet and a divertimento for chamber orchestra. But it was the piano that was to become the centre of his musical life. His concert career began with a recital in Budapest when he was thirteen. From the 1920s he undertook a ceaseless round of concerts around the world, his fame spreading rapidly. He went back to Hungary, but with the political situation worsening emigration beckoned, and he decided to move to England in 1935, becoming one of the mid-Europeans who transformed Britain's musical life. He became a British citizen in 1946, and London remained his home until his death. 
In an early review (in the 'Sunday Referee' of 11 October 1936), headed 'A new -- and great -- pianist comes to England', Constant Lambert wrote: 'What gives Kentner's playing its exceptional quality, however, is not so much his technical ability, which he shares with several virtuosos, but the remarkable intelligence and musical instinct which direct this ability... I have never heard a pianist of such power who at the same time has such delicacy and subtlety of tone gradation... a pianist with a brilliant future.' Lambert immediately discerned Kentner's exceptional musicianship, as did William Walton and the Sitwells, who were warm supporters and friends. He became an admired performer in solo recitals and concertos -- an early Mozart concerto with Sir Thomas Beecham was a landmark -- as also in chamber music, a lifelong passion. For some years there was a trio with Yehudi Menuhin and the cellist Gaspar Cassado. Music-making with Menuhin, who married Kentner's second wife's sister, was an important activity over the years. 
Kentner's repertory was enormous and ranged from Bach to Bartok. He was especially noted for his Chopin and Liszt, the latter being most remarkable. Liszt's music had been regarded as superficial and it was 'not done' to perform it. It was largely due to Kentner's championship and deeply felt performances that Liszt came to be treated as a composer of serious beauty. In 1951 he was one of the founders of the Liszt Society, and from 1965 to his death its president. 
Kentner gave the first performances of Bartok's second piano concerto (conducted by Otto Klemperer, 1933) and -- in Europe -- his third concerto (conducted by Sir Adrian Boult, 1946), the first piano concerto of Alan Rawsthorne in 1942, the piano concerto of Michael Tippett (1956), and, with Menuhin, of Walton's sonata for violin and piano. He was gifted with a formidable technique and a faultless memory. But what governed his playing was a constant quest for musical truth and his faithfulness to the composer's intention, with which he wished to identify. So his performances moved one both through their effortlessness -- though he never tried to dazzle -- and his sensitivity, accuracy, and, above all, musical humility. He seemed to be communing with the composer, and this musicianship transmitted itself to the listener. He was one of the last great romantic pianists and his eightieth birthday concert in the Queen Elizabeth Hall, London, caused a spontaneous standing ovation. Fortunately, a number of splendid recordings were made. 
The same qualities inspired Kentner's teaching, whether in master classes at the Yehudi Menuhin School of Music or with individual pupils in his studio. His standards were high and criticisms tough, though spiced with good Hungarian sarcasm ('Why play the wrong note when the right one is next door?'). There was no didactic method, just a search for musical truth. Technique was taught 'through' the music, and Kentner could translate brilliantly musical points into words. He wrote: 'no teacher can put anything into a pupil which is not already there. He can only awake what is already lying dormant, and guide it towards possible short cuts, tending and nurturing it as it grows.' And so his pupils were inspired. He also liked writing, and his little book, 'Piano' (1976), is necessary reading for any aspiring pianist. He became an honorary member of the Royal Academy of Music in 1970 and was appointed CBE in 1978. 
Physically, Kentner was small in build, and he looked even smaller on his very low (collapsible) piano stool. He had a beautiful head, and an ever-hovering smile. A gentle warmth emanated from him, coupled with a special sense of humour, sometimes wicked, always witty. He was a brilliant raconteur, equalled only by his second wife, Griselda. His wide reading made him into a typically cultured mid-European. 
In 1931 Kentner married a pianist, Ilona, daughter of Ede Kabos, journalist and writer. They were divorced in 1945 and in 1946 he married Griselda Katharine, sister of Diana, who married Yehudi Menuhin the following year, and daughter of Gerard Louis Eugene Gould (died 1916), of the special branch in the Foreign Office, and his wife, the pianist Evelyn Suart. There were no children of either marriage. Kentner and Griselda shared the remainder of his life, and he spoke often of how central to his playing and life Griselda was: he wrote of her as 'beautiful, talented, angelic, highly musical withal'. Kentner died at their home at 1 Mallord Street, Chelsea, on 22 September 1987. 
Claus Moser', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39909


Loss, Joshua Alexander (1909-1990), bandleader, was born on 22 June 1909 in Spitalfields, London, the youngest of the family of two sons and two daughters of Israel Loss, of Russian origin, a cabinet-maker who had an office furnishing business, and his wife, Ada Loss. His mother and father were first cousins. Israel Loss recognized his son's musical talents and started him with violin lessons at the age of seven. It was hoped that he might become a concert violinist, and, after education at the Jewish Free School, Spitalfields, he studied at the Trinity College of Music and the London College of Music. 
Loss's interests lay in lighter fields and, after playing in cinemas during silent films and in various bands, at the end of 1930 he formed his own first band to play at the Astoria Ballroom (then known as the Astoria Danse Salon) in Charing Cross Road, becoming, at the age of twenty-one, the youngest bandleader in the West End of London. Under the name of Joe Loss and his Harlem Band, his musicians first played as the number two unit, Joe Loss leading on violin, with three saxophones, trumpet, piano, and drums. Later they added a special tango section, which featured two accordions and two violins. Occasionally they deputized for the Percival Mackey band at the Kit-Kat Club, and, when Mackey left to go into vaudeville at the beginning of 1932, Joe Loss took over to initiate a new 'popular price' policy, playing for daily tea, dinner, and supper dances, supported by and often combining with Fred Spedbury's Coney Islanders. He returned to the Astoria in 1934 to become the number one band and remained there until the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939. 
During this period Loss began to record for the Regal-Zonophone label and his first really big hit came with a recording made in July 1939 of 'Begin the Beguine', with Chick Henderson (who was killed by shrapnel in 1944) as vocalist. During the war years Joe Loss toured the country and after D-day (6 June 1944) played to the forces at various venues in Europe. His was to become the most prestigious society dance orchestra in the country, its qualities based on his love of a strong rhythm. From 1939 it played a regular engagement at Buckingham Palace and later at the weddings of Princess Margaret, Princess Anne, and Princess Alexandra. After the war there were residencies at the Hammersmith Palais, the Villa Marina in the Isle of Man, and Green's Playhouse, Glasgow, and there were frequent trips on the liner 'Queen Elizabeth II'. The band was now always at least eighteen strong, usually with three vocalists -- his singers, at various times, including Monte Rey, Howard Jones, Ross McManus, and Rose Brennan. Vera Lynn was among those given encouragement in the early stages of an illustrious career. In 1970, when Loss left Hammersmith, the band, in the face of economic demands, became smaller. 
Loss's recording career was a busy one. In 1940 he had a second big hit with 'In the Mood', which became his signature tune, and many others followed. Despite the emergence of pop, he continued to record his swinging strict-tempo music, and in the 1970s had two albums which sold a million copies -- 'Joe Loss Plays Glenn Miller' and 'Joe Loss Plays the Big Band Greats'. He continued to record with EMI until the end of his career, and became a well-known name on radio and television, notably with the long-running 'Come Dancing' series. 
Loss was a great supporter of such charities as the Variety Artists' Federation Sunshine Coach Fund. He was appointed OBE in 1978 and LVO in 1984. He was awarded the queen's silver jubilee medal in 1978 and became a freeman of the City of London in 1979. Posthumously, he was made a fellow of the City University when his wife, who continued to run the Joe Loss Agency, started in the 1930s, presented the library with his collection of big-band scores. 
Loss's generosity, kindness, and courtesy, and his dislike of star treatment, made him one of the best-liked figures in the world of popular music. He was 5 feet 8 inches in height, with a trim figure, and sleek black hair, which tumbled over his face when he was conducting in his typically energetic way. He was always well dressed, in later years in a white silk suit, and usually had a broad, friendly smile. Away from the relentless hard work of sixty years as a bandleader, celebrated by a Variety Club luncheon in 1989, he was a devoted family man. In 1938 he married Mildred Blanch Rose, daughter of a Latvian from Riga, Barnet Rosenberg (who later changed his name to Rose), master tailor. They had a son and a daughter and were delighted to have grandchildren who followed in Loss's musical footsteps. Loss, who lived latterly at 89 North Gate, Prince Albert Road, London, died in a London hospital on 6 June 1990. 
Peter Gammond', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39910


Matthews, Denis James (1919-1988), pianist and composer, was born on 27 February 1919 in Coventry, the only child of Arthur Matthews, director of the Norman Engineering Company at Leamington Spa, and his wife, Elsie Culver, schoolteacher. His father committed suicide when Denis was twelve. He was educated at Warwick grammar school, where his musical gifts brought him to the attention of visiting adjudicators including Herbert Howells, who encouraged him to consider a career in music. Another was the pianist Harold Craxton, who offered to teach him. He won the Thalberg scholarship to the Royal Academy of Music in 1935, and studied composition with William Alwyn and the piano with Craxton, who welcomed him into a large and musical family circle, giving him a home as well as tuition and encouragement. His interests were initially in composition, and early works included songs and chamber music, which he later described as 'cosily derivative and romantic'. However, a piano trio, performed at a student concert, excited favourable press attention; and in 1937 he added a composition scholarship to that for piano. His performing and composing abilities were sometimes combined, as when Sir Henry Wood conducted his symphonic movement for piano and orchestra. The list of his compositions eventually included a violin sonata, five sketches for violin and piano, a string quartet, and a partita for wind quintet for a fellow student, the horn player Dennis Brain. 
Though some of his works were taken up by performers, and even published, Matthews found that his deepening interest in the classics -- Bach, Mozart, and Beethoven, in particular -- was directing him towards playing. His professional debut came with a Promenade Concert in 1939, when he played Beethoven's third piano concerto under Sir Henry Wood. Beethoven was to remain central to his interests, and was the subject of many lecture recitals, some records expounding the sketch-books, and two BBC music guide booklets, 'Beethoven Piano Sonatas' (1967) and 'Brahms Piano Music' (1978). Matthews's writings also included a chapter on Beethoven, Schubert, and Brahms in a symposium he edited, 'Keyboard Music' (1972), 'Arturo Toscanini' (1982), and an autobiography, 'In Pursuit of Music' (1966). 
Having graduated from the Royal Academy of Music in 1940 with the LRAM (to which he added the Royal College of Music's ARCM, as well as the Worshipful Company of Musicians medal, 1938, for the most distinguished student), Matthews earned a living accompanying for opera and ballet classes, playing for social occasions such as City dinners, and occasionally giving concerts either alone or with student friends. He remained all his life an excellent sonata pianist, though latterly he seldom accompanied singers in lieder. 
In 1940 Matthews was called up, entered the Royal Air Force, and, together with a number of other musicians who were to go on to make distinguished careers, joined the RAF central band at Uxbridge. He toured Germany at the end of the war with the central band, playing piano solos at the Potsdam conference to Josef Stalin, Winston Churchill, and Harry S. Truman. He also shared the keyboard with Truman. 
Demobilized in 1946, Matthews was taken up by musicians including Dame Myra Hess, and solo engagements began to come in. He played concertos with John Barbirolli, Malcolm Sargent, Sir Thomas Beecham, Sir Adrian Boult, and other leading conductors, and toured widely; he had also begun making records in 1941, in a repertory centring on Mozart and Beethoven (and including a classic version of Beethoven's horn sonata with Dennis Brain), but also embracing modern British composers. He was closely associated with the London Mozart Players, founded in 1949 by another friend from the central band, Harry Blech. Concerts and recordings brought him wide popularity, and he embarked upon a career that took him all round the world. In 1955 he settled in Henley, where he and his friends took part in festival music-making. However, divorce in 1960 brought him back to London. 
With the emergence of a post-war generation of virtuosi, Matthews found his career prospering less well in the 1960s. To his friends, he was candid about his powers, believing that he had been fortunate to make a career at a time when competition was less fierce. He was never a great technician, but the musicality of his playing gave his performances at their best an illuminating quality, and a sense of the music's essential structure and meaning. His interest in conveying this found a new outlet when in 1971 he was invited to be the first professor of music at the University of Newcastle. He ran an enterprising and successful department, while continuing to maintain a performing career. He retired in 1984. He was appointed CBE in 1975, and had honorary degrees from St Andrews (1973), Hull (1978), and Warwick (1982). 
Though prey to private melancholy, Matthews was an amusing and warm-hearted companion. He was slightly built, with sandy hair and an expressive face that remained impassive during performance but could take on a lively, animated expression in the discussions about music which were his greatest joy. He retained a somewhat boyish appearance and manner. He married three times. In 1941 he married Mira Howe, a cellist, and they had one son and three daughters. The marriage was dissolved in 1960 and in 1963 he married Brenda, who had been brought up by Dr Samuel McDermott, a general practitioner in Swindon, and taken his surname. They had one son and one daughter. The marriage was dissolved in 1985 and in 1986 he married Beryl, a piano teacher, daughter of Arthur Harold Jordan Perry, owner of a textile firm. Matthews died by his own hand in Birmingham, on 24 December 1988, having suffered from bouts of severe depression, particularly after his marriage to Brenda McDermott broke up. 
John Warrack', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39911


Moore, Gerald Frederick (1899-1987), pianist and accompanist, was born on 30 July 1899 in Watford, Hertfordshire, the eldest in the family of three sons and a daughter, who died in childhood, of David Frank Moore, who owned a men's outfitting establishment, and his Welsh-born wife, Chestina Jones. He was educated at Watford grammar school. Musical, with perfect pitch, he learned the piano locally with Wallis Bandey. When, owing to a financial crisis, the family decided to emigrate to Toronto, Canada, the thirteen-year-old Gerald had to start again with his piano studies. His mother arranged an audition with Michael Hambourg, founder of a school of music in Toronto. This resulted in a scholarship and much expert coaching. Hambourg's cellist son, Boris, later took Moore as his accompanist on a tour of forty engagements in western Canada. When Moore finally was shipped back to London in 1919, it was another Hambourg son -- the pianist Mark Hambourg -- who offered to take over his training. 
But Moore was not cut out for a career as a soloist and on the advice of Landon Ronald, then principal of the Guildhall School of Music, he concentrated on accompanying. He went on tour with baritone Peter Dawson and was engaged on an exclusive basis by the tenor John Coates. Coates taught him to work and awakened his realization of the importance of the piano part in the basic structure of the song: Moore said he owed everything to him. 
In 1921 Moore made his first record (for HMV), with Renee Chemet, the French violinist. The studio had a large horn contraption into which the violinist played. In spite of the piece being a gentle lullaby Moore had to play fortissimo throughout in order to be heard at all on the record. 
A vital step forward for Moore was the arrival on the recording scene of the microphone. At last his playing would be faithfully reproduced on records. At first he was greatly shocked by hearing himself. But by listening carefully he was able to improve, technically and musically, and raise his playing to a new standard, which took him to the top. Apart from many instrumentalists, his famous vocal partners included Elena Gerhardt, Elisabeth Schumann, Maggie Teyte, John McCormack, Hans Hotter, Kathleen Ferrier, Elisabeth Schwarzkopf, Victoria de los Angeles, Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, and Janet Baker. 
When Myra Hess started her series of lunchtime concerts in the National Gallery, during the Second World War, she asked Moore to give a talk at the piano on his experiences as an accompanist. He revealed a sense of verbal timing of which any professional comic would be proud. His unique blend of wit and wisdom not only pleased the cognoscenti but also won over ordinary people who had no idea that classical music could be fun. This kind of treatment has its dangers, but not with Moore, who always put the music first and used the jokes to sugar the pill. The talk became immensely popular. His first book, 'The Unashamed Accompanist' (1943; 3rd edn, 1984) grew out of these talks. 
Moore played throughout the world as an accompanist and included many tours of the United States as a lecture-recitalist. His favourite festivals included Edinburgh, Salzburg, and King's Lynn (where he played piano duets with Ruth, Lady Fermoy). 
Moore retired from the concert platform in 1967, at the comparatively early age of sixty-seven, when he was at the top of his form. A farewell concert, which was recorded, was given in his honour at the Royal Festival Hall on 20 February 1967. After Moore gave up public playing his great affection for Schubert became an obsession: he embarked on the huge task of recording over 500 Schubert songs. Three sets of these -- 'Die schone Mullerin', 'Winterreise', and 'Schwanengesang', all with Fischer-Dieskau -- were issued on compact disc and form a lasting tribute to his work. His playing was remarkable for flawless technique and a rare ability to make the piano 'sing'. 
Moore was a talented writer. His best-known book was the autobiography 'Am I Too Loud'? (1962). He became CBE (1954), honorary RAM (1962), FRCM (1980), honorary DLitt, Sussex (1968), and honorary MusD, Cambridge (1973). 
Moore was a stocky, thickset figure not readily associable with the ravishingly delicate effects he could obtain from the piano. His zest for living, his enormous vitality, and his sense of humour were strong preservatives in a very hard-working life. Away from music Moore enjoyed in early life tennis and golf and, later, bridge, gardening, and watching cricket. He had an ideal partner in his wife, Enid Kathleen (died 1994), daughter of Montague Richard, ironmonger, of Beckenham, whom he called 'the most perfect of all accompanists'. They had no children. Moore had had a previous marriage, in Canada in 1929, which lasted only three or four years and which ended in divorce. Moore died in his sleep at his home, Pond House, Elm Road, Penn, Buckinghamshire, on 13 March 1987. 
Joseph Cooper', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39912


Ogdon, John Andrew Howard (1937-1989), pianist and composer, was born on 27 January 1937 in Mansfield Woodhouse, Nottinghamshire, the youngest in the family of three sons and two daughters of Howard Ogdon, teacher, who wrote about music, and his wife, Dorothy Mutton, a former secretary, who also encouraged her children's musicianship by ensuring that they learned the piano from an early age. John began piano lessons when he was four years old. His gifts were such that at the age of eight he went to the Royal Manchester (later the Royal Northern) College of Music as a pupil of Iso Elinson. After attending Manchester grammar school, he returned in his mid-teens to the college, where he found a gifted group of contemporaries -- Alexander Goehr, Harrison Birtwistle, Peter Maxwell Davies, and Elgar Howarth -- who were later known as the 'Manchester School'. Ogdon took piano with Elinson, Claude Biggs, and Gordon Green, and composition with Richard Hall. 
Ogdon's superlative sight-reading gifts and his phenomenal musical memory enabled him to tackle the most difficult scores virtually at sight, but his technical mastery was allied to a deep intellectual grasp, which soon marked him out as a re-creative musician of extraordinary range and depth. When he was still a child, his father had suffered a schizophrenic breakdown; it may well have been that this experience chastened Ogdon's own development: musically he was prodigiously gifted, and physically he was (so described by Goehr) 'a big, clumsy, untidy, roly-poly boy'. His character was shy and reserved, his speech quietly withdrawn; only at the piano, it seemed, did his personality publicly flower, when he was overwhelming. 
As a student Ogdon entered the Belgian Queen Elisabeth competition in 1956 but was unsuccessful. On graduating soon afterwards (with distinction in every subject), he gave Brahms's D minor concerto, conducted by Sir John Barbirolli, which prompted his Halle Orchestra debut at the age of twenty. Postgraduate work with Denis Matthews in London and Egon Petri (a pupil of Ferruccio Busoni) in Basel led, in 1958, to his playing Busoni's vast piano concerto from memory, conducted by John Pritchard, in Liverpool. The Busoni performance was much praised and on 8 August 1959, at less than forty-eight hours' notice, Ogdon made his Promenade Concert debut in Franz Liszt's E[flat] concerto, after coming second in the Liverpool international piano competition, and a month before his Wigmore Hall debut in London. 
In July 1960 Ogdon married Brenda Mary, daughter of John Gregory Lucas, civil servant; they had a son and a daughter. Ogdon and his wife made a notable two-piano team. In December, Ogdon began his record career with a Busoni-Liszt album for EMI. Although he later recorded for other labels, his main recorded legacy is with EMI. In January 1961 he took first prize in the Liszt competition, and he achieved world fame as joint winner (with Vladimir Ashkenazy) of the first prize at the Tchaikovsky competition in Moscow in 1962. 
One of the most sought-after artists of his day, Ogdon travelled widely, notably to the USA and Russia, where he was adored. Unlike other virtuosi, he championed new and unusual music, including concertos written for him by Alun Hoddinott (with whom he founded the Cardiff music festival in 1967), Robert Simpson, and Gerard Schurmann, alongside standard repertory. He also found time to compose, among other music, a piano concerto, a symphony, solo piano works, and two string quartets. His immense energy ensured a full engagement book, yet his chain-smoking and excessive drinking, his unkempt appearance, and a tendency to overwork meant that the strains thus placed upon him took their toll. 
In 1973 Ogdon began to exhibit symptoms of an alarming personality change. This previously gentle man became prone to degenerative mental and physical violence, eventually attacking his wife with such ferocity that she was hospitalized: he attempted suicide on numerous occasions. His condition at first eluded diagnosis, his treatment ranging from drugs and electric shock to psychotherapy. Some of his earlier treatment was experimental; he seemed to suffer from paranoid schizophrenic psychosis. Ogdon spent eighteen months in the Royal Maudsley Hospital in London; by 1977 he had improved enough to take his first teaching post, at Indiana University in Bloomington, where he stayed until 1980. Under care, he resumed concert-giving, which he had never really abandoned: an American doctor who had observed him for a year concluded that he was not schizophrenic but manic depressive and prescribed lithium, claiming Ogdon was an obsessive genius living a vital inner life against which the 'real' world could appear remote. 
The treatment was a success and, although never 'cured', Ogdon was able gradually to resume his career. His history meant that his condition was watched constantly; his earlier instability led to his affairs being taken over by the court of protection. Symptomatic of a new confidence was his recital in 1988 of the legendary three-and-a-half-hour solo piano work 'Opus clavicembalisticum' by Kaikhosru Sorabji, which he also recorded. Ogdon was a fellow of the Royal Manchester College of Music (1962) and the Royal Academy of Music (1974), and an honorary fellow of the Royal Northern College of Music (1986). He was also a recipient of the Harriet Cohen international award (1960). His publications included contributory chapters to 'Franz Liszt: the Man and his Music' (ed. A. Walker, 1976) and 'Keyboard Music' (ed. D. Matthews, 1972). 
In late July 1989 Ogdon complained of feeling unwell. He saw a new doctor, who asked if he had been diagnosed as diabetic and who arranged for him to be examined by several specialists some days later. But his condition worsened, and his wife found him unconscious on the morning of 31 July, the day of his first specialist visit. Rushed to Charing Cross Hospital in London, he was found to be in a diabetic coma. He had, moreover, contracted bronchial pneumonia, from which he died in hospital early the following day, 1 August 1989. 
Robert Matthew-Walker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39913


Pears, Sir Peter Neville Luard (1910-1986), singer, was born on 22 June 1910 at Newark House, Searle Road, Farnham, Surrey, the youngest in the family of three sons and four daughters (one of whom died in infancy) of Arthur Grant Pears, a civil engineer and later a director of Burma Railways, and his wife, Jessie Elizabeth de Visme Luard. Pears's parents were married in Bombay in 1893. Much of his father's working life was spent overseas, which meant that Peter had little contact with him until 1923, when Arthur Pears retired to live in England. Pears's mother too was often absent, though it is clear from his letters that his relationship with her was a fond one and sustained throughout his young manhood. His brothers followed naval careers, continuing a family tradition in which there was a strong service element: his mother's father had been a general. But there was another, altogether different strand in Pears's ancestry, that of the church and, more particularly, the influence of Pears's great-great-grandmother Elizabeth Fry, the Quaker reformer. A bonding with Quakerism continued throughout Pears's life and was reflected in his pacifism, his sense of values, and his virtues. There was indeed something of the patrician Quaker in his looks, manners, and deeds. His habitual charm and courtesy rarely deserted him. 
Pears's childhood, even though it may have lacked the continuity of a settled home, seems to have been happy, as indeed were his schooldays at Lancing College, Sussex, which he entered as a classical scholar in 1923. At Lancing he became aware of his homosexual nature, though it was some years before it found fulfilment. In this respect he lived at ease with himself throughout his life. It was at school, too, that his musical and theatrical gifts and inclinations showed themselves. He was a capable pianist, took part in operatic and dramatic productions, and involved himself in the school's cultural life. He was an accomplished cricketer. As his schooldays ended, his love of painting seems to have begun: his taste and judgement aided him in the acquisition over the years of a notable private collection which included many examples of work by the best British artists of the period. 
In 1928 Pears went to Keble College, Oxford, to study music, but again without a very clear musical goal in mind. For a while he had a post at Hertford College as temporary organist. But his Oxford career was short-lived. He failed his pass moderations, left Oxford, and never returned. He went back to his preparatory school, The Grange, Crowborough, in 1929, this time as a teacher, and resumed his interest in cricket. At this point Pears's instinct for music finally located itself in his voice. This led to his undertaking, for the first time, professional vocal studies at the Royal College of Music in London, initially on a part-time basis and then, in 1934, as a full-time student (he was an operatic exhibitioner). Again, however, he failed to complete the course. He left after only two terms, during which he participated in college operatic productions, to begin his professional career as a singer, with the BBC Singers (1934-7) and, in 1936, the New English Singers, with whom he made his first visit to the USA. In finally making his commitment specifically to a singer's life, he was helped by Nell Burra. She was the twin sister of Peter Burra (1909-1937), a close friend of Pears at Lancing and Oxford, whose life Pears briefly shared in 1936 and 1937. It was a friendship with a momentous consequence for Pears and indeed for the history of British music. 
Burra, a gifted writer on the arts, had met the young composer Benjamin Britten (1913-1976) in Barcelona in 1936, and the two men became friends. This was before Pears and Britten had met. It was Burra's untimely death in an air accident in 1937 that brought Pears and Britten together. Their remarkable partnership had its inception in April of that year when, as Burra's friends, they jointly sorted out his personal papers. Thus the end of one friendship was the beginning of another; and thereafter the careers of Pears and Britten were inextricably linked, as were their lives (they began to share a flat in 1938), though it was not until 1939 in Canada that the love of each for the other finally declared itself. It was sustained over thirty-six years. Pears had left England for North America with Britten in the same year and they did not return until 1942, when both men -- convinced pacifists of long standing -- sought and received exemption from military service, provided that they continued their wartime work as performing musicians. 
Already in 1938 Pears had professional experience of opera as a member of the chorus at Glyndebourne, and in that year he was described by a fellow artist as 'tall, fair-haired, reserved and poetic-looking', most of which characteristics remained unchanged. Britten's phenomenal development as a composer for the opera house, which had begun in the USA, inevitably brought with it a comparable development in Pears, for whom Britten wrote an extraordinary number and variety of leading roles in almost all his principal operas, from 'Peter Grimes' (1945) to 'Death in Venice' (1973). It was in this last opera, dedicated to Pears, that Pears made his debut at the Metropolitan Opera, New York, in 1974, at the age of sixty-four. But while it is true that Britten's operas shaped Pears's destiny as an opera singer, it must be remembered that Pears, on his return to England from America, had established himself independently as a notable member of the Sadler's Wells company, appearing in such roles as Alfredo in 'La traviata', Ferrando in 'Cosi fan tutte', the Duke in 'Rigoletto', Almaviva in 'The Barber of Seville', and Vasek in 'The Bartered Bride'. His performances attracted critical attention for their exceptional musicality and intelligence, and admiration from Britten, who was often in the audience. It was his growing confidence in Pears's theatrical and vocal skills that enabled Britten to write the title role of 'Peter Grimes' with Pears's voice in mind (he had at one time thought of Grimes as a baritone). The famous world premiere of the opera on 7 June 1945 placed the composer in the front rank of musical dramatists of his time and Pears as his principal interpreter. 
It was not only as a singer that Pears and his unique voice had an influential role to play in Britten's operas. In one of them, 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1960), he collaborated with the composer in converting Shakespeare's text into a libretto. He was also the inspiration of the long series of song sets and song cycles that Britten composed between 1940 (the 'Seven Sonnets of Michelangelo') and 1975 ('A Birthday Hansel'), a legacy of song perhaps without equal in the twentieth century. This rich fund of songs reflected the prowess of Pears and Britten as performers. They established themselves as one of the most celebrated and accomplished voice and piano duos of the post-war period, with an extensive repertory that included much of the work of Henry Purcell (when his songs were by no means the staple diet of recital programmes) and the great nineteenth-century classic song cycles -- for example, Schubert's 'Winterreise' and Schumann's 'Dichterliebe' -- in interpretations which themselves achieved classic status, and have been preserved on gramophone records. His partnership with the lute virtuoso Julian Bream became almost as celebrated, perhaps especially for performances of the Elizabethan master John Dowland, of incomparable sensitivity and skill from both singer and accompanist. Of equal note was Pears's Evangelist in the passions of Heinrich Schutz and J. S. Bach, roles to which he brought not only a predictable sensitivity but also an overwhelming sense of immediacy, as if he were a participant in the drama that was being unfolded. This was musical 'theatre' of an unusually exalted order. 
Pears's life was inextricably interwoven with Britten's; until he suffered a slight stroke in 1973 as a result of his heart operation Britten was virtually the only pianist to accompany Pears. It involved strenuous recital tours at home and abroad, recording and broadcasting, and planning the policy of the English Opera Group (of which Pears was a co-founder, in 1947), and the programmes of the annual Aldeburgh festival (of which too he was a co-founder, in 1948). He played a leading role in both organizations as a performer and a stimulating, highly individual impresario. 
Peter Pears was appointed CBE in 1957 and knighted in 1978. He received honorary degrees from several universities, and Keble College, Oxford, made him an honorary fellow in 1978. From 1957 he and Britten lived together in the Red House, Aldeburgh, Suffolk. After Britten's death in 1976 Pears continued to live in the house until his own death there on 3 April 1986. He was buried beside Britten in the churchyard of the parish church of St Peter and St Paul, Aldeburgh. 
It was Britten's name, as opera and song composer and pianist, that was inevitably most closely associated with Pears's. But his distinctive interpretations of roles other than Britten roles will not be forgotten: his Tamino in 'The Magic Flute', Idomeneo (in Mozart's opera), David in 'The Mastersingers', and Pandarus in 'Troilus and Cressida' by William Walton, were all marked by the exceptional musicality and intelligence that characterized him as a singer and, above all, by his exceptional response to, and articulation of, words. He was as sensitive to the sounds of words as he was to pitches. It was a gift that enabled him to bring even a 'dead' classical language to life, as in his masterly performance as Oedipus in Igor Stravinsky's opera-oratorio, in which he collaborated with the composer. He was an enquiring and adventurous singer too, as the long list of first performances by living composers other than Britten amply demonstrates, among them commissions which he himself generously funded. His commitment to the singer's life and art, which had begun so tentatively in the 1930s, found further reflection in his later years when he was an active teacher in the Britten-Pears School for Advanced Musical Studies. This he had co-founded with Benjamin Britten in 1972, and, after the incapacitating stroke he suffered in 1980, which brought his career as a performer virtually to an end, he devoted more and more of his time to it. It was entirely appropriate that he should die at home at Aldeburgh, the focus of his personal and musical life for so many years, having completed, the day before, a full day's teaching at the school -- a course, as it happened, on Bach's passions -- passing on to future generations his own unique experience of music, of creative partnership, of the spectrum of the arts, and of life itself. It was the totality of all of these that coloured and informed Pears's voice and made it the unique instrument that it was. There were some who found it difficult to come to terms with its peculiar timbre. But his admirers worldwide rightly regarded it as a vehicle of civilization and sensibility without equal among English singers of his time. 
Donald Mitchell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39914


Pritchard, Sir John Michael (1918-1989), conductor, was born on 5 February 1918 at 17 Cromwell Road, Walthamstow, London, the younger son (there were no daughters) of Albert Edward Pritchard, violinist, and his wife, Amy Edith Shaylor. He was educated at Sir George Monoux School in London, and he studied privately with his father and other music teachers. In his teenage years he visited Italy to listen to opera. When the Second World War broke out Pritchard registered as a conscientious objector, to his father's dismay. He therefore underwent an army medical examination, but, because of an earlier attack of pleurisy, was registered unfit to serve. In 1943 he took over the Derby String Orchestra and was its principal conductor until 1951. Meanwhile he joined the music staff of Glyndebourne Opera (1947) and was appointed chorus master there (1949). He succeeded Reginald Jacques as conductor of the Jacques Orchestra (1950-52). By 1951 he was sharing with Fritz Busch major Mozart productions at Glyndebourne and at the Edinburgh Festival. 
Important opportunities came Pritchard's way in 1952: at Edinburgh he appeared with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, replacing Ernest Ansermet, who was ill; and he made his debuts at the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden, and at the Vienna State Opera. He appeared regularly with the Vienna Symphony Orchestra (1953-5). He continued to work at Glyndebourne, conducting their productions of Mozart's 'Idomeneo' and Richard Strauss's 'Ariadne auf Naxos' at the Edinburgh festivals of 1953 and 1954. After the latter he conducted the Glyndebourne production of Rossini's 'La Cenerentola' at the Berlin Festival. The performance was a triumph. 
At home, Pritchard was appointed principal conductor of the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra (1957-63) and within a year had launched the 'Musica Viva' series at which contemporary music was introduced, illustrated, performed, and then discussed. During five seasons, unfamiliar music by many living composers was heard for the first time in Britain. Pritchard's success in Liverpool led to his appointment as musical director of the London Philharmonic Orchestra (1962-6). At Glyndebourne he became music counsellor (1963), principal conductor (1968), and musical director (1969-77). In 1969 he took the London Philharmonic to the Far East and made his American debut, at the Chicago Lyric Opera. Appearances at the San Francisco Opera (1970) and the Metropolitan Opera (1971) followed. In 1973 he conducted the London Philharmonic in China -- the first visit by a Western orchestra. 
By 1980 Pritchard had conducted many of the world's greatest orchestras, including the Berlin Philharmonic, the Leipzig Gewandhaus, the Dresden Staatskapelle, and the Philadelphia Orchestra; he had appeared at the Salzburg festival, the Maggio Musicale in Florence, and the Munich State Opera. In London he was a regular guest at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, at the Proms, and with the BBC Symphony Orchestra, whose chief conductor he became in 1982. Overlapping posts included at that time the musical directorships of the Cologne Opera (1978), the Theatre de la Monnaie, Brussels (1981), and the San Francisco Opera (1986). 
Pritchard's innate musicality, his quick grasp, his range of sympathies, and his gift for getting the best out of the musicians (with whom he was very popular) combined to bring him a career of astonishing concentration and variety. No conductor can have had a fuller diary. Although this sometimes led to a perfunctoriness bordering upon indolence, he was, at his best, an interpreter of lasting distinction. His Mozart and Strauss were superbly idiomatic, but he also excelled in nineteenth-century Italian opera. And he could surprise his public with, for example, some tough Shostakovich. He was not, however, a great star; he did not make enough recordings to achieve that status. But he was appointed CBE in 1962 and was knighted in 1983. The coveted Shakespeare prize (Hamburg) was awarded him in 1975. 
Pritchard's much imitated manner of speech -- bland, almost epicene -- was an outward sign of his unabashed homosexuality, but there was nothing effeminate about his music-making. He had friends in every walk and style of life and was loyal and generous to them. Witty and well-informed, he lived in some style (in a number of homes, including an elegant house near Glyndebourne and a villa in the Alpes-Maritimes above Nice). Indeed his enjoyment of good food and wine became a problem when he needed to lose weight for a hip replacement operation not long before his death. It was a problem he observed with rueful detachment. Though already ill, with lung cancer, he conducted the last night of the Proms on 16 September 1989 and made a touchingly prescient and self-deprecating speech. He died on 5 December 1989 in Daly City, California. He left a large part of his estate to Terry MacInnes, his partner. 
Robert Ponsonby', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39916


Ball, Sir George Thomas Thalben- (1896-1987), organist, was born on 18 June 1896 in Sydney, Australia, the elder son (there were no daughters) of George Charles Ball, who had gone to live temporarily in Australia on business, and his wife, Mary Hannah Spear, daughter of a miller, of Newquay, Cornwall. The family returned to England in 1899 and settled in Muswell Hill, where the father kept a shop. Both his parents were amateur musicians and George became a member of the choir of St James's Church. The Thalben of George's surname, which he added by deed poll in 1924, although he used it from 1917, has some Cornish connection. After attending Highfield, a private school in Muswell Hill, he entered the Royal College of Music on an exhibition in 1911, and studied piano with Frits Hartvigson, Franklin Taylor, and Fanny Davies, organ with Sir Walter Parratt and F. A. Sewell, and composition and history with Sir Charles Stanford, Sir Hubert Parry, and Charles Wood. He quickly took part in ensemble and solo performances at the Royal College of Music, playing, among other works, Liszt's sonata in B minor and, with the orchestra conducted by Stanford, the solo part in Rakhmaninov's piano concerto no. 3 in D minor, the performance of which made a profound impression on his seniors and peers alike. 
As an organist Thalben-Ball's energies were largely directed towards developing the music at the various churches where he held appointments: as organist of Whitefield's Tabernacle, Tottenham Court Road (1911); as organist and choir-master of Holy Trinity Church, Castelnau, Barnes (1914-16), and St James's, Sussex Gardens (1916-19); and as acting organist (from 1919) and organist (1923-81) of the Temple Church, near Fleet Street, London. His association with Sir Walford Davies, which led eventually to Thalben-Ball's appointment at the Temple Church, began with Saturday morning choir-training classes at the Royal College of Music, when he took part in conducting and accompanying the choir, and succeeded in getting Walford Davies to allow him to bring along his choristers from Barnes to take part. Thalben-Ball's work at the Temple was the cornerstone of his musical life. Throughout an association of more than sixty years he maintained a uniquely high standard of performance, and a musical style, traditional and in some ways limited, of extraordinary consistency. His achievement was all the more remarkable because the choir, for which the boys were drawn from the City of London School, had essentially to be re-established in the early 1950s following the ravages of the Second World War and the later rebuilding of the church. Thalben-Ball was helped, however, by a strong association of old choristers, which provided a continuing nucleus of singers. 
The importance of church and choral music to Thalben-Ball makes his position as an organist somewhat paradoxical. Endowed with an exceptionally robust constitution, possessing impeccable technique and powers of co-ordination, showing concentration and alertness at all times, he became the outstanding British organ recitalist for more than half a century: he could knock spots off everyone else! Together with his seniors, Sir Walter Alcock and George Dorrington Cunningham, he inaugurated the Royal Albert Hall organ in 1924, and was the preferred choice for many opening recitals. He became curator-organist of the Albert Hall in 1934, and was a regular soloist at the Henry Wood Promenade Concerts for many years, making a great effect with Wood's transcriptions of Handel concertos for modern resources. After a recital at Birmingham town hall in 1948, following Cunningham's death, he was persuaded to take on the post of city organist in 1949, together with that of university organist. He always had reservations about this job, but none the less enjoyed the rail journeys from London, and performed a large repertory in more than a thousand recitals before his retirement in 1982. 
With his many-sided work and musical interests, Thalben-Ball was never a specialist organist, and this fact helps to explain why his reputation is more that of an executant than an interpreter; his natural sympathies lay firmly within the period bounded by the standard concert repertory of his time, which excluded early music and, to a considerable extent, radical modern composition. His teaching was consistent with this outlook. He would work hard and long, even if somewhat spasmodically, with his pupils at the Royal College of Music, and yet a student often received the greatest enlightenment, not from explanation and discussion, but from persuading the master himself to get on the organ bench and demonstrate his way of doing things. He seemed most at home in music of the era from Mendelssohn to Elgar, and produced memorable accounts of the organ works of Liszt and Julius Reubke. As an accompanist he performed extraordinary feats in turning the organ into an orchestra, such as when playing for Kathleen Ferrier in 'The Dream of Gerontius'. 
Thalben-Ball was religious music adviser to the BBC from 1941, concerned with directing music for broadcast services and composing choral introits for them. This at first involved constant travel, as the department had been evacuated from London to Bedford. Even with the later commitments of Birmingham and the re-formed Temple Church choir, Thalben-Ball was able to keep his BBC connection until 1970. He was appointed CBE in 1967 and knighted in 1982. He was a fellow of the Royal College of Organists (1915), the Royal College of Music (1951), the Royal School of Church Music (1956, diploma 1963), and the Royal Society of Arts (1971), and an honorary member of the Royal Academy of Music (1973). He was president of the Royal College of Organists in 1948-50 and an honorary bencher of the Inner Temple (1959). He won the grand prix de Chartres (1973) and the EMI gold disc (1963, for Mendelssohn's 'Hear my prayer'). He had an honorary DMus and gold medal from Birmingham (1972). 
Thalben-Ball was about 5 feet 6 inches in height, stockily built, with a small moustache and a ramrod-straight back. His dapper dress and turnout made him a man of the city. He married in 1926 a New Zealand artist, (Grace) Evelyn (1888-1961), daughter of Francis Chapman, a New Zealand wheat exporter. They had a son and a daughter. Evelyn died in 1961 and in 1968 Thalben-Ball married the organist Jennifer Lucy Bate, daughter of Horace Alfred Bate, organist of St James's, Muswell Hill. They had no children and the marriage was annulled in 1972. Thalben-Ball died at a nursing home in Wimbledon on 18 January 1987. He was buried at Highgate cemetery. 
James Dalton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39917


Turner, Dame Eva (1892-1990), singer, was born on 10 March 1892 in Oldham, Lancashire, the elder child and only daughter of Charles Turner, chief engineer of a cotton mill, and his wife, Elizabeth Park. She was educated at Werneth council school, Oldham, until she was ten, when her father moved to Bristol to take up an appointment as manager of another mill in the south-west of England. There she heard her first opera, performed by the Royal Carl Rosa Opera Company, and so struck was she by this that she was determined to become a singer herself. Her parents were musical and gave her every encouragement, sending her for lessons to Daniel Rootham, who taught Clara Butt. Her studies were continued at the Royal Academy of Music in London from 1911 to 1915, during which time she was briefly betrothed. In 1915 she joined the chorus of the Royal Carl Rosa Opera Company: she entered her new life with enthusiasm and with the serious determination and commitment that were to characterize her life. When not singing in the chorus she never lost an opportunity to observe other performers from the wings, studying the action and learning the soprano repertory. Anxious for progress, she badgered the management to find her roles and she soon made her solo debut as the page in 'Tannhauser'. 
But Turner was still not satisfied, and on the advice of the company's principal tenor she began to work with an Australian singer, Richard Broad, who had recently joined the management of the Carl Rosa. He had sung as a bass under Hans Richter at Covent Garden, but it was as an authority on voice production that he was better known. This proved to be a most successful relationship, and Broad continued as her coach, adviser, and friend until his death some twenty-five years later. 
The small parts became larger and by 1920 Eva Turner was assuming dramatic roles as her voice increased in power and weight. In that year the company gave a four-week season at Covent Garden, in which she sang Santuzza ('Cavalleria rusticana'), Musetta ('La Boheme'), Leonora ('Il trovatore'), Butterfly ('Madama Butterfly'), Antonia ('The Tales of Hoffmann'), and Venus ('Tannhauser'). The 'Times' critic described her Leonora as promising. Another Covent Garden season followed a provincial tour in 1921. 'Tosca' and 'Lohengrin' were two operas added to her repertory that year. In 1922 she appeared as Eva in 'The Mastersingers' with the Carl Rosa at Covent Garden, and won a favourable review from 'The Times'. 
In 1924 the Carl Rosa was at the Scala Theatre, London, for a four-week season, which was to be a turning point in Turner's career. Among other roles she sang Butterfly on 3 June, a performance with which 'The Times' did not find entire favour but which so impressed Ettore Panizza, Arturo Toscanini's assistant at La Scala, Milan, that he asked her to sing to the maestro. She auditioned successfully and was offered Freia and Sieglinde in the 1924/5 La Scala season. Her characteristic loyalty persuaded her to tell La Scala that she was not free to accept because of her Carl Rosa contract. However, she was released from that and she spent the intervening period learning Italian and her roles in that language in preparation for her debut, as Freia in 'Das Rheingold', conducted by Vittorio Gui. 
Thus began the most important part of Turner's career and a love affair with Italy, one of the outcomes of which was the Italianate colouring, with strongly enunciated consonants, that she applied to her speaking voice. She was then to sing in many Italian cities, including Brescia, where she first sang Turandot with conspicuous success. This became the role with which she was most identified, though from all accounts her portrayal of Aida was equally outstanding. She built and settled in a villa on Lake Lugano. 
By now Eva Turner's international career was developing rapidly, with appearances in Europe and in North and South America. She returned to Covent Garden in 1928 in a season managed by the Covent Garden Syndicate, and scored a major triumph with the press and public with Turandot. Nobody was prepared for such a magnificent performance. Nothing could then hold her back, and with her glorious voice she took a leading place in the seasons at Covent Garden and abroad until the outbreak of war in 1939. Small of stature, Eva Turner had a vocal command that was astonishing, with a voice of extraordinary sumptuousness and steadiness that could project through the loudest orchestral sound without any loss of quality. She surmounted all the technical challenges of the German and Italian repertoire and left her audiences spellbound. Turner's colossal success did much to encourage British opera singers, who at that time were probably more noted for dependability than brilliance and rarely given chances to prove anything else. An English name was a handicap and Eva Turner was urged to change hers. Proud of her Lancastrian roots, she refused. 
Undoubtedly the war deprived Turner of the final climax to her career, including the conquering of audiences at the Metropolitan in New York. After a performance of Turandot in Brescia in 1940 she returned to England, where she spent the war singing in concerts for the armed forces and the radio, and in the Proms. A staunch patriot, this was what she believed she needed to do and she declined invitations to work in America. 
In the 1947 and the 1948/9 seasons at Covent Garden Turner joined the newly formed company for Turandot, in which once again she astonished and thrilled the public and press. Then, in 1949, she accepted an invitation to teach at the University of Oklahoma for one year, and stayed for ten. After that she returned to London to teach at the Royal Academy of Music. Teaching occupied her for several more years and she passed on to many singers, established and young alike, her wealth of experience, with her inimitable generosity but also with a ferocious expectation of hard work and high standards in return. For her it was serious work that produced the results, however talented the individual. President of the Wagner Society from 1971 to 1985, she was appointed DBE in 1962. She was FRAM (1928), FRCM (1974), an honorary citizen of the state of Oklahoma (1982), and a first freeman of Oldham (1982). She was awarded honorary DMus degrees from Manchester (1979) and Oxford (1984) and became an honorary fellow of St Hilda's College, Oxford (1984). 
Well into her nineties and still immaculately groomed and handsome, Turner maintained her enthusiasm and capacity for work, serving on committees and lecturing endlessly to music clubs and societies. She was constantly to be seen at opera performances and concerts, travelling and coaching with an eagerness and display of energy that left many breathless. She never married, probably because she believed she could not find the time for the kind of relationship that marriage demanded. She led an intensely busy life, ably assisted by Ann Ridyard, her companion and secretary for thirty-five years, whose descent into senile dementia caused Eva Turner's last years to be burdensome. Eva Turner died on 16 June 1990 in the Devonshire Hospital, Marylebone, London. A memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 5 February 1991. 
John Tooley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39918


Collingwood, William Gershom (1854-1932), author, artist, and antiquary, was born on 6 August 1854 at 87 Chatham Street, Liverpool, the eldest son of the artist William Collingwood (1819-1903), of the Royal Watercolour Society, and his wife, Marie Imhoff (died 1873) of Arbon, Switzerland. At Liverpool College he acquired sound classical scholarship, but much of his early life was spent travelling and drawing with his father in the Alps. Meanwhile in England he spent long holidays in the cottage of a fisherman, William Alexander, at Gillhead, Windermere. In 1872 he went up to University College, Oxford, where in 1876 he won the Lothian prize and obtained a first in Greats. More importantly, at Oxford he met and fell under the spell of John Ruskin. He attended Ruskin's lectures and breakfasts, and helped build Ruskin's road at Hinksey. In his introduction to Collingwood's 'Limestone Alps of Savoy', Ruskin was later to describe him as 'one of the best and dearest of those Oxford pupils', and during the summer of 1873 Collingwood, with his father, visited Ruskin at Brantwood, Coniston. Two years later Collingwood was staying at Brantwood with Alexander Wedderburn, translating Xenophon's 'Economist' for Ruskin's 'Bibliotheca pastorum', and helping with the enlargement of the harbour there. Ruskin admired his draughtsmanship, and on leaving Oxford, Collingwood went to the Slade to study, between 1876 and 1878, under Alphonse Legros; he exhibited for the first time at the Royal Academy in 1880. 
The succeeding years were dedicated to helping Ruskin. Collingwood stayed at Brantwood in 1881 as his assistant and travelled with him in the following year to Switzerland, where he filled his sketchbooks with details of French and Italian sculpture and collected material for his 'Limestone Alps of Savoy', published in 1884 as a supplement to Ruskin's 'Deucalion'. Meanwhile, in 1883 he had already published his 'Philosophy of Ornament'. That same year he married Edith Mary Isaac (1857-1928) and settled at Gillhead, though in 1891 he moved to Lanehead, Coniston, to be even nearer to Ruskin. In this decade he edited a number of Ruskin's texts: 'Poems' (1891), 'Studies in both Arts' and 'Poetry of Architecture' (1893), 'Verona and other Lectures' (1894), and 'Lectures on Landscape' (1897). His biography of Ruskin, published in 1893 and rewritten in 1900, became a standard work, but after Ruskin's death in 1900 Collingwood declined to edit the Ruskin 'Library Edition' because he saw it as a mere money-making venture by Ruskin's executors. However, he arranged Ruskin exhibitions in Coniston (1900 and 1919), London (1901), and Manchester (1904). 
In 1896 Arthur Ransome first met the Collingwoods and their children, Dora 
('b'. 1886, later Mrs Ernest Altounyan)
, Barbara 
('b'. 1887, later Mrs Oscar Gnosspelius)
, Ursula 
('b'. 1891, later Mrs Reginald Luard Selby)
, and Robin (Robin George Collingwood, the historian and philosopher). An excursion in the Collingwoods' boat 'Swallow' was followed by a firm friendship, and much later, after teaching Collingwood's grandchildren to sail in 'Swallow II', Ransome's 'Swallows and Amazons' series resulted. Partly because of lack of income, Collingwood and his wife educated their children at home for their early years. 
In the 1890s Collingwood found his vocation as a painter and also became drawn into the group of men studying Lake District history. He joined the Cumberland and Westmorland Antiquarian and Archaeological Society in 1887 and wrote a large number of papers for its 'Transactions'; he became editor in 1900, a post which he nominally relinquished in 1920 on being nominated the society's president. Collingwood was particularly interested in Norse lore and the Norsemen in Lakeland, and he wrote a series of novels, including 'Thorstein of the Mere' (1895) and 'The Bondwoman' (1896), against this background. In 1897 he visited Iceland for three months, and two years later published, with Jon Stefansson, his 'Pilgrimage to the Sagasteads of Iceland'. He was a member of the Viking Club and served as its president. Adverse criticism of 'The Bondwoman' directed Collingwood's interests to a more intensive study of Norse and Anglican archaeology in the north, particularly the artistic aspect of it, on which he became widely recognized as the leading authority. Following Ruskin's death Collingwood continued to help for a while with secretarial work at Brantwood, but in 1905 he went to University College, Reading, as master of drawing and painting, and served as professor of fine art from 1907 until 1911. 
Collingwood was sixty at the outbreak of the war; he joined the Admiralty intelligence division, but life in London did not improve his health. He returned to Coniston in 1919. He was vice-president of the Lakes Artists Society from its formation in 1903, and he and his wife regularly exhibited at their shows. His writing continued with 'Lake District History' (1925) and perhaps his most important work, 'Northumbrian Crosses of the pre-Norman Age' (1927). The intense activity of Collingwood's life was taking its toll, and in 1927 he experienced the first of a series of strokes. His life was further saddened by the death of his wife in the following year. Collingwood's last task was the revision of his 'Lake Counties'. Originally published in 1902, this highly regarded book had long been out of print and was reissued in 1932. Collingwood died on 1 October 1932 at Lanehead, Coniston, after a stroke and was buried four days later in Coniston churchyard, near to Ruskin whose monolithic memorial cross he had designed. 
In stature Collingwood was short, broad-shouldered, and erect; his eyes, like Ruskin's, were bright and piercingly blue. He was great climber and swimmer, and a tireless walker into advanced age. A fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and an honorary member of the Yorkshire Archaeological Society, the Society of Antiquaries of Ireland, the Alpine Club, and the Carlisle Society of Arts and Crafts, Collingwood was an artist of no mean accomplishment, a scholar of great versatility, and an accomplished musician. Few English scholars have been better versed in Scandinavian languages. His books in various fields remain standard works at the end of the twentieth century and continue to be reprinted. 


@@@@@


doc= 39919


White, Arnold Henry (1848-1925), journalist and publicist, was born at Chapel House, All Saints, Hereford, on 1 February 1848, the third child and second son of Edward White (1819-1898), a Congregational minister in Hereford and then Camden Town, and his wife, Rachael Ainsley, 'nee' Aldersey (died 1864). As a young man he was employed by the P. & O. shipping company; he then became a coffee planter in Ceylon. In the late 1870s this venture failed, and White returned to London, taking up residence in Hampstead. For a while he served as manager of the Edison Electric Light Company, only to find himself unemployed when Edison merged with the rival Swan Company. Heavily in debt, White was obliged to seek another career: he opted for the life of a political agitator. 
From 1884 onwards White helped to organize a number of colonizing schemes, in the course of which he visited South Africa, Canada, Australia, and the United States of America. He also began 'exploring' the East End of London to study the social question. This gave him the material for his first book, 'The Problems of a Great City' (1886), and led to an invitation to fight the Mile End constituency in the Liberal interest, which he did unsuccessfully in the 1886 general election. Eighteen months later White broke with the Liberals in protest over Gladstone's refusal to condemn the Irish Plan of Campaign. He then stood as the Liberal Unionist candidate for Tyneside in 1892 and 1895, suffering defeat on both occasions. 
Frustrated in his parliamentary ambitions, White enjoyed some success as a polemical journalist. His articles were soon appearing in a variety of newspapers and periodicals. Many of them dealt with the question of alien immigration, for White was an ardent 'restrictionist', anxious to check the entry into the United Kingdom of 'destitute' Jews from eastern Europe, a subject on which he gave evidence before several official inquiries. During the 1890s, acting as the agent of the Baron de Hirsch, he also paid a number of visits to Russia in the hope of persuading the tsar's government to establish a colony in Argentina for poor Russian Jews. From the mid-1890s White increasingly turned his attention to the state of the British navy. He served for several years on the executive council of the Navy League and probably drafted some of its more inflammatory manifestos. During the summer of 1900 White visited the Mediterranean Fleet, as the guest of Admiral Charles Beresford, and in June of the following year achieved notoriety when he sent the 'Daily Mail' a private letter of Beresford's, complaining about the fleet's deficiencies. Meanwhile, White was forming a firm friendship with the man who shortly emerged as Beresford's bitterest enemy within the service, Admiral Sir John Fisher. Both men were obsessed with the danger posed by the recently founded German high fleet. Indeed, White favoured the sudden and unheralded destruction of the German warships in harbour before they could seriously threaten Britain's naval hegemony. An article to this effect, written in late 1904, annoyed the prime minister, Arthur Balfour, and the Kaiser was so angered by it that, when a party of English journalists visited Germany on a goodwill mission in April 1907, he insisted on White's exclusion. 
White landed himself in another scrape in the course of his campaign to bring the crooked company promoter Whitaker Wright to justice; in August 1903 an outspoken article in 'The Sun', while the case was 'sub judice', resulted in his committal to Brixton Prison for contempt of court. This episode reveals White in his favourite role, that of 'tribune of the people' crusading against 'decadence' in high places -- a role that he had recently performed with 'brio' in 'Efficiency and Empire' (1901), the book by which he is perhaps best remembered. White was also a fearless critic of all forms of political ineptitude and misconduct, from whichever party they emanated. 
During the 1906 general election White made his final attempt to get into parliament, unavailingly contesting Londonderry North as an independent. From 1907 onwards he supplied a regular column to the popular weekly 'The Referee' under the pseudonym Vanoc. White had always taken an interest in eugenics and sat for a while on the council of the Eugenics Education Society. He was also a zealous supporter of compulsory military service, a cause which brought him into contact with the duke of Bedford, who thereafter acted as his patron. 
White's political convictions were those commonly found among the Edwardian radical right: he sang the praises of empire and national defence, and fiercely lambasted Irish home rule, socialism, cosmopolitan pacifism, and the corruption engendered by the secret party funds. Many of his contemporaries thought him foolish and hot-tempered, but few questioned his honesty or his patriotism. During the First World War, White's Germanophobia became even more extreme; his book 'The Hidden Hand' (1917) purported to uncover a sinister, long-standing conspiracy to 'Germanize' all aspects of British life. These xenophobic views drew him into an association with the demagogue Noel Pemberton Billing. But military victory, when it came, did not bring White peace of mind; he spent his final years raging impotently against Bolsheviks, Germans, Sinn Feiners, and international Jewry. 
In private life White took an interest in climbing, travel, shooting, golf, chess, and gardening. In 1879 he married Helen Constance (1849-1918), only daughter of Lowell Price of Farnham Royal, Buckinghamshire; they had one son. White died, a widower, at his home at Farnham Common, Buckinghamshire, on 5 February 1925, aged seventy-seven. In his will he asked to be commemorated by a simple wooden cross, inscribed only with his name, the date of his death, and the words, 'for England'. 


@@@@@


doc= 39920


Albery, Sir Donald Arthur Rolleston (1914-1988), theatre manager, was born on 19 June 1914 at 33 Cumberland Terrace, Regent's Park, London, the elder son and second of the four children of Sir Bronson James Albery (1881-1971), theatre director, and his wife, Una Gwynn (died 1981), daughter of Thomas William Rolleston, Irish scholar and poet. He was educated at Alpine College, Switzerland, and joined the family firm of Wyndham and Albery, owners and managers of three London theatres: the Criterion in Piccadilly Circus, and Wyndham's and the New (after 1972 the Albery), both built by his grandmother, the actress Mary Charlotte Moore, and Sir Charles Wyndham, her partner and second husband. His first position of importance, as general manager of Sadler's Wells Ballet in London (1941-5), was complicated by wartime emergencies. On one occasion he arrived in Bath to find that the trucks containing scenery and costumes were immobilized in a siding close to unexploded bombs. 
On first nights at his theatres Donald Albery, a tall lean figure, would be seen walking about the auditorium with a slight limp. He was prematurely bald and had a long narrow face, and in later years his resemblance to his father became more marked. He inherited the family business sense, though his taste in plays was modern, whereas Sir Bronson Albery was known for his classical productions. In 1953 he formed his own company, Donmar, and his choice of dramatists included Graham Greene, Tennessee Williams, Edward Albee, Jean Anouilh, and Iris Murdoch (adapted by J. B. Priestley). Greene's 'The Living Room', with Dorothy Tutin, was his favourite production, and 'I am a Camera', John van Druten's adaptation from Christopher Isherwood, gave him 'enormous pleasure'. 
Although he ran his theatres with an eye to commercial success, Albery could spring surprises and on occasion was prepared to take risks. He had youthful memories of going to Paris with his parents to see the Compagnie des Quinze, which Bronson admired and brought to London knowing that their appeal would be limited. On hearing about Samuel Beckett's 'Waiting for Godot', Albery went to Paris and decided to put it on in London. He hoped to cast star names in the roles of the tramps, but after two years of failing to persuade any of them -- including Laurence Olivier and Ralph Richardson -- the play opened at the Arts Theatre Club in 1955, directed by the young Peter Hall and without stars. In a daring move, he transferred it to the Criterion in the heart of the West End, where it survived for nearly 300 performances, though the audiences were frankly puzzled. Many left at the interval; the performances were disturbed by shouts of 'Take it off!', 'Rubbish!', and 'It's a disgrace!' The run was dogged by illness in the cast and inadequate understudies. In these unhappy circumstances the high teas provided by the management between the Saturday performances were greatly appreciated. 
During the late 1950s and the 1960s the idiosyncratic productions of Joan Littlewood at the Theatre Royal, Stratford East, appealed to Albery. Under his management they moved to the West End and some even went to New York -- another example of his adventurous spirit. These included 'A Taste of Honey' and Brendan Behan's 'The Hostage' (both 1959) and 'Fings ain't what they used t'be' (1960). Out of gratitude to Joan Littlewood he presented a crystal chandelier to the Theatre Royal. This connection brought him his greatest success, the musical 'Oliver!' (1960) by Lionel Bart (who also wrote the score of 'Fings ain't'). 'Oliver!' had been turned down by three managements and opened so disastrously at Wimbledon that doubts were expressed about the wisdom of taking it to the West End, where advance bookings (at the New) amounted to just $145. A new musical director had to be found at the last moment, but the first night changed these gloomy expectations, and Sean Kenny's revolving set, on which everything took place, was rapturously received. 'Oliver!' ran for 2618 performances and has since been revived. 
In 1960, against strong competition from Bernard Delfont, Albery added the Piccadilly to the Wyndham-Albery empire. Thus 3360 seats were offered to the public at every performance in these four theatres. At one point, when it looked as if the Criterion, the oldest of them, would be endangered by a Piccadilly Circus development scheme, Albery leapt eagerly into the fray and fought hard -- enjoying the battle -- and finally won. After 'Oliver!' he produced several other musicals: in 1966 a failure, 'Jorrocks', which lost $70,000; and in 1968 a success, 'Man of La Mancha', which called for extensive structural alterations to the Piccadilly stage, and so, by special permission of the lord chamberlain, the safety curtain was never lowered during the run. Albery was the first manager to investigate the tourist trade in relation to the theatre. This pioneering survey proved beyond doubt that without overseas visitors the theatres would suffer irreparably (though this situation had been suspected for years). 
When Sir Bronson Albery died in 1971 Donald Albery took control. In 1977 he became the third member of his family to receive a knighthood; in the following year he sold the theatres and retired to Monte Carlo. His son Ian carried on for a time, later becoming chief executive of the rebuilt Sadler's Wells Theatre. During the Albery regime their theatres were regarded as being among the best run in London, and the two back-to-back theatres, Wyndham's in Charing Cross Road and the Albery in St Martin's Lane, housed some of the most interesting productions of the period. From 1958 to 1978 Donald Albery was also a director of Anglia Television. 
Albery was married three times. On 7 July 1934 he married Rubina (Ruby), daughter of Archibald Curie Macgilchrist, medical officer in India; she died in 1956 as a result of injuries incurred in a Second World War air raid. Ian Albery was their only son. In 1946, the year of his divorce from Ruby, he married, on 1 February, (Cicely Margaret) Heather ('b'. 1915/16), daughter of Brigadier-General Reginald Harvey Henderson Boys. They had two sons, one of whom was Nicholas Bronson Albery (1948-2001), social activist and charity founder, and a daughter. The marriage was dissolved in 1974, and in 1978 in New York he married Nobuko, daughter of Keiji Uenishi, businessman, and former wife of Professor Ivan Morris. Albery died in Monte Carlo on 14 September 1988. 
Wendy Trewin', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39921


Anstey, Edgar Harold Macfarlane (1907-1987), documentary film-maker, was born in Watford, Hertfordshire, on 16 February 1907, the younger child and only son of Percy Edgar Macfarlane Anstey and his wife, Kate Clowes. His father was a chef, distinguished in his occupation. Edgar Anstey attended Watford grammar school and then Birkbeck College, London University, graduating in sciences. In June 1926 he was appointed junior scientific assistant at the Building Research Establishment, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, where he served for five years, 'eagerly looking for something more creative to do', developing a keen interest in film, and joining the London Film Society, which gave him the opportunity to see films by Soviet and continental avant-garde directors. In 1931 he left the security of the civil service to join the nascent documentary film unit at the Empire Marketing Board under John Grierson. 
Anstey's creative career fell into two phases. Until 1949 he followed the mercurial path of Grierson, making the types of documentaries which Grierson was currently championing, and moving posts in accordance with Grierson's wishes. 'Housing Problems' (1935) and 'Enough to Eat?' (1936), both made jointly with Arthur Elton, were landmarks in the development of the documentary, being the first (and effectively the only) Griersonian documentaries addressing social issues with party political implications. They employed the starkly pedagogical, unvisual style, deliberately devoid of aesthetically pleasing features, which Grierson argued for at the time. Following Grierson's interest in the kind of screen journalism developed by the American series 'March of Time' -- designed not so much to report but to editorialize about contemporary issues -- Anstey became the London editor of 'March of Time' and then went to the USA as foreign editor (1936-8). 'March of Time' issues touching on British concerns, such as appeasement, were banned in Britain, much to the regret of Winston Churchill. 
Always a patriot and a family man first, Anstey returned to Britain as war was approaching, though he loved the United States and was set fair for a career there offering both greater scope and better financial prospects. He was turned down for military service, much to his anger, because he was more useful to the war effort as a film-maker. Between 1940 and 1945 he directed, produced, or supervised the making of some seventy films, concentrating on instructional films, the most unglamorous but most useful type of film during the war. 
After the war something went wrong with the documentary movement. There was a loss of purpose, creative development, and young talent -- Grierson called it 'the dereliction'. Some of the leading figures -- such as Harry Watt and Paul Rotha -- tried their hand, with varying success, at feature films and television; others, such as Stuart Legg and Basil Wright, gradually gave up film-making altogether, and Grierson himself took charge of a feature-film studio (Group Three) and never returned to documentary production. Anstey turned to writing in 1947, publishing a book on the development of film techniques in Britain, and worked as a film critic for 'The Spectator' (1946-9), but unlike the others he then returned to production, with drive and purpose undimmed. In 1949 he became films officer for the British Transport Commission and established there a new documentary film unit, British Transport Films, which he headed until his retirement in 1974. Also in 1949 he married (Marjorie) Daphne, who worked with Grierson at the National Film Board of Canada; she was the daughter of Leslie Dalrymple Lilly, of the Canadian Bank of Commerce and the Lilly Adjustment Agency. They had a son and a daughter. 
Thus began the second phase of Anstey's creative career. His unit succeeded in attracting young talent, such as that of John Schlesinger, and adopted new technologies and creative ideas as they came along. In addition to making many instructional, informational, and public relations films of impeccable technical standards as well as cost-efficiency, it produced a regular flow of documentaries, gaining some of the highest awards nationally and internationally, including those of the British Film Academy and the Venice film festival, and the Oscar in Hollywood. Anstey showed that the solution to the 'dereliction' of the documentary was to give the audience aesthetic enjoyment as well as ideas, and that those 'arty' and 'commercial' techniques which make films attractive need not be incompatible -- as Grierson had so disastrously argued -- with the documentary purpose. 'Journey into Spring' (1957), 'Between the Tides' (1958), 'Under Night Streets' (1958), 'Terminus' (1961), and 'Wild Wings' (1965) are some of the most mature and flawless manifestations of the British documentary film genre. As Anstey later put it with characteristic simplicity: 'Without art there is no effective communication, anyway'. 
Anstey was also an outstanding manager, of people as well as organizations, and a much liked and effective committee man, lecturer, and public speaker. He served as chairman of the British Film Academy (1956 and 1967), president of the British and the International Scientific Film associations (1961-3), and governor of the British Film Institute (1965-75), and was adjunct professor at Temple University, Philadelphia (from 1982). He was appointed OBE in 1969, but it pleased him particularly to have been made an honorary member of the Association of Cinematographic and Television Technicians and of the Retired Railway Officers. In appearance he was the image of the tall, slim Englishman, with a small moustache and regular features, made for the classic Savile Row suit; in manner he was courteous, rather formal at first, but with great warmth and charm. His private life was entirely devoid of the eccentric preferences, tastes, and lifestyles common to those in the film world. Anstey died suddenly on 26 September 1987 at the Royal Free Hospital, London. He had been suffering from leukaemia, which sapped his physical energies, but his intellectual zest and vigour remained unimpaired to the last. 
Nicholas Pronay', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39922


Ashton, Sir Frederick William Mallandaine (1904-1988), choreographer and director, was born on 17 September 1904 in Guayaquil, Ecuador, the fourth of the five children of George Ashton (1864-1924) and his second wife, Georgiana (1869-1939), daughter of Henry Fulcher and his wife, Edith. His father was manager of the Central and South American Cable Company and vice-consul at the British embassy in Guayaquil. In 1907 the family moved to Lima, Peru, where Ashton went to the Dominican school of La Recoleta; from 1914, when his parents returned to Guayaquil, he attended the school established for children of the English colony. With a surrogate family, he grew up in a socially exciting life dominated by the seaside pleasures of the Pacific Ocean; and in 1917, seeing a performance by Anna Pavlova, he realized that he wanted to be a dancer. 
Sent home to Dover College in England in 1919, Ashton was inevitably miserable in a British public-school environment -- as again when called up into the RAF during the Second World War. There were compensations, however, in school drama performances and London holidays with a full diet of plays and art exhibitions. In 1921 he was impressed by Isadora Duncan, to whom he paid later choreographic tribute (1976) with 'Five Brahms Waltzes in the Manner of Isadora Duncan'. Influences from every early cultural experience, from Peruvian dance rhythms to theatre trends of the 1920s, can be traced in his professional career. While still at school he came to terms both with his own homosexuality and with a yearning for an ideal partner: 'I was very romantic... and had the Greek point of view about the Ideal One' (Kavanagh, 43). 
Ashton's general academic backwardness meant that in 1921 his father, visiting Britain, decided he should go to work in London with an import-export firm where the fact that he was trilingual (speaking English, Spanish, and French) was an asset. In January 1924, however, he was faced with a family tragedy and a complete change of life. His father killed himself, leaving his widow financially dependent on her older sons, who ran a successful business, Casa Carlos Ashton, in Guayaquil. Mrs Ashton moved to London to be with Fred and his younger sister, Edith. 
Ashton's never-forgotten determination to be a dancer now surfaced. He applied to Leonide Massine for a pupil's audition and, rather surprisingly given his age (twenty), he was taken on: in Britain, male dancers were sufficiently rare to be worth trying out. Ashton applied himself strenuously to ballet lessons, and when Massine left London, he was transferred to Marie Rambert, whose small ballet school was to become a fruitful nursery for British dancers and choreographers. Ashton began to make important contacts, and saw performances by the Diaghilev Ballet and other outstanding visiting artists. He made his own performing debut on 10 April 1925, in a variety show at the Palace Pier, Brighton. 
Family problems again intervened. Casa Carlos Ashton failed dramatically, and Ashton and his mother became really impoverished. His lessons with Rambert, however, were free, and in 1926 he created his first little ballet, 'The Tragedy of Fashion', for her. He began to get work composing dances for operas, musicals, and plays. These included Purcell's 'The Fairy Queen', performed by the Purcell Opera Society (1927); a ballet, 'Mars and Venus', in the play 'Jew Suss', which reached the Duke of York's Theatre in London (1929); dance arrangements in 'A Masque of Poetry and Music' produced by George Rylands at the Arts Theatre Club (1930); and dances in a British film, 'Dance Pretty Lady', directed by Anthony Asquith (1932). 
In 1928, with other aspiring male dancers of his generation, Ashton was a member of Ida Rubinstein's company in Paris, for which Bronislava Nijinska was choreographer. He had admired Nijinska's Diaghilev Ballet productions, and working with her was a never forgotten privilege. Perhaps the most notable act of his later artistic directorship of the Royal Ballet (1963-70) was when he persuaded her to stage revivals of 'Les biches' and 'Les noces' at Covent Garden. 
In 1930 Rambert occasionally presented her posse of promising dance talents at the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith, and there Ashton staged an innovative ballet, 'Capriol Suite', that stood up well to later revivals. The music was an unusual suite by the composer Peter Warlock based on sixteenth-century music quoted in Thoinot Arbeau's book 'Orchesographie'. Ashton's choreography drew on illustrations of dances of the period -- 'basse danse', pavane, 'tordion', and 'bransle' -- smoothly mixing robust masculine leaps with courtly duets. During these Lyric Theatre seasons he met another of his idolized prima ballerinas, Tamara Karsavina. Ashton was much influenced by her: 'When she danced with us we watched her every movement, admired her discipline, her exquisite manners, her humanity and her approach to the public' (Vaughan, 41). 
On 16 February 1931 Rambert, with the collaboration of her husband Ashley Dukes and the ballet critic Arnold Haskell, launched the Ballet Club at the tiny Mercury Theatre in Notting Hill Gate, with Alicia Markova as ballerina. Engaged by Diaghilev at fourteen, Markova had experienced a decline in her career after his death in 1929. Now, dancing for both the Ballet Club and Ninette de Valois's young Vic-Wells Ballet, she originated exquisite Rambert miniatures composed by Ashton and, at the Vic-Wells, had the chance to dance the great traditional ballerina roles. 
Ashton was now Rambert's key choreographer, as well as a leading performer, and he partnered Markova in Michel Fokine's 'Les sylphides' on the opening night. During the next few years his ballets for the Ballet Club included 'La peri' (1931), 'The Lady of Shalott' (1931), 'Foyer de danse' (1932), and 'Les masques' (1933). The first three were designed by a fellow dancer, William Chappell, the last by Sophie Fedorovich. These two designers remained closely associated with Ashton over the years, Fedorovich establishing herself as his finest design collaborator with such ballets as 'Dante Sonata' (1940) and 'Symphonic Variations' (1946). After her sudden death in 1953, Ashton inherited some $35,000 from Fedorovich's estate (with which he bought Chandos Lodge in Eye, Suffolk). 
From 1930, along with most of the British ballet world, Ashton was connected with an influential organization called the Camargo Society. Comparable in aims with the well-established play-performing Stage Society, the Camargo presented occasional programmes in London over many months, launching new ballets, some of which were added to the repertory of the Ballet Club or the Vic-Wells Ballet. One of these, Ashton's 'Facade', to music by William Walton (1931), was adopted by both groups, and continues to amuse twenty-first-century audiences. 
Other Ashton ballets for the Camargo drew on his enthusiasms for Latin American and jazz dance. 'A Day in a Southern Port' (1931, later called 'Rio Grande'), in a cast led by Lydia Lopokova and Markova, was danced to a score by Constant Lambert. As musical director and conductor to Sadler's Wells Ballet, Lambert became a close colleague of Ashton. 'High Yellow' (1932) was a collaboration with Buddy Bradley, set to music by Spike Hughes. Ashton and Bradley had earlier worked on the musicals staged by Charles B. Cochran, and throughout the 1930s Ashton continued to make major contributions to revues and musicals. In this period it was only through West End theatre engagements that British dancers could survive financially, as both Rambert and de Valois were operating on the slenderest of shoestrings. 
The Camargo was an important meeting place for choreographers, dancers, composers, designers, and writers; in the 1930s and 1940s the London artistic community was a close network of practitioners in all the arts and their keenly interested and informed patrons. Camargo programmes included not only music by Lambert, Walton, Vaughan Williams, and Arthur Bliss but designs by Vanessa Bell, Edward Burra, Duncan Grant, Gwen Raverat, and John Armstrong. Leading roles were taken by Lopokova, Markova, Ninette de Valois, Phyllis Bedells, Maude Lloyd, Anton Dolin, and Stanley Judson. 
De Valois had already, in 1931, asked Ashton to set a comedy piece, 'Regatta', for the Vic-Wells Ballet (she danced the leading role), and in 1933 he composed another work for her company, the ballet-divertissement 'Les rendezvous'. With Markova and the former Diaghilev dancer Stanislas Idzikowski as principals, and a Lambert-arranged score from music by D.-F.-E. Auber, Ashton created an enjoyably effervescent production that remains in the Royal Ballet repertory. De Valois, Judson, and the Vic-Wells's newly acquired young man from Australia, Robert Helpmann, sparkled in the pas de trois. As a result of the ballet's success, in 1935 Ashton became resident choreographer and dancer with the Vic-Wells Ballet, beginning his lifelong association with the company (which eventually became the Royal Ballet). Despite his homosexuality, Ashton in 1936-7 had an affair with a rich American socialite, Alice von Hofmannsthal ('nee' Astor). Alice had two subsequent marriages, but continued to love Ashton, and left him $2500 on her death in 1956. 
Ashton was invited by the composer Virgil Thomson to work on a distinctive project in the USA. This was the opera 'Four Saints in Three Acts' (with music by Thomson, libretto by Gertrude Stein), which reached New York on 20 February 1934. For the dance scenes in this he worked with black dancers, and drew substantially on Peruvian memories. He later described the choreography as 'not operatic but ritualistic and ordered, not balletic but ceremonial' (Vaughan, 100). He commented that it succeeded 'because I am devout and the Negroes are devout, and I am plastic and they are plastic' (ibid., 101). Although the mainstream of Ashton's career was in Britain, there were to be other transatlantic collaborations in the future. He created 'Devil's Holiday' for the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo at the Metropolitan Opera in New York in 1939. For New York City Ballet there were 'Illuminations' (a haunting realization in dance of Rimbaud's poems and Britten's music) in 1950 and 'Picnic at Tintagel' in 1952. 
When Ashton joined the Vic-Wells Ballet in September 1935 he joined a group of artists who remained lifelong friends and associates. William Chappell and Leslie Edwards had been Rambert dancers, as had Harold Turner. Helpmann had worked with him over 'Les rendezvous'. De Valois and Lambert he had known with the Camargo. Without any great technical ability, as a leading dancer Ashton always made a mark in specific roles such as Pierrot in 'Carnaval', the Dago in 'Facade', or, much later, the meek Ugly Sister in 'Cinderella'. As a choreographer he was everything de Valois (and British ballet) needed, and he was given ample opportunities to develop and strengthen his skills. In this he was fortunate, as also with the outstanding musical help and guidance he received from Constant Lambert. The policy adopted by de Valois resembled that of Rambert, and both derived from Diaghilev -- the creation of short ballets, each one based on a stylistic unity of dance, music, and design -- and this suited Ashton very well. His opening work at Sadler's Wells (1935) was a version of Stravinsky's 'Le baiser de la fee' (he had danced in Nijinska's ballet to that score), designed by Fedorovich, in which the beautiful Pearl Argyle (earlier with Rambert) was the Fairy, and a new little girl with a very special destiny, Margot Fonteyn, was the jilted Fiancee. 
De Valois had specifically asked Ashton to accept this casting. Markova, whose status at Sadler's Wells as prima ballerina had made possible the historic full productions of 'Giselle', 'The Nutcracker', and 'Swan Lake', was leaving. Foreseeing this, de Valois decided to develop the potential of the inexperienced Fonteyn, so her role in 'Baiser' was followed in 1936 by the Woman in Balldress in Ashton's 'Apparitions'. Helpmann had the central role of the Poet, thus inaugurating a highly compatible and greatly admired partnership that was of inestimable value to the company. 

'Apparitions', exquisitely designed by Cecil Beaton and with an evocative Liszt score arranged by Lambert, reflected in its romantic beauty an important aspect of Ashton's taste. This same quality was seen at various times over the years in other works, particularly in the now much better known 'Marguerite and Armand', set for Fonteyn and Rudolf Nureyev in 1963. But in 1937, after Ashton had composed a stunning and durable ballet-divertissement in 'Les patineurs', another feature of his talent was represented by 'A Wedding Bouquet'. Sophisticated wit was allied to a refreshing streak of fun. The original cast was perfection: the coy Bride of Mary Honer, the distraught Julia of Fonteyn, the splendidly tipsy Josephine of June Brae, and Helpmann's brilliantly delineated philandering Bridegroom, were all absolutely in tune with Gertrude Stein's idiosyncratic text and Lord Berners's flexible score. 
The two years leading up to the Second World War were marked by one more notable work for the Vic-Wells: 'Horoscope'. A fine Lambert score, coolly exquisite designs by Fedorovich, and limpid performances by Pamela May (as the Moon) and Fonteyn and Michael Somes (as the Young Man and the Young Woman) ensured its success. 
When war broke out in September 1939, Ashton had recently returned from the USA, where he had choreographed 'Devil's Holiday' for the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo. He had not taken up a suggestion made by Richard Pleasant about working in New York for the newly launched Ballet Theatre, but now the offer was repeated in a letter that he never received. However, his deep sense of patriotism made it unlikely that he would have left Britain at that time. Remaining with Sadler's Wells Ballet (as it became known), he captured in 'Dante Sonata' (1940) the deep feeling for a struggle between good and evil that characterized the national mood of the time. Lambert found the ideal music in Liszt's 'Apres une lecture du Dante', while Fedorovich's swirling scenic lines and her black and white costumes, inspired by John Flaxman's engravings illustrating Dante's 'Inferno', reflected the choreographic contrasts between the turbulence of the Children of Darkness (Helpmann and June Brae) and the poignant serenity of the Children of Light (Fonteyn, Somes, and May). In the final tableau Helpmann and Somes were separately lifted to create an image of two crucifixions, implying an eternal confrontation. In May that year Ashton and the company gained first-hand experience of war's perils -- they were appearing in the Netherlands at the time of the German invasion, and were able only with difficulty to return to Britain. The score, scenery, and costumes for 'Horoscope' were lost; the ballet was never revived. 
Ashton's next ballet, 'The Wanderer' (1941), was a departure in style, more akin than any other of his works to Massine's symphonic ballets. Set to Schubert's fantasia in C major, it had stark and startling designs by Graham Sutherland in browns, blacks, and reds. Although portrayed through predominantly athletic and gymnastic dance, it also had a 'programme' of the emotional development of a central male character (magnetically portrayed by Helpmann). Carefree youth, deep and tender physical love, a fascination with 'worldly glitter' (Fonteyn in an almost circus-like characterization), doubts and depressions, were finalized into a resolution of all the elements. Ashton preferred happy endings; possibly Marguerite Gautier's demise was the only occasion on which he dealt with a balletic death. 
Sadler's Wells Ballet (under de Valois's able direction) determinedly coped with the manifold changes caused to everyone in Britain by the war. The regular calling-up of men to the forces was something de Valois accepted without question, and Ashton's time came in June 1941. He did not have a hard war, however: as an RAF officer he worked on analysing aerial photographs and as an intelligence officer. He was also given special leave to choreograph a ballet. Based on a laborious scenario by Doris Langley-Moore from Spenser's 'The Faerie Queene', with a score by William Walton and designs by John Piper, 'The Quest' never came properly to life, in spite of some episodes of quality choreography. More leave, in 1944, allowed Ashton to revive the nostalgic 'Nocturne' (created in 1936). He was released from the RAF at the end of the war in Europe in 1945. 
Glory years were to follow. From 1946 to the end of his life, Ashton found his position (in spite of a number of poorish creations) securely established as Britain's finest choreographer. His innate sense of insecurity, however, meant that he needed constant reassurance and praise from fellow artists, from critics, from the public, and from his friends and lovers. This trait, and the extreme jealousy and bitterness resulting from it, were disastrous flaws in his personal character; but they in no way lessen his supremacy as a choreographer. 
Sadler's Wells Ballet moved to the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, in February 1946, and in April Ashton's new work was a masterpiece. 'Symphonic Variations', to music by Franck and with lucent designs by Fedorovich, was a superb balletic reflection of the score, danced with breathtaking perfection by six dancers led by Fonteyn and Somes. An elaborate early working plan, involving a scenario about a symbolic marriage between woman as winter and man as summer, was fortunately abandoned. After 'Symphonic Variations', and another connoisseur's joy, 'Scenes de ballet' (1948), however, Ashton's output was for years distinctly uneven. In the 1950s he spent a good deal of time outside Sadler's Wells Ballet, choreographing for the Ballets de Paris, the New York City Ballet, and the Royal Danish Ballet and working on dances for the film 'The Tales of Hoffmann' (1951). He also directed operas at Covent Garden (Massenet's 'Manon', Britten's 'Albert Herring', and Gluck's 'Orpheus' with Kathleen Ferrier). 
Urged by de Valois, Ashton tackled his first full evening ballet, 'Cinderella', to the Prokofiev score, in 1948. The production was (and remains) full of weaknesses, apart from some fine passages of dance (the masque of the seasons, Cinderella's solos, and the act II pas de deux). It was also embellished by the largely improvised (and later established) comedy of the bullying and meek sisters as devised for Helpmann and Ashton himself. 'Sylvia' (1952), the next three-act ballet, worked even less well, but with 'Romeo and Juliet', staged for the Royal Danish Ballet in 1955, Ashton was more in command of the length. Revived, and slightly revised, in 1985 for English National Ballet, it is one of the most rewarding of the many versions of the Prokofiev score. 'Ondine' (1958), to music by Hans Werner Henze, succeeded because it was a superb vehicle for the mature Fonteyn. Of his one-act ballets of the 1950s the most lasting (created for Fonteyn and Somes) were 'Daphnis and Chloe' (1951) and 'Birthday Offering' (1956). 'Tiresias' (1951) failed because its composer, Lambert, near the end of his life, was unable to edit and orchestrate a score from which Ashton drew little inspiration. 
However, in 1960 came another masterpiece, of a very different kind from 'Symphonic Variations'. 'La fille mal gardee' goes far back in ballet history: it was first created by Jean Dauberval in Bordeaux in 1789. In 1960 Ashton used a score arranged by John Lanchbery from music by Ferdinand Herold and others. He adhered closely to the original scenario, but created deliciously inventive new choreography that was the happiest amalgam of classical ballet and English folk-dance, while Osbert Lancaster's delightful designs were firmly related to French country life. Joyous and technically secure performances came from Nadia Nerina and David Blair, and there were fine character studies by Stanley Holden (Widow Simone) and Alexander Grant (Alain). The pleasures of 'Fille' are many. Each act has dance highlights couched in terms of pure classical technique which at the same time cleverly express character and situation; folk-dance is naturally introduced for stick or maypole ensembles, while pleasurable mime keeps the narrative line flowing without interruption. 
In Ashton's personal life, the two decades after the war were full of intense emotional experiences -- and the ups and downs of love affairs and bitter hatreds undoubtedly influenced his creativity and choreographic output. In these years he had a series of discreet attachments to younger men, including the dancers Brian Shaw and Alexander Grant and an American admirer, Tony Lizzut. A friend later described how 'his emotional life ate him up but it all went into the work' (Kavanagh, 317). 
From 1965, however, Ashton had a more established partner. This was Martyn Thomas (died 1985), a 23-year-old interior decorator. Despite having 'something of the cad about him', for Ashton, Thomas was 'a lifeforce whose influence in the final phase of his career proved as intoxicating and rejuvenating as Nureyev's had been for Fonteyn' (Kavanagh, 489). 
If Ashton were to be remembered by only two ballets, they would undoubtedly be 'Symphonic Variations' and 'La fille mal gardee'. However, during the 1960s other charming works followed. There were 'The Two Pigeons' (1961), for Lynn Seymour and Christopher Gable, and 'The Dream' (1964) (another delight in its choreographic diversity and mastery of comedy), for Anthony Dowell and Antoinette Sibley. In 1965 there was the elegant pas de trois 'Monotones II'. In 1968 he produced a popular success in 'Jazz Calendar'; and later the same year came one of his greatest ballets, 'Enigma Variations (My Friends Pictured Within)', which was quintessential Ashton in its realization. 

'Enigma Variations', an interpretation in dance of Sir Edward Elgar's life, set to his work of this name, grew out of a project conceived many years before by a student of the Royal College of Art, Julia Trevelyan Oman, and taken up by Ashton in 1966. For a composite scene, and with detailed designs that would have swamped any lesser choreographer, he set out to compose dances of such subtlety and beauty that every element fell into place. Individualities became clear -- Dorabella's slight stammer was translated into exquisite hesitancies of pointe work by Antoinette Sibley, and Troyte's tempestuous pace was magnificently caught in the brilliant high-speed solo, first performed by Anthony Dowell. Ashton was also an expert at 'conversational' dance -- choreographed movement that catches the mood of a conversation -- and the roles of Elgar, his wife, and his friend and publisher, A. J. Jaeger, are built up in this way. This ballet, in its artistic daring and its deep appreciation of the English character, could have been created by no one but Ashton. 
In 1963 Ashton's career was enlarged by his appointment to follow de Valois as artistic director of what was now the Royal Ballet. He was the obvious choice, although it was perhaps not what he had wanted. De Valois carefully ensured that he had good back-up from John Hart and Somes on the administrative side and John Field as artistic director of the touring company, and these arrangements worked well during the seven years of Ashton's directorship. The Covent Garden company maintained its international reputation for fine 'home-grown' dancers and a memorable repertory. The touring company built up a strong and attractive identity of its own. At Covent Garden, as well as his own new productions, Ashton brought in not only the Nijinska ballets but Nureyev's staging of the 'shades' scene from 'La bayadere'. 
The basis of Ashton's choreographic style was supplied by his varied background. Strongly classical in foundation, leaning towards the lyrical mood of Fokine's 'Dying Swan' (for Pavlova) and 'Le spectre de la rose' (for Karsavina and Nijinsky), it was augmented by many new ideas from the Diaghilev choreographers Massine, Nijinsky, and Nijinska; it adopted fluent non-classical elements from Isadora Duncan and other contemporary free-dance artists; it incorporated Latin-American dance ideas from his South American upbringing; and it included a clever sense of comedy that was very much his own. The final amalgam contrived to be essentially English -- as always, a state of the art difficult to analyse or pinpoint but nevertheless unmistakable. 
Ashton's 'oeuvre' can be divided up into categories: highly romantic ('Apparitions' and 'Marguerite and Armand'); plotless classical ('Symphonic Variations' and 'Scenes de ballet'); contrasted comedies ('La fille mal gardee' and 'A Wedding Bouquet'); 'pieces d'occasion' ('Birthday Offering' and 'Rhapsody'); and ballet-divertissements ('Les patineurs' and 'Les rendezvous'). Inevitably there were failures and semi-successes over the years, but all his works related to, and drew sustenance from, their musical scores. Sensitivity to music, indeed, was the mainspring of his choreography, and his translations of a wide range of composers (from Satie and Stravinsky to Elgar and Britten) were rich in fresh and varied ideas. 
Equally outstanding was Ashton's flair for creating roles that reflected the abilities of dancers. He was never at a loss in perceiving and exploiting natural strengths, whether of physique and technical endowment or of emotional and histrionic interpretation. Even small solos, such as the four 'season' variations in 'Cinderella', perfectly matched the originating cast. Time and again, he revealed the essence of dancers, to themselves and to their audiences, with extraordinary perception. 
Fonteyn certainly was an inspiration to Ashton, as she developed from the teenage soloist to the universally acclaimed prima ballerina, and without the ballets he created for her much of her genius would have remained unexplored. But he was generous to many others. For Markova he created Rambert ballets such as 'Les masques' and Vic-Wells ballets such as 'Les rendezvous'. For Nadia Nerina he set 'La fille mal gardee'. For Antoinette Sibley and Anthony Dowell there was 'The Dream'. For Lynn Seymour there was 'A Month in the Country'. For Harold Turner there was 'Les patineurs'. For Helpmann, the most versatile of his interpreters, the creations ranged from the witty Bridegroom of 'A Wedding Bouquet' through the passionate turmoil of 'Dante Sonata' to the unforgettable comedy of the dominant Ugly Sister in 'Cinderella'. 
In 1970, against his will, it was arranged for Ashton to retire, the post of artistic director of the Royal Ballet having already been offered to Kenneth MacMillan. Old friends and colleagues arranged a farewell gala that has never been equalled for its high professional standard and style. A selection adeptly made by Michael Somes, John Hart, and Leslie Edwards from Ashton's choreographic career, smoothly produced and admirably danced, was accompanied by a narration eloquently written by William Chappell and brilliantly spoken on stage by Robert Helpmann. 
Ashton worked in 1970 on the film 'Tales of Beatrix Potter' (released in 1971), a lovingly crafted tribute to that author's best-known books. Here again, English countryside and English values (English, as distinct from British) were handled with affection. He himself was glimpsed, briefly, as Mrs Tiggy-Winkle, and among the smooth course of the scenes the most memorable episodes were those of Jemima Puddleduck, Jeremy Fisher, and the Two Bad Mice. A posthumous transfer of the ballet to the stage has proved popular, but has little of the film's special charm. 
Creatively speaking, lean years set in after Ashton's undesired retirement. His only major ballet, in 1976, was 'A Month in the Country', designed by Trevelyan Oman and set to a Chopin score arranged by John Lanchbery, conductor of the Royal Ballet. Created by Lynn Seymour as Natalia Petrovna and Anthony Dowell as Beliaev, it was as striking for the minor roles as the major ones. Ashton's diversity and ingenuity were apparent, for instance, in an allegro pas de quatre for Seymour, Dowell, Wayne Sleep as Kolia, and Denise Nunn as Vera, in which each character was acutely revealed. After 1976 only slight (but clearly Ashton-stamped) 'pieces d'occasion' appeared apart from 'Rhapsody', created for the eightieth birthday of Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother, in 1980. A pure dance work to Rachmaninov's 'Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini', this was a vehicle for the virtuoso Mikhail Baryshnikov, although there was a delicate and difficult female leading role for Lesley Collier. An outrageously over-the-top comedy, 'Varii capricci', was choreographed in haste for the Royal Ballet's New York season in 1983, but Ashton's final short work, created for the Royal Ballet School to dance, was a true expression of the man. Personally devoted to the queen mother and her daughters Queen Elizabeth II and Princess Margaret, Ashton linked Elgar's 'Nursery Suite' (dedicated to the two young princesses in 1930) with a memory of his own. He had seen, from the top of a London bus, these two little girls at play in their Piccadilly garden; now, to celebrate Queen Elizabeth's sixtieth birthday in April 1986, he depicted with a lifetime's choreographic mastery the mood of the 1930s as well as the royal sisters' different characters and potential, in subtly chosen movements. 
In November 1985 Ashton's partner, Martyn Thomas, was killed in a car crash. It was a tragedy from which Ashton found it hard to recover. Thereafter he looked 'permanently tired, very small and dishevelled' (Kavanagh, 590). He died in his sleep on 19 August 1988, in his much loved country home, Chandos Lodge, and was buried on 24 August at St Mary's Church, Yaxley, Suffolk. An impressive service of thanksgiving at Westminster Abbey followed three months later. A moving tribute came by letter from Fonteyn in Panama, describing 'his extraordinary understanding of the human heart and mind and his ability to illuminate them through his own art form' (ibid., 598). In his will Ashton left legacies and the royalties from particular ballets to the dancers with whom he had worked closely. 
In his lifetime, Ashton was far from being a prophet without honour in his own country. He was knighted in 1962, became a Companion of Honour in 1970, and was appointed to the Order of Merit in 1977. France appointed him to the Legion d'honneur (1960) and Denmark to the order of Dannebrog (1964). He received honorary doctorates of music from both Oxford and London universities. Back in 1959, when the Royal Academy of Dancing gave him their Queen Elizabeth II coronation award, he told them it was 'the first award I have ever received in my life', and ended his speech with thanks to 'the legions of dancers who have been through my hands and who, to use a medical term, have had to submit to my manipulative choreography' (Vaughan, 18). 'Manipulative choreography' was a neat phrase. Ashton indeed manipulated dancers of every level to the greater glory of British ballet. 


