@@@@@


doc= 39923


Baddeley, Hermione Youlanda Ruby Clinton (1906-1986), actress, was born on 13 November 1906 in Broseley, Shropshire, the youngest of four daughters (there were no sons) of William Herman Clinton-Baddeley, composer and journalist, and his wife, Louise Rosalie Bourdin. A descendant both of Sir Henry Clinton (1738?-1795), a British general in the American War of Independence, and of Robert Baddeley (1733-1794), the actor and pastry-cook who bequeathed the annual fruit cake to the cast playing at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, she combined aspects of both these ancestors in her long and eventful career. Her immediate senior sister, Angela Baddeley (1904-1976), was also a successful actress. Their theatrical education was at the Margaret Morris School of Dancing in Chelsea, London, where the pupils considered themselves vastly superior to the more competitive Italia Conti children. 
Hermione Baddeley's first great success was in 1923, under Basil Dean's management, in Charles McEvoy's 'The Likes of Her', at the St Martin's Theatre, in which she played a badly behaved waif from the slums who had a famous plate-smashing scene. The next year Dean cast her as a murderous Arab urchin in 'The Forest', by John Galsworthy. Having established a career as a dramatic actress she switched to comedy in 'The Punch Bowl' (1924), a revue at the Duke of York's, where she danced with Sonny Hale and credited her formidable comic technique to lessons learned from the comedian Alfred Lester. She joined The Co-optimists, at the Palace Theatre, in the same year. In 'On with the Dance' (1925), Noel Coward's revue for Charles Cochran, she created (with Alice Delysia) Coward's topically satirical 'poor little rich girl'. This was the first of four productions for Cochran and then, among a number of undistinguished comedies, farces, and musicals, she played Sara in James Bridie's 'Tobias and the Angel' (Westminster, 1932). She had a long run in 'The Greeks Had a Word for It', which transferred from Robert Newton's Shilling Theatre in Fulham, London, to the Duke of York's in 1934. 
With 'Floodlight' by Beverley Nichols (Saville, 1937) Hermione Baddeley began a long period as a queen of revue, having also plunged into an increasing social whirl with her husband, David Tennant, for whom she often performed in cabaret at his club, the Gargoyle. Herbert Farjeon's wit in 'Nine Sharp' (subsequently 'The Little Revue', 1940) provided the perfect launching pad for her inspired clowning, bravura characterization, and skill at quick costume and make-up changes. Her most popular characters included an old girl at Torquay, a Windmill girl in ''Voila Les Non-Stop Nudes'', and her prototype funny ballerina, Madame Allover. When she was ill, five understudies barely kept the curtain up. 
In her autobiography Baddeley suggests that she recruited Hermione Gingold to 'Rise Above It' at the Comedy Theatre (1941). It was a legendary, explosive partnership, with Gingold's daunting control of laughter and Baddeley's penchant for wild improvisation. They were reunited less successfully in 'Sky High' at the Phoenix the next year. Their final joint venture, Noel Coward's 'Fallen Angels' at the Ambassador's in 1949, inspired the fury of the author at the liberties they took. He was mollified when the show became a fashionable success. Meanwhile, as a dramatic actress Hermione Baddeley's two outstanding successes were as Ida in Graham Greene's 'Brighton Rock' (Garrick, 1943), which she repeated in the Boulting brothers' film (1947), and in 'Grand National Night' (Apollo, 1946), by Dorothy and Campbell Christie. Her American debut in 'A Taste of Honey' (1961) led to an invitation from Tennessee Williams to create the role of Flora Goforth in 'The Milk Train doesn't Stop here Anymore' at the Spoleto festival in Italy (1962) and on Broadway a year later. A newspaper strike killed the play but Williams greatly admired her performance. 
In England, Hermione Baddeley played in many films from 1926 ('A Daughter in Revolt') -- most notably in 'Kipps' (1941), 'It always Rains on Sunday' (1947), 'Quartet' (1948), 'Passport to Pimlico' (1949), and 'The Pickwick Papers' (1952). She was nominated for an Oscar in 1959 for 'Room at the Top' (1958) and had a Hollywood success as the housekeeper, Ellen, in 'Mary Poppins' (1964). For the last twenty years she lived mainly in Los Angeles and became a familiar face on television in situation comedies, especially 'Bewitched' and 'Maude'. 
Always known as Totie, and originally a petite and delicate gamine, Hermione Baddeley grew into a still small but fuller figured beauty, and this lent authority to her later blowsier characterizations. On 16 April 1928 she married David Pax Tennant (1902-1968), founder of the Gargoyle Club in Soho, and son of Edward Priaulx Tennant, first Baron Glenconner and MP for Salisbury; they had a son and a daughter. The marriage was dissolved in 1937, and in 1941 she married Captain J. H. (Dozey) Willis MC, of the 12th lancers, the son of Major-General Edward Henry Willis, of the Royal Artillery. This marriage was also later dissolved. She enjoyed a stormy romance with the actor Laurence Harvey, but they did not marry. She died in Los Angeles at the Cedars Sinai Hospital on 19 August 1986. 
Baddeley's daughter, Pauline Laetitia Tennant, Lady Rumbold (1927-2008), actress and poet, was born on 6 February 1927 at 13 Beaumont Street, in London's West End; her childhood was divided between the Gargoyle Club in Meard Street and her uncle Stephen Tennant's Gothic pile in Teffont Magna, Wiltshire. She was a close friend of Michael Wishart, the artist, and of her father's second wife, Virginia Parsons (later marchioness of Bath). Through her parents she also got to know well Dylan Thomas, Cyril Connolly, Tambimuttu, Francis Bacon, and Lucian Freud; the latter painted her in 1945. She made her stage debut as a chorus girl before starring in Ben Travers's 'She Follows Me About' (1943), with Robertson Hare, and in 1945 appeared on the front cover of 'Theatre World'. She made her screen debut in 'Great Day' (1945), with Eric Portman and Sheila Sim. In 'The Queen of Spades' (1949) she played the 'young countess' who sells her soul to the devil. She was married three times: first on 17 August 1946 to the social anthropologist Julian Alfred Lane Fox Pitt-Rivers (1919-2001); second on 3 June 1954 to Euan Douglas Graham (1924-2007), grandson of the fifth duke of Montrose, and principal clerk of bills of the House of Lords, with whom she adopted a son, Andrew; and third on 14 December 1974 to Sir (Horace) Anthony Claude Rumbold, tenth baronet (1911-1983), a retired diplomat. They lived in Tisbury, Wiltshire, before moving to Dorchester, Dorset, where she was at the centre of an extensive social life. In 1989 she published a translation of the Dorset poet William Barnes's dialect verse, and in 1992 a book of her own poems, 'Loaves and Fishes'. Towards the end of her life she moved back to Wiltshire, to a townhouse at Wilton, near Salisbury. She died on 6 December 2008 and was survived by her adopted son. 
Ned Sherrin', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39924


Bennett, (Nora Noel) Jill (1929?-1990), actress, was born, possibly on 24 December 1929, in Penang, Malaya, the only child of (James) Randle Bennett, an owner of rubber plantations, and his wife, Nora Adeline Beckett. Her death certificate claims that she was born in 1931, but she was reticent about her date of birth. In 'Who's Who' she wrote that she was born in 1929. When war broke out in 1939 her mother took her to England. Her father was taken prisoner by the Japanese, and neither Jill nor her mother saw him again for five years. In England she attended several boarding-schools, including Priors Field, Godalming, Surrey, where, she claimed, she was good at games, French, riding, and the history of art. She was expelled at the age of fourteen. She also showed an early talent for ballet, but at fifteen decided to be an actress and was accepted by the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, London, which she attended in 1944-6. She made her stage debut in 1947 in 'Now Barabbas' (Bolton's Theatre and, later, Vaudeville Theatre). 
In 1949 Bennett was given one speaking part and walk-ons with the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre Company at Stratford upon Avon, where she met Godfrey Tearle (1884-1953), a fine actor, who was more than forty years her senior. From then until his death, they had what she called 'a passionate friendship'. In her book, 'Godfrey: a Special Time Remembered' (written with Suzanne Goodwin in 1983), she makes it clear that he was the great love of her life. She later married twice, both times to playwrights. In 1962 she married Willis Hall (1929-2005), the son of Walter Hall. Willis Hall wrote, among other things, 'The Long, the Short and the Tall'. The marriage was dissolved in 1965, and in 1968 she married (as his fourth wife) John James Osborne (1929-1994), the son of Thomas Godfrey Osborne, copy-writer in an advertising agency. John Osborne was the author of 'Look Back in Anger' (1956), which started a new kind of drama in England, known as the kitchen sink drama. They were divorced in 1977. There were no children of either marriage, though she had two miscarriages when married to Osborne. Osborne's hostile picture of her in 'Almost a Gentleman' (1991) is unrecognizable to those who knew her well. 
Bennett had a long and successful career in theatre, films, television, and radio. Her first parts in London were as Anni in 'Captain Carvallo', directed by Laurence Olivier (St James's, 1950), and Iras in both 'Antony and Cleopatra' and 'Caesar and Cleopatra' in the Sir Laurence Olivier season, also at the St James's Theatre (1951). From 1955 she was much in demand, mostly in the West End, notably as Helen Eliot in 'The Night of the Ball' (New Theatre, 1955), Masha in 'The Seagull' (Saville, 1956), and Isabelle in 'Dinner with the Family' (New, 1957). In December 1962 she began her important association with the Royal Court Theatre, as Hilary in 'The Sponge Room' and Elizabeth Mintey in 'Squat Betty'. In 1965 she made the first of her three appearances there in a play by her future husband, John Osborne, as Countess Sophia Delyanoff in 'A Patriot for Me'. She was also in the film versions of Osborne's 'Inadmissible Evidence' and 'The Charge of the Light Brigade' (both 1968). Osborne wrote 'Time Present' -- based on her relationship with Godfrey Tearle -- for her in 1968, and in it, as Pamela, she won the Evening Standard and Variety Club awards for best actress. Her final Osborne play (also at the Royal Court, and subsequently at the Cambridge Theatre) was 'West of Suez' (1971). She was a memorable Hedda Gabler in 1972, and Fay, in Joe Orton's 'Loot', in 1975 (both at the Royal Court), and she was highly successful in a revival of Sir Terence Rattigan's 'Separate Tables', in which she played the contrasting emotional cripples Mrs Shankland and Miss Railton Bell (Apollo, 1977). This was followed by leading parts in successive seasons at the Festival Theatre, Chichester, in 1978 and 1979, which included Miss Tina in 'The Aspern Papers'. Other personal successes included Gertrude in 'Hamlet' -- in the opinion of the director, Anthony Page, the best Gertrude he ever saw (Royal Court, 1980) -- and the wife in August Strindberg's 'Dance of Death' (Manchester Royal Exchange, 1981). 
Bennett's films included 'Lust for Life' (1956), Joseph Losey's 'The Criminal' (1960), 'The Nanny' (with Bette Davis, 1965), 'Britannia Hospital' (1982), and Bernardo Bertolucci's 'The Sheltering Sky' (1990). Her many television credits included 'The Heiress', 'The Three Sisters', 'Design for Living', and 'Rembrandt' (all 1970), Alan Bennett's 'The Old Crowd' (1979), and John Mortimer's 'Paradise Postponed' (1986). 
No conventional beauty, Bennett considered herself ugly. She was in fact extremely attractive, elegant, petite, blonde, and blue-eyed, with a distinctively turned-up nose, flared nostrils, strong teeth, and a small, amusingly jutting chin. She had quick intelligence and wit, and her laughter was companionable and infectious, but needed to be won. She often indulged in extravagant behaviour, which could be embarrassing. She wrongly believed that she was a failure in her relationships with men. Her friendships were many and long-lasting. For instance, Anthony Page was a friend and colleague for over thirty years, and Lindsay Anderson, the film director, for longer still -- as was her loving and much-loved secretary, Linda Drew. 
Bennett adored acting but, being sensitive and nervous, preferred the cloistered security of rehearsal, the passionate search for character and motive, and the trusting relationship with her directors to the exposure of performance. When, however, she felt utterly secure in her part, in the play, and in her colleagues, she could be superb. She committed suicide on 5 October 1990 at her home, 23 Gloucester Walk, Kensington, London, by taking an overdose of sleeping-pills, having tried unsuccessfully to do so a month previously. Her relationship with a Swiss businessman, Thomas Schoch, had foundered and her ever-present sense of failure had finally overcome her. 
Dulcie Gray', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39925


Carreras, Sir James Enrique (1909-1990), film executive, was born on 30 January 1909 at 9 Chiswick Lane, Chiswick, as Jaime Enrique Carreras, the only child of Enrique Carreras, commission merchant, and his wife, Dolores Montousse. He was educated privately. In 1913 his father, who came from the Carreras tobacco family of Spain, became a film exhibitor and built the first of a small chain of cinemas in London, the Blue Halls. James joined the business as a youth and worked his way up from usher to assistant manager. In 1927, when he was very young, he married Vera St John (died 1986); they had one son, Michael ['see below']. In 1935 his father and William Hinds, known professionally as Will Hammer, founded Exclusive Films. James worked for this firm also. It distributed imported second features and a few films made by Hammer himself for Hammer Productions, a small company which he had registered in 1934. This was moribund by 1937. During the Second World War James rose from private to lieutenant-colonel in the Honourable Artillery Company, but he rejoined the firm after the war. 
Will Hammer now wished to return to production and revive the name of Hammer. He was associated with a few films made at Marylebone Studios in 1947. In 1948 he joined with Enrique and James Carreras to form a new company, Hammer Film Productions, as the production arm of Exclusive Films. Production proper began in 1948 at a mansion studio at Bray, near Windsor. The company was registered in February 1949 and James Carreras, who was to dominate the company, became chairman. They made routine second features, a number of them based on BBC radio serials, using the large house and nearby locations as inexpensive settings. Output was large, and films were quickly and cheaply made by a small permanent team. Much of the writing and direction was by James's son Michael and Will Hammer's son Anthony Hinds, and there was an informal and family atmosphere in the unit. 
In 1955 they made a science fiction thriller, 'The Quatermass Xperiment', in which the survivor of a space journey is gradually consumed by a mysterious fungus. This had been a popular BBC television serial, and its enormous success as a film encouraged Carreras to introduce a second seeping mass of something horrible in 'X the Unknown' the next year. A third successful film, shown in 1957, was 'Quatermass II', which portrayed people taken over by menacing space organisms. The Gothic horror tale was out of fashion at the time, but Carreras now took a well-considered gamble, and with 'The Curse of Frankenstein' later that year found his niche. Christopher Lee and Peter Cushing first appeared as Hammer's favourite bogeymen in this lurid and profitable colour remake of the 1931 film 'Frankenstein'. From now on an important part of Hammer Films' output featured vampires, werewolves, resurrected mummies, blood, and gore, and there were repeated appearances of Frankenstein and Dracula, producing delicious dread in the audience. Most other film-makers and the critics scorned these films, made in six to eight weeks and promoted with lurid posters and stunts. But they had a large and enthusiastic public in Britain and abroad, especially in America, where they had a huge cult following among teenagers. Ironically, it was Carreras who achieved the assured distribution in America which had so long eluded more serious British producers. His was the most consistently profitable film company in Britain, earning $1.5 million in foreign exchange one year. The company received the queen's award for industry in 1968. Carreras took no part in the creative side of film-making. 
However, times changed. The studio was sold in 1968, and although production continued elsewhere the verve had gone. In 1972 Carreras sold his holding to Michael and resigned as chief executive, though he remained chairman. He moved to the EMI group of companies, where he acted as special adviser for some years. With the appearance in 1973 from America of 'The Exorcist', an exceptionally frightening film, the writing was on the wall for the escapist Hammer brand of horror. The last Hammer film was made in 1978, and the company was in the hands of the receivers by 1979. Carreras then had a remarkable idea: to sell the 'Hammer House of Horror' series to television in the early 1980s. This was then repackaged as video cassettes in the late 1980s for yet another set of youngsters going through the monsters stage. 
In appearance and character Carreras, a good-looking, mild-mannered, soberly dressed businessman, who was a strong family man and devout Christian, was a surprising person to have brought about the phrase 'Hammer horror'. But the essential innocence of the genre, with its saving grace of absurdity, was very different from the sadistic and violent films produced by other companies in later years. 
Carreras was a prominent member of the Variety Club, the show-business charity, being its chief barker in 1954-5. He was chairman of the board of Variety Clubs International for eleven years and president from 1961 to 1963. In 1970 he was knighted for his extensive charity work over many years, especially in the cause of young people -- he was president of the London Federation of Boys' Clubs for five years. He had been appointed MBE in 1944, possibly for secret operations in Spain during the war. He became KCVO in 1980 and also received honours from Spain and Liberia. Carreras died of a heart attack on 9 June 1990 at his home, Queen Anne Cottage, Friday Street, Henley-on-Thames. 
Carreras's only son, 
Rachael Low', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39926


Clarke, Thomas Ernest Bennett (1907-1989), author and screenwriter, was born on 7 June 1907 in Watford, Hertfordshire, the younger son and third of four children of Sir Ernest Michael Clarke, a company director dealing in shipping and goldmines, and his wife, Madeline, daughter of Ernest Bennett Gardiner, an Irish bank manager. Clarke, always known as Tibby, attended Charterhouse and spent a year at Clare College, Cambridge, studying law, before visiting Australia, where he edited the 'Red Heart', a girls' magazine. He then travelled to New Zealand, San Francisco, and Canada. On his return to England he secured employment as junior editorial assistant on the 'Hardware Trade Journal', moving on to work for the weekly magazine 'Answers' and other papers. 
Clarke's work in the late 1920s as publicity officer for the W. S. Crawford Advertising Agency brought him into contact with the film industry for the first time, publicizing sound equipment systems for Western Electric. Clarke was made redundant in 1930 and decided to visit Argentina, securing his passage by becoming a purser on a tramp steamer. On his return he resumed work for 'Answers' and wrote 'Go South -- Go West' (1932), an account of his recent adventures abroad. Clarke secured another journalistic publicity job, editing the British Temperance and General Provident Institution's monthly magazine. He then decided to go freelance, continued work on his novels, and reported for the 'Daily Sketch'. 
In the Second World War Clarke enlisted as a war reserve constable in the Metropolitan Police until asthma forced his discharge. He did not write screenplays until 1942, aged thirty-five, when Monja Danischewsky, director of publicity at Ealing Studios, asked Clarke to assist with unsatisfactory scripts before securing a contract as a screenwriter. His first screen credit was for 'doctoring' the script of 'For those in Peril' (1944), followed by 'The Halfway House' (1944), a ghost story directed by Basil Dearden. 
Clarke is best known for his Ealing comedies, and his first opportunity to work on comedy was to write a short sequence of the supernatural story film 'Dead of Night' (1945). This was a prelude to his writing the first classic Ealing comedy, 'Hue and Cry' (1946). One of his most famous comedies was 'Passport to Pimlico' (1949), which celebrated its characters' discovery that an area of London belonged to Burgundy, thus freeing them from laws and petty restrictions, a theme that reflected its post-war audiences' desire to be rid of rationing. Clarke won an Oscar and an award at the Venice film festival for 'The Lavender Hill Mob' (1951), about a Bank of England employee, played by Alec Guinness, who steals bullion and turns it into souvenir models of the Eiffel tower. The 'Titfield Thunderbolt' (1952), about a village community trying to save a branch railway from closure, similarly celebrated individuals who battled against authority. Although these films had no clear political message, their themes tapped into the mood of post-war austerity, and reflected the concerns of many British people. Clarke also scripted 'The Blue Lamp' (1949), a police drama from a play by Ted Willis, starring Jack Warner and Dirk Bogarde. 
Clarke was associated with Ealing's most productive years, when it was a studio with a distinctive outlook and structure, which enabled its head, Sir Michael Balcon, to initiate some of the British cinema's most famous films. In 1955 Ealing was sold to the BBC and Clarke went freelance, working in Hollywood and Britain. He scripted John Ford's 'Gideon's Day' (1958) and adapted literary classics during this period. But his days of writing original screenplays were over, and he was never again allowed the freedom or creative inspiration he enjoyed at Ealing. The last film with a Clarke screen credit was 'A Man could Get Killed' (1966). In 1952 he was appointed OBE. He published a witty and penetrating autobiography in 1974, 'This is Where I Came In'. He continued to write novels throughout his career as a screenwriter, from 'Jeremy's England' (1934), to 'Grim Discovery' (1983). 
Clarke was a courteous, sensitive man with a great sense of humour, who fulfilled his ambition to become a racehorse owner in the 1960s. He was genial and portly, with a youthful appearance; his distinctive brown hair had a silver streak. On 23 July 1932 he married Joyce Caroline Jenny (1906/7-1983), daughter of Roy Rockwell Steele, engineer. They had a son, Michael, a film producer who died in a drowning accident in 1966, and a daughter, Ann. Clarke died on 11 February 1989 in London. 
Sarah Street', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39927


Clements, Sir John Selby (1910-1988), actor and theatre manager, was born on 25 April 1910 at 1 Carlton Terrace, Childs Hill, Hendon, Middlesex, the only child of Herbert William Clements, barrister, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Stephens. He was educated at St Paul's School, and spent one term at St John's College, Cambridge. He was forced to withdraw from the college, where he had begun to study history, because sudden financial loss meant his family could no longer afford the fees. His mother's great friend Marie Lohr gave him his first job at the age of twenty at the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith. In 1931 he joined the Shakespearian Company run by Sir Ben Greet, and at twenty-five, in 1935, was sufficiently confident to found the Intimate Theatre, Palmers Green, as a weekly repertory company which he managed, directed, and acted in until 1940. In the first year he produced forty-two plays there, playing thirty-six leading parts. 
In 1936 Clements married his first wife, Inga Maria Lillemor Ahlgren. They had no children and the marriage was dissolved ten years later. In 1946 he married the actress Kay Hammond, whose real name was Dorothy Katherine, daughter of Sir Guy Standing KBE of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. Kay was formerly the wife of Sir Ronald George Leon, third baronet, and was the mother of Sir John Leon, fourth baronet, later better known as the actor John Standing. She and Clements had no children. 
During the Second World War, Clements produced many plays for Entertainments National Service Association (ENSA) and also organized a revue company to entertain the troops at out-of-the-way places. John Clements and Kay Hammond together became one of the best-known theatrical couples of their day. In 1944 they acted at the Apollo in 'Private Lives', by Noel Coward, an enchanting production with which Coward was delighted. In 1946 Clements appeared as the earl of Warwick in 'The Kingmaker' at the St James's Theatre, which he himself managed. He presented and directed 'Man and Superman' in 1951 at the New Theatre, playing the role of John Tanner. 
In addition to his many productions and performances, Clements was a successful broadcaster on the radio, taking part with Kay Hammond in the weekly discussion programme 'We Beg to Differ'. Their comic rivalry on the air delighted audiences. From 1955 Clements was adviser on drama for Associated Rediffusion, one of the first independent television companies, for which he was contracted to produce a number of television plays. In July 1955 he joined the board of directors of the Saville Theatre, the management of which came under his personal control. 
In 1960 Kay Hammond became paralysed after a stroke and was confined to a wheelchair for the remaining twenty years of her life. Clements joined the Old Vic Company in 1961, making his first appearance in New York in the title role in 'Macbeth' in 1962. In 1966 he took on the challenge of directing the Chichester festival theatre when Sir Laurence Olivier left to found the National Theatre. His boundless enthusiasm and love of the theatre overcame any initial reluctance on the part of the actors he approached for his first season at Chichester to join him 'in the wake of Larry'. He was able to recruit Celia Johnson and Bill Fraser and splendid supporting casts, who were very loyal to him. His seasons were independent and enterprising, and he was always encouraging, calm, and resourceful in times of crisis. 
As a director Clements was businesslike, almost prosaic, and very logical, never selfish and always courteous. Six feet tall, with a handsome face and slightly 'jug' ears, he had kind eyes and excellent hands. He was one of the last actor-managers in the country. In Chichester he was not only the director of four plays each summer season, but also played, among other parts, Macbeth, Antony, and Prospero, as well as two of Jean Anouilh's heroes, the general in 'The Fighting Cock' and Antoine in 'Dear Antoine'. It was his appreciation of the literary tradition of drama that gave him the courage to present 'The Fighting Cock', a great success in its original French version in Paris. 'Heartbreak House', in which he played Shotover, was one of his most memorable productions. Clements also acted in a number of films, including 'Things to Come' (1936), 'South Riding' (1937), 'The Four Feathers' (1939), 'Oh! What a Lovely War' (1969), and 'Gandhi' (1982). He was appointed CBE in 1956 and knighted in 1968. A member of the council of Equity in 1948-9 and vice-president in 1950-59, he was also a popular trustee of the Garrick Club. 
Clements left Chichester in 1973 to spend more time with his wife, for they were a devoted couple. She died in 1980. Clements died on 6 April 1988 at Pendean Convalescent Home near Midhurst, Sussex, where he had spent the last two years of his life. 
Bessborough', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39928


Croft, (John) Michael (1922-1986), founder and director of the National Youth Theatre, was born in Oswestry on 8 March 1922, the child of Constance Croft, who was unmarried. As a young child he moved with his elder sister to live with his mother's sister in Manchester, where he was educated at Burnage grammar school from 1933 to 1940. His adolescence was dominated by two passions, for literature (in particular, poetry, for which he had an almost photographic memory), and for team games. He played games with extreme gusto, but achieved a limited effectiveness only in cricket, the rich lore of which always fascinated him. 
Croft had little satisfaction or security from his home. He soon developed an uncompromising individualism and volunteered for aircrew duties in the Royal Air Force in 1940. He became a sergeant-pilot and took part in daylight bombing raids over occupied France, but his manual dexterity proved unequal to the demands of flying, and he was offered the option of a discharge. He had a variety of casual occupations, as an actor, professional 'fire-watcher' in air-raid precautions, credit salesman, and lumberjack, before he volunteered for the navy in 1943. After service in Mediterranean convoys, he finished the war as a radar operator on merchant ships. 
In 1946 Croft went to Keble College, Oxford, to read English. He was a member of an exceptionally talented generation of former service students, and revelled in being able to indulge his love of literature, theatre, writing, and sport, while, at the same time, breaking university regulations by living in licensed premises. He took a special short-course degree and achieved a third class in English in 1948. 
An unsettled period followed graduation. Croft did occasional journalism, poetry writing, broadcasting, and acting, and worked as a private tutor and a supply teacher. From teaching he gathered the material for his novel 'Spare the Rod' (1954), a minor 'cause celebre' among liberal educationists, which, after skirmishes with the British Board of Film Censors, was filmed in 1961 with Max Bygraves as the sexually ambivalent schoolteacher. He also wrote 'Red Carpet to China' (1958). Croft's final teaching post was at Alleyn's School, Dulwich (1950-55), where he staged a series of epic Shakespearian productions, involving the majority of the school's pupils, that aroused the interest of the London press and the professional theatre. His work was characterized by spectacle, vigour, commitment, and an unusual concern for verse speaking: he wanted to envelop everybody in his huge enthusiasm and to make them share his fascination with the works of Shakespeare. 'Spare the Rod' gave him sufficient financial independence to resign from teaching, ostensibly to devote himself to writing, but it seems that he was persuaded by a group of former pupils, disconsolate at the loss of their Shakespeare play, to direct them in an out-of-term production of 'Henry V' at Toynbee Hall in 1956. In effect, this was the first youth theatre production and it determined the course of the rest of his life. The venture was self-supporting: ticket sales and donations were the only funding until, in 1958, King George's Jubilee Fund gave a grant which was continuous. Subsequently, the British Council and the Department of Education and Science provided support. There was a long and fairly acrimonious battle with the Arts Council before any funding was secured, only for it to be withdrawn after a few years. By 1970 Croft was able to claim, 'We have three companies touring in Europe, four in London, and one in the north-east of England -- the whole being run by a full-time staff of four, with a handful of voluntary helpers.' Ahead lay the televising and broadcasting of youth theatre productions, the commissioning of new works (significantly from Peter Terson and Barrie Keeffe in the 1970s), the visit to America, the acquiring of the Shaw Theatre (1971), and, in 1977, official recognition of the National Youth Theatre of Great Britain (NYTGB). Croft gained an increasing reputation as an internationally respected director, and his companies added to the lustrous reputation of the English theatre, but the NYTGB struggled against inadequate funding. He saw his creation as the victim of national parsimony to the arts and he became more obviously an abrasive, militant publicist, enjoying a bare-knuckle approach to negotiation. He had a flair for discovering stars, such as Derek Jacobi, Helen Mirren, Ben Kingsley, and Diana Quick. 
Croft was appointed OBE in 1971. After the straitened circumstances of his early days, his later success introduced him to an expansive lifestyle, which he delighted in sharing generously with his vast number of friends and acquaintances. He was homosexual, but he had many friends of the opposite sex and, particularly in his early years, led a bisexual existence. He had few intimates, apparently finding it difficult to break down his core of loneliness. He was a man of gargantuan appetites in every way, especially for food and drink, and his eventual failure to control these proclivities, allied to a dread of surgery, contributed to his comparatively early death. He died of a heart attack at his home, 74 Bartholomew Road, Kentish Town, London, on 15 November 1986. A characteristic instruction in his will provided a party for a vetted list of some hundreds of his friends, 'at which the food shall be wholesome -- and the drink shall not be allowed to run out'. 
Geoffrey Sykes', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39929


Dexter, John Henry (1925-1990), theatre director, was born on 2 August 1925 in Derby, the only child of Harry Dexter, plumber, and his wife, Rosanne Smith. There were music, painting, and home theatricals in the family, but Dexter's only formal education was at the local elementary school (Reginald Street), which he left at the age of fourteen. He then took a factory job before joining the army as a national serviceman. Not having attended a university was a source of lifelong regret, particularly as his entry into the professional theatre coincided with the rise of the graduate director. For the same reason he developed into a compulsive autodidact, a passionate scholar of stage history who never undertook a classical text without exhaustive research. His career began at the Derby Playhouse, in a company that also included John Osborne. Osborne recommended Dexter to the English Stage Company's artistic director, George Devine, who engaged him in 1957 as an associate director. Dexter had no previous directing experience, but he rapidly gained it at the Royal Court Theatre in London, which he subsequently described as his university; there he forged relationships with working-class writers, notably Michael Hastings and Arnold Wesker. At the same time he formed his long alliance with the designer Jocelyn Herbert, crucially in the 1959 production of Wesker's 'The Kitchen', an elaborately choreographed show on a defiantly undecorated stage, where even the lighting rig was exposed to the audience. This marked the beginning of the text-centred, visually austere style which was to become his trademark. 
At the Royal Court, Dexter gained a double reputation: as an electrifying animator of spectacle and crowd movement, and as a 'playwright's director' who could spot not only the defects of a script but also the hidden potential, and coax the writer into achieving it. The success of his subsequent partnership with Peter Shaffer ('The Royal Hunt of the Sun', 1964; 'Black Comedy', 1966; 'Equus', 1973) depended as much on pre-rehearsal textual analysis as on the physical staging. 
In 1963 Dexter left the Royal Court to become assistant director to Laurence Olivier at the National Theatre when it was in its honeymoon phase. He began widening his range with productions of 'Saint Joan' (1963), 'Hobson's Choice' (1964), and Olivier's 'Othello' (1964), shows that went lastingly into public memory. He also began another fertile partnership with the poet Tony Harrison, whose versions of Moliere and Racine ('The Misanthrope', 1973, and 'Phaedra Britannica', 1975) set a dazzling new standard for creative translation. 
By the late 1960s Dexter was building a parallel career as a director of opera -- a natural move, given his flair as an animator and his innate musicality (coupled with his temporary withdrawal from the National Theatre following disagreements with Olivier). His first venture, Berlioz's 'Benvenuto Cellini' at Covent Garden (1966), was untypically ornate; but with Verdi's 'I vespri siciliani' at the Hamburg State Opera three years later he declared himself in a production of characteristically austere magnificence. Staged on Josef Svoboda's gigantic staircase between two vast watch-towers, the production carried his name round the world as a new force on the operatic scene; and although he maintained his connection with Hamburg until 1973 (his production of Verdi's 'Un ballo in maschera'), the main focus of his work during the 1970s was at New York's Metropolitan Opera House, where he was appointed director of productions in 1974. Dexter saw the Metropolitan as a Babylonian anachronism, and he made it his mission to drag it into the twentieth century through simplified staging, technical reform, and enlargement of repertory. Against the odds he won over the conservative public with a series of non-standard works, from Meyerbeer's 'Le prophete' and Poulenc's 'Les dialogues des Carmelites' (both 1977) to 'Parade' (1981), a French triptych which he assembled from Satie, Poulenc, and Ravel. By this time, however, his relationship had soured with the Metropolitan's administration and its musical director, James Levine, and during the early 1980s he returned to freelance work. 
Dexter continued to direct major productions in London and New York, but he never achieved his ambition of running a house and company of his own; and his final attempt to do so -- with a classically based West End troupe -- fell apart after its opening production of T. S. Eliot's 'The Cocktail Party' (Phoenix Theatre, 1986). 
Dexter was a stocky figure of medium height, with chubby features and a domed head that became increasingly prominent as he lost his hair. He had a biting tongue which could wound actors and alienate patrons; he also suffered from declining health, due to diabetes and the aftermath of youthful polio, before his final heart attack. He was a homosexual and suffered a brief term of imprisonment for homosexuality in the 1950s. A collection of his writings, 'The Honourable Beast: a Posthumous Autobiography', was published by his friend Riggs O'Hara in 1993. Dexter died on 23 March 1990 in London, following a heart operation. 
Irving Wardle', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39930


Edwards, James Keith O'Neill (1920-1988), actor, was born on 23 March 1920 in Barnes, Surrey, the fifth of five sons and eighth of nine children of Reginald Walter Kenrick Edwards, professor of mathematics at King's College, London, and his wife, Phyllis Katherine Cowan, who was from New Zealand. He was educated at St Paul's Cathedral choir school and at King's College School, Wimbledon, where he first developed what was to become a lifelong enthusiasm for brass instruments and learned to play the trombone. In 1938 he went to St John's College, Cambridge, where he read history and developed a mock 'professor' act for the Cambridge Footlights, in which he gave a musical lecture on the trombone. 
Edwards's university career was interrupted by the Second World War, and in 1939 he joined the Royal Air Force, eventually succeeding in his ambition to become a pilot. In 1944 he was flying a hazardous mission towing gliders and dropping supplies to the beleaguered troops at Arnhem when his Dakota was badly hit by a German Focke-Wulf. He made a successful landing, saving the lives of two men on board and sustaining burns to his face which he later disguised by growing the magnificent handlebar moustache that was to become his trademark. He was awarded the DFC in 1945 for his skill and bravery. 
Throughout his RAF career Edwards had successfully entertained the troops with his 'professor' act, and so after demobilization in 1946 he contemplated life as an entertainer. He served his apprenticeship at London's Windmill Theatre, where he met Frank Muir, who with Denis Norden was to write his most successful comedy material. In 1948 Muir and Norden created one of Edwards's best loved characters, the bibulous belligerent Pa Glum in the BBC radio comedy programme 'Take it from here', which ran from 1948 until 1959. The programme commanded audiences of more than 20 million and made Edwards a wealthy man. He bought polo ponies, an aeroplane, and a farm in Fittleworth, Sussex, which was run by his elder brother Alan while Edwards played the local squire. Fox-hunting was one of his favourite pastimes, and he was proud to be made master of foxhounds of the Old Surrey and Burstow hunt. In 1951 he was elected lord rector of Aberdeen University, an appointment he held until 1954. 
From 1957 until 1977 Edwards appeared in 'Does the Team Think?', a radio panel game he had devised in which four comedians answered light-hearted questions from a studio audience. He attempted some 'straight' acting, turning in a creditable Sir Toby Belch in 'Twelfth Night' and Falstaff in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' for BBC radio (both 1962). On television he found a tailor-made role in the series 'Whack-o!' (1957-61 and 1971-2), in which he played the corpulent, conniving headmaster of Chiselbury School. His films included 'Three Men in a Boat' (1957), 'Bottoms up' (1960), 'The Plank' (1979), and 'It's your Move' (1982). Perhaps most surprising of all, in 1964 he stood as Conservative candidate for Paddington North, and although he did not win his seat, he polled 10,639 votes -- more than his predecessor had gained. 
Edwards's private life was less satisfactory. In 1958 he married Valerie, a British Overseas Airways Corporation ground steward, daughter of William Seymour, small landowner. They had no children and eventually divorced in 1969. She later told the press that on their honeymoon he had admitted that he was a homosexual 'trying to reform'. In 1976 Ramon Douglas, an Australian female impersonator, told the tabloid newspapers that for the past ten years he and Edwards had shared a 'loving relationship'. Even though he was personally devastated by the resulting publicity, Edwards found that his career did not suffer, and in 1978 he was invited to reinvent his Pa Glum character when the Glums were revived for television. In 1984 he published his memoirs, 'Six of the Best', which followed an earlier autobiography, 'Take it from me' (1953). 
By the early 1980s Edwards's blustering style of comedy was going out of fashion and he concentrated on touring in plays such as 'Big Bad Mouse' with his friend Eric Sykes. He spent more time in the house he had bought in Perth, Western Australia, and it was there in 1988 that he became ill with bronchial pneumonia. He returned to England and died in the Cromwell Hospital, London, on 7 July 1988. 
Veronica Davis', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39931


Gingold, Hermione Ferdinanda (1897-1987), actress, was born in London on 9 December 1897, the elder daughter (there were no sons) of James Gingold, stockbroker, who had emigrated from Austria, and his wife, Kate Walter. She claimed Viennese, Turkish, and Romanian blood on her father's side. Her mother was Jewish. 
La Gingold, or Herman or Toni, as she was often called in the theatre, first appeared on stage at the age of ten as the herald in 'Pinkie and the Fairies', produced by Herbert Beerbohm Tree. She later played the title role on tour and was cast by Tree as Falstaff's page in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'. In 1912, aged fifteen, she played Cassandra at Stratford upon Avon in 'Troilus and Cressida', adventurously produced by William Poel. Edith Evans was Cressida. For an actress who was subsequently to achieve fame for her flamboyant personality, her wit, her sophisticated but often grotesque comedy, and her basso profundo voice, described by J. C. Trewin as 'powdered glass in deep syrup', her surprising billing in the actors' directory 'Spotlight' in the 1920s and early 1930s read 'Shakespearean and soprano'. She lost her high notes after suffering nodules on her vocal chords: 'One morning it was Mozart and the next 'Old Man River'.' 
Gingold played many parts in the theatre and on radio in the 1930s; but she found her true metier in revue. She was in 'Spread it Abroad' at the Saville in 1936, 'The Gate Revue' in 1939 which transferred to the Ambassador's Theatre, and its sequel 'Swinging the Gate' (1940). Her legendary partnership with Hermione Baddeley ['see 'Baddeley, Hermione Youlanda Ruby Clinton (1906-1986)] ('the two Hermiones'), which was shorter lived than memory usually allows, began at the Comedy Theatre in 1941 with 'Rise above it' (two editions), and continued in 'Sky High' at the Phoenix Theatre. It was during this show that their rivalry escalated in the press into a famous feud. She moved back to the Ambassador for 'Sweet and Low' (1943), 'Sweeter and Lower' (1944), and 'Sweetest and Lowest' (1946). Gingold became a special attraction for American soldiers and 'Thanks, Yanks' was one of her most appropriate numbers. During the astringent, name-dropping 'Sweet' series she played 1676 performances, before 800,000 people, negotiating 17,010 costume changes. 
Gingold followed with 'Slings and Arrows' at the Comedy in 1948 and appeared in cameo roles in English films, notably in 'The Pickwick Papers' (1952), capturing a wider radio following with her weekly show 'Home at Eight', which featured Sid Colin's Addams-like family, the Dooms. However, in spite of success with Baddeley in 1949 in 'Fallen Angels', by Noel Coward, achieved despite the author's disapproval of their overdoing the comic effects, she was determined to renew her American friendships. Her first significant appearance in New York was in John Murray Anderson's 'Almanac' (Imperial, 1953). For the rest of her career she was based in America and became particularly well known on talk shows. She made other appearances in revue, and toured in a number of plays and musicals -- taking over from Jo Van Fleet the role of Madame Rose Pettle in Arthur Kopit's 'Oh Dad, poor Dad, Mama's hung you in the closet and I'm feelin' so sad'. She made many cameo appearances on television and in films, notably 'Around the World in Eighty Days' (1956), 'Bell, Book and Candle' (1958), and 'The Music Man' (1962). She joined the San Francisco Opera to play the Duchess of Crackenthorp in Donizetti's 'La fille du regiment' in 1975 and attacked the concert platform as a narrator. 
There were two milestones in this period. Gingold appeared with Maurice Chevalier in the film 'Gigi' (1958), in which they sang Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe's song 'I remember it well' with exquisite wit and pathos. In 1973 she played Madame Armfeldt in Stephen Sondheim's 'A Little Night Music', triumphing with 'Liaisons', the memoirs of a grande horizontale. Once again she reminded audiences of her gift for pathos and the power of her acting. 
In 1977 Gingold took over the narrator's role in 'Side by Side by Sondheim' on Broadway. Over eighty, she stayed with it gallantly on the gruelling 'bus and truck' tour of one-night stands, travelling over 30,000 miles and visiting sixty cities until she tripped over an iron pole on Kansas City railway station in the small hours. A shattered knee and a dislocated arm effectively ended her performing career. 
Hermione Gingold was an artist whose style and wit were unmistakable and who always held the promise of laughter and outrage. Adored as an icon and often underestimated as an actress, she is secure in her reputation as a queen of revue and one of the essential sights of London during the Second World War. She was a statuesque woman who exaggerated her gargoyle features for comic effect on the stage; but she could achieve a handsome aspect in repose. 
In 1918 Gingold married Michael Joseph (1897-1958), publisher, the son of Moss Joseph, diamond merchant. They had two sons, the younger of whom, Stephen Joseph, pioneer of theatre in the round in Scarborough, later Alan Ayckbourn's base, died in 1967. They were brought up by her husband. The marriage was dissolved in 1926, and in the same year she married (Albert) Eric Maschwitz (1901-1969), playwright, lyricist, and television executive, son of Albert Arthur Maschwitz, of Edgbaston. The marriage was dissolved in 1940. Hermione Gingold died of pneumonia and heart disease in the Lennox Hill Hospital, New York, on 24 May 1987. 
Ned Sherrin', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39932


Grant, Cary (1904-1986), actor, was born on 18 January 1904 at 15 Hughenden Road, Bristol, the only surviving child of Elias Leach (1876-1935), a tailor's presser, and his wife, Elsie Maria, 'nee' Kingdon (1878-1973), daughter of a shipwright. An elder brother had died before he was born. He became one of the wealthiest and most famous Hollywood film stars of the mid-twentieth century, making seventy-two feature films between 1932 and 1966. A dark, handsome man well over 6 feet tall with thick, wavy hair and an attractively cleft chin, he was a romantic comedian, suave and well dressed, ironic, jaunty, and a touch caustic, but very, very funny. The world accepted this relaxed figure as the real person, and to his many friends he was an amusing and generous individual. But the image was carefully cultivated, and behind it was a complex and troubled man. 
The Leach household was not happy and when Archie Leach was nine his mother was suddenly committed to a mental institution. Nobody told the boy what had happened to her and in time he came to believe that she was dead. The sense of abandonment deeply affected his character and left him with a lack of trust which was to ruin all but one of his many marriages and love affairs. He was a lonely child, hanging around backstage doing odd jobs at the local music-halls. Stagestruck, he left school at fourteen and joined a troupe of boy acrobats, stilt walkers, and slapstick comics called Bob Pender's Knockabout Comedians. With them he toured the British music-halls, learning physical skills and a sense of timing which never left him. In 1920 they went to America for a long run at the huge New York Hippodrome, followed by a tour of large American cities. Pender returned to England in the early 1920s but Leach and some of the other young men stayed on and ran their own troupe for several years. He later told colourful stories about the strange jobs he had during the next few years. A charmer, he soon became welcome in New York theatrical circles and appeared in musical shows for both the Hammersteins and the Shuberts. As he grew more sophisticated he acquired mannerisms which became characteristic of him -- the well-timed double take, the quizzically raised eyebrow -- and modified his working-class accent to one all his own, clipped and jerky but apparently acceptable to American ears as typically British. A screen test at Paramount's small New York studio was not a success but his first film, a short later shown as 'Singapore Sue', was made there in 1931. He went to Hollywood, where his good looks, charm, and useful contacts easily got him a five-year contract with Paramount, and in 1932 he assumed the more elegant name of Cary Grant. He legally adopted the name in December 1941. 
From 1932 to 1936 Paramount used Grant in over twenty films as well as lending him to other companies. He played opposite many well-known stars but the films, although good experience, were stereotyped and undistinguished. To Grant's frustration Paramount made no attempt to promote him as they promoted their big star Gary Cooper. However, his appearance in a star vehicle with Marlene Dietrich and two more with Mae West drew attention to him, and the talented director George Cukor borrowed him to play opposite Katharine Hepburn in 'Sylvia Scarlett' (1935). Although this film was a failure, Cukor's sympathetic direction enabled Grant to explore a style of his own and it was a milestone in his development. 
On 9 February 1934 Grant married a young actress, Virginia Adler (1908-1996), daughter of James Edward Cherrill, and former wife of Irving Adler. The marriage rapidly fell apart and ended in a bitter divorce the next year. Grant returned to the apartment he had previously shared with a fellow Paramount actor, Randolph Scott. This convenient bachelor arrangement was not uncommon at the time but led to talk of bisexuality. Whatever the truth, Grant's desire for a happy marriage was to prove one of the driving forces of his life. During a pause in his work for Paramount in 1935 he made a film in England with the actress Mary Brian, with whom for a while he contemplated a second marriage. About this time his father died and he was able to settle his mother, whose whereabouts he had discovered, in a house of her own. He was to visit her many times until her death in 1973. 
As his reputation grew, Grant decided to leave Paramount and in future negotiate his own contracts for single films or groups of films. He refused to renew his contract in the autumn of 1936, a brave move at the height of the studio system. From then on he was to insist on a share of the box-office take on top of a guaranteed fee. 'Topper' (1937), in which he made a debonair appearance as a ghost, was made at MGM and was such a box-office hit that Columbia and RKO eagerly signed overlapping contracts with Grant. By the middle of the war he had made some twenty films for them, more or less on his own terms. He worked with some of the best directors in Hollywood, including Leo McCarey, Howard Hawks, Frank Capra, and George Stevens. 'The Awful Truth' firmly established him in 1937 as a leading comedy actor. 'Bringing up Baby' (1938) and 'Holiday' (1938) were other crazy comedies and 'Gunga Din' (1939), an enormous success, was an uproarious version of Kipling's story. His screen image and comic timing were now so polished that success at the box-office was assured, and his departure from Paramount was triumphantly justified. A perfectionist, his apparently casual performances were achieved by meticulous attention to detail. 
When war broke out in 1939 Grant remained in Hollywood, reassured by the British ambassador's comforting view that members of the expatriate community were acting as their country's representatives. He became an American citizen in June 1942. The citation for the king's medal for services in the cause of freedom, awarded him in April 1947, was for his contributions to the British War Relief Fund. 
Grant continued to make films, mainly comedies, during the war. One which was outstanding as both a critical and a commercial success was 'The Philadelphia Story' (1940) for MGM, directed by Cukor and co-starring Katharine Hepburn. James Stewart received an Oscar for his part in this film. Grant, on the other hand, had such a relaxed comedy style that he hardly seemed to be acting at all and was taken for granted by the academy. He was nominated as best actor for his next film, the sentimental 'Penny Serenade' (1941), but to his disappointment the Oscar that year went to Gary Cooper. The black comedy 'Arsenic and Old Lace' (1942) was another tremendous commercial hit. His next film, 'Suspicion' (1941), was the first of four important collaborations with the English director Alfred Hitchcock. Characteristically, the latter saw more in Grant than the urbane charmer. He detected a hidden side, guarded and even with a hint of menace, and cast him as a man plotting to murder his wife. Both Grant and the studio demurred and the ending was changed, but a teasing ambiguity remained, and the film has probably had a greater appeal to later, more sophisticated generations than it had at the time. Joan Fontaine won an Oscar as the wife, but as usual Grant's unostentatiously perfect performance went unrewarded. 
On 8 July 1942 Grant married a second time. His wife, Barbara Hutton, formerly Reventlow (1912-1979), was heiress to the Woolworth fortune, and the extravagant and gregarious lifestyle of a wealthy socialite was so much at variance with Grant's lack of security that despite a real affection which lasted until her death in 1979 the marriage could not survive, and ended sadly in 1945. Grant was deeply distressed by this second failure and by his lack of recognition as an actor, and for a while his work suffered. Then, with the unusual production 'None but the Lonely Heart' (1944), written and directed by the playwright Clifford Odets, he was again nominated for an Oscar. But again, while a supporting player in his film was honoured, the award for best actor that year went elsewhere. Hurt and depressed, for about a year he made no films. 
It was Hitchcock who revitalized Grant with one of the best films of his career, 'Notorious', in 1946. Again Hitchcock cast him as not entirely straightforward, a cool intelligence agent using the woman he loved to entice another man. The film, with Ingrid Bergman, had the usual Hitchcock suspense and was much admired. Refreshed, Grant returned to making light comedies. Among them, 'I was a Male War Bride' (1949) was an uncharacteristically broad comedy, with Grant in deliberately unconvincing drag, and rather surprisingly was another huge box-office hit. On 25 December 1949 Grant married for the third time. Betsy Drake ('b'. 1923) was another young actress, an intelligent and well-educated girl of wide interests. Desperately anxious to get this marriage right, for a while they lived quietly and for some years Grant read widely and made fewer films. It was through Betsy that he met a doctor who was experimenting with the use of LSD to help patients solve their problems by reliving their pasts. Grant attended a number of sessions and believed they had been beneficial. 
By 1950 Grant had been in films for nearly twenty years and his type of sophisticated, screwball comedy was beginning to look dated as gritty realism took over. He talked of retiring. Before long, however, he was again lured back by Hitchcock and in 1954 filmed one of his most popular and glamorous films, the comedy thriller 'To Catch a Thief' (1955), with Grace Kelly. Far from retiring, he continued to make films for another twelve years and, though fewer in number and lacking some of the old sparkle, most of them made money. One made in Spain in 1957 co-starred Sophia Loren, with whom he fell madly in love. This wrecked his already faltering marriage to Betsy and he was devastated when Loren married Carlo Ponti. Once more he was rescued from despair by Hitchcock with the last of their four films together, one of Grant's best, the classic comedy thriller with a chase, 'North by North West' (1959). His third marriage having ended in divorce in 1962, on 22 July 1965 Grant married another young actress, Dyan Cannon 
(born Samille Diane Friesen; 'b'. 1939)
, but despite the welcome birth of his only child the marriage was no more successful than the others and ended in 1968. In a lamentable last film, 'Walk, Don't Run' (1966), for the first time Grant did not get the girl. 
At sixty-two Grant was still a vigorous and handsome man and had no intention of becoming a silver-haired character actor. Without formally announcing his retirement he simply turned his attention to other things. He had always been interested in business and for some years he now pursued an active business career which included directorships of the big toiletries firm Rayette-Faberge and of MGM. In 1970 the Academy gave him the survivor's consolation prize, an honorary award 'for his unique mastery of the art of screen acting, with the respect and affection of his colleagues'. Later his films found new life on television and video, and as times changed a new audience's perception of him shifted slightly. A hint of the hidden depths and vulnerability could be detected behind the cool facade so carefully constructed to divert attention from the uncertainty within. 
During the last decade of his busy life Grant achieved married happiness at last. He had met Barbara Harris ('b'. 1951), an English girl forty-seven years his junior, in 1976 when she was a public relations consultant for Faberge, and after several years of passionate friendship they married on 15 April 1981. As an old man with thick white hair and undimmed charm he toured the small towns of America with a one-man show called 'A Conversation with Cary Grant', reminiscing and chatting with the audience. It was as he prepared for the show in Davenport, Iowa, in November 1986 that he had a severe stroke. He died on 29 November 1986 at St Luke's Hospital in Davenport. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 39933


Greenwood, Joan Mary Waller (1921-1987), actress, was born on 4 March 1921 at 122 Fulham Road, Chelsea, London, the only child of Sydney Earnshaw Greenwood, artist, and his wife, Ida Waller. The name Mary does not appear on her birth certificate. She was educated at St Catherine's School in Bramley, Surrey, and at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. She first appeared on stage in 1939, when she was seventeen, in a small part in 'The Robust Invalid', a translation of Moliere's 'Le malade imaginaire' at the Apollo Theatre, London, and two years later in an unimportant film, 'John Smith Wakes Up'. 
Thereafter Joan Greenwood was much in demand on both stage and screen, in every sort of production. Her first major film was 'The Gentle Sex' in 1943, directed by Leslie Howard, as one of a group of conscripts in the ATS (Auxiliary Training Service). Her first leading part was in a comedy of 1946 called 'A Girl in a Million', playing opposite Hugh Williams. It took her longer to make her mark in the theatre. During the war she took over from Deborah Kerr in 'Heartbreak House', toured with ENSA (the Entertainments National Service Association), did a season with Worthing Repertory Company, and toured with the company run by Donald Wolfit, playing Ophelia in 'Hamlet' and Celia in 'Volpone'. For several years after the war she concentrated on the cinema, becoming well known to the general public when she had roles in a number of Ealing films. 'Saraband for Dead Lovers' (1948) was a historical romance with Stewart Granger, then at the height of his popularity. Her light touch as a comedian was particularly suitable for the gentle Ealing comedies of the day and she appeared in three of the best: 'Whisky Galore!' (1948), 'The Man in the White Suit' (1951), and, above all, 'Kind Hearts and Coronets' (1949). In 1952 she was a piquant Gwendolen in the elegant film of 'The Importance of being Earnest', directed by Anthony Asquith. 
In the United States, Joan Greenwood appeared in New York and made two disappointing films in Hollywood, where she disliked the lifestyle. On her return to London, after taking over from Lilli Palmer in 'Bell, Book and Candle' at the Phoenix Theatre in 1955, she scored two critical successes with 'Lysistrata' at the Royal Court Theatre in 1957, later transferred to the West End, and 'Hedda Gabler' at the Oxford Playhouse in 1960, which was repeated in the West End in 1964. When appearing in 'Hedda Gabler' at Oxford, at the age of thirty-nine, she surprised everyone by eloping to Jamaica and secretly marrying an older fellow member of the cast, Andre Cecil Morell formerly Mesritz (1909-1978), son of Andre Cecil Mesritz. They had one son, Jason, also an actor. 
Joan Greenwood appeared at the Chichester festival of 1962 in 'The Broken Heart', and the following year in the film 'Tom Jones', Tony Richardson's rip-roaring adaptation from the novel by Henry Fielding. This, however, was the last big film in which she had a role of any importance. She appeared in a few minor productions, the last being a partly animated Anglo-Polish version of 'The Water Babies' which, despite a wonderful cast, was disappointingly flat. She later returned to the screen in 1987, the year of her death, for a small cameo part in the distinguished film 'Little Dorrit'. On the stage she gave a fine performance in 'The Chalk Garden' in 1971 but, like her film career, her stage career virtually ended when she was in her mid-fifties, although she did appear in several television series later than this. She also returned to the stage later to take over the part in 'The Understanding' played by Dame Celia Johnson, when the latter died in 1982. 
A versatile actress and a talented comedian, Joan Greenwood appeared in everything from sophisticated comedy, romance, and adventure to classical drama and even revue. Only 5 feet tall, slight, and with dazzling blonde hair, she was both sophisticated and elfin, quizzical and mocking, with her full pouting mouth and lingering glance. Her distinctive voice and almost exaggerated diction have been described as 'gargling with champagne', husky, purring, deliciously seductive. Her work as an intelligent and witty comedian endeared her to a discriminating minority, and her films, especially the Ealing comedies, brought her a wider public. However, both on stage and screen her career seems to have been strangely uneven. Perhaps the very distinctiveness of her style limited the opportunities offered to her. The strength and emotional power of her Lysistrata and even more her Hedda Gabler suggest possibilities not realized in the rest of her career. Joan Greenwood died of acute bronchitis and asthma on 27 February 1987, at her home, 27 Slaidburn Street, Chelsea, London. 
Rachael Low', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39934


Halliwell, (Robert James) Leslie (1929-1989), film buyer and encyclopaedist, was born on 23 February 1929 in Bolton, Lancashire, the youngest child by thirteen years and only son in the family of three children of James Halliwell, cotton spinner, of Bolton, and his wife, Lily Haslam. He won a scholarship to Bolton School, and after national service in the Royal Army Education Corps he went to St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he gained a second class (division 1) in both parts of the English tripos (1951 and 1952). 
Leslie Halliwell saw his first film at the age of four, and he spent his childhood going to the cinema, usually in the company of his mother. He claimed that at one time there were forty-seven cinemas within 5 miles of the centre of Bolton, and that he visited them all. At Cambridge, where he was editor of 'Varsity', he ran the university film society, and his first job after graduating was working as a journalist on 'Picturegoer'. At the end of 1952 he took on the job of running two cinemas in Cambridge. In 1956 he became a trainee publicity executive for the Rank Organization in London, moving in 1958 to Southern Television as a film buyer, and in 1959 he joined Granada Television as a film researcher, where he devised the 'Cinema' series before moving to buy films for Granada from other companies. In 1959 he married Ruth Porter, who had one son and one daughter from her previous marriage. She was the daughter of Samuel Edward Turner, clerk and Baptist minister, of Nottingham. The Halliwells had one son. 
In 1968 Halliwell became film buyer for the whole independent television network (ITV), and in 1982 Jeremy Isaacs, head of the new television channel Channel 4, asked him to buy American films for Channel 4 as well. Isaacs described him as 'much more than a film buyer. Leslie Halliwell was a film buff, a walking encyclopaedia.' He visited Hollywood twice a year to search in the film libraries. At Channel 4 he was able to help schedule programmes, and he compiled very successful series such as 'The British at War', which he introduced himself. While he continued to buy for the other ITV companies, he earmarked interesting discoveries as 'obvious Channel 4 material', and his seasons of 'golden oldies', neglected films from the 1930s and 1940s, were very popular. 
Halliwell was best-known for his reference books. 'The Filmgoer's Companion', the first comprehensive reference book of the cinema ever published, appeared in 1965, and revised editions appeared regularly thereafter. The first edition of 'Halliwell's Film Guide', with synopses and comments on 8000 films, came out in 1977. Revised annually, it had grown to 16,000 entries by the time of the seventh edition in 1988. 'Halliwell's Teleguide' (later, with Philip Purser, 'Halliwell's Television Companion') was first published in 1979. 
As well as compiling works of reference, Halliwell wrote about the cinema in such books as 'The Clapperboard Book of the Cinema' (with G. Murray, 1975) and 'Mountain of Dreams: the Golden Years of Paramount' (1965). In 'Halliwell's Hundred' (1982) and its successor 'Halliwell's Harvest' (1986) he considered some of his favourite films, claiming not that they were the greatest films ever made, or serious works of art, but that they all demonstrated an ability to entertain. In 'The Dead that Walk' (1986) he wrote about horror films, with essays on films about Dracula, Frankenstein, and mummies, in which he argued that 'Bride of Frankenstein' (1935) was the best horror film ever released. He also wrote a history of comedy, 'Double Take and Fade Away' (1987). In the 1980s he published three books of short stories, wrote his autobiography, and also a novel, 'Return to Shangri-La' (1987), a sequel to one of his favourite films, 'Lost Horizon' (1937). After his retirement from ITV in 1986 he wrote a weekly television column in the 'Daily Mail'. 
Halliwell's work was directed at the general public, the middlebrow audience which went to the cinema for entertainment, and not at 'the egghead student of film culture who shuns commercial entertainments in favour of middle-European or Oriental masterpieces which never got further than the National Film Theatre' (L. Halliwell, 'Introduction', 'The Filmgoer's Companion', 1965). While he did not ignore foreign films, they did not appeal to him. Brought up in the 1930s and 1940s, he always regarded these years as the golden age of the cinema, the age when films were made in the studio in black and white. He liked very little that was produced after 1950, and lamented the demise of the old studio crafts and film techniques. He found modern films crude and violent, and the language offensive, and he felt that the wit and style of the early movies were lacking. He dedicated 'Halliwell's Harvest' to the proposition that art should not be despised because it is popular. 
Halliwell's most distinctive physical feature was his very long chin, which he later covered with a beard. He died of cancer on 21 January 1989 in the Princess Alice Hospice, Esher, Surrey. At a memorial meeting at the National Film Theatre excerpts from some of his favourite films were shown, including 'Citizen Kane' (1941), which he regarded as the greatest film ever made. 
Anne Pimlott Baker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39935


Harrison, Sir Reginald Carey (1908-1990), actor, was born on 5 March 1908 in Huyton, Lancashire, the youngest of three children and only son of William Reginald Harrison, stockbroker, and his wife, Edith Mary Carey. At the age of ten he adopted the name Rex, by which he was known for the rest of his life. He was a sickly child and a bout of measles left him with poor sight in his left eye. He was educated at Birkdale preparatory school and Liverpool College. His appearances in school plays, and regular visits to the Liverpool Playhouse, confirmed an early desire to be an actor. At sixteen he was taken on at the playhouse and after a year backstage made his acting debut in 1924 in 'Thirty Minutes in a Street'. After two and a half years playing small roles, he left Liverpool for London, where in 1927 he landed a part in a touring production of 'Charley's Aunt'. Thus began six years of touring and repertory, in which he learned his craft. It was a five-month run as a caddish explorer in 'Heroes Don't Care' in 1936 that provided his breakthrough. The critic of 'Theatre World' proclaimed him 'one of the best light comedians on the English stage' and he maintained this position until his death. 
On the basis of 'Heroes Don't Care', the producer Alexander Korda signed a contract with Harrison at London Films, and he was launched on a cinematic career, which he was to continue henceforth in tandem with his stage career. He achieved an early success in the delightful comedy 'Storm in a Teacup' (1936), where as a crusading reporter he was taught by the director Victor Saville how to relax in front of the camera. He consolidated his theatrical reputation with long runs in 'French without Tears' (1936), 'Design for Living' (1939), and 'No Time for Comedy' (1941). From 1942 to 1944 he served in the Royal Air Force volunteer reserve as a flying-control liaison officer. Emerging from the forces, he established himself as a major British film star in the screen version of 'Blithe Spirit' (1945) and in 'The Rake's Progress' (1945), in which he was excellent as a charming, feckless, parasitic playboy, who expiates a worthless life with a heroic death on the battlefield. 
Hollywood inevitably beckoned and Harrison signed a seven-year contract with Twentieth Century Fox. They saw him not as a light comedian but as a character actor. The vehicles they provided for him, if not always to his taste, were invariably superbly mounted and stretched him as an actor. In 'Anna and the King of Siam' (1946), Harrison was both comic and touching as the capricious but dedicated King Mongkut. In 'The Ghost and Mrs Muir' (1947), playing the spirit of an old sea dog, he took to being blasphemous and bad-tempered with evident glee. In 'Unfaithfully Yours' (1948) he played an autocratic and egocentric orchestral conductor with a memorable line in vituperation. But his continuing unhappiness in Hollywood, his unflattering comments on the film capital, poor box-office returns on his later Fox films, and an unsavoury scandal surrounding the suicide of actress Carole Landis, with whom he was having an affair, led Harrison and Fox to terminate the contract by mutual consent. He returned to Broadway to play Henry VIII in Maxwell Anderson's 'Anne of the Thousand Days' (1948) at the Shubert Theatre, New York, and promptly won a Tony award as best actor. Then in London and on Broadway he did John Van Druten's play 'Bell, Book and Candle' (1950) and directed and starred in Peter Ustinov's play 'The Love of Four Colonels' (1953). He won the 1961 Evening Standard best actor award for his performance in Anton Chekhov's 'Platonov' at the Royal Court Theatre in 1960. 
Harrison resolutely avoided Shakespeare, but became the supreme interpreter of the plays of Bernard Shaw, bringing the necessary quality of civilized intelligence to his performances both on stage ('Heartbreak House', 1983; 'The Devil's Disciple', 1977) and film ('Major Barbara', 1940-41). He will for ever be associated with the role of Professor Henry Higgins in 'My Fair Lady', the Lerner and Loewe musical based on Shaw's 'Pygmalion'. Harrison played the part for three years on stage in New York and London (1956-9), winning a second Tony award, and an Oscar for his performance in the film version (1964). So much did he make the part his own that he later said: 'For years I could never bear to see anyone else do it -- Higgins has become so much a part of me and I, of him.' 
Harrison's success in 'My Fair Lady' made him a major international star and led to appearances in several screen epics in the 1960s. There was more than a touch of Shaw's Julius Caesar in his drily witty and very human performance as the Roman conqueror in 'Cleopatra' (1963). When Caesar expired half-way through, so did the film. The ponderous film about Michelangelo, 'The Agony and the Ecstasy' (1965), was almost redeemed by Harrison's engaging interpretation of Pope Julius II as an urbane schemer. 
In the late 1960s there was a string of expensive flops -- 'The Honey Pot' (1965), 'Doctor Doolittle' (1966), 'A Flea in her Ear' (1967) -- and in the 1970s and 1980s Harrison's film appearances were mainly cameos, though he played Don Quixote in a notable 1973 BBC television production. He concentrated his energies on the stage, displaying his gifts in London and New York in a series of Edwardian revivals: 'Heartbreak House' (1983), 'Aren't we All?' (1984-5), 'The Admirable Crichton' (1988), and 'The Circle' (1989). He was appearing in 'The Circle' when his final illness was diagnosed. Harrison was married six times, and allegedly mistreated all his wives. His first wife (1934) was the fashion model Collette Thomas (her real name was Marjorie). They had one son, the actor and singer Noel Harrison (1934-2013), and were divorced in 1943. His second wife was the emigre German Jewish actress Lilli Palmer (1914-1986) (whose real name was Lilli Peiser), whom he married on 25 January 1943. They had one son, the playwright Carey Harrison ('b'. 1944), and were divorced in 1957. His third wife (23 June 1957) was the English actress Kay Kendall (1927-1959), who died of leukaemia at the age of thirty-two. Their relationship was the basis of the play 'After Lydia', by Sir Terence Rattigan, in which Harrison starred on Broadway in 1974, playing the role based on himself. He married his fourth wife on 21 March 1962, the Welsh actress Rachel Roberts (1927-1980), daughter of the Revd Richard Rhys Roberts. They divorced in 1971 and she committed suicide in 1980. His fifth wife (26 August 1971) was Mrs (Joan) Elizabeth Rees Harris ('b'. 1936), daughter of David Rees Rees-Williams, first Baron Ogmore, and ex-wife of actor Richard Harris. They divorced in 1976. He married finally on 17 December 1978 an American, Mercia Tinker. Harrison wrote two volumes of autobiography and three of his wives left their impressions of him in their autobiographies. 
Harrison was a man of enormous charm and this often compensated for the personal and professional self-centredness and perfectionism that sometimes tried the patience of colleagues and associates. He was perhaps the last Edwardian, compeer of Sir Gerald Du Maurier, Sir Charles Hawtrey, and Sir (E.) Seymour Hicks, actors who contrived to give the impression that they had just popped into the theatre for a spot of acting on the way to the club. Harrison had admired and closely studied the style and technique of the great Edwardians and had come to embody the same combination of elegance, authority, wit, and grace. He was appointed commendatore of Italy's order of merit in 1967, awarded an honorary degree by the University of Boston in 1973, and knighted in 1989. He died of cancer of the pancreas in New York on 2 June 1990. He was cremated and his ashes were scattered over the sea near Portofino, Italy, where he had owned a villa from 1949 to 1976. 
Jeffrey Richards', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39936


Helpmann, Sir Robert Murray (1909-1986), ballet dancer and actor, was born on 9 April 1909 at Kingsley House, Bay Road, Mount Gambier, South Australia, the eldest of the three children of James Murray Helpman (1881-1927), stock judge and auctioneer, and his wife, Mary (1883-1970), daughter of Robert Melville Gardiner and his wife, Catherine. His parents' origins were British (the extra 'n' in his surname was adopted for the theatre). 
Helpmann's great-grandfather, Lieutenant Benjamin Helpman RN, served on HMS 'Beagle' in 1840, contributing to the exploration of northern Australia. His maternal grandfather, Captain Robert Gardiner, born in Scotland in 1812, eventually owned sheep stations in South Australia. No connections with the theatre existed on either side but his maternal grandmother, according to her daughter Mary, was 'a good pianist, a good singer, and a devastating mimic, entertaining us with not always kind impersonations of visitors' (Helpman, 3). Mary grew up with a passion for plays and poetry, but professional acting was out of the question. Her frustration resulted in all three of her children -- Robert, Max, and Sheila -- making notable stage careers. 
Robert was early indoctrinated into his mother's enthusiasms and, as an uninterested and recalcitrant scholar (at Prince Alfred College, Adelaide), he devoted his energies to dancing, piano, and theatregoing. In 1927, when Anna Pavlova toured Australia, she took him on as a student apprentice. Unable for family reasons (his father died in 1927) to go overseas with her, he accepted a contract with the theatre management J. C. Williamson Ltd as principal dancer for musicals, revues, and pantomimes. 
Prompted by the actress Margaret Rawlings, who was touring Australia, Helpmann went to England in 1932 with an introduction to Ninette de Valois, director of the Vic-Wells Ballet. De Valois recalled the meeting: 'This unknown young man impressed me with a strange sense of power; here, possibly, was an artist of infinite range' (Anthony, [7]). Although his experience was primarily in stage dancing, she took him on and never regretted it. He was one of a group of talented young men, but steadily outstripped them by reason of his versatility. Technically he was not a classical virtuoso, but ballet then largely required interpretative demi-character dance for which his skills were ideal. He had impeccable musicality, excellent 'port de bras', and an outstanding gift for partnering. 
In April 1934 De Valois gave Helpmann his first created lead in 'The Haunted Ballroom'. He partnered Alicia Markova in 'Swan Lake', and danced in operas and in open-air ballets at Regent's Park. In 1935 he was leading dancer in the revue 'Stop Press'. Returning to the Wells, he danced the principal role in De Valois's latest ballet, 'The Rake's Progress', which, over many years, displayed his great histrionic power and depth. As part of the stimulating Vic-Wells organization he met people in drama, opera, and the visual arts as well as in ballet. One particular, and always acknowledged, mentor was Constant Lambert, the Vic-Wells Ballet's musical director. 
In 1936 Frederick Ashton staged an intensely romantic work, 'Apparitions', featuring Helpmann and the teenaged Margot Fonteyn. Fonteyn recalled that this was when 'the harmony of dancing with Robert Helpmann began taking hold' of her: 'It is hard for me to explain the intensity of our involvement in that magical process of 'theatre'' (M. Fonteyn, 'Autobiography', 1975, 61). An example of their perfectly matched partnership was their superb rendering of the Aurora 'pas de deux' in 'The Sleeping Beauty'. 
Helpmann's inherited talent for comedy surfaced on stage in 1937, when Ashton's wittily eccentric 'A Wedding Bouquet' proved his command of burlesque. As a comedian he understood how to differentiate between send-up fun, delicate wit, clever mimicry, and out-and-out clowning. Roles like his inventively crusty Dr Coppelius, and the endearingly inebriated Mr O'Reilly in De Valois's 'The Prospect before Us', won him staunch admirers. Ballet, however, would never be enough to satisfy Helpmann and in 1937, in a historic Old Vic production by Tyrone Guthrie of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', he played Oberon to Vivien Leigh's 'Titania'. It was at the Old Vic that he met the producer Michael Pickersgill Benthall (1919-1974), with whom he had a lifelong homosexual partnership as well as many working collaborations. 
During the Second World War, Sadler's Wells Ballet (as it was now known) alternated provincial tours with London seasons. It was accepted that drama, opera, and ballet had a vital part to play in supporting public morale. As an Australian, Helpmann was not liable to be called up, but his tireless wartime workload often involved dancing leads in three performances in one day. The appeal of his partnership with Fonteyn and of his own ballets resulted in the company being far better known and loved after the war than before. 
Helpmann turned choreographer in 1942 after Ashton was called up. His first ballet, 'Comus', reflected Milton faithfully through lyrical and dramatic dancing, and two months later came a brilliantly condensed 'Hamlet' set to Tchaikovsky's fantasy overture and stunningly designed by a discovery of Helpmann, Leslie Hurry. The kaleidoscopic action, representing Hamlet's dying memories, testified to Helpmann's thorough knowledge of the play; and in 1944 he acted the part in a Guthrie production for the Old Vic, giving a reading of keen intelligence and finely spoken verse. Later that year came another highly successful ballet, 'Miracle in the Gorbals'. Theatrically compelling, this was a morality story of a Christlike stranger who raised a suicide and was killed by a gang of thugs. Classical dance, folk-dance, and popular social dances were smoothly intertwined. 
Sadler's Wells Ballet transferred in 1946 to the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, and at the gala premiere of 'The Sleeping Beauty' Helpmann, although barely convalescent after a serious viral illness, doubled as Prince Florimund and an elegantly malevolent Carabosse. Healthwise he was in no way up to choreographing and dancing the lead in his complex 'Adam Zero', premiered in April. Although a memorably exciting production, it was uneven and over-ambitious, and as such was critically damned. Its failure alone did not alter Helpmann's relationship with the company, but another more important factor existed in Ashton's growing antipathy towards him. Temperamentally dependent on general admiration, Ashton was fiercely envious of Helpmann's popularity with the public. Helpmann responded by turning more and more towards other activities. 
Although Helpmann continued to dance and maintain connections with ballet -- he choreographed the ballet in the film 'The Red Shoes' (1948) -- the next few years were primarily devoted to the dramatic theatre, for the most part in serious or tragic roles. In 1947 he and Benthall presented a triumphant revival of 'The White Devil' in which he played Flamineo. In 1948 they joined Barry Jackson's company at Stratford upon Avon, and Helpmann added King John and Shylock to his repertory. In 1951 they were associated with the Olivier-Vivien Leigh season of Shaw's 'Caesar and Cleopatra' and 'Antony and Cleopatra', when Helpmann played Apollodorus and Octavius Caesar. In 1952 he acted with Katharine Hepburn (who became a close friend) as the Doctor in 'The Millionairess'. In 1954 he played Oberon at the Edinburgh festival, and was rightly acclaimed as The Devil in Gunther Rennert's production of 'The Soldier's Tale'. He returned to Australia in 1955 (after twenty-three years), with Hepburn and Benthall, in a stimulating trio of Shakespeare plays, acting Petruchio, Shylock, and Angelo in 'Measure for Measure'. Three years later he danced for the first time in Australia with the Royal Ballet. 
Helpmann was now directing plays, having staged a remarkable production of 'Murder in the Cathedral', starring Robert Donat, at the Old Vic in 1953. In opera, there was a spectacular and amusing production of 'Le coq d'or', starring Mattiwilda Dobbs, at Covent Garden in 1954. During Benthall's term as director of the Old Vic (1953-61), Helpmann regularly acted and directed there while at the same time appearing in West End plays such as Coward's 'Nude with Violin' and Sartre's 'Nekrassov' in 1957. Television plays included the solo performance 'Box for One' in 1953, and his film roles included the terrifying Child-catcher in 'Chitty Chitty Bang Bang' (1968). 
Australian tours had tightened Helpmann's always strong family bonds, and in 1964 he choreographed 'The Display' for the Australian Ballet. This related the lyre-bird's mating dance to a group of young picnicking Australians, and was an immense local success. In the following year he became co-director of the company with Peggy van Praagh. Other ballets followed, and Helpmann's worldwide contacts and standards were also of great value to the Australian Ballet's development and its increasingly important overseas tours. His services to both British and Australian ballet were marked by a knighthood in 1968. 
Helpmann's international reputation in the performing arts, and his mischievous delight in feeding the media with controversial material (he was wittily articulate), made him a household name in Australia. He was, however, often in conflict with the Australian Ballet board, and in 1976 they sacked him (his word) from his directorship. During the next ten years he continued acting and directing plays and operas. In May 1986, although suffering from emphysema, he appeared for the last time on stage as the Red King in an Australian Ballet revival of De Valois's 'Checkmate', an impressive mime role he had created forty-seven years before. On 28 September 1986 he died at Sydney Royal North Shore Hospital. 
Australia realized what it had lost. He was given a state funeral on 2 October at St Andrew's Cathedral, Sydney, before a private cremation, and tributes came from the senate and the house of representatives, where the prime minister (Bob Hawke) said: 'No one should underestimate Sir Robert Helpmann's role in the development of the growing maturity of Australia's art and culture'. De Valois summed up their long association more personally: 'To work with Robert Helpmann was always an inspiration. There was at work an alerted intelligence with an acute sense of perception... Bobby had a sense of humour that surmounted everything. Sometimes it was expressed by word of mouth, sometimes by an outburst of mime, at other times by just a look -- and the latter could prove to be the most potent of all. ('Daily Telegraph', London, 29 Sept 1986)' Helpmann's achievements in the dramatic arts resulted from natural talents guided by a well-balanced and courageous character. He brought unremitting perfectionist application, as well as great zest, to everything he undertook. As a choreographer he created mime and movement dramas rather than plotless ballets, and always chose collaborating composers and designers of the highest calibre. Inevitably he had critics and denigrators, and people he upset either by his mimicry or by the incurable honesty with which he said what he thought. Great friendships, however, were a dominant feature of his life. Michael Somes of the Royal Ballet spoke for many who knew him when he wrote in 'Uproar', the Royal Ballet's house journal at Christmas 1986: 'Perhaps only those of us (from all branches of the theatre) who were fortunate enough and privileged enough to work and learn from him, can know how much we owe to his influence and example... [he] was not only a kind and generous human being who... was willing to share his talent for the benefit of others. Above all, on and off the stage, we owe him hours of laughter.' 



@@@@@


doc= 39937


Howard, Trevor (1913-1988), actor, was born in Cliftonville, Kent, on 29 September 1913, the only son and elder child of Arthur John Howard-Smith, who worked as Ceylon representative for Lloyd's of London, and his Canadian wife, Mabel Grey Wallace, nurse. Until he was five he lived in Colombo, Ceylon, but then travelled with his mother until the age of eight, when he was sent to school at Clifton College, Bristol. He was an isolated child and when neither of his parents returned to England holidays were spent either in seaside bed-and-breakfast accommodation or in the home of one of the housemasters. At school Howard was not strongly academic and it was sport that caught his interest, particularly boxing and cricket. The latter became one of the great loves of his life, together with jazz. Towards the end of his school career he started visiting the local theatre, and he left Clifton to become an actor, getting into the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) without any previous stage experience. 
Howard's first paid work was in the play 'Revolt in a Reformatory' (1934), before he left RADA in 1935 to take small roles. That year he was spotted by a Paramount studio talent scout but turned down the offer of film work in favour of a career in theatre. This decision seemed justified when, in 1936, he was invited to join the Stratford Memorial Theatre and, in London, given the role of one of the students in 'French without Tears' by Terence Rattigan, which ran for two years. He returned to Stratford in 1939. At the outbreak of war he decided to enlist, but both the army and the Royal Air Force rejected him. However, in 1940, after working at the Colchester repertory theatre, he was called up into the Royal Corps of Signals, airborne division, becoming a second lieutenant before he was invalided out in 1943. The stories of Howard's war heroism were fabricated, without his consent, for publicity purposes. 
Howard moved back to the theatre in 'The Recruiting Officer' (1943), where he met the actress Helen Cherry ['see below']; they married in 1944. They had no children. A short part in one of the best British war films, 'The Way Ahead' (1944), provided a springboard into cinema. This was followed by 'The Way to the Stars' (1945), which led to the role for which Howard became best known, the doctor in 'Brief Encounter' (1945), in which his co-star was Celia Johnson. Directed by David Lean, the film won an award at the Cannes festival and considerable critical acclaim for Howard. Next came two successful Frank Launder and Sidney Gilliat thrillers, 'I See a Dark Stranger' (1945) and 'Green for Danger' (1946), followed by 'They Made me a Fugitive' (1947), in which the roots of British realism in cinema can be traced. In 1947 he was invited by Laurence Olivier to play Petruchio in an Old Vic production of 'The Taming of the Shrew'. Despite 'The Times' declaring 'We can remember no better Petruchio', the opportunity of working again with David Lean, in 'The Passionate Friends' (1948), drew Howard back to film and, although he had a solid reputation as a theatre actor, his dislike of long runs, and the attractions of travel afforded by film, made him concentrate on cinema from this point. 
Howard's film reputation was secured in 'The Third Man' (1949). He played the character type with which he became most associated, the British military officer, but his capabilities were stretched by his role in this story of post-war Vienna by Graham Greene. Howard had a certain notoriety as a hellraiser, based on his drinking capacity. Under the influence of alcohol he could embark on celebrated exploits, one of which led to his arrest in Vienna, for impersonating an officer. Despite his drinking, however, he always remained reliable and professional, never allowing alcohol to affect his work. 
During the 1950s, while often eliciting good notices for his work, Howard frequently appeared in flawed films like 'Odette' (1950) and 'An Outcast of the Islands' (1951). An exception was 'The Heart of the Matter' (1953), another Graham Greene story, in which he produced his best screen performance. Such opportunities were rare, even though he shifted into the American market. In 1958 he received the best actor award from the British Film Academy for his performance in 'The Key', but this film, too, failed to meet his high standards. 
Although 'Sons and Lovers' (1960), for which Howard received an Oscar nomination for his performance as the father, and 'Mutiny on the Bounty' (1962), in which he worked with Marlon Brando, enabled him to move away from playing military stereotypes, 'Von Ryan's Express' (1965) and 'The Long Duel' (1967), with Yul Brynner, saw a return to playing officer figures. Even the role of the pugnacious Cardigan in 'The Charge of the Light Brigade' (1968) revisited military territory, and in this uneven yet innovative film Howard gave a fine performance. Working with Brando and Brynner proved frustrating experiences, leaving him with a mistrust of Hollywood. After the 1960s cinema gave him fewer opportunities to display his ability. His performance as the cynical priest in Lean's 'Ryan's Daughter' (1971) is one of the most memorable in this over-long film, but for much of the 1970s he was increasingly relegated to cameo appearances in films such as 'Ludwig' (1973) or disappointing movies such as 'Persecution' (1974) and 'Conduct Unbecoming' (1975). However, in 1978 he played a choric-narrator figure in 'Stevie' with Glenda Jackson, an experience he found satisfying. 
In television Howard began to find more substantial roles. In 1962 he played Lovborg in 'Hedda Gabler' with Ingrid Bergman, and in 1963 won an Emmy award as Disraeli in 'The Invincible Mr Disraeli'. In the 1970s he was acclaimed for his playing of an abbot in 'Catholics' (1973) and in 1975 he received an Emmy nomination for his role as Abbe Faria in a television version of 'The Count of Monte Cristo'. The decade ended with him reunited with Celia Johnson, giving a moving performance in the nostalgic 'Staying on' (1980), written by Paul Scott. 
The 1980s saw a resurgence of Howard as a film actor. The exhilarating role of a Cheyenne Indian in 'Windwalker' (1980) revitalized his acting. However, as was the case with 'Sir Henry at Rawlinson End' (1980), a low-budget black and white film, this impressive movie never reached a wide audience. He continued with cameo roles, including Judge Broomfield in 'Gandhi' (1982). His final films were 'White Mischief' and 'The Old Jest', both released in 1988. Howard did not abandon the theatre altogether in 1947, returning to the stage on occasion, most notably as Lopakhin in 'The Cherry Orchard' (1954) and the captain in 'The Father' (1964). His last appearance on the British stage was in 'Waltz of the Toreadors' in 1974. 
Howard made seventy-four films. He embodied the traditional Englishman: his tight-lipped features and quiet, well-bred speaking voice caught the mood of post-war Britain while, in later years, his craggy face and gravelly voice animated the crusty character roles he played. He lacked the looks and physique to be an archetypal male hero, and his tall frame suited military roles. He failed to fulfil his potential, for he rarely played the lead roles he deserved. Supporting some of the most notable names in the world of cinema, he often received the highest critical acclaim. Howard died on 7 January 1988, at Bushey Hospital in Hertfordshire, of bronchitis complicated by jaundice. 
Howard's wife, 
Lib Taylor', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39938


Lillie, Beatrice Gladys (1894-1989), actress and singer, was born on 29 May 1894 in Toronto, the younger daughter (there were no sons) of John Lillie, cigar seller, of Lisburn in Ireland, and his wife, Lucie Ann, eldest daughter of John Shaw, a Manchester draper. Following her parents' emigration to Toronto, the family grew up there and Bea, as she was known, was educated at St Agnes' College in Belleville, Ontario; she began to appear in amateur concerts there with her mother and sister as the Lillie Trio. At the outbreak of the First World War they all returned to London, and it was at the Chatham Music Hall in 1914 that she made her professional stage debut. 
Already it was clear that the Lillie Trio was not much of a success, and that if Beatrice Lillie was to succeed in the theatre it would have to be as a solo act. Almost immediately after her London debut she formed an alliance with the leading First World War producer of intimate revues, Andre Charlot, who saw in her not the serious singer she had set out to become, but a comedian of considerable if zany qualities. Charlot at this time was also fostering the very early careers of Gertrude Lawrence (who for a time was Lillie's understudy), W. J. ('Jack') Buchanan, and Noel Coward. During the First World War, Lillie became a favourite of troops on leave from the front, relying on spontaneity and an improvised response to her audiences, which Charlot had to restrain when it threatened to go too far. Lillie's great talents were the arched eyebrow, the curled lip, the fluttering eyelid, the tilted chin, the ability to suggest, even in apparently innocent material, the possible 'double entendre'. 
On 5 January 1920 Lillie married Robert Peel (1898-1934), son of Robert Peel, and great-grandson of Sir Robert Peel, prime minister. He succeeded his father as fifth baronet in 1925. He died in 1934, leaving his wife with one beloved son, Robert, sixth baronet, the last of the senior line of the Peel family, who was killed in the Second World War, in April 1942. The loss of her husband and then her son comparatively early in her life (she never married again) left Lillie with a constant private sadness that she seemed able to overcome only on stage. Her career encompassed some fifty stage shows in the West End and Broadway as well as a dozen films, but she excelled in live performance, demolishing scripts and songs alike with her own particular brand of solo eccentricity. Charles Cochran, Coward, and Florenz Ziegfeld all employed her in their revues, but in 1932 American audiences saw her as the Nurse in the New York premiere of 'Too Good to be True' by Bernard Shaw, one of the comparatively few 'straight' roles she undertook: others were in Robert Morley's first play, 'Staff Dance' (1944), and the non-musical version of 'Auntie Mame', which she brought to London after the war. 
Lillie made her cabaret debut at the Cafe de Paris in 1933, worked in revue and troop concerts throughout the war, and made her own television series, based on her cabaret routines, as early as 1951. She then developed, and toured for many years around the world, a solo show called simply 'An Evening with Beatrice Lillie', which ranked alongside those of Joyce Grenfell and Ruth Draper. Her career in films began with the silent film 'Exit Smiling', in 1927 and continued intermittently right through to 'Around the World in Eighty Days' (1956) and 'Thoroughly Modern Millie' (her last, in 1967). But in films as on radio something was missing: the live audience to which she could respond and which she often made part of the act. She was excellent as the mad Auntie Mame, or as Madame Arcati in 'High Spirits' (1964), a Broadway musical version of Coward's 'Blithe Spirit'. Coward called her 'the perfect comedienne' and wrote his 'Marvellous Party' for her to sing, while Cole Porter wrote her 'Mrs Lowsborough-Goodby'. Her entire career was a sustained monument to anarchic alternative comedy before those terms had ever been invented, and hers was a triumph of manic high spirits. With her long face, tall brow, lively eyes, natural poise, and radiant personality, she was one of the great female clowns. 
Lillie's last years were overshadowed by illness; she lived at Peel Fold, Mill Lane, Henley-on-Thames, a virtual recluse had it not been for her devoted manager John Philip, who shared the house with her for twenty years and who died of a stroke only a matter of hours after her death. She died on 20 January 1989 in Henley. 
Sheridan Morley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39939


Lockwood, Margaret Mary (1916-1990), actress, was born on 15 September 1916 in Karachi, India, the younger child and only daughter of Henry Francis Lockwood, district traffic superintendent (later chief superintendent) on the Indian railways, and his third wife, Margaret Eveline Waugh, a Scot, who had been a nurse. She also had an older stepbrother. Mother and children set up home in Upper Norwood, London, when Margaret was three and a half, after which they saw little of her father. She attended Sydenham Girls' High School, taking dancing lessons at the Italia Conti School. These led to her appearance as a fairy in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' at the Holborn Empire when she was twelve. She left Sydenham High for the Cone School of Dancing, and did the rounds of auditions, performing in clubs, concerts, cabarets, and tea dances. In 1929 she adopted a family name, Day, for her stage name Margie Day, finally leaving school altogether at fourteen. 
In 1933 Lockwood was accepted by the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) at the age of sixteen, and showed both talent and dedication, completing the two-year course in fourteen months. Playing a leading part in the annual RADA show, she caught the attention of the London agent Herbert de Leon. He quickly secured her two brief London stage engagements and second lead in the film 'Lorna Doone' (1934), directed by Basil Dean. De Leon remained her manager, adviser, and friend until his death forty-five years later. 
Margaret Lockwood was immediately put under contract by British Lion film company and during the next few years made over a dozen films, many of them quota quickies, often appearing on the London stage in the evenings as well. A beautiful girl with abundant dark hair, big eyes, delicate features, a beauty spot high on her left cheekbone (which was allowed to appear for the first time in 'The Wicked Lady', 1945), natural poise, and an unaffected speaking voice, she proved a hard-working and reliable actress and was much in demand. The important Gainsborough film company promoted her as a star, and in 'Bank Holiday' (1938) and in Alfred Hitchcock's 'The Lady Vanishes' (1938) she achieved critical success (the latter film, in which she starred with Michael Redgrave, proved enduringly popular). Before long she was appearing in some of the best British films of the period, including 'The Stars Look Down' and 'Night Train to Munich', both directed by Carol Reed. 
Margaret Lockwood's career entered a new phase in 1943. Gainsborough had been acquired by J. Arthur Rank, who launched a series of frankly escapist films to cheer up the war-weary British public. These were novelettish costume melodramas, dubbed 'Gainsborough Gothics', scorned by serious critics and not especially well made but an enormous success at the box office. Lockwood afterwards was always identified with her part in the best-known of these, 'The Wicked Lady', in which she starred with James Mason. 
Lockwood was now at the peak of her career and earning a large salary, the biggest British film star of her time although no longer taken very seriously as an actress. But her films began to decline in quality and by 1948, still only thirty-two, her great days were over. Her contract with Rank was dissolved in 1951. A woman of spirit, she returned to the stage and turned also to television. Always professional, she continued to act on the London stage and on tour for another twenty-five years. She starred in two television series, 'The Flying Swan' (1965) and 'Justice' (1971-4). Her last film appearance was in the fairy tale 'The Slipper and the Rose', in 1976, and her last stage part was Queen Alexandra in 'Motherdear' in 1980. 
Not a great emotional actress, Margaret Lockwood was a straightforward and intelligent woman who worked hard and lived quietly, earning the affection of the British public. Unpretentious, she disliked the attributes of stardom. She was nominated by the 'Motion Picture Herald' as the top money-making star in Britain in 1945 and 1946, and won the 'Daily Mail' film award as best actress in British films in 1946, 1947, and 1948. Later she received the 'Daily Mirror' television award in 1961, and best actress award from the 'Sun' in 1973 and from the 'TV Times' in 1977. In 1981 she was appointed CBE. 
In 1937 she married Rupert William Leon (who was not related to her agent), commercial clerk (later steel broker), the son of Emil Armand Leon, managing director of the British Iron and Steel Corporation. Her mother disapproved strongly of the marriage. Their daughter Julia, later the actress Julia Lockwood, was born in 1941 but the marriage failed soon afterwards. Margaret Lockwood wished to marry Keith Dobson, but her husband refused to give her a divorce. She then had a relationship with Theo Cowan, who was in charge of Rank's publicity. She later lived for seventeen years, apparently happily, with John Stone, a minor fellow actor considerably younger than herself, whom she met in 1959. She was afflicted by ear trouble and, after he left her in 1977, she gradually withdrew from the theatre. Two years later she was devastated by the death of her friend and mentor de Leon. For the last years of her life she lived as a recluse at 34 Upper Park Road, Kingston upon Thames. She died, a wealthy woman, of cirrhosis of the liver in the Cromwell Hospital, Kensington, on 15 July 1990. 
Rachael Low', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39940


Manvell, (Arnold) Roger (1909-1987), film critic and historian, was born on 10 October 1909 at St Barnabas vicarage, Leicester, the only child of the Revd Arnold Edward William Manvell, later canon of Peterborough Cathedral, and his wife, Gertrude Theresa Baines. He was educated at King's School in Peterborough. He studied English literature at University College, Leicester, obtaining his PhD on W. B. Yeats at London University. He began work in 1931 as a schoolmaster and adult education lecturer in Leicester, moving to the department of extramural studies at Bristol University in 1937. 
In 1940 Manvell joined the films division of the Ministry of Information, screening factual films and lecturing to non-theatrical audiences. Seizing the opportunities offered by current interest in 'film appreciation', he wrote 'Film' (1944), which broke new ground as a critical history of the great films of the past. It was an immediate best-seller, introducing a whole generation to an understanding of film as an art form. In the following year he was appointed research officer and lecturer at the British Film Institute and was instrumental in setting up, and at first guiding, the institute's academic series of volumes 'The History of the British Film'. 
In 1946 Manvell began broadcasting and his name became a household word through the BBC series 'The Critics'. Also in 1946 he founded the 'Penguin Film Review', and edited it until 1949, and in 1947 became the first director of the senior film-makers' own organization, the British Film Academy, the forerunner of BAFTA, where he remained until 1959. All the while he busily produced books written or edited by himself alone or in collaboration with experts in various aspects of the cinema. After 1959 he acted as consultant to the British Film Academy, continuing to write, lecture, and sit on numerous committees. He was also prominent in the humanist movement, and was associate editor of 'New Humanist' from 1967 to 1975. Books of film criticism, analysis, and history continued thick and fast, interspersed with biographies of Charlie Chaplin (1974) and of several great English actresses. In later years he was involved in film studies at Sussex University, Louisville University (1973), and the London Film School, of which he was a governor (1966-74), and he did useful work for the Society of Authors and other bodies. 
Manvell also took up a new interest. Heinrich Fraenkel, a Jewish film journalist and scriptwriter, who had fled Germany in 1933, had founded a Free German movement in Britain and written several slight books to persuade his adopted country that not all Germans were Nazi. Manvell began a fruitful collaboration with him in 1959 with a thoughtful and well-documented biography, 'Doctor Goebbels' (1960). Together, during the next dozen years they produced eight solid books on the history of Nazism, including four biographies and an account of the 1944 July plot to kill Hitler. Fraenkel had gone to the Nuremberg trials and interviewed many key people. He had valuable contacts in Germany, as well as access to relevant archives. Manvell's expertise in scholarly presentation, as well as his wide contacts and fluent style, helped make this an important body of work. 
By 1975 film studies in Britain and France had developed in directions uncongenial to a man of Manvell's generation and he felt more at home in American universities. He joined Boston University in 1975, was made a professor in 1982, and worked there for the rest of his life, continuing his large and varied output of books, of which two of the most notable were 'Films and the Second World War' (1974) and 'Elizabeth Inchbald, England's Leading Woman Dramatist' (1987). 
In 1970 Manvell was made commander of the order of merit of the Italian Republic, and in 1971 was awarded the order of merit (first class) of the German Federal Republic. A scholar-teacher of the year award for 1984-5 from Boston University followed, as well as an honorary DFA of New England College (1972), and honorary DLitts from Sussex (1971), Leicester (1974), and Louisville (1979) universities. 
These were meagre distinctions for an influential writer who had pioneered the serious study of film in his native land. Brisk and practical, he was a good organizer and a prolific writer, who combined accuracy with a readable middlebrow style. Even his puzzling insistence on the use of his academic title of 'Dr' played its part, perhaps, in the emergence of film as a respectable subject for academic study, belatedly accepted at last by British universities. His assiduous use of contacts, combined with great energy and drive, did much to spread a serious appreciation of the cinema in Britain. 
Of medium height, fairly heavily built, and inclined to be pudgy, he always seemed in a hurry to get to the next opportunity that beckoned. As he grew older his hair receded fluffily and his eyes peered shrewdly from behind thick glasses. Ambition and determination almost hid a wry, slightly sardonic humour. In 1936 he married Edith Mary, daughter of John Cook Bulman; they had one son. The marriage was dissolved and in 1946 he married Margaret Hilda, daughter of Percy James Lee, dental surgeon, of Bristol. After a divorce, in 1956 he married Louise, daughter of Charles Luson Cribb, of London. They divorced in 1981 and in the same year he married Francoise Baylis, daughter of Rene Nautre, company director. There were no children of the final three marriages. Manvell died in Boston on 30 November 1987. 
Rachael Low', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39941


Marshall, (Charles) Arthur Bertram (1910-1989), humorist and broadcaster, was born on 10 May 1910 in Barnes, Surrey, the younger son of Charles Frederick Bertram Marshall, consulting engineer, and his wife, Dorothy Lee. His father was a loving husband, but although he quite liked the idea of children, to Arthur's disappointment he preferred to be where they were not. In 1920 the family moved to Newbury, Berkshire, and Arthur was sent away to boarding-school. First he went to Edinburgh House, an uncomfortable but enjoyable preparatory school in Lee-on-Solent, Hampshire, and then to Oundle School in Northamptonshire. He was happy at Oundle -- he seems to have been happy almost everywhere -- and during a debate in his last winter term a great burst of laughter at something he said gave him such a whiff of power and pleasure that he decided to make the raising of laughter the prime consideration of his life. He then went to Christ's College, Cambridge, where he obtained a second class (second division) in part one of the modern and medieval languages tripos (French, 1929, and German, 1930) and a third class in part two (1931). 
Marshall acted at every opportunity at Oundle and at Christ's and was determined on a career in the theatre. He mostly played female parts at university, for which he collected some excellent press notices, notably for his playing of Lady Cicely, opposite Michael Redgrave, in G. B. Shaw's 'Captain Brassbound's Conversion'. He became president of Cambridge's Amateur Dramatic Society. 
Down from Cambridge, armed with his glowing press cuttings, Marshall had his heart set on going to the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London, but his mother pointed out that the acting profession would hardly give an ecstatic welcome to an amateur female impersonator. She persuaded him to go back to Oundle instead and make a career as a schoolmaster. In 1931 Oundle offered him a job as a house tutor and teacher of French and German, which he accepted, quaking in his shoes. To his own surprise he turned out to be a good teacher and, as the terms sped happily by, he spent a good deal of his free time writing and performing to friends what were then called 'turns', three-minute comic monologues in which, inspired by Angela Brazil's girls'-school stories which he found hilarious when read aloud, he impersonated hearty botany mistresses and stern school matrons. 
In 1934 a BBC radio producer saw Marshall perform his botany mistress turn at a party and booked him to broadcast it on 'Charlot's Hour'. Thus his professional career began by his becoming the world's first drag act on radio. In the same year Raymond Mortimer, literary editor of the 'New Statesman', asked him to review a clutch of schoolgirl stories. His review was much enjoyed and for many years was a popular Christmas feature of the magazine. 
During the Second World War Marshall, like many a schoolmaster, was drafted into intelligence; he had a busy time, surviving the evacuation of Dunkirk in the British expeditionary force and working with combined operations headquarters and Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force. In 1945 he was a lieutenant-colonel on General Dwight D. Eisenhower's staff. He was appointed an MBE in 1944. In 1943, while still in uniform, he wrote and starred in a BBC comedy series on the radio, 'A Date with Nurse Dugdale', which was a wartime success. 
After the war Marshall returned to Oundle in 1946 as a housemaster, but his fascination with the theatre was still strong and, afraid that he might end up as a rotund Mr Chips before his time, he left Oundle in 1954 at the age of forty-four and became a social secretary to his old friend Victor, third Baron Rothschild. In 1958 he changed jobs again and went to work in London as a script reader for one of the leading figures of Shaftesbury Avenue's commercial theatre, H. G. (Binkie) Beaumont of H. M. Tennent Ltd. Marshall was in his element at last. He was such pleasant company that everybody in the theatre seemed to know and like him, and this charming, funny, and uncompetitive person was invited everywhere. He spent many long weekends at Somerset Maugham's Villa Mauresque at Cap Ferrat on the French riviera and months with Alfred Lunt and Lynn Fontanne in the USA. No doubt part of his attraction as a guest was that when conversation sagged his host would call upon him to entertain the company with a turn, and he was delighted to oblige. 
In 1953 Marshall began to publish his humorous prose pieces in book form, beginning with 'Nineteen to the Dozen' (1953); many more followed. He also published some gratifyingly successful compilations from the 'New Statesman' competitions and his own book reviews, 'Salome Dear, not in the Fridge!' (1968), 'Girls will be Girls' (1974), 'Whimpering in the Rhododendrons' (1982), and 'Giggling in the Shrubbery' (1985). In 1975 he started writing a regular column for the 'New Statesman' and another for the 'Sunday Telegraph'. He also became a regular broadcaster and chat-show guest and in 1979 was enlisted as a team captain in the BBC television game show 'Call my Bluff', which he graced for ten years. 
In the world of broadcast humour in the 1980s it was Arthur Marshall who was the 'alternative comedian'. This was the era dominated by young writers and comics who appealed to young viewers and readers with a stunning display of aggressive, sexual, and politically simplistic routines nurtured on the student union circuit. For those for whom this sort of comedy ceased to appeal much after the first excitement, Marshall's charming, intelligent, witty, and affectionate humour came as a breath of fresh air. He was perhaps the last flowering of the humour which Joseph Addison and Sir Richard Steele pioneered in the early eighteenth century and called 'polite comedy'. 
With his unconventional attitudes towards such things as religion and erudition, his distaste for foreigners, and his eyes sparkling and chins a-wobble at some absurdity he had noticed, a line of Rupert Brooke's should be bent to Arthur Marshall, this happiest of humorists, as 'an English unofficial sunbeam'. His last years were spent in Devon where he lived at Pound Cottage, Christow, near Exeter, and during his final illness he was fortunate to have an old friend, Peter Kelland, a retired schoolmaster, to look after him and share his life. He died, unmarried, on 27 January 1989, and a memorial service was held in London on 19 July of that year. 
Frank Muir', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39942


Murdoch, Richard Bernard (1907-1990), actor and comedian, was born on 6 April 1907 at the family home in Keston, Kent, the only son of Bernard Murdoch, tea merchant, and his wife, Amy Florence, daughter of Avison Terry Scott, archdeacon of Tonbridge. He was educated at Charterhouse School and at Pembroke College, Cambridge, which he left without gaining a degree, his appetite for a career in show business being whetted by success with the Cambridge Footlights. 
Murdoch's professional stage career began in 1927 at the King's Theatre, Southsea, in the chorus of the musical play 'The Blue Train'. He then worked in the chorus and played small parts in various musical comedies and revues including 'That's a Good Girl' (1928), 'Oh Letty!' (1929), 'Cochran's 1930 Revue', and 'Stand up and Sing' (1931). This was followed in the 1930s by Andre Charlot's West End revues and the musical comedy 'Over she Goes' (1936). By the mid-1930s his reputation as a first-class light comedian was growing. In 1932 he married Peggy, daughter of William Rawlings, solicitor. They had one son and two daughters. 
In 1938 the BBC teamed Murdoch with Arthur Askey in the radio series 'Band Waggon', in which they were alleged to live in a flat in Broadcasting House, and many sketches were based on this notion. Their humour was a forerunner of much radio comedy to come, for although their comic interludes took up only ten minutes of the weekly one-hour programme, the fantasy of their living in Broadcasting House, and the creation of such mythical characters as Mrs Bagwash the charlady and her daughter Nausea and their pet animals, a goat called Lewis, and two pigeons Basil and Lucy, preceded 'ITMA' and 'Hancock's Half Hour' and was a strong influence on many nascent comedy scriptwriters. 
In 1938, after two series, the stage rights to 'Band Waggon' were acquired by the impresario Jack Hylton, and Murdoch with Askey and a supporting cast toured the provincial music-halls and finished with a run at the London Palladium in 1939. The debonair, sophisticated West End style of Murdoch blended neatly with the more down-to-earth humour of Liverpudlian Arthur Askey, whose reputation was based on his successes in seaside concert parties. It was Askey who gave Murdoch the nickname Stinker. Together they were enormously successful. 
In 1941 Murdoch joined the Royal Air Force as a pilot officer working in the intelligence sector of Bomber Command. Later he was posted to the Air Ministry in London, where he was promoted to squadron leader in the directorate of administrative plans, under the command of Wing Commander Kenneth Horne. The two quickly became friends and as both were regular broadcasters it was only a matter of time (1944) before they dreamed up the mythical RAF station 'Much Binding in the Marsh'. This became the RAF segment of a services series 'Merry Go Round', alternating with the Royal Navy show 'HMS Waterlogged', written by and starring Eric Barker, and the army contribution 'Stand Easy', with Charlie Chester. 
Murdoch and Horne wrote the scripts of the 'Much Binding' shows and when peace came in 1945 they duly transferred it to a civilian milieu, where it thrived until 1954. From then on Richard Murdoch's career was varied and interesting and included a tour of South Africa, a season in Canada playing William the waiter in G. B. Shaw's 'You Never can Tell', and a round-the-world trip for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation in a series of programmes called 'Much Murdoch'. 
His next major success was the BBC radio series 'The Men from the Ministry' (1961-77), in which he co-starred first with Wilfrid Hyde-White and later with Deryck Guyler. Towards the end of his life Richard Murdoch appeared in several episodes of the television series 'Rumpole of the Bailey', playing the aged barrister Uncle Tom. 
Murdoch was 6 feet 1 inch tall and good looking. He was always polished and well mannered and was, to quote James Green, the show business columnist, 'a subtle and charming comic actor'. Murdoch died on 9 October 1990. As a keen golfer he could not have wished for a better end, for he died while playing golf at Walton Heath, Surrey. 
Barry Took', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39943


Neagle, Dame Anna (1904-1986), actress and film producer, was born in Forest Gate, Essex, on 20 October 1904, the only daughter and youngest of three children of Herbert William Robertson, a captain in the merchant navy, and his wife, Florence Neagle. She was educated at the high school, St Albans, and at Wordsworth's Physical Training College, South Kensington, London. After being a student dance teacher, from 1925 to 1930 she appeared in the chorus of revues produced by Andre Charlot and Charles Cochran. 
In 1930 she changed her name to Anna Neagle. Her first significant film part was in 'Goodnight Vienna' (1932), directed by Herbert Sydney Wilcox (1890-1977), whom she married in 1943. They had no children. Wilcox directed thirty-two films with Neagle. Her first major film success was in 'Nell Gwyn' (1934), and she gradually became synonymous with the historical picture, especially when Wilcox directed her in 'Victoria the Great' (1937), an unexpectedly popular and critical success. It won the 'Picturegoer' gold medal award and the gold cup at the Venice film festival. Neagle and Wilcox went to America to publicize its release and on their return repeated the formula successfully in Technicolor with 'Sixty Glorious Years' (1938). 
Anna Neagle went to America in 1939 and made four films with RKO studios: 'Nurse Edith Cavell' (1939) and three musical comedies, 'Irene' (1940), 'No, No, Nanette' (1940), and 'Sunny' (1941). She was the first actress to appear on the cover of 'Life' magazine. On her return to Britain she started work on a film of the life of the aviator Amy Johnson, 'They Flew Alone' (1941). Her next film was 'Yellow Canary' (1943), about a Women's Royal Naval Service intelligence worker mistaken for a Nazi spy. 
In 1945 Neagle's films became less heroic, and more escapist light entertainment, as she continued to straddle her film career with stage appearances and tours. She appeared in the film 'I Live in Grosvenor Square' (1945), co-starring Rex Harrison, and went on an Entertainments National Service Association (ENSA) tour in Europe in the play 'French without Tears'. After the Second World War Neagle starred in a distinctive series of musical comedies with Michael Wilding. The first of the 'London series' was 'Piccadilly Incident' (1946), which won the 'Daily Mail' national film award, as did its successor, 'The Courtneys of Curzon Street' (1947). For her performances in both films Neagle received the 'Picturegoer' gold medal. The third film in the Neagle-Wilding partnership was 'Spring in Park Lane' (1948). 
Aware of her previous success in 'biopics', Herbert Wilcox directed Neagle as Odette Sansom, a Special Operations Executive undercover agent, who had been tortured by the Nazis, in the film 'Odette' (1950). As a result Neagle was appointed an honorary ensign (1950) of the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry, an appropriate award for an actress who went on to play Florence Nightingale in 'The Lady with a Lamp' (1951). 
In 1957 Anna Neagle produced 'These Dangerous Years', starring Frankie Vaughan, and was directed for the first time by a person other than Herbert Wilcox (Cyril Frankel) in 'No Time for Tears' (1957). After her first box-office flop, 'The Lady is a Square' (1958), financial problems beset Neagle and Wilcox and her attempt to start a dance school failed. Eventually, however, theatre appearances helped to resuscitate her flagging career. 
Neagle was distinctive for her ability to maintain a 'regal presence' on screen. She was an 'English' beauty with a striking bone structure, who maintained her dancer's figure throughout her life. She could look equally at home in a glamorous ball gown or a practical flying-suit. Despite her variety of parts, her portrayals of heroines firmly placed her as a British icon in a patriotic style of film-making. She was appointed CBE in 1952 and DBE in 1969. She also received the freedom of the City of London (1981) and the order of St John (1981). Her final appearance was as the Fairy Godmother in 'Cinderella' at the London Palladium that year. Anna Neagle, whose home latterly was at 117B Hamilton Terrace, London, died on 3 June 1986 from breast cancer at a nursing home, Clare House, Oakcroft Road, West Byfleet, Surrey, and was buried in the City of London cemetery, Manor Park, London. A service of thanksgiving was held in Westminster Abbey on 20 October 1986. 
Sarah Street', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39945


Powell, Michael Latham (1905-1990), film director, was born on 30 September 1905 at Howletts, Bekesbourne, near Canterbury, Kent, the second son and younger child of Thomas William Powell, farmer, and his wife, Mabel, daughter of Frederick Corbett, of Worcester. He was educated at King's School, Canterbury, where he was a king's scholar, and at Dulwich College. Powell started work with the National Provincial Bank in 1922, but entered the film business in 1925, when he joined Rex Ingram, a Hollywood director who was working at the Victorine Studios in Nice, and Harry Lachman, a Chicago-born painter who secured employment for Powell with British International Pictures. The contact with Ingram was made through Powell's father, who owned a hotel in Nice. In 1927 Powell married Gloria Mary Rouger, an American dancer; they were married in France and stayed together for only three weeks. In 1931 Powell formed Film Engineering with Jerry Jackson, an American lawyer, to produce 'quota quickies', British films given a market by the 'Cinematograph Act' of 1927. In just five years he worked on approximately twenty-three films, gaining valuable experience and making useful contacts in the film world. 
After a successful contract with Gaumont-British, one of Britain's major film production companies, Powell directed a personal project shot on the island of Foula in the Shetlands, 'The Edge of the World' (1937), produced by the American Joe Rock. The film received good reviews and a cup for the best direction of a foreign film at the 1938 Venice film festival. This led to a contract with Alexander Korda, who facilitated Powell's first collaboration with the screenwriter Emeric Pressburger on 'The Spy in Black' (1939), about a German plan to sabotage the British fleet anchored off the Orkney Islands in the First World War, the first of twenty-one films they made together; they formed their production company, the Archers, in 1943. But before their partnership was more permanently forged Powell co-directed a propaganda film, one of the first to be completed after the beginning of the Second World War, 'The Lion has Wings' (1939). The film was much admired by Winston Churchill for its patriotism. Powell then co-directed Korda's spectacular adventure film 'The Thief of Bagdad' (1940). This gave him the opportunity to explore the potential of Technicolor, the preferred technique in many of his subsequent films, and also the use of the pre-recorded soundtrack. It also encouraged his fascination with modernist, self-reflexive devices which he developed in later films. On 1 July 1943 Powell married Frances May Reidy (1909-1983), daughter of Jerome Reidy, a medical practitioner. They had two sons. Not long after this marriage he began an affair with the actress Kathleen Byron (1921-2009), an entanglement which contributed to the breakdown of both of their marriages. 
During the Second World War Powell and Pressburger produced some of their finest work, including 'Forty Ninth Parallel' (1941), 'One of our Aircraft is Missing' (1941), and 'The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp' (1943), a film which was criticized by Churchill and the Ministry of Information for its satirical portrayal of the military. The films were imaginative, creative, cinematic, and rather unconventional. Whereas most British films were made in realistic style, Powell and Pressburger used fantastical situations, dream sequences, bold colour, and disjointed narratives. Powell's break with the realist tradition (of which 'The Lion has Wings' was part) left both audiences and critics puzzled. The Archers also broke new ground with 'A Canterbury Tale' (1944), a lyrical meditation for the post-war world which suffered from studio cuts to render it more conventional. Although Powell's films were considered to stray beyond what was expected from British films, the Rank Organization nevertheless gave the Archers a firm production base and considerable freedom in the development of their projects. Powell excelled at location shooting and had a particularly poetic response to landscape. When location shooting was not possible or appropriate, Powell devised ingenious experiments in the studio to create fantasy environments. Pressburger's screenplays gave him ample opportunities to develop these skills, and he always preferred narratives based on fantasy and the imagination rather than on fact. 
At the end of the war Powell directed 'I Know Where I'm Going!' (1945), a film which employed location shooting on the western isles of Scotland and impressive studio effects to create a dramatic storm sequence. This was followed by his favourite film, the spectacular 'A Matter of Life and Death' (1946), starring David Niven as a British pilot on the verge of death who has to argue his case in 'heaven' in order to be allowed to live. It was an aesthetic experiment involving imaginative sets and innovative film techniques to represent the pilot's hallucinations. For this film Powell used the German art director Alfred Junge, with whom he had first collaborated on 'Contraband' (1940). Junge and Powell worked towards creating a distinctive and imaginative setting for both 'heaven' and earth, alternating between black and white and colour to stress the difference. Another collaborator with whom Powell worked on many successful occasions was the cinematographer Jack Cardiff, who did his best work for the Archers. 'A Matter of Life and Death' was Cardiff's first film for Powell and Pressburger, and used his experience of working with Technicolor for several years to stunning effect. 
In a spirit of resourceful creativity 'Black Narcissus' (1946), based on Rumer Godden's novel, reproduced the Himalayas in a Pinewood studio. Seeking to avoid an awkward mix of two styles, Powell turned down the opportunity to go to India for location shots, in favour of a studio experiment. Powell, Junge, and Cardiff again rose to the challenge, creating stunning sets and evoking an atmosphere of alluring sensuality. The film was the subject of intense controversy in the USA, where the Legion of Decency, a Catholic organization, lobbied to have it banned because of its allegedly sacrilegious portrayal of a religious order. A cut version was released there to placate this powerful pressure group. Their next film, 'The Red Shoes' (1948), was an extravagant gamble. Rank allowed the Archers to produce a high-budget film about ballet at a time when the British film industry was enjoying a brief period of protection against US film imports. Its excess stretched the limits of the relationship with Rank and ended the Archers' partnership with the studio until 'The Battle of the River Plate' in 1956. 'The Red Shoes' is significant for its experimentation with the idea of the 'composed' film, whereby the film is conceived and shot on the basis of an existing musical score. Powell had used elements of this method in earlier films, but employed the technique to an unprecedented extent with 'The Red Shoes'. The film was also ambitious in its use of British and European locations, and dealt with the tempestuous world of ballet, in which dedication and personal sacrifice are demanded for art. The film was extremely successful in the USA, appearing as the highest-earning British film in top box-office lists for many years. Powell repeated the strategy of the composed film several times, particularly in 'The Tales of Hoffman' (1953), an experimental adaptation of Jacques Offenbach's opera. He was also involved in the development of a technical special effects device known as the 'independent frame', which aimed to reduce costs by creating a multiplicity of effects in the studio. 
From 1948 to 1955 Powell worked with Alexander Korda again on 'The Small Back Room' (1949) and 'The Tales of Hoffman'. In 1950 two costume films, 'Gone to Earth' and 'The Elusive Pimpernel', suffered from Korda's involvement with the American independent producers Sam Goldwyn and David O. Selznick. Selznick insisted on two versions of 'Gone to Earth', resulting in an American version which related more closely than the British to the source novel by Mary Webb. 'The Elusive Pimpernel' was not released in the USA until 1955 in a black and white version that was shorter than the British version released in 1950, and retitled 'The Fighting Pimpernel'. Powell's last film with Pressburger was a wartime drama, 'Ill Met by Moonlight' (1956), produced by Rank. Powell felt constrained with a narrative based on fact and was dissatisfied with the results. The Archers' partnership ended in 1956 after disagreements during the filming of 'Ill Met by Moonlight'. Over the previous few years there had been a mutual distancing, and several unsuccessful attempts to raise finance for film projects. 
In 1959 Powell directed the controversial 'Peeping Tom', later widely regarded as a classic but at the time considered to be sadistic cheap horror. It was based on a story by Leo Marks about a young cameraman who photographs victims as he kills them with the point of his tripod. The film was controversial because it encouraged sympathy for the murderer. Powell also indulged his fascination for self-reflexivity with the inclusion of home-movie footage of himself as a child with his father. Its immediate reception was so bad that Powell could get no further funding for his work and had to go to Australia in 1966 to make two films: 'They're a Weird Mob' (1966) and 'The Age of Consent' (1969), the last feature film he was to direct. Despite its initial poor reception, 'Peeping Tom' has subsequently been praised by critics as an important advance in the horror genre and a meditation on voyeurism in cinema. In the 1970s Powell's talent was fully recognized by film-makers and critics, especially Martin Scorsese, Brian de Palma, and David Thompson, who encouraged him to move to the USA in 1980 to teach at Dartmouth College, New Hampshire. Powell's passion for experiment, risk taking, and creative use of colour influenced many film directors in both Britain and the United States. In 1981 Powell became director-in-residence at Francis Ford Coppola's Zoetrope Hollywood studio, where he also worked on his boastful and vengeful autobiographies 'A Life in Movies' (1986) and 'Million-Dollar Movie' (1992). 
Powell was remarkable for his liveliness, enthusiasm, and passion for both cinema and Rudyard Kipling. He was a fierce champion of cinema as an art form and resented producers who placed restrictions, creative and budgetary, on his films. Above all, he insisted that a good film was the product of many talents, remarking in his autobiography that 'one of my missions in life is to convince my fellow film directors that collaboration is an art, and that the movies is the greatest of collaborative arts' (Powell, 'Million-Dollar Movie', 421). He particularly admired the films of Akira Kurosawa, Luchino Visconti, John Huston, David Lean, Carol Reed, Francis Ford Coppola, and Martin Scorsese. Despite his reputation as an imaginative director who acknowledged the importance of collaboration, however, Powell was difficult to work with, and antagonized many actors with his lack of respect and his self-centredness. The partnership with Pressburger was remarkable for its longevity, even though it was not entirely free from friction. When the work of Powell and Pressburger was being re-evaluated from the 1970s Pressburger often felt that Powell, the consummate self-publicist, dominated billings and events for retrospectives. Yet when interviewed about the partnership Powell always expressed a huge debt to the quality of the screenplays, upon which he worked closely with Pressburger to ensure their most striking realization. In acknowledging the importance of their collaboration Powell remarked that 'I am the teller of the tale, and not the creator of the story' (Macdonald, 155), insisting that above all he was a craftsman in film art. Powell likened their relationship to a marriage which on the whole was characterized by mutual dependence and respect. Powell's physical appearance was distinctive: he had clear blue eyes, ruddy cheeks, and a moustache, and was bald from an early age. He loved the outdoors and always shot on location when possible. 
In recognition of his work Powell received a number of awards, including fellowship of the Royal Geographic Society, honorary doctorates from the universities of East Anglia (1978) and Kent (1984) and the Royal College of Art (1987), and the British Film Institute's special award in 1978 and a fellowship in 1983. He married for a third time on 19 May 1984; his wife was the film editor Thelma Colbert Schoonmaker ('b'. 1939/40), daughter of Bertram Schoonmaker, a clerical worker in the Standard Oil Company. He also lived for many years with the actress Pamela Mary Brown. Powell died from cancer on 19 February 1990 at his home at 1 Lee Cottages, Avening, Gloucestershire. His third wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 39946


Pressburger, Emeric (1902-1988), author and screenwriter, was born Imre Josef Pressburger at 3 St Peter's Street, Miskolc, Hungary, on 5 December 1902, the only son (he had one elder half-sister from his father's previous marriage) of Kalman Pressburger, estate manager, and his second wife, Katherina Wichs. The family were Jewish. Pressburger attended a boarding-school in Temesvar, where he was a good student, excelling at maths, literature, and music. He then studied mathematics and engineering at the universities of Prague and Stuttgart before his father's death forced him to abandon his studies. 
Pressburger moved to Berlin in 1926 to work as a journalist and writer of short stories and film scripts. Universum Film, the major European film studio, employed him as a contract writer, and his first screen credit was for 'Abschied' (1930), co-written with the novelist Erich Kastner and directed by Robert Siodmak. The film was a drama-documentary shot in 'real time', representing one and a quarter hours in the lives of people living in a Berlin boarding-house. Although not a great success, it ensured Pressburger's continued employment by Universum Film in their script department at a time when film jobs were scarce. Pressburger was not listed on the credits for a screen adaptation of Kastner's 'Emil and the Detectives' (1931), which was signed by Billy Wilder. A key experience at Universum Film was working on musical comedy adaptations of operettas, thereby beginning a fascination with the links between music and film which continued all his life. When Universum Film did not renew Pressburger's contract for 1933, and in a context of escalating antisemitism in Germany (where he changed his forename to Emmerich), he decided to settle in France, beginning again in another country as an emigre writer. Although Pressburger managed to obtain film work, life was difficult; he was threatened with deportation and faced imprisonment for debt. Intermittent film employment prevented this, and one script, 'Monsieur Sans-Gene' (1934), directed by Karl Anton, was a major success in France. It was remade in Hollywood by Jesse L. Lasky and released as 'One Rainy Afternoon' (1936). 
Pressburger entered Britain in 1935, on a stateless passport. One of his screenplays, 'La vie parisienne' (1935), an adaptation of an operetta by Jacques Offenbach, had been filmed in English and French versions, and Pressburger had travelled to Britain to work on the English version with Arthur Wimperis, an associate of Alexander Korda, of London Film Productions, one of the largest British film companies. Pressburger was eventually to work for his fellow Hungarian. He decided to settle in Britain, and changed his name in 1938 to Emeric. On 24 June that year he married Agnes ('b'. 1917/18), daughter of Andol Donath, a general merchant. The marriage was dissolved in 1941. 
Pressburger's first British assignment for Korda was 'The Challenge' (1938), a film about a race to reach the summit of the Matterhorn. In 1938 he met Michael Powell, his director and collaborator for the next eighteen years. Their first joint project was 'The Spy in Black' (1939), a First World War espionage thriller based on a novel by Storer Clouston. Filmed at Denham Studios, it starred Conrad Veidt and Valerie Hobson. Powell was hired to direct the film as a replacement for Brian Desmond Hurst, and Korda invited Pressburger to work on the script. After this successful collaboration their next joint venture was 'Contraband' (1940), another vehicle for the popular stars Veidt and Hobson. From then onwards Pressburger's most successful work was with Powell. In 1943 they formed a production company, the Archers, which became known for its distinctive film trademark of a red, white, and blue archery target with eight arrows, a ninth one thrusting into it. Their partnership was egalitarian; both men shared the financial rewards and creative responsibility for all the films, the credits stating that they were 'written, produced and directed' by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger. 
Pressburger's screenplays provided excellent scope for Powell's distinctive visual style, which employed colour in an imaginative way and used fantasy and spectacle, complex and challenging narrative structures, and flamboyant visual and camera devices. Several films were produced under the aegis of the Ministry of Information, a connection which prevented Pressburger from being deported as a foreigner. The most notable films produced by Powell and Pressburger during The Second World War were 'Forty Ninth Parallel' (1941), 'One of our Aircraft is Missing' (1941), 'The Silver Fleet' (1943), 'The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp' (1943), based on the cartoon character created by David Low, 'A Canterbury Tale' (1944), and 'I Know Where I'm Going!' (1945). In many respects Pressburger was patriotic, an Anglophile who celebrated the freedom he had found in his adopted country. His ability to see Britain from the point of view of a fascinated outsider suited the films' quizzical perspective on British society and history. 
A recurrent theme in Pressburger's writing was a journey by a leading character into unknown territory. Now regarded as a classic in a mystical tradition, 'A Canterbury Tale' was misunderstood at the time of release, a misunderstanding that helped initiate the Archers Company reputation as film-makers who were ahead of their time, and whose work was characterized by wit, fantasy, ambition, and originality. The film celebrated British heritage and freedom, two themes that were extremely important to Pressburger. 'I Know Where I'm Going!' shared a similar fascination with self-discovery and mysticism, charting the journey of a young woman from Manchester to Scotland, where she discovers that the path in life she believed she was destined to follow has been mistaken. The screenplay for 'The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp', Pressburger's favourite Archers film, proved to be controversial. Its portrayal of the British officer class as anachronistic led to accusations that the film was pro-German. The film's release was delayed in the United States, where it was cut and advertised inappropriately. During the war Pressburger's involvement with the Screenwriters' Association and the Association of Cine Technicians became more active. He mixed with other left-wing emigres and in 1942 was involved with the Free German League of Culture, a group which organized a rally, the Pageant of Four Freedoms, at the New Theatre, Oxford. 
Pressburger (who was naturalized in 1946) married again on 29 March 1947. His second wife was Gwynneth May (Wendy) Zillah ('b'. 1911/12), former wife of Abraham Jacob Greenbaum, and daughter of Edward Regnald Orme, army officer. They had two daughters, one of whom died as a baby in 1948. The marriage was dissolved at Reno, Nevada, in 1953, and in Britain in 1971. 
In 1946 'A Matter of Life and Death' became the film chosen for Britain's first charity royal film performance. Although it was originally conceived as a wartime propaganda film, its production was delayed because Technicolor was not available. Starring David Niven as an RAF pilot on the borderline between life and death, the film is an imaginative meditation on love, grief, and war. Pressburger's ability to deal with broad, challenging themes was further demonstrated when he explored a clash of communities and values in 'Black Narcissus' (1946), about a group of nuns in the Himalayas living in an atmosphere of hysteria and repressed sexuality. Perhaps the most daring experiment was 'The Red Shoes' (1948, based on a Hans Christian Andersen story), set in the tempestuous and exacting world of a ballet company. This film in particular showed how Powell's sense of colour could be assisted by Pressburger's ambitious screenplay. Pressburger first started working on the screenplay for 'The Red Shoes' in 1939 but the project was disrupted by the war. In 1946 the Archers bought the rights from Korda for the project and began a productive collaboration with art director Alfred Junge and Robert Helpmann, a dancer at Sadler's Wells. Most of Pressburger's subsequent screenplays were also not based on original material. 'The Red Shoes' was followed by adaptations of challenging material for 'The Tales of Hoffman' (1953, adapted from a Jacques Offenbach opera at the suggestion of Sir Thomas Beecham) and 'Oh Rosalinda!' (1955, based on Johann Strauss's operetta 'Die Fledermaus'). These films separated the Archers from the conventional canon of British film production, often to their cost, for puzzled critics were inclined to dismiss their work as pretentious, extravagant, and confusing. In 1952 Pressburger directed for the only time, but the film, 'Twice upon a Time', was generally regarded as a disastrous project. On the other hand, 'The Battle of the River Plate' (1956), directed by Powell, was chosen for the royal film performance in 1956. After their last Archer collaboration, 'Ill Met by Moonlight' (1956), a wartime drama, Powell and Pressburger parted. Their work was beginning to lose its experimental edge and the two agreed to separate as their interests began to diverge. 
Pressburger then wrote and produced 'Miracle in Soho' (1957) and published his first novel, 'Killing a Mouse on Sunday' (1961), a story about a terrorist set in the Spanish Civil War, on which Fred Zinnemann based his film 'Behold a Pale Horse' (1964). The novel's controversial subject matter led to Pressburger being banned from entering Franco's Spain. Pressburger's critical success with 'Killing a Mouse on Sunday' was not repeated with his second novel, 'The Glass Pearls' (1966), a more personal book about Nazi Germany. He continued writing, but could not find a publisher for a subsequent novel, 'The Unholy Passion'. Many of his projects in the 1960s were never completed. Pressburger accompanied David Lean to India to conduct research for a screenplay about the life of Gandhi, but Lean rejected the script he eventually produced. He worked again with Powell in 1966 on 'They're a Weird Mob' (1966), shot in Australia, and again in 1972, when they collaborated on a film for the Children's Film Foundation, 'The Boy who Turned Yellow', and on a novel of 'The Red Shoes' (1978). None of these projects revived their former ingenuity. Pressburger more or less retired after this, but enjoyed the critical appreciation of his work encouraged by Martin Scorsese and Francis Ford Coppola. Key events in the reappraisal of the Archers' work were a retrospective of their work at the National Film Theatre in 1971, and the showing of a restored print of 'The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp' at the National Film Theatre in 1978. A documentary on Powell and Pressburger was shown on BBC2 television in 1981. 
Powell was always keen to stress that his skill as a director was stretched to the best advantage when Pressburger had written the screenplay. Their general method was for Pressburger to write the story and devise the structure, and then he would collaborate with Powell on scripting the dialogue. Pressburger was involved in all stages of a production, a process that engendered creativity out of conflict. As Pressburger commented, 'Our films were born out of disagreement' (Macdonald, xvii). Powell described Pressburger's talent for storytelling as that of 'a screenwriter with the heart and mind of a novelist. He was a born dramatist and writer, and he didn't learn as much from me as I did from him' (ibid., 155). Nevertheless, Pressburger often felt that Powell put himself at the centre of events organized to reappraise their work. However, their earlier collaborations were marked by a mutual sense of trust and a shared desire to explore the boundaries of word and image. Pressburger commented on how they inspired each other's work: 'He knows what I am going to say even before I say it -- maybe even before I have thought it -- and that is very rare' (ibid., 156). Pressburger was a diffident and private person, who at times, particularly later on in his life, could be hypersensitive and prone to bouts of melancholia. This was in contrast to Powell, who was more of a self-publicist. A keen gastronome, Pressburger loved French food, enjoyed music, and possessed a great sense of humour. In appearance he was short, wore glasses, and had a sagacious, bird-like facial expression. He was a keen supporter of Arsenal football team, a passion he developed soon after arriving in Britain. 
Pressburger received the British Film Institute special award (with Powell) in 1978 and fellowships from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts in 1981 and the British Film Institute in 1983. He won an Oscar in 1942 for best original story, for 'Forty Ninth Parallel'. He died of bronchial pneumonia on 5 February 1988 in the Foxearth Lodge Nursing Home, Little Green, Saxtead, Woodbridge, Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 39947


Quayle, Sir (John) Anthony (1913-1989), actor and theatre director, was born on 7 September 1913 at 2 Delamere Road, Ainsdale, Southport, Lancashire, the only child of Arthur Quayle, solicitor, and his wife, Esther Kate Overton. The Quayle family had Manx roots. During a rather lonely youth Anthony's interest in the theatre was encouraged by his lively and imaginative mother. He was educated at Rugby School and at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, where he stayed only a year. His first appearance on the professional stage, unpaid, was in 'The Ghost Train' at the Q Theatre while on holiday from RADA. He began his career in earnest playing both Richard Coeur de Lion and Will Scarlett in 'Robin Hood' at the same theatre in 1931. 
In the following year, after touring as feed to a music-hall comic, Quayle found his feet in classical theatre and met two men whose influence was to be an important factor in his career, Tyrone Guthrie and John Gielgud. By 1939 he had appeared in many supporting roles, with Old Vic seasons in 1932 and 1937-8, had appeared in New York, and had played Laertes in the famous Guthrie production of 'Hamlet' at Elsinore. Strongly drawn to the classics and especially to Shakespeare, he took over the lead from Laurence Olivier in 'Henry V' during an Old Vic tour of Europe and Egypt just before the Second World War. Though not yet at the top of his profession, he was known and liked by many who were. 
Quayle spent the war in the Royal Artillery, reaching the rank of major. Characteristically, he gave up an administrative job in Gibraltar, learned to parachute, and joined Albanian partisans behind German lines. He later wrote two slight novels suggested by his wartime experiences. 
After the war Quayle returned to the stage and as Enobarbus in 'Antony and Cleopatra' (1946) was a great success in the first of the many supporting roles he was to make his own. He also turned to directing, and in 1946 his 'Crime and Punishment', starring John Gielgud, was considered outstanding. 
In 1948, through Guthrie, he joined the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in Stratford upon Avon as actor and stage director. He was soon promoted to run the whole memorial theatre. In eight years he transformed it from an unfashionable provincial theatre to a world-famous centre of classical drama. Because of his many contacts, he was able to attract illustrious players and directors to Stratford, as well as encourage such major new talents as Richard Burton and Peter Hall. He took companies on tours of Australasia in 1949 and 1953 and tried, although without success, to secure the kind of London shop window for the company which was later obtained by the Royal Shakespeare Company. With his 'Cycle of the Histories' for the Festival of Britain in 1951 he foreshadowed the later practice of staging Shakespeare's historical plays in chronological order. Among his own parts during these strenuous years were Henry VIII, Falstaff, and Othello. His work was not entirely confined to Stratford, but his enthusiastic leadership and hard work at the memorial theatre, proudly unsubsidized, put it on the map. He paved the way for the subsequent achievements of Peter Hall, Trevor Nunn, and the Royal Shakespeare Company. 
In 1956 Quayle resigned from Stratford and returned to mainstream theatre. For over twenty more years he continued to act and direct in the West End, having a steady if unspectacular career, occasionally taking the lead, as in 'Tamburlaine' in 1956, but more often in highly praised supporting parts. He also appeared in over thirty films, most of them British, again in strong supporting roles. His portrayal of stiff-upper-lip Englishmen was much admired in films, especially in 'The Battle of the River Plate' (1956), 'The Guns of Navarone' (1961), and 'Lawrence of Arabia' (1962). The first of his many television appearances was in 1961. 
In 1978, at sixty-five, Quayle's career took a different course and he toured with the Prospect Theatre Company, playing leading roles in 'The Rivals' and 'King Lear'. The company closed, however, when its Arts Council subsidy was withdrawn. Several years later, in 1983, he formed his own Compass Theatre, which bravely stumped the country without subsidy, dedicated to bringing major plays to people who could otherwise never see them. 
Quayle had a big physique, a vigorous personality, and a steadfast -- even romantic -- devotion to great plays and classical traditions. Despite his fine technique he had neither the personality nor the face for a great actor. As he grew older his face became more rugged but there was something about his amiable blue eyes which suggested a warm and pleasant person and deprived his acting of some of its emotional impact. However, as a man of great courage and integrity he was a natural leader and a major influence on the theatre in Britain. 
Quayle was appointed CBE in 1952 and knighted in 1985. He had honorary DLitt degrees from Hull (1987) and St Andrews (1989). He was guest professor of drama at the University of Tennessee in 1974, and was nominated for an Oscar as best supporting player for his performance as Cardinal Wolsey in the 1969 film about Anne Boleyn, 'Anne of the Thousand Days'. 
On 3 March 1935 Quayle married Hermione (died 1983), actress daughter of the actor Nicholas James Hannen, but the marriage was dissolved in 1943. On 3 June 1947 he married another actress, Dorothy Wardell Hyson ['see below'], divorced wife of Robert Douglas Finlayson and daughter of another actress, Dorothy Dickson (1897?-1995), and Carl Constantine Hyson, of independent means. They had a son and two daughters. He was still touring until two months before his death from cancer at his London home, 49B Elystan Place, Chelsea, on 20 October 1989. 
Quayle's second wife, Dorothy Wardell Hyson (or Heissen) [
Rachael Low', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39948


Stevens, Thomas Terry Hoar (1911-1990), actor and comedian, was born on 14 July 1911 at his parents' home in Finchley, Middlesex, the third child and third son in the family of four sons and one daughter of (Ernest) Frederick Stevens, managing director of a produce merchant's business, and his wife, Ellen Elizabeth, daughter of Joseph Hoar, horse dealer, of London. He was educated at Ardingly College, Sussex. During the Second World War he served in the Royal Corps of Signals (1941-6) and with the Entertainments National Service Association (ENSA). 
Stevens began his career as a clerk at Smithfield market, but his interest in amateur theatricals led him to work as a film extra. He took the stage name of Terry-Thomas, which he hyphenated to match the gap in his front teeth. His props were a diamond-encrusted cigarette holder, monocle, raffish waistcoat, and red carnation. Six feet in height, handsome in appearance, with a neat moustache and a natural upper-class accent, Terry-Thomas personified the Englishman as an amiable bounder. With his drawling accent, he commonly used phrases such as 'rotter' and a leering 'jolly good show'. Once established, the character changed little from film to film. He toured with ENSA during the Second World War and, when demobilized, turned to cabaret work. In 1946 he found success with Sid Field in a West End hit, 'Piccadilly Hayride'. He soon became popular on radio, with his own personal caddish humour, on 'To Town with Terry' (1948-9) and 'Top of the Town' (1951-2). He also presented his own television series -- 'Strictly T-T' (1949-56) and 'How do you View?' (1951-2). 
The Boulting brothers brought his natural comic talents to universal acclaim when they cast Terry-Thomas, with Ian Carmichael, Dennis Price, and Richard Attenborough, in their film 'Private's Progress' (1956), in which he uttered the words 'You're an absolute shower' in his best upper-crust voice, words which were to become a catch-phrase. This led to a succession of memorable films, which included 'Brothers in Law' (1957), 'Carlton-Brown of the FO' (1958), 'Lucky Jim' (1958), 'I'm All Right, Jack' (1960), and 'School for Scoundrels' (1960). In the early 1960s Terry-Thomas went to Hollywood, where he had to coarsen his already not very subtle persona, and he made several films, including 'How to Murder your Wife' (1964, his favourite film, in which he acted with Jack Lemmon), 'Those Magnificent Men in their Flying Machines' (1965), and 'Monte Carlo or Bust' (1969). He was also a frequent performer on American television, appearing with Danny Kaye, Judy Garland, Andy Williams, and others. A return to the BBC in 1968, with a series called 'The Old Campaigner', had only a modest impact. In the late 1970s he discovered that he was suffering from Parkinson's disease, which put an end to his career. 
In 1938 Stevens married a dancer, Ida Florence (died 1983), the divorced wife of Ernest Stern and daughter of Philip Patlansky, hotel proprietor. There were no children of the marriage. After a divorce in 1962 he married in 1963 Belinda, daughter of Geoffrey Percy Cunningham, a lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Artillery. They had two sons. A millionaire at the height of his fame, after his premature retirement he and his wife went to live in a villa on Ibiza, where he had built up land and property holdings. However, his illness caused him to spend $40,000 a year on medical bills and he had to return to Britain. Following a succession of house moves, he was discovered in the late 1980s living in reduced circumstances in a church charity flat in Barnes, London, furnished by the Actors' Benevolent Fund. Friends in show business staged a benefit concert for him at London's Drury Lane Theatre in April 1989. The money that it raised enabled him to live in comfort at Busbridge Hall Nursing Home in Godalming, Surrey. He died there of pneumonia on 8 January 1990. At his funeral service the organist played the theme tune to one of his favourite films, 'Those Magnificent Men in their Flying Machines'. 
Richard Hope-Hawkins C. S. Nicholls', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39949


Trinder, Thomas Edward (1909-1989), comedian, was born on 24 March 1909 in Streatham, London, the eldest in the family of two sons and one daughter of Thomas Henry Trinder, tram driver and baker, and his wife, Jean Mills. Educated at Queensborough Road School and St Andrew's, Holborn, he left school early to work as an errand boy at Smithfield meat market. Giving up his job at the age of twelve he toured South Africa with a variety company, and then in the following year, 1922, he won a talent competition at Collins's Music Hall, Islington, which led to a week's engagement. He worked in a touring show, Will Murray's Casey's Court, using the name Red Nirt (his own surname backwards) and played the halls for seventeen years before reaching the London Palladium in 1939 in 'Band Waggon'. For the next eleven years he played there regularly, first as a supporting act in 'Top of the World' (1940), with Bud Flanagan and Chesney Allen, and 'Gangway' (1941), with Ben Lyon and Bebe Daniels, and then topping the bill in 'Best Bib and Tucker' (1942), 'Happy and Glorious' (1944-6), which with 938 performances became the longest running of all Palladium shows, 'Here, there and everywhere' (1947), and 'Starlight Rendezvous' (1950). 
Trinder had a long, thin face, a jutting chin, and a wide smile; he always wore a trilby hat, even with evening dress. Soon after he arrived at the Palladium, he invested $265 a week for two weeks to advertise his chin on twenty-five strategically sited London hoardings. All but one read: 'If it's laughter you're after, Trinder's the name. You lucky people!' The odd one out, opposite Aldgate station, was printed in Hebrew. With his shovel-like jaw, ready grin, quick-fire topical humour, and 'You lucky people' catch-phrase, he became one of the most popular of variety entertainers. 
Trinder's film career began in 1939, but it was not until his fifth film, 'Sailors Three' (1940), with Claude Hulbert and Michael Wilding, that he made a mark. Of his fifteen films, 'The Foreman Went to France' (1941), 'The Bells Go Down' (1943), and 'Champagne Charlie' (1944), in which he played Victorian music-hall star George Leybourne, are the most notable. 
In 1943 Trinder was singled out in the House of Commons for criticism for not having worked overseas for Entertainments National Service Association (ENSA), a criticism which ignored the fact that he had been entertaining troops at home since the outbreak of war. He later became the first major star to visit Italy and in 1946 took the last ENSA party to the Far East. It was Trinder who gave ENSA its sobriquet 'Every Night Something Awful'. Trinder holds a record unlikely to be beaten of playing the most West End theatres in a single night. During the London blitz, when audiences had to remain in their seats during air raids and Trinder was at the Palladium, he drove round the West End and managed to play a ten-minute spot in seventeen theatres before the all-clear sounded. 
Known as the Mr Woolworth of show business, Trinder could sometimes be earthy, though never crude, and he hated bad language. When he arrived at Scapa Flow to entertain the Royal Navy he found the padre sitting with his back to the stage watching the audience to see who laughed. He invariably worked alone without the aid of stooges, props, or even a microphone, and frequently without a script, relying on his ready wit. He was noted for his ability to deal with hecklers. When he opened his act at the Embassy Club with his usual 'Trinder's the name', a morose Orson Welles, having that day been divorced from Rita Hayworth, growled 'Well, change it', to which Trinder retorted 'Is that an offer of marriage?' 
In 1955 Trinder became the first host of 'Sunday Night at the London Palladium', one of the most successful television variety shows. He fell out with producer Val Parnell and left the show; his career, although he rarely stopped working, became a series of one-night stands, overseas tours, and pantomimes in the provinces. A firm favourite of the royal family, he appeared before the queen mother at the 1980 royal variety show, in what must have been the oldest chorus line, when thirteen artists, including Arthur Askey, Stanley Holloway, Richard Murdoch, Chesney Allen, and Trinder, with a combined age of 891 years, danced and sang their way through Flanagan and Allen's 'Strollin'. 
A lifelong supporter of Fulham Football Club, Trinder was on its board for many years, becoming chairman in 1955, a post he held for twenty-one years despite being forced to apologize publicly for cracking jokes at his players' expense. He was appointed CBE in 1975 for his services to charity (he was thrice chief rat of the show business charity the Water Rats). He married Gwyn (Toni), daughter of Major Gilbert Arthur Lancelyn Green, of the Royal Field Artillery. There was one daughter of the marriage. He died on 10 July 1989 in St Peter's Hospital, Chertsey, Surrey. 
Richard Fawkes', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39950


Williams, (George) Emlyn (1905-1987), actor and playwright, was born on 26 November 1905 at Pen-y-Ffordd, Mostyn, Flintshire, the eldest of the three surviving sons (two older children, a boy and a girl, died in infancy) of Richard Williams, a former navy stoker become greengrocer, of Ffynnongroyw, Flintshire, and his wife, Mary, a former maidservant, daughter of Job Williams, collier, of Treuddyn, Mold. He was educated at Holywell county school and at St Julien, Switzerland, before winning an open scholarship to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1923. At Holywell county school he had met Miss Sarah Cooke, the senior mistress, on whose character and personality he drew for much of Miss Moffett in 'The Corn is Green'. She encouraged him, fostered his gift for languages, paid for his stay in Switzerland, entered him for the Oxford scholarship, gave him much financial support, and remained a lifelong friend. At Oxford he did little work, spending his time acting with the Oxford University Dramatic Society and writing plays. In 1926 he suffered a nervous breakdown before his final examinations, mainly due to an emotional friendship with a fellow undergraduate (his autobiography is frank about his bisexuality). He sat his finals in 1927, when he was already a professional actor, and took a second class in modern languages. Williams was stage-struck, captivated by a glamorous popular theatre in which, through hard work and professional commitment, he became a dominant figure. Though he acquired great sophistication he remained, essentially, the daringly optimistic, emotional, and single-minded romantic who had worked his way up from humble beginnings. 
When he was an undergraduate Williams's one-act play, 'Vigil' (1925), and a full-length drama, 'Full Moon' (1927), were performed at the Playhouse theatre, Oxford. In London, after impressing with 'Glamour' (1928) and 'A Murder has Been Arranged' (1930), he had his first commercial success with 'The Late Christopher Bean' (1933), an adaptation of Sidney Howard's English version of Fauchois's 'Prenez garde a la peinture'. 'Night Must Fall' (1935) ran for more than 400 performances; 'The Corn is Green' (1938) was very popular in both London and New York. His numerous plays include 'The Druid's Rest' (1944), a Welsh comedy in which the young Richard Burton made his debut, 'The Wind of Heaven' (1945), and 'Someone Waiting' (1953). He wrote features for radio and one play, 'Pepper and Sand' (1947), and two plays for television, 'A Blue Movie' (1968) being the better known. His film scripts include 'The Citadel' (1938), in collaboration, and 'The Last Days of Dolwyn' (1949). 
Williams's professional acting career began in 1927, at the Savoy, with a small part in 'And So to Bed' by J. B. Fagan. His first success was as Angelo in Edgar Wallace's 'On the Spot' (1930). In a long West End career he often starred in his own plays: he was a hit as Dan in 'Night Must Fall' and an even greater one as Morgan Evans in 'The Corn is Green'. In 1937 he appeared in Shakespeare at the Old Vic. He was Sir Robert Morton in Terence Rattigan's 'The Winslow Boy' (1946). At Stratford in 1956 he played Angelo, Shylock, and Iago. In 1955 he was Hjalmar Ekdal in 'The Wild Duck'; he was Sir Thomas More in the New York production of 'A Man for All Seasons' (1962). His films included 'The Last Days of Dolwyn' (1949), 'Ivanhoe' (1952), 'The Deep Blue Sea' (1955), 'The L-Shaped Room' (1962), and 'David Copperfield' (1969). 
In 1951 Williams began his acclaimed readings from Charles Dickens, performing all over the world until he was well over eighty. From 1955 he performed a second one-man show, as Dylan Thomas in 'A Boy Growing Up'. A third, based on the writings of H. H. Munro (Saki), began at the Apollo in 1977. 
In 1961 Williams published the best-selling 'George: an Early Autobiography'; its sequel, 'Emlyn', followed in 1973. His interest in the psychology of murderers led to 'Beyond Belief' (1967), on the 'moors murderers', and to 'Dr Crippen's Diary' (1987). 
Given the high intellectual promise of Williams's beginnings his career is disappointing. He was a fine popular actor with lucid diction and a 'mesmeric' stage presence. But, though he had a success in 'The Wild Duck' and as a 'superbly dangerous' Iago, his classical roles generally received mixed reviews. He was a determinedly commercial dramatist, with little interest in the avant-garde or in exploring social or political issues. His subjects were the psychology of murder and the supernatural, the conflict between innocence and experience, and the relationship between Wales and the outside world. But too often his desire for immediate effect led to melodrama, sentimentality, or theatrical cleverness. His portrayal of Welsh people tended to stereotype; claims that, in his Welsh plays, he perfected a rich poetic language reminiscent of J. M. Synge are overstated. However, with such plays as 'A Murder has Been Arranged', 'Night Must Fall', and 'Someone Waiting' he contributed to the psychological thriller; his portrayal of ordinary people, particularly the rural Welsh, widened the narrow social range of West End 'drawing-room' plays. Above all, his fine command of the dramatist's craft made him a highly successful entertainer. His was the age of the well-made, middlebrow drama, and the abrupt changes in British theatre during the 1950s, the advent of Samuel Beckett and John Osborne, effectively ended his writing for the stage. 'Night Must Fall' and 'The Corn is Green' are occasionally revived and remain staple fare for amateurs, but he is now better remembered for his brilliantly accurate impersonation of Dickens the public reader. 
Williams's greatest literary achievement is 'George', a moving and detailed recreation of his childhood and adolescence in north Wales and an important study of a 'scholarship boy' in the 1920s. 'George' is one of the twentieth century's finest autobiographies. 
Williams's family was poor and Welsh-speaking. He remained proud of his roots and retained his Welsh. His upbringing made him careful with money; he died a wealthy man. He was a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature, received an honorary LLD at the University College of North Wales, Bangor, in 1949, and was appointed CBE in 1962. During his early career he lived with a fellow actor, Bill Cronin-Wilson, who died in 1934. In 1935 he married Mary Marjorie 
(Molly; died 1970)
, formerly an actress, who was divorced from the barrister Cecil Caradoc (Jack) Carus-Wilson. They had two sons. Mary's father was Theodore Walter O'Shann, a chartered accountant. Emlyn Williams died on 25 September 1987, of cancer, at his London home, Flat 3, 123 Dovehouse Street. 
James A. Davies', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 39951


Williams, Kenneth Charles (1926-1988), actor and comedian, was born on 22 February 1926 at Bingfield Street, off the Caledonian Road, London, the younger child and only son of Charles George Williams, manager of a hairdressing salon in Marchmont Street, King's Cross, London, and his wife, Louisa Alexandra Morgan (1901-1991), who assisted in the hairdresser's. He had theatrical aspirations from an early age, although his father, a Methodist, had a hatred of loose morals and effeminacy and thought the theatre epitomized both. The young Kenneth Williams, on the other hand, found acting 'instinctive, involuntary and authentic', attributes which marked his theatrical career in later years. He received his formal education at Lyulph Stanley School, Mornington Crescent, and from 1940 studied at the Bolt Court School of Lithography in Fleet Street, where he trained as a draughtsman. 
Called up for national service in the army in 1944, Williams served as a sapper in the cartography section of the Royal Engineers and later as a poster designer and actor in combined services entertainment, when stationed in Singapore. There, in company with such aspiring actors, playwrights, and directors as Stanley Baxter, Peter Nichols, and John Schlesinger, his theatrical aspirations hardened and developed, and he toured army bases in the Far East in the revue 'At your Service'. 
Williams was demobilized in 1947 and by 1948 had become an established actor in various repertory companies, playing many different roles. By the early 1950s he had established his versatility. He made his debut in films in a small part in the 1952 production of 'Trent's Last Case'. In the same year he made his first television appearance in 'The Wonderful Visit', by H. G. Wells, in which he played the Angel. This was followed by more repertory. In 1954 he played the Dauphin in G. B. Shaw's 'Saint Joan', which led to his becoming the ubiquitous 'funny voice' man in the BBC radio success 'Hancock's Half Hour'. 
In the theatre success followed success with Orson Welles's production of 'Moby Dick' (1955), 'Hotel Paradiso' (1956) with Alec Guinness, 'Share my Lettuce' (1957), 'Pieces of Eight' (1959), and 'One Over the Eight' (1957). Then, most importantly, with Maggie Smith, to whom he was devoted, Williams acted in Peter Schaffer's 'The Private Ear' and 'The Public Eye' (double bill, 1962), followed by 'Gentle Jack' (1963) with Dame Edith Evans, and 'Loot' (1965) by Joe Orton, with whom Kenneth Williams developed a warm friendship. Later came 'Captain Brassbound's Conversion' (1971), with Ingrid Bergman. His one flop was the 1956 production of Sandy Wilson's musical 'The Buccaneer', about a boys' magazine, in which Williams played the editor. 
In 1958 Williams appeared in his first 'Carry On' film, 'Carry on Sergeant', subsequently becoming a regular and playing in twenty-four 'Carry On' films, all of them low farces. On radio he went from 'Hancock's Half Hour' to 'Beyond our Ken' in 1958, and later to 'Round the Horne' in 1965, where his brilliant characterizations contributed considerably to the show's success. In 1968 he became the star of the radio quiz 'Just a Minute', a game in which the panellists are asked to talk on a given topic 'without repetition, deviation, or hesitation'. Williams duly astonished chairman, cast, and listeners with his knowledge, erudition, humour, grasp of language, and simulated outrage when told he had deviated. One could hardly imagine him hesitating. 
Williams, camp, slim, and dapper, was an amazingly versatile performer, able to switch from the vulgarities of the 'Carry On' films and the louche characters of 'Round the Horne' to more serious roles in plays by Jean Anouilh, Shakespeare, and Shaw. In addition he could be a sparkling raconteur, as he showed in the 1966-7 television series 'International Cabaret', where his long monologues happily punctuated the mundane procession of jugglers and acrobats. He was also a capable chat show guest, always ready with a new anecdote, and on more than one occasion successfully deputized for Terry Wogan as chat show host. 
The public persona of a loud, brash, verbose vulgarian was very different from Williams's private life, which was solitary, fastidious, and intellectual. He never married. His attitude to sex was ambivalent, for while he accepted his homosexual tendencies he found it difficult to consummate sexual relationships with either men or women. His writings included the books 'Acid Drops' (theatrical anecdotes, 1980), 'Back Drops' (personal anecdotes, 1983), and his autobiography, 'Just Williams' (1985). His diaries were published posthumously in 1993. 
In the last entry in his diary, 14 April 1988, Williams complained of 'immense' exhaustion, pains in the back, and stomach trouble. He had never been physically robust and had a history of health problems, and it is likely he died as a result of accidentally taking an overdose of painkillers. Williams died in his sleep at his home, 8 Marlborough House, Osnaburgh Street, London, on 15 April 1988. 
Barry Took', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40134


Urquhart, Robert Elliott (1901-1988), army officer, was born in Shepperton on 28 November 1901, the eldest in the family of three sons and one daughter of Alexander Urquhart MD, physician, and his wife, Isabel Gillespie. After attending St Paul's School and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Highland light infantry in 1920. Two years at the Staff College, Camberley (1936-7), were followed by staff appointments in India -- staff captain (1938), deputy adjutant and quartermaster-general at army headquarters (1939-40), and deputy assistant adjutant-general and assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general, 3rd division (1940-41), until he was given command of the 2nd battalion of the Duke of Cornwall's light infantry in 1941. In 1942 he became general staff officer grade 1 of the 51st Highland division and went through the campaign in north Africa which destroyed the Afrika Korps. He was given command of 231st brigade in Malta in 1943, and its distinguished performance in Sicily and Italy brought him appointment to the DSO. 
Urquhart was then brigadier, general staff, of 12th corps and was chosen in 1944 for command of the 1st airborne division. He led it in operation Market Garden, which was designed to cross three main river obstacles in the Netherlands in September 1944 and to join up with 30th corps arriving from the south, to swing through into the German industrial heartland. Since Urquhart was over 6 feet tall, of robust build, and possibly at forty-two rather too old for parachuting, he moved into battle by glider. He faced immediate difficulties. British troops arrived in a piecemeal fashion over three days and had to move 5 miles to their allotted positions around Arnhem. Their route was blocked by German armour reorganizing after Normandy, and, to compound the difficulties, the Germans captured the plans of the entire operation on the body of an American soldier shot down in a glider. Communications were rarely satisfactory and the weather was atrocious, making air support and replenishment difficult. The worst stroke of ill luck was Urquhart's enforced absence (he was obliged to take refuge in the attic of a house surrounded by German troops) from his headquarters for thirty-six hours soon after his arrival, when decisive command was imperative and was lacking. Urquhart made mistakes: the high ground at Wester Bouwing, for example, dominating the divisional bridgehead, and the heavy ferry at Heveadorp were never secured, but he fought a great battle. The high morale of the troops under his command reflected his own, but the battle of Arnhem was a defeat for the British and the advance of 30th corps was delayed. The remnants of Urquhart's division, withdrawn on 25 September 1944 across the lower Rhine, numbered some 2600 men of the 10,000 he had brought in. 
Urquhart, appointed CB after Arnhem (1944), was next used to command an 'ad hoc' airborne force, styled 1st airborne division, which was sent to Norway to rescue King Haakon, but his division was never reconstituted and was disbanded in November 1945. He became a colonel in 1945 and major-general in 1946. He was awarded the Netherlands Bronze Lion (1944) and Norwegian order of St Olaf (1945). 
Urquhart's career thereafter puzzled and disappointed many who knew his qualities. For fourteen months while the Territorial Army was being reorganized he was its director-general (1945-6). He was general officer commanding, 16th airborne division, Territorial Army (1947-8), and commander, lowland district (1948-50). In 1950 he was given command of 17th Gurkha division in Malaya and in the same year became general officer commanding, Malaya. He moved to Austria in 1952 for three years as general officer commanding-in-chief of British troops, in an agreeable if uninspiring assignment which was his last in the service. From 1954 he was colonel of his regiment, the Highland light infantry, but when the army council decreed its amalgamation with the Royal Scots Fusiliers in 1957 he became embroiled in a disagreement which concerned style, title, and above all dress. Would the new regiment be in kilt or trews? The two colonels negotiated an agreement, with the lord Lyon's support, that the kilt should be worn with the tartan dress Erskine. The War Office insisted on trews and both colonels had to go (1958). 
After Urquhart's retirement from the army in December 1955 he lived for some years at Drymen in Stirlingshire and thereafter at Bigram, Port of Menteith, nearby. In 1957 he joined the Davy and United Engineering Co., where his sound judgement and administrative experience found useful scope, first as personnel manager and then as director, in an industrial environment whose technical aspects were not perhaps among his deepest interests. He moved into complete retirement in 1970. 
In 1939 Urquhart, always known as Roy, married Pamela, daughter of Brigadier William Edmund Hunt Condon, of the Indian army. They had one son and three daughters. Urquhart died on 13 December 1988 at his home in Port of Menteith. He was survived by his wife. 
J. W. Hackett', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40135


Balfour, Harold Harington, first Baron Balfour of Inchrye (1897-1988), airman, businessman, and politician, was born on 1 November 1897 in Farnham, Surrey, the younger son and second of the three children of Colonel Nigel Harington Balfour OBE, a serving officer, of Belton, Camberley, Surrey, and his wife, Grace Annette Marie, youngest daughter of Henry Robarts Madocks and granddaughter of Field Marshal Baron Napier of Magdala. His elder brother was killed in January 1941 when his ship, HMS 'Southampton', was sunk in the Mediterranean. Balfour was educated at Chilverton Elms, Dover, Kent, and the Royal Naval College, Osborne. Soon after the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, he volunteered for service with the 60th rifles, but his urge to fly encouraged him to transfer to the Royal Flying Corps when a chance was offered the next year. There then began a distinguished, yet hazardous spell as a fighter pilot on the western front, which culminated in his promotion, in 1917, to command a flight in the famous 43 fighter squadron, in which he had served earlier under the command of Major William Sholto Douglas. Once wounded in action and, by temperament, by no means fitted for war, he was awarded the MC and bar for gallantry. He remained with the newly formed Royal Air Force until 1923. In 1921 he married Diana Blanche Harvey (died 1982), daughter of Sir Robert Grenville Harvey, second baronet; they had one son. The marriage was dissolved in 1946. 
Faced with a continuing need to earn a living, Balfour became, initially, a news reporter on the 'Daily Mail' before joining Whitehall Securities in the Pearson group in 1925, when the organization was entering the field of commercial aviation. He was also attracted by politics; he stood unsuccessfully as the Conservative candidate for the Stratford division of West Ham, London, in 1924 and was elected in 1929 as member for the Isle of Thanet, Kent, which he represented until 1945, when he was created Baron Balfour of Inchrye, of Shefford in the county of Berkshire. 
In 1938, as the Royal Air Force was rearming for war, Balfour accepted Neville Chamberlain's invitation to join the government as parliamentary under-secretary of state for air, first, under Sir H. Kingsley Wood, and later, in Winston Churchill's national government, under Sir Archibald Sinclair. It was an inspired appointment in which he served with signal ability until 1944, often flying himself about in a Spitfire and forming a first-hand judgement of Fighter Command's 'big wing' controversy in the battle of Britain. 
Balfour adorned the office which he was to hold for six and a half years. His achievements at the Air Ministry were many. Outstanding among them was the establishment, in the spring of 1940, of the great empire air training scheme of which he was a prime instigator and which, in the next five years, was responsible for training more than 130,000 aircrew in countries of the Commonwealth and empire. Its contribution to victory was undoubted. Moreover, his relationship with the Royal Air Force's senior officers, from the chief of the air staff, Sir Charles Portal, and the air staff, to the heads of operational commands, was both effective and forthright, not least because they respected his knowledge of aviation and his own service record in the First World War. 
Eventually Churchill, having earlier failed to persuade Balfour to accept, first, the office of financial secretary to the Treasury, and later, a civil department of state (Balfour refused each to remain loyal to the Royal Air Force), in 1944 appointed him resident minister in west Africa; he resigned with the Conservatives in 1945. A senior privy councillor (sworn on 5 August 1941), he remained active in politics for much of his life, speaking frequently for tory friends in the country and often intervening in House of Lords debates. This he combined with his business interests, which included a directorship of British European Airways (BEA) from 1955 to 1966 and chairmanship of BEA Helicopters Ltd in 1964-6. He also held the presidency of the Chambers of Commerce of the British Empire from 1946 to 1949 and of the Commonwealth and Empire Industries Association from 1956 to 1960. His autobiography, 'Wings over Westminster' (1973), one of his three published works, was well received, reflecting his early training as a Fleet Street journalist and his feeling for words. He wrote touching little stanzas and verses on the back of old envelopes. In 1947 he married his second wife, Mary Ainslie, daughter of Albert Peter Anthony Profumo, barrister; they had one daughter. 
An upstanding and attractive man, who was intensely loyal, Balfour was a persuasive speaker on a public platform, his sensitivity and humour enabling him quickly to catch the mood of an audience. His all-round judgement was acute. Although he lived happily in London at End House, St Mary Abbot's Place, Kensington, with his family often around him, his love of fishing and shooting took him regularly to Scotland. There, in his contented twilight years, he once confided in a member of his family: 'You know, I would sooner be stone deaf on a grouse moor than able to hear a pin drop in a bath chair.' Balfour died on 21 September 1988 at the King Edward VII Hospital in London. He was succeeded in the barony by his son, Ian ('b'. 1924). 
P. B. Lucas', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40136


Bennett, Donald Clifford Tyndall (1910-1986), air force officer and politician, was born on 14 September 1910 in Toowoomba, Queensland, Australia, the fourth and youngest son and youngest of the five children of George Thomas Bennett of Brisbane, cattle estate owner, and his wife, Celia Juliana Lucas. His sister died in early childhood. He was educated at Brisbane grammar school and enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force. 
In 1931 Bennett was posted to England on a short-service commission in the Royal Air Force. He resigned in 1935 to join Imperial Airways, having successfully passed the examinations for a civil navigator's licence (first class) and both wireless operator's and ground engineer's licences. In 1938 he gained the world's long-distance record for seaplanes in a flight from Dundee in Scotland to Alexandra Bay in South-West Africa. In 1935 he married Elsa, daughter of Charles Gubler, jeweller, of Zurich; they had a son and a daughter. 
In 1940, as flight superintendent of the Atlantic Ferry service, Bennett flew the first of thousands of American-built aircraft to the British Isles, a feat never before attempted in winter. Despite his technical brilliance and outstanding capacity for work, his relationship with his civilian masters was difficult and he returned to the RAF in 1941. He was posted to Leeming, Yorkshire, to command 77 squadron operating Whitley bombers and in April 1942 to 10 squadron, also at Leeming. During an attack on the 'Tirpitz' in a Norwegian fjord his Halifax was shot down. After bailing out he escaped on foot to Sweden to be repatriated to Britain, where he was immediately awarded the DSO. 
When the Air Ministry ordered Bomber Command to create an elite target-finding force Bennett was the obvious choice to command it. Promotion followed swiftly and as air officer commanding 8 group his Pathfinder force successfully mastered the identification and marking of chosen targets. In 1943 he was accorded the rank of air vice-marshal. Although regarded by many as the architect of the efficiency of Bomber Command, his relationship with other long-serving bomber group commanders was not without friction. Few had any recent operational experience and most were reluctant to release their best crews to 8 group. 
In 1945, having resigned his commission, Bennett was appointed chief executive of British South American Airways, a new airline founded by shipping interests. His policy of operating only British aircraft involved dependence upon a converted bomber, the Lancastrian, until the Avro Tudor was ready for service. The deficiencies of the airport facilities, together with the inexperience of the youthful crews, took their toll in accidents. In 1948, following the unexplained disappearance of a Tudor 'en route' to Bermuda, the minister for civil aviation, Lord Nathan, grounded the remainder, pending an investigation. Convinced that the Tudor was perfectly airworthy, Bennett angrily denounced the minister to the national press. In the ensuing furore he refused to resign and was dismissed. 
Almost at once the Russian blockade of road, rail, and river routes to West Berlin provided Bennett with an opportunity to prove the Tudor's merits. He founded Airflight, based at Langley, near Slough, equipping two Tudors as oil tankers and personally flying 250 sorties to Berlin. In May 1949 he registered a new company, Fairflight, based at Blackbushe, Hampshire. Charter flights to the Middle East and Far East were carried out before the company was sold in 1951. 
At the invitation of Sir Archibald Sinclair, leader of the Liberal Party, Bennett stood for Middlesbrough West at a by-election in May 1945. He was unopposed but at the general election shortly afterwards he lost the seat to the Labour candidate. In 1948 he unsuccessfully contended North Croydon, and, in 1950, Norwich North. Thereafter the Liberal Party's enthusiasm for the European Economic Community and its defence policies alienated Bennett, whose upbringing was founded on pride in the empire and the merits of imperial preference. He left the Liberal Party in 1962 and five years later polled about 500 votes as a National Party candidate at a by-election in Nuneaton, Warwickshire. Although not a member of the National Front, he supported some of its policies, such as the voluntary repatriation of immigrants, when he organized, in 1969, the Association of Political Independents and, later, the independent democratic movement. He joined the National Council of Anti-Common Market Organizations and was its chairman from 1973 to 1976. From 1946 to 1949 he was chairman of the executive committee of the United Nations Association of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. His most notable publication, 'The Complete Air Navigator' (1931), ran through many editions until 1967. He also wrote 'The Air Mariner' (1938) and 'Pathfinder' (1958), among other books. He was appointed CBE (1943) and CB (1944). The Russian government awarded him the order of Alexander Nevsky in 1944. For services to aviation he was awarded the Johnston memorial trophy in 1937 and 1938, and the Oswald Watt medal in 1938 and 1946. Bennett died on 15 September 1986 at Wexham Hospital, Buckinghamshire. 
Archie Stewart Jackson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40137


Dickson, Sir William Forster (1898-1987), air force officer, was born in Northwood, Middlesex, on 24 September 1898, the only child of Campbell Cameron Forster Dickson, solicitor, and his wife, Agnes Nelson-Ward, a direct descendant of Lord Nelson. He was educated at Haileybury College, Hertfordshire, and joined the Royal Naval Air Service in 1916. After training as a pilot he served with the Grand Fleet aboard the aircraft-carrier 'Furious', where he pioneered deck landings and participated in the first carrier-based bombing raid, earning appointment to the DSO (1918). After the war he became a flying instructor in the newly independent Royal Air Force and flew as a test pilot, being awarded the AFC (1922). Then, after working in the Air Ministry (1923-6) as the expert on naval/air operations for Sir Hugh Trenchard, he flew with 56 squadron (1926-7), attended the Royal Air Force Staff College, Andover (1927-8), spent several years in India, commanded 25 squadron (1935-6), and thoroughly enjoyed three years on the directing staff at Andover (1936-8), where he proved a fine instructor. In 1932 he had married Patricia Marguerite, sister of Sir George (Gubby) Allen, cricketer, and daughter of Sir Walter Macarthur Allen, commandant-in-chief of the metropolitan special constabulary. They had two daughters, one of whom died in childhood in 1952. 
On the outbreak of war, having attended the Imperial Defence College (1939), Dickson was called upon to use his exceptional staff skills in the joint planning staff, first as group captain (1940) and then as air commodore (1941). He contributed greatly to the forward planning in the early years of the war, working directly for Winston Churchill and the chiefs of staff, joining in meetings with the Soviet ambassador to discuss military aid, and attending the Arcadia conference, where the future Anglo-American strategy was decided. After a year (1942-3) in Fighter Command (as air vice-marshal) he spent another year (1943-4) preparing 83 group for the Normandy invasion, whereupon General Montgomery insisted that the group be handed over to Harry Broadhurst, the commander whom he knew. Dickson, accepting the inevitable disappointment with good grace, departed for Italy to command the desert air force, and for most of 1944 ably directed its intensive interdiction and close army support operations. 
At the end of the year Dickson returned to London as assistant chief of air staff (policy); in June 1946 he was promoted air marshal and joined the Air Council as vice-chief of air staff, working under Lord Tedder and devoting much of his attention to the RAF's post-war re-equipment programme; and in March 1948 he became commander-in-chief in the Middle East. A year later he was criticized in parliament after four reconnaissance Spitfires had been shot down by the Israelis, but Clement Attlee, the prime minister, firmly defended him over what had been essentially a political air operation. Dickson returned to the Air Ministry in March 1950, as air member for supply and organization. Central to his work was the expansion programme necessitated by the Korean War, and he also negotiated an agreement with his American counterpart to cover the deployment of a large American air force contingent in the United Kingdom. 
Dickson became chief of air staff on 1 January 1953. Churchill, again prime minister, remembered him well from wartime and fully supported him in his prime task: the planning and preparation for the RAF's nuclear deterrent. Recognizing the increasing importance of cold war operations Dickson also pressed forward the development of the air transport force, but was ever mindful of the growing economic pressures on the RAF's budget. He became marshal of the Royal Air Force in 1954. Then, on 1 January 1956, Sir Anthony Eden, now prime minister, appointed him to the new position of separate chairman of the chiefs of staff. Dickson, convinced of the need for a stronger 'centre' in the Ministry of Defence, readily accepted the post, which he held throughout the Suez crisis of 1956 and the subsequent defence review by Duncan Sandys; unable to exercise much influence during this controversial debate he supported the proposal by Harold Macmillan in 1958 to convert his post to chief of defence staff. On 1 January 1959 he became the first incumbent, handing over to Lord Mountbatten of Burma six months later. 
Dickson had served at the top of the defence hierarchy for six and a half years, at a time of turmoil, defence cuts, and post-Suez reforms in the armed services. While short of stature, he always commanded attention, combining a razor-sharp brain with a great sense of fun. His sense of humour often defused awkward situations. His love of flying had enamoured him of the RAF, but he retained deep respect for the other services and was seen as an ideal choice for Britain's first chief of defence staff. In retirement at Cold Ash, near Newbury, Berkshire, his interests included the Royal Central Asian Society, the Ex-Services Mental Welfare Society, and the Forces Help Society and Lord Roberts Workshops; he also loved to play golf. He was appointed OBE (1934), CB (1942), CBE (1945), KBE (1946), KCB (1952), and GCB (1953). William Dickson died on 12 September 1987 at the Royal Air Force Hospital, Wroughton, Wiltshire. 
Henry A. Probert', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40138


Martin, Sir Harold Brownlow Morgan (1918-1988), air force officer, was born on 27 February 1918 in Edgecliffe, Sydney, Australia, the only son and second of the three children of Joseph Harold Osborne Morgan Martin MD, medical practitioner, and his wife, Colina Elizabeth Dixon. He was educated at Randwick high school and at Lyndfield College. An accomplished horseman, he became a cadet in the Australian light horse. In 1937, intent on world travel, he left Sydney as a crew member on a liner. In 1940, in England, he joined the Royal Air Force volunteer reserve. 
During his first Bomber Command tour in 455 squadron (Royal Australian Air Force) and 50 squadron (Royal Air Force), flying Hampden, Manchester, and Lancaster bombers, Martin concluded that the most effective way of penetrating enemy defences at night was to disregard regulations and to fly at low level. By questioning higher policy and refusing to allow regulations to hinder chances of success he was already showing a boldness and independence of mind which was to characterize his entire career. His first DFC came in 1942, after twenty-five sorties. 
Invited to join 617 (the 'Dambuster' squadron) in March 1943, Martin made a significant contribution to its night low-level training for the actual operation. The squadron flew at night at an altitude of 150 feet all the way to its targets and released its bouncing bombs from 60 feet. Martin's bomb exploded short of the dam. He flew down the dam and over the wall three times. Despite damage to the aircraft from anti-aircraft fire, he and his crew supported the following crews and engaged the enemy's guns. The last two pilots' mines exploded successfully against the dam wall. The Mohne and Eder dams were breached, and the Sorpe Dam damaged. Martin was appointed to the DSO and this was soon followed with a bar to his DFC for his courage and resolution in a costly attack on the Dortmund and Ems Canal. He became 617's acting commander and rebuilt the squadron before handing it over, well trained, to Leonard Cheshire in 1943. He also convinced Cheshire of the feasibility of low-level night target marking, a prerequisite for accurate bombing. 
In February 1944 Martin's action during an attack with 'Blockbuster' bombs on a heavily defended viaduct in southern France, for which he received a bar to his DSO, was described by Cheshire as the supreme example of inspired fearless night marking. During his last operational tour in 515 night intruder squadron, Martin again distinguished himself, gaining a second bar to his DFC (1944). He then attended the Haifa Staff College in Israel before returning to flying duties in 242 transport squadron (1946). With his war gratuity he bought a horse. In 1944 he married Wendy Lawrence, widow of Flight Lieutenant P. D. Walker, and daughter of Grenbry Outhwaite, lawyer, and Ida Rentoul, artist, of Melbourne. The marriage was very happy; the couple had two daughters. 
In 1947 Martin was awarded the Britannia trophy for a record-breaking Mosquito flight (21 hrs 31 mins.) from London to Cape Town, and the following year he received the AFC for his crucial contribution to the first jet crossing of the Atlantic, which was made by an RAF squadron. While serving in London as a squadron leader (1948-51), he began to take an interest in painting (in which he displayed a natural talent), sculpture, and archaeology, subjects he pursued most of his life. From 1952 to 1955, as a wing commander, he was air attache in Israel, a post in which he was a success because of his diplomatic flair and grasp of the political complexities of the Middle East. This posting, extended at the Israelis' request, marked a turning point in his career, and steady progress followed. 
A rewarding NATO staff post at Fontainebleau in France (1955-8) was followed by a course at the Joint Services Staff College and postings, first as group captain to signals command, and then to Cyprus, where Martin commanded the important Nicosia base. In 1963 he became an air commodore and was posted to 38 support group, where he enjoyed his contacts with the airborne forces but disagreed profoundly with the infantry over the control of the helicopter force. A course at the Imperial Defence College (1965), promotion to air vice-marshal (1967), and a return to Cyprus as the senior air staff officer prepared him for his last command appointments -- air officer commanding 38 group (1967-9), then, as air marshal (1970), air officer commanding-in-chief of the RAF in Germany, and commander of the NATO second Tactical Air Force, with its force of Belgians, Dutch, Germans, and British. 
Primarily because of frustration in his fight against service cuts, Martin was unhappy in his last RAF post, as air member for personnel at the Ministry of Defence (1973-4). After his retirement in 1974 he spent three years in Beirut and Athens as Middle East marketing adviser to Hawker Siddeley International, before returning to London as a consultant. He was aide-de-camp to Elizabeth II (1963-6) and was appointed CB (1968) and KCB (1971). 
Martin, a vital, alert man of medium height, with powerful, humorous eyes, was universally liked and respected. He was a man of great courage who always fought unselfishly for what he believed was right. In 1985 his lifestyle became restricted when he suffered brain damage after being knocked down by a coach, but he bore his lot with fortitude and patience. He died from cancer at his home, 64 Warwick Gardens, Kensington, London, on 3 November 1988. He was survived by his wife. 
Frederick Rosier', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40139


Davis, Sir William Wellclose (1901-1987), naval officer, was born in Simla, Punjab, India, on 11 October 1901, the elder son and eldest of the three children of Walter Stewart Davis, of the Indian political service, and his wife, Georgina Rose. Having been to Summer Fields School in Oxford, he joined the Royal Navy as a cadet in May 1915 and attended the Royal Naval College at Osborne, Isle of Wight and Dartmouth. He first went to sea as a midshipman in the battleship 'Neptune' in 1917. He specialized in torpedoes in 1926 and quickly showed his ability as a staff officer. He was fleet torpedo officer to Admiral Sir Frederic Dreyer on the China station and was promoted commander in 1935. He then became fleet torpedo officer and staff officer, plans, to the commander-in-chief, Home Fleet, and was subsequently appointed executive officer of the battle cruiser 'Hood' in January 1939. He served in her for the first eighteen months of the Second World War and was mentioned in dispatches. In 1934 he married Lady (Gertrude) Elizabeth Phipps (died 1985), second daughter of Constantine Charles Henry Phipps, third marquess of Normanby, canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and his wife, Gertrude Stansfeld, 'nee' Foster. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Promoted captain in December 1940, Davis went to the Admiralty as deputy director of plans. He was for a time seconded to the staff of admiral of the fleet Sir Roger Keyes, director of combined operations. Davis displayed his tact in his handling of Operation Workshop -- the projected seizure of the Mediterranean island of Pantelleria, a plan proposed by Keyes and espoused by Winston Churchill, but fiercely resisted by the chiefs of staff and Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham, the commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean. Operation Workshop never took place, but Davis himself emerged with credit, Keyes calling him 'the admirable staff officer'. In March 1943 Davis took command of the cruiser 'Mauritius', a ship in a very sensitive state of discipline which was aggravated in January 1944 when she arrived in Plymouth Sound with her ship's company expecting to pay off. In spite of Davis's representations to the Admiralty, proper leave was not granted and the ship had to return almost at once to the Mediterranean. Her sailors believed, not unreasonably, that they were being punished for previous acts of indiscipline and there was further unrest, with outright refusals of duty. It was a discouraging start, but Davis, with his gift for making people work together, turned the commission into a triumph. 'Mauritius' was the only major British warship to take part in the four invasions, of Sicily, Salerno, Anzio, and Normandy, bombarding enemy shore positions on more than 250 occasions. Later in 1944 'Mauritius' destroyed two enemy convoys in the Bay of Biscay. Davis himself was mentioned in dispatches three more times and appointed DSO with bar (1944). 
After the war Davis was director of the underwater weapons division at the Admiralty, where he helped to form the new electrical branch, and then he became chief of staff to the commander-in-chief, Home Fleet (1948-9). Promoted rear-admiral in 1950, he was naval secretary to three first lords of the Admiralty. From 1952 to 1954 he was flag officer, second in command, Mediterranean Fleet, when the first Earl Mountbatten of Burma was commander-in-chief. It was made clear to Davis that he was to run the fleet while Mountbatten dealt with the numerous political and strategic problems in the Mediterranean. 
A tall man, and extremely good-looking in his youth, Davis had great personal charm and a good brain. There was nothing bombastic or dramatic about him; he was no fire-eater. But when he went to the Admiralty in 1954, as vice-chief of the naval staff, he provided the competent, imperturbable staff work which ably supported the much more flamboyant Mountbatten, then first sea lord, during a seemingly interminable series of crises in the late 1950s, notably the 'Crabb affair', when Commander Crabb, a naval frogman, disappeared while allegedly inspecting the propellers of the Soviet cruiser which had brought Nikolay Bulganin and Nikita Khrushchov to Portsmouth in 1956; the Suez operation, later that year, which Mountbatten himself deplored; and the navy's response to the swingeing cuts proposed by the 1957 white paper of Duncan Sandys, a man whom Davis privately thought had little grasp of the strategic needs of the country. 
Davis's last appointment, as a full admiral, was from 1958 to 1960 as commander-in-chief, Home Fleet, and NATO commander-in-chief in the eastern Atlantic. He was by then the only senior naval officer still serving who had served in the First World War. He was also the first commander-in-chief to haul down his flag afloat and hoist it again ashore over the 'Fuhrer Bunker', the NATO headquarters at Northwood in Middlesex. He was appointed CB in 1952, KCB in 1956, and GCB in 1959. After he retired in 1960 he devoted much time to county affairs in Gloucestershire. To the end of his life he took a close interest in naval history and naval affairs. William Davis died in hospital in Gloucester on 29 October 1987. 
John Winton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40140


Hopkins, Sir Frank Henry Edward (1910-1990), naval officer, was born on 23 June 1910 at The Poplars, Maldon Road, Wallington, Surrey, the fourth child and only son of Edward Frank Lumley Hopkins, solicitor, and his wife, Sybil Mary Walrond. He was educated at the Nautical College at Pangbourne, Berkshire, and joined the Royal Navy as a cadet on 16 September 1927. He served as a midshipman in the cruiser 'London', and then in destroyers before qualifying as an observer in 1934, flying from the aircraft-carriers 'Furious' and 'Courageous'. When war broke out in 1939, he was on the staff of HMS 'Peregrine', the naval observer school at Ford in Sussex. In 1940 he joined 826 naval air squadron, flying Fairey Albacores, covering the Dunkirk evacuation, bombing rail and road communications in Holland, and attacking enemy shipping off Zeebrugge, before operating for five months with Royal Air Force Coastal Command, making night attacks against targets in France, Belgium, and Holland. Hopkins was awarded the DSC in 1941. 
In November 1940 his squadron embarked in the aircraft-carrier 'Formidable' and sailed for the Mediterranean. On 28 March 1941 no. 826's aircraft made two torpedo attacks on ships of the Italian fleet off Cape Matapan. In a dusk attack, no. 826's aircraft torpedoed and crippled the heavy cruiser 'Pola'. This led to a night action in which 'Pola' and two more heavy cruisers, 'Fiume' and 'Zara', were sunk with considerable loss of life. Hopkins was mentioned in dispatches (1941). On 6 December 1941 Hopkins took command of 830 naval air squadron, which flew Fairey Swordfish from Malta. Night after night he led his squadron on torpedo and bombing strikes which sank thousands of tons of axis shipping, seriously affecting supplies to Rommel's army in north Africa. 
Late in January 1942 Hopkins led a striking force through a gale to search for a large enemy convoy on its way to Tripoli. By the time the planes found the convoy they were too short of fuel to attack so they returned to Malta, refuelled, took off again, found the convoy a second time, and sank a 13,000-ton troopship. When Hopkins landed at Hal Far, the naval air station in Malta, just after dawn, he had been in the air for more than twelve hours in flying conditions normally considered impossible. He received an immediate DSO (1942), an award which his squadron thought by no means over-generous. 
Hopkins then joined the staff of the British air commission in Washington, DC, and he qualified as a pilot in 1944. As British naval air observer with the US Pacific Fleet, serving in the American carriers USS 'Hancock' and 'Intrepid', he was present at the decisive defeat of the Japanese navy in the battle of Leyte Gulf in October 1944. In 1945 he went to the Royal Navy Staff College, Greenwich, London, for two years on the directing staff. He went to Washington again in 1947, for two years as assistant naval air attache. He was awarded the American Legion of Merit in 1948. 
In 1949 Hopkins joined the light fleet aircraft-carrier 'Theseus' as commander (air) and served in her in the Korean War from October 1950 until April 1951. Under Hopkins, 'Theseus''s air group was particularly energetic and successful in operations over Korea and in 1950 it won the Boyd trophy, awarded annually for the most outstanding feat of airmanship. Hopkins was again mentioned in dispatches (1950). 
From 1951 to 1958 Hopkins was at the Admiralty as deputy director, naval air organization and training; was captain (D) of the 2 training squadron, commanding the destroyer 'Myngs'; and was at the Admiralty again as director, naval air warfare. He also recommissioned the carrier 'Ark Royal', after a long and extensive refit, successfully commanding her through a difficult period with new aircraft, radar, and flight deck equipment. He then went to the Britannia Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, as the first naval aviator and the first public-school entry officer to command the college (1958-60). In 1960 (the year he was promoted rear-admiral) he became flag officer, flying training, and in 1962 flag officer, aircraft-carriers. 
Having become vice-admiral in 1962, in 1963 Hopkins was appointed deputy chief of naval staff and fifth sea lord. He now had to fight for the navy's future air power. The Royal Air Force set out to destroy plans for the projected new carrier, known as CVA 01, claiming that shore-based aircraft could do all that carrier aircraft could do, and more. When CVA 01 was cancelled in February 1966, the first sea lord and the first lord both resigned. Hopkins wanted to follow suit but was prevailed upon to stay and became commander-in-chief, Portsmouth, which he said was the most miserable appointment of his life. He was promoted admiral in 1966 and retired from the navy in 1967. He was made commander of the Swedish order of the Sword in 1954, appointed CB in 1961, and made KCB in 1964. 
Hopkins worked his squadron hard, but with his reputation for gallantry and endurance he could ask anything of his aircrew. He was always introspective, and his experience with no. 830, when he risked his life almost every night, left its mark on him, but he had great personal charm and was an excellent dinner-table companion. He was a keen and expert helmsman and a member of the Royal yacht squadron. 
Hopkins was a handsome man, even into old age, with sharp features, high cheekbones, and a keen gaze, quick to sum up a newcomer to ship or squadron. Although the marriage was not registered, about 1933 he married Joan Mary, 'nee' Ashwin (died 1982), widow of Lieutenant-Commander John Standring RN. They had one daughter. They were divorced in 1937 and in 1939 he married Lois Barbara, daughter of James Robert Cook, of Cheam, Surrey, director of Cook, Hammond, and Kell, cartographers and printers. They had no children. Lois died in 1987 and he married in 1988 Georgianna Priest, the widow of an American naval officer he had met during the war. Latterly he lived half the year in Devon near Dartmouth, where his home was Kingswear Court Lodge, and half in Hawaii, USA. Hopkins died on 14 April 1990 in Hawaii, after a road accident there. 
John Winton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40141


Irving, Sir Edmund George (1910-1990), hydrographer, was born on 5 April 1910 in Sandakan, British North Borneo, the elder child and only son of George Clerk Irving, resident magistrate, British North Borneo, and his wife, Ethel Mary Frances Poole, of Kimberley, South Africa. After arriving in England at the age of nine, Irving was sent to St Anthony's preparatory school, Eastbourne, before being accepted for the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, in 1923. Because of his distinctly prominent nose he was known to his classmates as Beaky. 
Irving went to sea as a cadet in HMS 'Royal Oak' in 1927. After completing the sub-lieutenants' courses, in 1931 he joined the Royal Naval Surveying Service, in which he served for thirty-five years. On 14 March 1936 he married Margaret Scudamore (died 1974), daughter of Richard Edwards, of Ipswich and Birmingham, with whom he had a son and a daughter. 
In 1941 Irving was mentioned in dispatches for his skill as navigating officer in HMS 'Scott' when she was employed laying moored marker beacons in the Denmark strait (between Iceland and Greenland) to guide a squadron of British minelayers. While on the staff of the commander-in-chief, Mediterranean, Irving was again mentioned in dispatches for putting in place on the western side of the Strait of Messina three pairs of searchlights which, when illuminated vertically on the night of 2-3 September 1943, formed three sets of transit marks to guide the British landing craft to their beaches in Reggio di Calabria. 
In 1944, when in command of HMS 'Franklin', Irving resurveyed a number of heavily damaged ports and harbours in north-west Europe as they fell into allied hands. Finally, after his ship was berthed in Terneuzen, his surveys of the River Schelde enabled allied shipping to bring vital military supplies to Antwerp. For this he received not only appointment as OBE in 1944, but also the thanks of Field Marshal Montgomery, who visited the ship and, at Irving's suggestion, 'spliced the mainbrace' (ordering the issue of an extra tot of rum). This action ruffled the feathers of their lordships at the Admiralty who considered that, apart from the monarch, only naval commanders-in-chief and the sea lords could give this beneficent order. 
In 1948 'Egg' Irving, as he was now widely called because of his initials, carried out in HMS 'Sharpshooter' a number of sea trials of the newly developed two-range Decca system for fixing the position of surveying ships when they were out of sight of land. This electronic invention brought about a radical change in sea surveying. Irving, by then a rear-admiral, was in 1960 appointed hydrographer of the Royal Navy, a post he held with distinction. During this period he convinced the Admiralty that converted warships made poor surveying vessels, and that new survey ships, custom-built to meet an increased oceanographic role -- and to merchant ship rather than naval specifications -- would save money by reducing the manpower needed to operate them. In December 1964 Irving's wife launched 'Hecla', the first of four successful ocean-going survey ships. He was appointed CB in 1962 and KBE in 1966, the year of his retirement. Meanwhile, in September 1966, Irving and his staff went to Leningrad in the survey ship HMS 'Vidal' to confer with Admiral Rassokho, the Soviet hydrographer. It was eleven years since any British naval ship had visited the Soviet Union but, having been warned in advance of the quantity of vodka they would be expected to imbibe in the name of friendship, the British visitors established cordial relations and charts were exchanged to mutual benefit. 
Irving was a man of great energy and enthusiasm with a flair for remembering people's names. When he took command of a ship he very quickly got to know the names of all his men. He was associated with a great number of institutes and associations, always playing an active part and often chairing vital committees, so that his retirement years were full and busy. He continued for a number of years to work for the Decca company, promoting the use of their electronic surveying equipment worldwide. He served on the council of the Royal Geographical Society, chairing the expeditions committee from 1965 to 1975, and as the society's president (1969-71). In 1976 he was awarded the society's patron's medal for 'services to the advancement of hydrographic science and encouragement for exploration'. As a member of the committee of management of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution from 1960, he was chairman of the boat committee from 1969 to 1978, when the faster 'Waveney' and 'Arun' class lifeboats were being developed. He was a fellow of the Royal Institution of Navigation and its president from 1967 to 1969. He also served in the Natural Environment Research Council from 1967 to 1974, and was acting conservator of the River Mersey from 1975 to 1985. He was a trustee of the National Maritime Museum (1972-81) and an active member of the Society for Nautical Research. 
Of middle height and fairly stout, Irving had a light complexion and sandy hair (although his beard was red when he grew it in wartime), with vivid blue eyes and bushy eyebrows. His first wife died in 1974 and in 1979 he married Esther Rebecca, daughter of Joseph Ellison, a company director. He died of a heart attack at his home, Camer Green, Meopham, Kent, on 1 October 1990. 
G. S. Ritchie', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40142


Mason, Sir Frank Trowbridge (1900-1988), naval officer and engineer, was born in Ipswich on 25 April 1900, the elder son and elder child of Frank John Mason MBE, draper and later JP and mayor of Ipswich, and his wife, Marian Elizabeth Trowbridge. He was educated at Ipswich School, passing into the Royal Navy (executive branch) as a special entry (public school) cadet in 1918. After two years as a cadet and midshipman in HMS 'Collingwood' and HMS 'Queen Elizabeth', he volunteered to specialize in engineering (E). He underwent specialist engineering training at the Royal Naval colleges at Greenwich and Keyham. In 1923 he qualified for his engineering watch-keeping certificate in HMS 'Malaya' and was promoted to lieutenant (E), continuing his service in that ship as a fully qualified mechanical and marine engineer until appointed in 1925 to HM Dockyard, Malta. 
In 1928 Mason was appointed to HMS 'Rodney', a new battleship then undergoing severe problems with her novel 16-inch guns. His engineering skill in securing improved reliability led him to specialize in ordnance engineering and to his reappointment after a short period with Messrs Vickers at Elswick. After promotion to lieutenant-commander (E) he served for three years in the naval ordnance department and in 1933-4 he again served in HMS 'Rodney', but this time as senior (second) engineer, responsible to the commander (E) for all propulsion, electricity generating, and 'hotel services' machinery and equipment. Following his next promotion to commander (E) in December 1934, he served again for three years in the naval ordnance department. From there he was appointed as engineer officer (chief engineer) to a new cruiser, HMS 'Galatea', then flagship of the rear-admiral, destroyers. In 1939 he became the first commander (E) to serve in HMS 'Excellent', then the naval gunnery school. He was appointed in 1943 as fleet gunnery engineer officer to the Home Fleet in Scapa Flow, and at the same time received promotion to captain (E). 
From 1944 Mason served again in the naval ordnance department in the Admiralty (Bath) and in 1947 became chief gunnery engineer officer and deputy director of naval ordnance. In 1949 he was the first engineering specialist to become a student at the Imperial Defence College (later the Royal College of Defence Studies) and, on promotion to rear-admiral, from 1950 to 1952 he held the post of deputy engineer-in-chief of the fleet. After a year on the staff of the commander-in-chief, the Nore, he was promoted to vice-admiral (E) in 1953 and assumed the post of engineer-in-chief of the fleet. He was appointed CB in 1953 and KCB in 1955. He was placed on the inactive list of the Royal Navy in 1957. 
By the 1950s Mason was among the last of those naval officers still serving who had entered under the Selborne-Fisher scheme of 1903, whose aim was to put engineers in the main stream of naval life. The scheme was cancelled in 1923 and the navy entered the Second World War technologically bereft. In the immediate post-war era Mason and others determined to resurrect it, in the face of great resistance. But Mason's influence and the battle experience of many senior officers of all specializations carried the day. In 1956 the new arrangements came into being. It was Mason's great service to the navy that he was at the centre of bringing about a general list of officers. 
For thirty years after leaving the active list Mason devoted himself to the national, but greatly neglected, engineering aspects of manufacturing industry and to education in general. He was president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (1964) and of the Institute of Marine Engineers (1967), as well as being a member of the Institute of Plant Engineers and chairman or vice-chairman of many other professional bodies. He was a member of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (1958-63), and its vice-chairman in 1962-3, a member of the National Council for Technological Awards (1960-64), a founder fellow of the Fellowship of Engineering (1976), a member of the Smeatonian Society of Civil Engineers, and assistant to the court of the Worshipful Company of Shipwrights. He served on the councils or governing bodies of the Further Education Staff College (1964-74), Brighton Polytechnic (1969-73), the Royal Naval School in Haslemere (1953-83), Hurstpierpoint College (1966-80), and Ipswich School (1961-72), and was chairman of the steering committee of the National Engineering Laboratory (1958-69) and of the Standing Conference on Schools Science and Technology (1971-5). He was an active member of the council of the Navy League (1967-73) and from 1967 held the life appointment of high steward of Ipswich. He was a fellow of the Fellowship of Engineering and of the Institute of Marine Engineers, an honorary fellow of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, and an honorary member of the Institute of Plant Engineers. 
Mason was good-looking and his expression was that of a man at peace with himself. Of medium build, he was always impeccably turned out, and, as he grew older, his white hair added to his aura of long and deep experience and benign but firm authority. He was a committed and practising Christian. On 23 April 1924 he married Dora Margaret (Margot) (died 1993), daughter of Sydney Brand JP, who, like Mason's father, was a draper. They were a devoted couple who had one son, who became archdeacon of Tonbridge, and two daughters, one of whom was appointed OBE. While suffering from cancer of the lung, Mason died from heart failure at his home, Townfield House, 114 High Street, Hurstpierpoint, Sussex, on 29 August 1988. His body was cremated at the Sussex and Surrey crematorium at Worth, Sussex. 
Louis Le Bailly', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40143


Allen, Sir George Oswald Browning (1902-1989), cricketer and cricket administrator, was born on 31 July 1902 in Sydney, Australia, the younger son and second of the three children of Sir Walter Macarthur Allen (1870-1943) and his wife, Marguerite Julie (Pearl), daughter of Edward Lamb, of Sydney, minister of lands in Queensland. His sister married Sir William Dickson, marshal of the Royal Air Force. His brother died on active service in 1940. Although by birth a third-generation Australian -- his father's brother had played cricket for Australia against England at Sydney in 1887 -- Allen was taken to England at the age of six, so that he could be educated there. In the event, his parents chose to settle in England, his father becoming commandant-in-chief of the metropolitan special constabulary, in which post he was appointed KBE in 1926. 
It was not long before Gubby, as he came to be known, was resolutely English. After showing early promise as a cricketer at Summer Fields School, Oxford, he had three years in the Eton eleven (1919-21) before winning a blue at Cambridge in 1922 and 1923. After two years at Trinity College, Cambridge, he left without a degree and became a stockbroker in the City of London. By 1923 he was making the occasional appearance for Middlesex and gaining a reputation as a genuinely fast bowler and no mean batsman. Of no more than medium build, Allen achieved his pace through timing, thrust, and a fine follow through. He made the most of an elastic strength, while managing, at the same time, to play the game with style. Between the late 1920s and the mid-1930s there was no English fast bowler, apart from Harold Larwood, capable of more dangerous spells. 
Allen was essentially an amateur. Even when, in 1929, he took all ten Lancashire wickets for forty runs for Middlesex at Lord's, he had done some stockbroking in the City first and arrived on the ground too late to open the bowling. He never played first-class cricket regularly enough in England to score 1000 runs or take 100 wickets in a season. Not surprisingly, perhaps, it was in Australia, to which he went back as a member of the MCC sides of 1932-3 and 1936-7 and had plenty of bowling, that he was at his most consistent. 
On the first of these tours Allen's refusal to resort to 'leg theory' distanced him from his captain, Douglas Jardine. Despite that, he took twenty-one wickets in the five test matches. Four years later he took another seventeen test wickets at the same time as enduring, as England's captain, the mortification of seeing Australia recover from the loss of the first two test matches so effectively that they won the last three and, with them, the Ashes. On the tour of 1936-7 a friendship developed between Allen and his opposite number, Donald Bradman, which was to last for over fifty years and to have a major influence within the corridors of cricketing power. 
In the seventeen years which passed between the last of Allen's twenty-five test matches, at Melbourne in 1937, and his last first-class match, against Cambridge University at Fenner's in 1954, he played very little first-class cricket, even for Middlesex. This was partly because of the Second World War, during which he served, to the rank of lieutenant-colonel, in military intelligence (MI5) at the War Office, partly because of the time he gave to the City, and partly through choice. He did, however, accept an invitation to take a somewhat experimental MCC side to the West Indies in 1947-8, a decision which he considered afterwards to have been a mistake. By then he was forty-four -- older than any England captain since W. G. Grace in 1899 -- and he tore his hamstring (the first instance of many) on the outward voyage. 
Elected to the MCC committee for the first time in 1935, at what was then an unusually young age, Allen became in time the 'eminence grise'. As a cricket administrator of dominance and durability he ranks with the seventh Baron Hawke of Towton (1860-1938), the fourth Baron Harris (1851-1932), and Sir Pelham Warner (1873-1963). For half a century there was scarcely an issue connected with the game in which he was not closely involved. He was chairman of the England selectors from 1955 to 1961, president of the MCC in 1963-4, treasurer of the MCC from 1964 to 1976, a member of the Cricket Council from its formation in 1968 until 1982, a prime mover in founding the national coaching scheme, and co-author, with H. S. Altham, of the 'MCC Cricket Coaching Book' (1952), the standard work of its kind. 
Allen's other main sporting interest was golf, a game to which he applied himself diligently and which he played well enough to have, at his best, a handicap of four. His own account of a good round, stroke by stroke, was always something of a ceremony. As a source of cricketing reference he had no equal, and in the summers after his retirement from the City (he was a member of the stock exchange from 1933 to 1972) there was never much doubt where to find him: he would be in his customary place in the window of the committee room at Lord's. 
Allen was appointed CBE in 1962 and knighted in 1986. He was awarded the Territorial Decoration of Ireland (1945) and the American Legion of Merit (1946) for his war services. Although he never allowed himself to be talked into marriage, he always enjoyed feminine company. Allen died on 29 November 1989 at his home, 4 Grove End Road, overlooking the Lord's pavilion in St John's Wood, London. 
John Woodcock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40144


Cotton, (Thomas) Henry (1907-1987), golfer, was born on 28 January 1907 at The Croft, Church Hulme, Congleton, Cheshire, the second son in the family of two sons and one daughter of George Cotton, an industrialist, inventor, and Wesleyan lay preacher, and his second wife, Alice le Poidevin, a native of Guernsey. His early childhood was spent in Peckham. He and his brother, Leslie, went to Ivydale Road school, Peckham, and, after their evacuation from London in the First World War, to Reigate grammar school. From there Cotton won a scholarship to Alleyn's School, Dulwich. The war over, George Cotton obtained junior membership for both boys at the Aquarius Golf Club, and both won the club championship before reaching their teens. From the time he left Alleyn's (after irritating the headmaster) to become a golf professional at sixteen, Cotton trod a path of his own. His aloofness lost him popularity with contemporaries, and his strong will brought him into conflict with golf's rulers, but he rarely deviated from his chosen course. His achievements were founded on intense application and self-reliance. 
When Cotton entered his profession, the status of golf professional was barely above that of a senior caddy. By personal example Cotton did more than anyone of his time to alter that. He sought the best: silk shirts from Jermyn Street, limousines rather than taxis, and the best restaurants. Though he won three British open championships and many famous victories, his impact on his own profession was his greatest attainment. He was not long content to be the junior of six assistants at Fulwell Golf Club on 12's'. 6died a week. Within a year he had moved to an assistant's post at Rye. There he made friends with Cyril Tolley, a fine amateur golfer, who assisted his next move. At nineteen, Cotton went to Langley Park, the youngest head professional in the history of British golf. 
At this point Cotton perceived that to reach the top in golf he must challenge American supremacy. With the blessing of his club, $300, and a first-class ticket on the 'Aquitania', he joined the 1928-9 winter season in America. A year later he was invited to Argentina to teach and play exhibition matches with a fellow professional. There (Maria) Isabel Estanguet Moss (1902-1982) booked him for fifty lessons. The daughter of Pedro Estanguet, a wealthy landowner, and his wife, Epifania, and married to Enrique Moss, of Argentina's diplomatic service, Toots, as she became universally called, was five years older than Cotton. They formed a close partnership, which transformed both their lives. Eventually, on the annulment in Latvia in June 1939 of her first marriage, they married at a Westminster register office on 11 December 1939. They had no children, though there were two daughters from Isabel's first marriage. Passionately loyal to Cotton's interests, she became, when occasion demanded, his most trenchant critic, as well as a competent golfer herself. 
Cotton won three open victories (1934 at Royal St George's, 1937 at Carnoustie, and 1948 at Muirfield). After seven years at Langley Park, he had taken a post at Waterloo, a fashionable club near Brussels. But after his first open win, he was persuaded by the sixth earl of Rosebery to build up the reputation of Ashridge Golf Club. The outbreak of the Second World War interrupted a career at the peak of success. Cotton joined the Royal Air Force, and suffered a regime which aggravated his stomach ulcer. After being medically discharged with the rank of flight lieutenant, he raised $70,000 for the Red Cross and other war charities from 130 matches which he organized. He took appointments first at Coombe Hill and then at Royal Mid-Surrey. From there he won his last open in 1948. That was the apogee of a career in which he had dominated tournament golf for some twenty years. He was also captain of the British Ryder cup team in 1947 and 1953. Though he had minor wins in 1953 and 1954, writing, teaching, and golf architecture became the main outlets for his energies. He wrote several books on golf, as well as designing thirteen golf courses in Britain and ten more abroad. 
In 1963 Cotton went to Portugal, and on the Algarve coast created from a swamp the Penina golf course. This became his memorial, and he became virtually squire of the place until the Portuguese revolution of April 1974, during which he was expelled. Profoundly depressed by enforced exile, Cotton was rallied by his wife and they moved for a spell to Sotogrande in Spain. After a two-year interlude they returned to Portugal. There, at Christmas 1982, Toots died, ending half a century's close partnership. In 1987 Cotton entered King Edward VII Hospital, and was there told of his knighthood. He had been appointed MBE in 1946. During his convalescence he died suddenly from a heart attack at Beaumont House, Beaumont Street, Westminster, on 22 December 1987; he was buried at Mexilhoeira Grande in Portugal. He was knighted posthumously in the new year's honours of 1988. 
Always an individualist, Cotton taught that golfing excellence demanded infinite pains. He believed in strong hands and could hit a succession of one-handed shots without regripping the club. A severe opponent, he was also an excellent host. Tireless in pursuit of his own goals, he freely shared with a generation of young golfers more insight into the game than any other figure of his time. 
Deedes', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40145


Hutton, Sir Leonard (1916-1990), cricketer, was born on 23 June 1916 at 5 Fulneck, near Pudsey, Leeds, the youngest of the six children of Henry Hutton (1876-1947), builder and foreman joiner, and his wife, Lily Swithenbank (1875-1952). Moravians, the earliest protestant sect in Europe, had come to Fulneck in 1732 and within a generation Benjamin Hutton, a tailor from Scotland, had been the first of his family to settle there. Moravian traditions of discipline, hard work, self-sufficiency, and craftsmanship would be the lodestars of Leonard Hutton's life and professional career. He was brought up in one of the community terraced houses 'in a home which was strict but caring' (Howat, 3) and attended the chapel, but there were not the financial resources to send him to Fulneck School, despite the emphasis it gave to cricket. Instead, he went to Littlemoor council school in Pudsey, practising on the concrete playground or at the Pudsey St Lawrence club, where his three elder brothers all played in Yorkshire league cricket. 
At thirteen Hutton made his debut for the club's first eleven and in 1930, on the recommendation of his near neighbour Herbert Sutcliffe, he reported to the Yorkshire indoor shed at Headingley, where he was coached by George Hirst. In the same year he watched Donald Bradman make his 334 in a test match, a record in Anglo-Australian tests which Hutton himself would eclipse eight years later. That autumn the fourteen-year-old began a year at Pudsey grammar school, where he studied technical drawing and quantitative work before joining the building firm of Joseph Verity. He would remain with them in the winters until 1939 and retain a practical interest in woodwork all his life. 
In the season of 1933 Hutton opened the batting both for Pudsey St Lawrence and Yorkshire second eleven (where he averaged 69.90), the prelude to his first eleven debut in 1934 against Cambridge University. He was still six weeks off his eighteenth birthday and the youngest player to have appeared for Yorkshire. In anxious pursuit of his first run, a throw from Jack Davies dismissed him for 0. But against Worcestershire he became the youngest Yorkshire centurion when he made 196. Neville Cardus wrote that he was mature at an age when other brilliant beginners were merely showing promise. But the young man, whom the press were idolizing, remained 'the most retiring and unconceited personality that anyone could meet' (Howat, 20). 
In playing for Yorkshire, Hutton had joined the strongest county side of the inter-war years, to whom winning the championship was almost a prescriptive right. Their tight ranks only welcomed a newcomer once he had proved his worth. From men such as Maurice Leyland, Hedley Verity, and Bill Bowes he learned the folklore of the Yorkshire cricket tradition. Sutcliffe remained his strongest advocate, and declared in print, in 1935, that at fourteen he had been good enough to play for most county sides. Hutton (and others) found the eulogy embarrassing: the more so, as the seasons of 1935 and 1936 were not without their pitfalls. He averaged under 30 in both and -- never the most robust of men -- had to be rested through physical strain. The press were beginning to criticize his reluctance to display the strokes at his command. Yorkshire, however, kept faith and he became, in July 1936, their youngest capped player in the twentieth century. 
Hutton's test debut, against New Zealand at Lord's in 1937, was as inglorious as his first-class one three years earlier. He was dismissed for 0 and 1, but redeemed himself with a century at Old Trafford a month later. Then, in August 1938, after two months' absence through injury, came his innings of 364 against the Australians at the Oval in the fifth test. In beating Bradman's record to make what remains the highest individual score in Anglo-Australian tests, Hutton fulfilled all the attributes of skill, concentration, and endurance so often credited to him. If the press were lost for words, they hid the fact successfully enough in column upon column of reporting. Not since the abdication crisis two years earlier had the thoughts of millions throughout the British empire been so centred on one person. Even the American magazine 'Time' reported on his innings. Hutton, ever after, would be conscious of his obligations to those, especially the young, who came to watch him. He would play better innings in the years to come (six, at least) but '364' remained for the rest of his life as much a millstone as a milestone. 
While not fulfilling the highest expectations in South Africa (1938-9), Hutton averaged 96.00 against the West Indies in 1939. The Second World War broke out twelve days after he had made 165 not out at the Oval in the third test. Pelham Warner summed him up at the time as possessing 'every stroke conceivable' (Howat, 50). The first wartime 'Wisden' called him 'one of the world's greatest batsmen' ('Wisden', 1940, 513). 
On 16 September 1939 Hutton married in Wykeham parish church Dorothy Mary ('b'. 1916), daughter of George Dennis, foreman joiner on Lord Downe's estate at Wykeham, Yorkshire. He had known her since 1935. The happiness of that marriage proved central to an understanding of his later success. She was as vital to her husband in his cricket career as in his later business one. Over the years they successfully faced the twin hazards of fame and separation. Of their two games-playing sons, Richard ('b'. 1942) would play for Cambridge University, Yorkshire, and England. 
Hutton's war service, as a sergeant in the Army Physical Training Corps, ended in 1941. He fell in a gymnasium while on a commando course. The resultant fracture of his left arm put his cricket future in doubt. There followed operations and graftings and he would eventually resume his cricket career with an arm 2 inches shorter and a need to adjust his batting technique. He was able, in 1943, to captain Pudsey St Lawrence (not without some differences of opinion with club officialdom) and in 1944 he played in two matches at Lord's -- for the Rest, and then for England, both against Australia. He was 'the real Hutton of brilliant and elegant stroke-play' ('The Times', 29 May 1944). In 1945, when the war in Europe was over, he played in the victory internationals against Australia, although Pudsey, who paid him $100 a season, resented his absences for these national occasions and had released him most reluctantly. 
In the immediate post-war era Hutton was the mainstay of England's batting against dominating Australians, challenging South Africans, and burgeoning West Indians. A cameo of 37 in the second test at Sydney during England's 1946-7 tour of Australia evoked the Yorkshire journalist J. M. Kilburn to flights of fancy: 'Hutton scattered light, loveliness and brave beauty and took cricket to the pinnacles of artistry' ('Yorkshire Evening Post', 19 Dec 1946). His 158 in the second test at Johannesburg in 1948-9 helped England to a record first-wicket partnership of 359 while his double century (in which he carried his bat) against the West Indies at the Oval in 1950 was a masterly display on a difficult wicket. He had also been flown out to the West Indies in February 1948 to strengthen a struggling MCC side and, in the five matches which remained of the tour, achieved an average of 64.22. 
In 1952 Hutton became England's first professional captain in the twentieth century, an invitation more widely welcomed than he allowed himself to realize. India were defeated 3-0 and the captain topped the batting averages. Meanwhile, he had never ignored his obligations to Yorkshire, whose senior professional he became soon after the war, though he was never made their captain. The county gave him a benefit match in 1950, which realized $9713, tax free. It was by far the highest ever received by a Yorkshire player. Hutton, who was an assiduous follower of the stock market, did not get the capital sum back, invested on his behalf by the county (as was the custom), until 1972. Cricket did not make even the top players of his generation rich and he would always assess his own financial worth. 'How much will we make?' he had asked when 'Cricket is my Life' was published in 1949. For Yorkshire he continued to make runs as consistently as he did for England. 
In coronation year (1953) Hutton brought the mythical Ashes back to England after nineteen years in Australian custody, the outcome decided by England's victory at the Oval in August 1953, in which he scored 82 in the first innings. Again he topped the averages. He took MCC to the West Indies in 1953-4 at a time when the movement for national independence in the Caribbean was gaining strength. 'The Times' called the tour 'the second most controversial in cricket history' (Howat, 141) and the demands upon Hutton's captaincy were compounded by umpiring disputes and crowd riots. Yet again he led from the front with a test average of 96.71 and a double century in the final test, which ensured that England drew the series. Despite his unfitness during the Pakistani visit to England in 1954, he made himself available for the forthcoming tour of Australia. Both he and his rival for the captaincy, David Sheppard -- both men of strong moral fibre -- conducted themselves with dignity during the summer. Hutton was eventually appointed and, though less successful as a batsman, he retained the Ashes. On his return from Australia he was elected to membership of the Marylebone Cricket Club, the first serving professional to be so honoured. But, stricken with lumbago, he relinquished the England captaincy in May 1955. If his had been a pragmatic appointment three years earlier, pragmatism had triumphed and the plaudits were generous. His diplomacy off the field, when abroad, could not be faulted. On the field undue caution and slow over rates had been the negative aspects of his leadership. But he had been quietly effective rather than demonstrative and displayed a tenacity of will which embodied total dedication. Only Peter May, in the long banner roll of England captains, would match his achievements as leader and performer. 
In June 1955 Hutton made 194 for Yorkshire against Nottinghamshire in his 129th and last century in first-class cricket, but in the following January he retired on medical advice. With a few more appearances his career record would be 40,140 runs (55.51), nearly three-quarters of which had been made for Yorkshire. In seventy-nine test matches he scored 6971 runs (56.67), with nineteen centuries. Harry Altham, in a broadcast, declared that a great chapter in the history of cricket had ended. But for Sir Leonard Hutton -- knighted in June 1956 -- another one had to open. At first, work as a broadcaster and journalist came his way. Both the London 'Evening News' and 'The Observer' employed him for many years but the significant change was an invitation to join the firm of J. H. Fenner, power transmission engineers. He would work for them longer than he had played first-class cricket. At first his role was to talk cricket to the firm's associates. The fitting of Fenner mechanical products to a new MGB model gave cars 'as smooth a performance as a Hutton innings'. However laboured the analogy or the pun, his name would be linked and his presence required. But events took an unexpected turn as Hutton, who became a director in 1973, found himself selling the products of his firm even in non-cricketing countries, where his name was of no consequence. 
The Hutton family had taken the decision in 1961 to leave Pudsey and settle in London. Living in Kingston upon Thames came to suit both his role in business and his work as a journalist. He served briefly (1975-7) as an England selector but felt he could not spare the time from his work for Fenner. He published three books, of which 'Fifty Years in Cricket' (1984) was the most illuminating. John Arlott called it a model cricket autobiography. Hutton identified with Surrey in his later years, especially with the 'Save the Oval' campaign, but he also accepted an invitation in January 1990 to become president of Yorkshire at a time of some 'political' unrest in the club. 
Achievement and fulfilment were all-in-all to Hutton, and always those stern puritan voices from his upbringing were calling him to succeed. His cricket was never meant to be a joyride, yet he was not a joyless man without humour. His own brand was never far away and might be seen in the twinkle in his blue eyes, a warm smile, in his delphic utterances and enigmatic remarks. Humour lurked in the wings but he was aware that he was expected to be centre-stage and he took the trouble to talk to people and to remember them. 
Hutton died in Kingston Hospital, Surrey, on 6 September 1990, five days after watching a Natwest final at Lord's. His wife survived him. His funeral took place on 13 September at St Peter's, Kingston, and he was cremated at Putney Vale crematorium. There was a memorial service in York Minster, at which the bishop of Liverpool, his former colleague David Sheppard, gave the address. 


@@@@@


doc= 40146


Murless, Sir (Charles Francis) Noel (1910-1987), racehorse trainer, was born on 24 March 1910 at Duckington Grange, Malpas, Cheshire, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Charles Herbert Murless, farmer, and his wife, Mary Constance, daughter of Frank Lloyd, auctioneer, of Wrexham, north Wales. Having ridden and hunted from early boyhood, Noel Murless was inspired to make a career in racing by seeing Poethlyn, owned by his parents' neighbour, Mrs Hugh Peel, win the Grand National in 1919. 
For a short time Noel Murless, while performing the duties of a stable lad, rode in steeplechases and hurdle races with limited success, as an amateur and then as a professional, for Frank Hartigan, a trainer in Weyhill, Hampshire. On leaving Weyhill in 1930, Murless began a period of five years as assistant to Hartigan's brother Hubert, first at the Curragh, and then at Penrith in Cumberland. In July 1935 he commenced training at Hambleton Lodge, near Thirsk in the North Riding of Yorkshire, with five horses belonging to Lady Maureen Stanley, Dick Taylor, J. T. Rogers, and Andrew Johnstone. On 2 September 1935 he obtained his first success with J. T. Rogers's Rubin Wood in the Lee plate at Lanark. He had only one winner again in 1936, but in 1939 he won ten races. 
During the Second World War Murless conducted a small stable at Middleham in Yorkshire, having been rejected by the forces because of injuries to his feet sustained in 1930. On 28 November 1940 he married Gwendolen Mary Lindsay, daughter of William Lindsay Carlow, coal exporter, of Craigend, Troon, Ayrshire; they had one daughter, Julia. After the war Murless came further to the fore, and in 1946 he was leading northern trainer with thirty-four races worth $15,337 to his credit. He was leading northern trainer again in 1947, obtaining his first important success with Closeburn in the Stewards' Cup at Goodwood. Following the retirement of Fred Darling at the end of 1947, Murless was invited to succeed him in the powerful Beckhampton stable, near Calne in Wiltshire, on the recommendation of the stable jockey Gordon Richards, who had been greatly impressed by his always carrying his own saddle and other evidence of personal attention to detail. Patrons of the stable included George VI, J. A. Dewar, the whisky millionaire, Sir Percy Loraine, Major and Mrs Macdonald-Buchanan, and Colonel Giles Loder. In his first season at Beckhampton, Murless almost brought off the Newmarket classic double. The Cobbler was only beaten by a head in the Two Thousand Guineas, and Queenpot won the One Thousand Guineas. At the end of that season of 1948, Murless was champion trainer, having won sixty-three races worth $66,542. In 1949 Major Macdonald-Buchanan's Abernant was beaten by a short head in the Two Thousand Guineas, but G. R. H. Smith's Ridgewood won the St Leger. The grey Abernant became an excellent sprinter, twice winning both the July Cup at Newmarket and the Nunthorpe stakes at York (1949 and 1950). 
Having moved to the palatial Warren Place stable at Newmarket towards the end of 1952, Murless performed a remarkable feat by winning the Two Thousand Guineas and Derby of 1957 with Sir Victor Sassoon's Crepello, a heavy-topped colt with far from the best legs. In 1957 he also won the Oaks with Carrozza, leased by the queen from the National Stud, and thus became that year's champion trainer, having won races worth $116,898. He was the first to amass a six-figure sum in a season. In 1959 he broke his own record by winning $145,727, when Ali Khan's grey filly, Petite Etoile, won the One Thousand Guineas, Oaks, Sussex stakes, Yorkshire Oaks, and Champion stakes. 
During 1960 Murless won the Derby and St Leger with Sir Victor Sassoon's St Paddy. Although another St Leger was won with Vera Lilley's ill-tempered Aurelius in 1961, and Murless was champion trainer for the third consecutive time, the season was marred by Sir Victor's Pinturischio being so badly nobbled while favourite for the Derby that he could never run again. A third record was broken in 1967, when Murless won sixty races worth $256,899, including the Two Thousand Guineas and Derby with H. J. Joel's Royal Palace, and One Thousand Guineas with R. C. Boucher's Fleet. The King George VI and Queen Elizabeth stakes and the Eclipse stakes were won by Stanhope Joel's Busted, who had improved greatly since joining Murless from Ireland. When champion trainer again in 1968, Murless won the One Thousand Guineas with Caergwrle, bred and owned by his wife. Murless was champion trainer for the ninth and final time in 1973, obtaining the last of his nineteen classic successes with G. Pope's Mysterious in the Oaks. He retired at the end of 1976, and sold Warren Place to his son-in-law, Henry Cecil. 
A tall, handsome man, with rather aquiline features and large brown eyes in a weather-beaten face, Murless had brown hair, which was silver in late middle age, brushed straight back from his forehead. He was impatient with people who sought information about horses with a view to making money, something to which he himself was almost indifferent. On the other hand, he would go to a great deal of trouble, not least with younger people, to help those anxious to increase their knowledge of the thoroughbred. Although he had no liking for the limelight, he had many close friends, mainly among owners and breeders, who found him a generous and amusing host. He was knighted in the silver jubilee honours in June 1977, and elected to the Jockey Club the following month. To a great extent his success was due to his inexhaustible patience and natural empathy with his horses, whose hallmark was a muscular robustness. To conserve nervous energy, he always kept them absolutely relaxed. On taking over Beckhampton, he gave orders that the horses' heads should be held by one rack chain, instead of three, while being dressed over, so that they could cope with irritation by flies. 
Murless died on 9 May 1987 of emphysema and chronic bronchitis at his home, The Bungalow, Woodditton, Newmarket. His daughter Julia married Henry Cecil, the racehorse trainer, in 1966. 
Richard Onslow', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40147


Odell, Noel Ewart (1890-1987), geologist and mountaineer, was born on 25 December 1890 in St Lawrence, Isle of Wight, the third child in the family of two sons and three daughters of the Revd Robert William Odell, rector of St Lawrence, and his wife, Mary Margaret, daughter of James Bell Ewart, timber merchant, of Dundas, Ontario, Canada. He was educated at Brighton College and at the Royal School of Mines at Imperial College, London, where he studied geology and gained the ARSM. During the First World War he was commissioned as a lieutenant in 1915 in the Royal Engineers. Wounded three times, he returned to civilian life in 1919, having, in 1917, married Gwladys Mona (died 1977), daughter of Robert Jones, rector of Gyffin, north Wales. They had one son. 
Odell embarked on a career in the petroleum and mining industries, first as a geologist with the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (1922-5) and then as a consultant in Canada (1927-30). In his late thirties he transferred to academic geology, first as a lecturer in geology and tutor at Harvard University (1928-30), then as a research student and lecturer at Cambridge, where he stayed on as a fellow commoner and supervisor of studies at Clare College (1931-40). His research for the degree of PhD, awarded in 1940, investigated the geology, glaciology, and geomorphology of north-east Greenland and northern Labrador. In 1940-42 he served as a major in the Bengal Sappers and Miners. 
After the Second World War he took up various appointments at universities in Canada, New Zealand, and Pakistan. He lectured at McGill and was visiting professor at the University of British Columbia (1948-9). He was also professor of geology at the University of Otago (1950-56) and at Peshawar University (1960-62). On finally retiring he returned to Clare and in 1983, at the age of ninety-two, was made an honorary fellow, an event which much pleased him. 
Although Odell published several important papers on the geology of the Himalayas, and other mountain regions, and was a fellow or member of numerous geological, geographical, glaciological, and Arctic institutions, he probably never aspired to be in the front rank of academic research. It was in mountaineering that he made his name, and managed with singular success to combine the career of a geologist with the pleasures of mountaineering. Odell made his first discovery of the hills of the Lake District at the age of thirteen and soon acquired wide climbing experience in Britain and the Alps. Many an aspiring rock climber has cut his teeth on Odell's severe tennis shoe climb on the uncompromisingly smooth slabs of Cwm Idwal in north Wales (1919). He participated in the Oxford University Spitsbergen expedition (1921) and led the Merton College Arctic expedition (1923). 
Odell was picked for the Everest expedition of 1924 and was the last man to see George Mallory and Andrew Irvine before they disappeared in their attempt to scale the final slopes of the world's highest mountain. Odell was in close support. In a period of four days he climbed mostly without oxygen, first alone to 25,000 feet to look for them, and then twice alone beyond Camp 6 to over 27,000 feet and back. On returning home he was invited to a private audience by George V. Odell was undoubtedly most widely known for his account of the last sighting of Mallory and Irvine which contributed to the enduring mystery of whether they ever reached the summit of Everest. The sensational discovery of Mallory's body by a special research expedition on 1 May 1999 on the slopes where he had fallen at 26,770 ft has renewed speculation but still not solved the mystery. 
There followed several visits for geological research, mountaineering, and exploration in the Canadian Rockies (1927-47) and with American friends to north Labrador (1931), north-east Greenland (1933), and the St Elias Mountains in Yukon and Alaska (1949 and 1977). While at Harvard he inspired a generation of undergraduates to climb steep ice and to organize expeditions to the greater ranges of the world. An ice route he pioneered in the White Mountains bears his name, Odell Gully, and two mountains, a lake, and a glacier are also named after him. 
Odell's greatest mountaineering achievement was the first ascent of Nanda Devi (25,695 feet) in 1936, with an Anglo-American party. H. W. Tilman and Odell reached the summit, which for fourteen years remained the highest peak climbed. Two years later he again joined Tilman in the 1938 attempt on Everest, but deep powder snow made the last 1500 feet impossible to climb. Odell continued to defy the normal limitations of old age. In 1984, at the age of ninety-three, he strode across the glacier to attend the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Britannia hut in the Alps, and recalled that as a young climber he had also been present at its opening. He was a founder member of the Himalayan Club and an honorary member of the Alpine Club and of kindred clubs in North America, Canada, South Africa, New Zealand, Switzerland, and Norway. He received the Livingstone gold medal (1944) of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society and, unusually, a star in the constellation Lyra was named after him ('International Star Register', 1925). He became a familiar figure at the Alpine Club and the Royal Geographical Society, retaining in old age his earnest enthusiasm and the tall, spare figure and purposeful gait which had carried him to record heights on the earth's surface. His genial nature and patriarchal figure earned him the nickname Noah, which he relished. Odell died suddenly on 21 February 1987 at his home, 5 Dean Court, Holbrook Road, Cambridge, and his body was donated to medical science at the Cambridge anatomy department. 
George Band', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40148


Revie, Donald (1927-1989), footballer and football manager, was born on 10 July 1927 at 20 Bell Street, Middlesbrough, the youngest in the family of one son and twin daughters of Donald Revie, journeyman joiner, of Middlesbrough, and his wife, Margaret Emily Haston. His mother died when Revie was twelve. He was educated at Archibald secondary modern school, Middlesbrough, and left school at fourteen to become an apprentice bricklayer, before joining Leicester City Football Club in 1943. Hull City bought him for $20,000 in 1950. On 17 October 1949 he married Elsie May Leonard ('b'. 1927/8), primary school teacher, daughter of Thomas Grosett Duncan, professional footballer, and niece of the Leicester City manager, John Duncan. They had one son and one daughter. 
Revie transferred to Manchester City in 1953, and reached his peak as a footballer in the mid-1950s, winning six England caps and being voted footballer of the year in 1955. Manchester City won the Football Association (FA) cup in 1956, using what became known as the 'Revie plan', with Revie, as centre-forward, lying deep while feeding the ball to the other forwards and then moving through in the final stage, a tactic copied from the successful Hungarian team by the Manchester City manager. 
Revie moved to Leeds United in 1958, after two years with Sunderland. At Leeds he was appointed manager in 1961, at a time when the club was struggling to avoid relegation to the third division. Revie not only avoided this, but brought Leeds to the top of the second division in 1964, and second to Manchester United in the first division in 1965, winning the League championship in 1969 with 67 points, the highest total in the history of the championship, and the FA cup in 1972. His ambitions for the club were not confined to the domestic scene, and in 1968 Leeds won the European Fairs cup (the UEFA cup), beating Ferencvaros 1-0, the first British club to win the cup. Despite these successes, Leeds had the reputation of being perpetual runners-up: they lost to Liverpool in the 1965 FA cup final, came second in the League championship in 1965, 1966, and 1970, lost to Chelsea in the FA cup final in 1970, were runners-up to Arsenal in the League championship in 1971, and lost to second-division Sunderland in the 1973 FA cup final. Revie never achieved his ambition for Leeds to win the European cup. 
However, encouraged by the British media, which declared Leeds to have the best side in the world at the beginning of the 1969-70 season, Revie was confident of a treble victory: the European cup, the FA cup, and the League championship. In the end all three eluded Leeds, partly as a result of a pile-up of fixtures, compounded by injuries. In 1974, after Leeds United had won the League championship, remaining undefeated for the first twenty-nine games of the season, Revie resigned to take up the position of England team manager, following the sacking of Sir Alf Ramsey after England had failed to qualify for the 1974 world cup finals. 
After a successful first season as the England manager, with the team undefeated after nine internationals, Revie encountered a set-back when England was eliminated from the European championship early in the 1975-6 season. He was faced with the task of building an international side with players from many different clubs, and it was hard to achieve the family atmosphere that had been so successful at Leeds. Moreover, his difficult relationship with Alan Hardaker, secretary of the Football League, made his task harder. While Revie was manager, England won fourteen out of twenty-nine matches, with seven defeats and eight draws. The poor results were attributed to the uncertainty and lack of continuity caused by frequent team changes rather than to the lack of outstanding players. He used fifty-two players in the twenty-nine games, awarding twenty-nine new caps, and he only once fielded an unchanged side. Morale sagged when England lost 2-0 to Italy in a world cup qualifying match in November 1976, and the press began to forecast England's elimination from the competition and Revie's dismissal. 
In July 1977 the 'Daily Mail', to which Revie had sold his story, revealed that he had been in secret negotiations with the United Arab Emirates (UAE) while the England team had been playing in South America, had accepted the post of team manager to the UAE for four years at $60,000 a year, and had resigned from his England job. This led the Football Association to ban him from English football for ten years. Revie successfully appealed against the ban in the High Court in November 1979, on the grounds that the head of the tribunal, Sir Harold Thompson, chairman of the Football Association, was biased. But the judge made it clear that it was still felt that Revie's conduct in leaving England so abruptly had brought English football into disrepute. He became manager of al-Nasir Football Club in 1980, and moved to the National Football Club, Cairo, in 1984. 
At Leeds, Revie had aimed to make the club as famous as Real Madrid. By the time he left in 1974 some argued that Leeds was the greatest club side of all time, and that his achievements lay there, and not in his spell as England manager. He transformed Leeds from a club in danger of relegation into a club aiming at, and achieving, major honours at home and abroad. 
Revie was appointed OBE in 1970, and was voted manager of the year in 1969, 1970, and 1972. Always well dressed, he had the pugnacious features of a boxer. He was very superstitious, and had a lucky blue suit, which he always wore on match days. 
Revie died on 26 May 1989 in Murrayfield Private Hospital, Edinburgh, of motor neurone disease, survived by his wife and children. He was cremated on 30 May at Warriston crematorium, Edinburgh. 
Anne Pimlott Baker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40149


Richards, Sir Gordon (1904-1986), jockey and racehorse trainer, was born on 5 May 1904 in Ivy Row at Donnington Wood, a district of Oakengates, Shropshire, the fourth child and third son of the eight surviving children (four died) of Nathan Richards, coalminer, and his wife, Elizabeth, a former dressmaker, daughter of William Dean, miner and lay preacher. He was given a strict Methodist upbringing, and educated at the infant school at Donnington Wood. In 1917 he became a junior clerk in the warehouse of the Lilleshall engineering works, Oakengates. Finding the work monotonous, he answered a newspaper advertisement for an apprentice to Martin Hartigan, who had the Foxhill stable near Swindon, Wiltshire, and on new year's day 1920 left home for the first time to go to Foxhill. 
Short, stocky, and very strong for his weight, Richards had the ideal physique for a jockey. He had dark brown eyes and a thick shock of black hair, which gave him the nickname Moppy. He weighed out at 6 stone 9 pounds for his first mount in public on Clock-Work at Lingfield on 16 October 1920, and rode his first winner on Gay Lord at Leicester on 13 March 1921, but it was not until he had ridden forty-nine winners, and lost his apprentice allowance, in 1923, that his career got under way. 
After coming out of his apprenticeship in 1924, Richards was first jockey to Captain Thomas Hogg's stable at Russley Park, Wiltshire, in 1925, and became champion jockey by winning 118 races. By the outset of 1926 his career was put in jeopardy by the diagnosis of a tubercular lung after he had ridden just five more winners, and he spent the rest of the year in a sanatorium. In the 1927 season he regained the championship with 164 winners. The first claim on his services in 1928 was held by the shipping magnate the first Baron Glanely, to whom Captain Hogg had become private trainer at Newmarket. Richards obtained his first classic successes in 1930 by winning the Oaks on Rose of England and the St Leger on Singapore for Lord Glanely, but he narrowly lost the championship. After landing the Manchester November handicap on Lord Glanely's Glorious Devon, on the final day he had ridden one more winner than Freddie Fox, but Fox won the fourth and fifth races to be champion with 129 successes. 
Richards was champion again with 141 winners in 1931, during which the Beckhampton trainer Fred Darling offered a substantial sum for first claim on him. With typical loyalty, he first asked Lord Glanely to match the offer, but on Glanely pleading poverty, he became first jockey to the Beckhampton stable. Always immensely popular with the public, Richards was a national hero in 1933, as he bid to break the seasonal record of 246 winners established by Frederick Archer in 1885. After eleven consecutive successes at Chepstow in October, he rode his 247th winner on Golden King at Liverpool on 8 November, and finished the season with 259 winners. In 1934 he rode Easton to be second in the Derby, a race he was yet to win, and in 1936 may have been unlucky not to win it on the Aga Khan's Taj Akbar, who was badly hampered before being runner-up to the Aga Khan's second string Mahmoud. By 1938 his bad luck in the Derby was proverbial. In that year Darling ran both Pasch, on whom Richards had won the Two Thousand Guineas, and the recent French importation Bois Roussel. Richards chose to ride Pasch, and was third to Bois Roussel. 
As his tubercular record made him ineligible to serve in the armed forces, Richards continued to ride during the Second World War but, after breaking a leg at Salisbury in May 1941, he missed the remainder of that season and lost the championship for the third time. In 1942 he wore the colours of George VI when winning substitute races for the One Thousand Guineas, Oaks, and St Leger on Sun Chariot. He also won a substitute Two Thousand Guineas for the king on Big Game, and was champion again. In 1943 he surpassed Archer's career total of 2748 winners on Scotch Mist at Windsor, and was champion for the sixteenth time. After winning the Two Thousand Guineas by an extraordinarily easy eight lengths on that great miler Tudor Minstrel in 1947, Richards seemed certain to win the Derby at last. Heavily backed by the public, Tudor Minstrel started hot favourite, but failed to stay the course and finished only fourth. Champion for the twentieth time in 1947, Richards broke his own record of 1933 by riding 269 winners. After the retirement of Fred Darling at the end of that season, the Beckhampton stable continued to hold first claim on him when it was taken over by Noel Murless. The best horse he rode for Murless was the brilliant grey sprinter Abernant, on whom he won the Nunthorpe Stakes at York in 1949 and 1950. 
The knighthood that Richards received in the coronation honours in 1953 was as much in recognition of his exemplary integrity as of his professional achievement; he was the first jockey thus honoured. A few days after the queen had conferred it upon him, he won the Derby at his twenty-eighth and final attempt by riding Sir Victor Sassoon's Pinza to beat the queen's colt Aureole. A little over a year later, Richards had to retire from riding after breaking his pelvis and four ribs when he was thrown by Abergeldie in the paddock at Sandown Park on 10 July 1954. 
With his body slewed round to the left, so that his weight was unevenly distributed as he rode his powerful finish, Richards had a most unorthodox style. All the same, horses ran as straight as a die for him. From 21,843 mounts, he rode 4870 winners and was champion jockey twenty-six times. 
Subsequently Richards trained at Beckhampton, Ogbourne Maisey, and finally Whitsbury, Hampshire. Although his success was not comparable to that which he had enjoyed as a jockey, he won a number of valuable races, notably the Middle Park Stakes with Pipe of Peace, who was to be third in the Derby in 1956, and the Champion stakes with Reform in 1967. Richards also managed the horses of Lady Beaverbrook and Michael Sobell. He closed his stable in 1970. He was elected an honorary member of the Jockey Club in the same year. 
On 1 March 1928 Richards married Margery Gladys (died 1982), daughter of Thomas David Winckle, railway carriage fitter. They had two sons and a daughter. A third son, the daughter's twin, lived only a few hours. Richards died of a heart attack at his home, Duff House, Kintbury, Berkshire, on 10 November 1986. 
Richard Onslow', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40150


Rous, Sir Stanley Ford (1895-1986), football referee and administrator, was born on 25 April 1895 in Mutford, Suffolk, the eldest son and third child in the family of two sons and five daughters of Samuel George Rous, provision merchant, and his wife, Alice Coldham. He was educated at the Sir John Leman School, Beccles, and, after opting for a teaching career, at the town's teacher training centre. His passion for football was early apparent when, aged fifteen, he organized a village team. Tall and strongly built, he was an imposing figure in goal and showed considerable ability in local leagues. Watching Norwich play league football he also developed an interest in refereeing. 
In the First World War Rous served in France, Palestine, Egypt, and Lebanon, as a non-commissioned officer in the 272nd brigade of the Royal Field Artillery (East Anglian). He acted as a referee in wartime Egypt, after a wrist broken by a shell impaired his playing ability. When demobilized he was attending an officer training centre. 
After the war Rous returned to complete his education, going to St Luke's College, Exeter. His football and sporting interests were furthered by his appointment in 1921 as an assistant master at Watford grammar school, where he was in charge of all sport. During his thirteen years at Watford he also became a leading football referee. In 1924 he married Adrienne (died 1950), daughter of Victor Louis Gacon, silk merchant, originally of Lyons, France, who had a small silk-weaving factory in Hemel Hempstead. She was half German and half French. There were no children of the marriage. 
In 1927 Rous was appointed a Football League referee. On 13 March that year he officiated at an international match in Antwerp, the first of thirty-four such games he refereed. In the week in which he submitted his application to succeed Sir Frederick Wall as Football Association secretary he refereed the Welsh cup final on Thursday, the Football Association cup final, in which he used the diagonal refereeing system he had invented, on Saturday, and an international in Antwerp on Sunday. 
As secretary of the Football Association from 1934 to 1961 Rous made an immediate impact with his emphasis on training, coaching, and youth football. Firm but charismatic, he was a forceful character, who got his way more by humour and persuasion than reliance on authority. During the Second World War he was released as a lieutenant in the Royal Artillery from an anti-aircraft battery to organize sport and raise funds for the Red Cross. He proved an outstanding Football Association secretary, methodical, clear, and well reasoned in his judgements. Always open-minded and progressive, he was conservative only in preserving the essential simplicity of the game and its laws, which he believed to be its main attraction. Indeed, he wrote 'A History of the Laws of Association Football' (1974). He was responsible for the codification of the laws of the game, redrafting the red and yellow card system for cautions and the linesman's signals. Otherwise he encouraged innovations and improvements, particularly in coaching and refereeing, in a variety of national courses, and in the introduction of floodlighting and of televised football. His close co-operation with the England team manager and director of coaching, Walter Winterbottom, gave both men a worldwide reputation. 
Rous's international interest was much in contrast to previous officials' insular outlook. He played a constructive part in England's entry into world cup football in 1950 and in the formation of the European football confederation (UEFA), of which he became a vice-president. He also helped Germany back into international football after the war. His international outlook led to his election in 1961 as president of the Federation Internationale de Football Associations (FIFA). Travelling the world and working tirelessly for the game, he made a particular impact on the technical and educational side, which represented his special interest. He wrote a football coaching manual and a book of physical exercises (both 1942). His popularity also played a part in the world cup being awarded to England in 1966. He was defeated when he stood for re-election as president of FIFA in 1974. 
Rous's many other contributions to sport in general include being a founder member in 1935 of the Central Council of Physical Recreation, of which he was chairman of the executive committee from 1945 to 1973. Work for the King George's Jubilee Trust, the 1948 Olympic games, the 1951 Festival of Britain, and the duke of Edinburgh's award scheme typified his dedication to his prime concept of 'work that others may play'. From 1943 to 1947 he was a member of Paddington borough council and he was a JP in 1950. He held many foreign awards, was appointed CBE in 1943, and was knighted in 1949. 
Rous was 6 feet 3 inches tall, with a straight back and distinguished presence that commanded respect, although his clear eyes and husky voice showed a warm-hearted and jovial personality. He died on 18 July 1986 in St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, London, of chronic myelomonocyclic leukaemia. A memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 25 September 1986. 
A. Pawson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40151


Andrews, Eamonn (1922-1987), radio and television broadcaster, was born on 19 December 1922 at 11 Synge Street, Dublin, Ireland, the second of five children and elder son of William Andrews, carpenter, and his wife, Margaret Farrell. He was educated at a Dublin convent and the Synge Street Christian Brothers' school, where he became an altar boy. In spite of being tall for his age (he was later over 6 feet and weighed 14 stone) he was bullied at school and to overcome this he started taking boxing lessons. He was so successful that he became the all-Ireland juvenile middleweight boxing champion. 
Andrews's first job was as a clerk with the Hibernian Insurance Company, from which he was dismissed when he was discovered doing a boxing commentary for Radio Eireann. After many applications he was finally given more broadcasting work for Irish radio. In 1948 he compered the stage show 'Double or Nothing' from the Theatre Royal, Dublin. It was seen by the English bandleader Joe Loss, who liked Andrews's voice and personality and invited him to take the programme on tour with the band in England. When he was at the Theatre Royal he met Grace (who was always known by the Gaelic version of her name, Grainne), daughter of Lorcan Bourke, a Dublin impresario. They married in 1951 and had two daughters and a son. 
In 1949, when Stewart MacPherson gave up his job as compere on a BBC radio programme, 'Ignorance is Bliss', Andrews wrote to the BBC stating his experience with Irish radio and asked to be considered for the job, which he got. The programme was a great success and Andrews's distinctive voice became known to his English audience. He was then asked to present the live weekly BBC radio programme 'Sports Report'. Although he was badly paid for this, he undertook the programme in order to consolidate his position with the BBC, and he went on to present many successful worldwide boxing commentaries. 
In 1951 a chairman was needed for a new BBC television panel game called 'What's my Line?', and two people were considered for the job -- Andrews and Gilbert Harding. As it happened, Harding joined the game's panel and Andrews became its chairman. The programme was such a national success that Andrews gained first-class status in television, being voted the top television personality of the year for four years running from 1956. He also appeared on a children's programme, 'Crackerjack'. 
The BBC bought a new American television programme, 'This is Your Life', in 1955, even though there was some doubt about its intrusive nature, which was not in the BBC style. Andrews presented the programme, which became an instant success and lasted until 1964, when for internal BBC reasons it was dropped. Greatly concerned, he accepted the chance to change channels to the new independent television station ABC TV. In 1964 he presented a late-night live talk programme, featuring five guests at the same time. 'The Eamonn Andrews Show', live from London, became the first television programme to broadcast at eleven o'clock at night and get into the top twenty television ratings. 
One of Andrews's biggest challenges was to bring back his favourite programme, 'This is Your Life', on Thames Television in 1969. However, it became an even greater success, rising to the number one position in the national television ratings. It remained in the top ten programme lists and was watched by over 14 million people weekly. Andrews continued to present it until he died. The current affairs programme 'Today' was also presented by him on three nights a week, which meant that for part of the year he was on television for four nights every week. In spite of this schedule, he found time to write for 'Punch' magazine and was a member of the exclusive 'Punch' lunch club. He was also (from 1960) chairman of Telefis, the Irish independent television service. He became one of the highest-paid entertainers on British television and was reputed to be a millionaire when some of his business activities failed towards his later years. 
In 1964 Andrews became a papal knight of St Gregory (an honour given to him personally by the pope), and in 1970 he was appointed honorary CBE. Even at the height of his success he was always shy and reticent with strangers. Andrews, who never lost his Irish brogue, had an open face, with brown eyes, a broad smile, and a large chin. He died from heart failure at Cromwell Road Hospital, London, on 5 November 1987. His memorial service at Westminster Cathedral in London attracted more than 3000 people. 
Malcolm Morris', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40152


Boxer, (Charles) Mark Edward (1931-1988), cartoonist and magazine editor, was born on 19 May 1931 in Chorleywood, Hertfordshire, the only son and younger child of Lieutenant-Colonel (Harold) Stephen Boxer, garage owner and car salesman, and his wife, Isobel Victoria Hughlings Jackson. He was educated at Boarsted, at Berkhamsted School, and at King's College, Cambridge. 
Boxer cut an immediate dash. To contemporaries his slender elegance, charm, and wit seemed immensely sophisticated, even intimidating. As a youth he appeared mature, as an adult boyish. In his first term he acted as Tybalt, all in white, for the Marlowe Society, and also drew for a comic magazine, 'Granta'. He became editor the next year (1952), and took more interest in style than content; the content undid him. A poem contained the lines: '
You drunken gluttonous seedy God 

You son of a bitch, you snotty old sod. 

' This was deemed blasphemous, and he was sent down for a week. Though he could have taken finals, he chose not to do so and left Cambridge in a hearse, followed by a crowd of perhaps a thousand protesters. 
In London, Boxer worked briefly on the 'Sunday Express', a fashion magazine called 'Ambassador', and 'Lilliput', and drew for 'The Tatler'. In 1957 Jocelyn Stevens, a Cambridge friend, bought 'Queen' and made him art director. Boxer hired the best photographers, displayed their work to maximum advantage, and was a large contributor to the magazine's conspicuous success. In 1962 he was the editor who launched the 'Sunday Times Magazine'. Of the first issue its proprietor, Roy Thomson, who was paying for it, commented 'This is awful, absolutely awful'; even so Thomson carried the losses and the magazine. It became one of the major developments in British journalism of its time -- much copied but rarely equalled. Boxer remained as editor until 1965 and stayed on as assistant editor until 1979. He was a director of the 'Sunday Times' in 1964-6. In 1965 a listings magazine, 'London Life', of which he was editorial director, came and went; his only spectacular failure. 
Over the same years Boxer had become famous as the outstanding pocket cartoonist of his time, under the name Marc. His reputation was made at 'The Times' (1969-83), where his work showed to best advantage, but he later worked for 'The Guardian'. He had a detailed knowledge of the manners and customs of the establishment, the upper classes, and newly fashionable 'swinging London'. His own background and his left-wing views, conventional at the time, gave him the necessary distance. He did not deal directly with political issues, but reported what certain types would (revealingly) say about them. He also had an extraordinary eye for details of dress. He was cartoonist of the year in 1972. His caricatures, for profiles in the 'New Statesman', 'The Observer', the 'London Review of Books', and, after 1987, the 'Sunday Telegraph', were witty. Immediately pleasing because of his skill at catching a slightly distorted likeness, they were often sharp, even wounding. He said himself that the best compliment was when the subject asked if he could buy the original and then after a day or two reconsidered. He also developed, from one of Alan Bennett's ideas, the Stringalongs, who first appeared in a strip cartoon in 'The Listener'. Based on friends, they were viewed without affection and with merciless accuracy. Among his most effective illustrations for books were those which appeared in Clive James's 'The Fate of Felicity Fark' (1975) and 'Britannia Bright's Bewilderment' (1976), and in Alan Watkins's 'Brief Lives' (1982), and on the jackets of the novels of Anthony Powell. In 1980 he became a director of the publisher Weidenfeld and Nicolson, but he returned to magazines to edit 'The Tatler' in 1983-6. This time a dowdy magazine had already been livened up by Tina Brown, and Boxer's job, successfully carried out, was to maintain its vitality and widen its appeal. In 1986 he was made editorial director of Conde Nast in Europe, and in 1987 editor-in-chief of 'Vogue'. Thus he ended as he had begun; if he ever wished for a more serious role, there was no sign of it in his career. A stylish cricketer, he did everything that he did exceptionally well, and left a precise and amusing portrait of the world he lived in. 
In 1956 Boxer married Lady Arabella Stuart, youngest daughter of Francis Douglas Stuart, eighteenth earl of Moray; they had a daughter and a son. In 1982 they were divorced and in the same year Boxer married the television newscaster Anna Ford, daughter of John Ford, Church of England clergyman. They had two daughters. Boxer died of a brain tumour on 20 July 1988 at his home, 1 Upper Butts, Brentford, London. He was cremated at Mortlake cemetery, London, and his ashes were scattered at King's College, Cambridge. 
Mark Amory', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40153


Cawston, (Edwin) Richard (1923-1986), documentary film-maker, was born on 31 May 1923 in Weybridge, Surrey, the elder child and elder son of Edwin Cawston, merchant, of Weybridge, and his wife, Phyllis, daughter of Henry Charles Hawkins. He always wanted to make films; as a boy at Westminster School he and a friend made a documentary of the school's evacuation to Lancing. In 1941 he joined the Royal Signals and then spent two terms at Oriel College, Oxford, doing an army short course in radio, electricity, and magnetism. He became a captain in 1945, and a major in 1946, while serving in the southern command in India. When he was demobilized in 1947, he took a post as assistant film librarian with the newly reopened BBC television service in Alexandra Palace. 
Cawston did not stay a librarian for long. He soon became film editor and then the producer of the popular 'Television Newsreel'. Between 1950 and 1954 he produced 700 editions and gained a depth of experience in the technicalities of film craftsmanship which few of his television contemporaries could equal. This early experience of volume production under pressure was the foundation of his success as one of Britain's (and later the world's) most respected television documentary producers over a period of thirty years. It is also a key to the kind of producer he became; he was a capable camera director, but he showed his greatest strengths in the cutting room and dubbing theatre after the film had been shot. The newsreel years gave him a grounding in the shaping and pacing of film, and the adding of commentary, music, and effects, which were to be of great value in guiding the work of younger producers as well as in developing his own. 
In 1954 'Television Newsreel' lost its battle to stay independent of the BBC news division and Cawston left to join the talks department of the television service, as a documentary producer. The age of the old film documentary makers such as John Grierson and (F.) Humphrey Jennings was dead; Cawston was present at the birth of the new documentary on television. He produced a long series of major documentary films, many of which won national and international awards. He was especially interested in institutions and professions, with whom his frank and open approach, and high professionalism, created a trust which gained him an entree that would have been refused to most producers. His films documented the worlds of lawyers, pilots, the National Health Service, the British educational system, and, perhaps most memorably, the BBC itself in 'This is the BBC' (1959). There was no 'typical Cawston' film because he did not impose his own views or slant on his subject matter. His aim was to let the subject speak for itself, usually with the minimum of narration or (as in the BBC film) none at all. The common factor was meticulous craftsmanship. 
In 1965, just after the start of BBC2, he was made head of documentary programmes. It was here that for fourteen years he coached and developed a new generation of documentary makers. The sessions in which he looked at rough assemblies of their films were master-classes that refined the skills of many of today's leading documentary makers. But he did not stop making his own films; 'Royal Family', in which he recorded a year (1968-9) in the private and public life of the queen, was at that time the most popular and widely seen documentary in television history, and did much to restore the popularity the monarchy had lost in the mid-1960s. It led to his becoming the producer of the queen's Christmas day broadcast to the Commonwealth from 1970 to 1985, and to his appointment as CVO in 1972. 
For most of his working life Cawston was an active and influential member of BAFTA, the television and film-makers' professional body; he was chairman from 1976 to 1979, and a trustee from 1971 until his death in 1986. It was largely through his energy and enterprise that BAFTA secured its home at 195 Piccadilly, and it was due to his advocacy that the queen made the initial major donation towards its funding out of the sales revenues of 'Royal Family'. 
Cawston left the BBC in 1979, having won almost all the major professional prizes, including the Italia prize (1962), three BAFTA awards, and the silver medal of the Royal Television Society (1961). He joined Video Arts Ltd as special projects director, but continued producing programmes for the BBC as an independent executive producer, and acting as consultant to the government and tourist board of Hong Kong. 
Cawston was tall, clean-shaven, and well built; his dress was reassuringly conventional, more like that of a family solicitor than the usual image of a film-maker. In 1951 he married Elisabeth Anne (Liz), daughter of Richard Llewellyn Rhys, of St Fagans, canon of Llandaff. They had two sons. She died in 1977, and in 1978 he married Andrea, daughter of Michael Phillips, company director, of Cyprus. Cawston died of a heart attack in Cassis, France, on 7 June 1986. 
Antony Jay', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40154


Cleverdon, (Thomas) Douglas James (1903-1987), bookseller and radio producer, was born on 17 January 1903 in Bristol (he retained all his life a faint trace of a Bristol accent), the elder son (there were no daughters) of Thomas Silcox Cleverdon, master wheelwright, and his wife, Jane Louisa James. The only book in the house in those days was his mother's Welsh 'Bible'. He was educated at Bristol grammar school, where he learned his love of books from the headmaster, Ted Barton. While still an astonishingly good-looking schoolboy in a cap and blazer he went for a week to London, and walked into Francis Birrell's and David Garnett's new bookshop. He was feted by Clive Bell and Roger Fry, and introduced to the latest work in painting, engraving, and printing. 
Cleverdon published his first catalogue as an undergraduate at Jesus College, Oxford, immediately establishing his reputation as a lover of fine printing and exquisitely illustrated books. He became part of what he himself later called the 'typographical renaissance' made possible by Stanley Morison's reintroduction of great typefaces of the past and Eric Gill's sculptural lettering, and became a close friend and disciple of both. At Oxford he obtained a second class in classical honour moderations (1924) and a third in 'literae humaniores' (1926). 
In 1926 Cleverdon opened his own bookshop in Charlotte Street, Bristol. Roger Fry painted the hanging sign, bought from an old pub, with Athena's owl perched on a pile of books, and Eric Gill painted the fascia over the shop window in sans-serif capitals. Cleverdon asked him for a copy of the alphabet, and it was from this that Morison commissioned the famous 'Gill Sans-serif'. At this time he also began publishing, with Gill's 'Art and Love' (1927), printed in a limited edition, including thirty-five copies on full vellum, and S. T. Coleridge's 'The Rime of the Ancient Mariner' (1929), for which he commissioned ten copper-engravings, and an introduction from David Jones. This venture was brought to an end by the economic depression, but Cleverdon continued to sell books until the end of the 1930s, when he was persuaded by Francis Dillon to begin working part-time for the BBC. In 1939 he worked for 'Children's Hour' and in the same year became a west regional features producer. In 1940, as he himself put it, 'a bomb fell on the bookshop, and I was with the BBC for thirty years'. In 1943 he became a features producer in London. He was to bring to radio all his skills as a publisher: inspired commissioning of new work; patient encouragement and direction of writers, musicians, and actors; perfectionism in editing and production; and all the craftsmanship he had learned from Morison and Gill, and in his father's workshop. 
It was shortly before the Second World War that Cleverdon met (Elinor) Nest Lewis (1920-2003), former head girl of the Clergy Daughters School in Bristol, and daughter of James Abraham Lewis, canon, of Cardiff. They eventually married in 1944, though John Betjeman referred to her ever afterwards as 'Douglas's child bride'. They were to have two daughters, the elder of whom, born in 1948, died immediately, and three sons, the eldest of whom died at birth in 1952. Cleverdon, busy, bustling, chuckling, with sparkling blue eyes and a slightly irregular smile, would greet almost everyone as 'my dear' to save himself from having to remember names. He was a small man, but even so it was said that he towered over his wife. She was to be his strength and stay. 
Cleverdon's main achievement of the war years was The Brains Trust, which he devised with Howard Thomas, and which reached an audience of twelve million. He was sent briefly to Burma in 1945 as a BBC war correspondent, and on his return began by developing the already existing 'Radio Portrait' series for the Third Programme. He dramatized David Jones's 'In Parenthesis' (1948) and 'The Anathemata' (1953), using the voices of Richard Burton and Dylan Thomas. He also launched Henry Reed's satirical 'Hilda Tablet' series in 1953, broadcast the poems of Sylvia Plath, Ted Hughes, Thom Gunn, Wole Soyinka, John Betjeman, Siegfried Sassoon, and Stevie Smith, and produced the work of David Garnett, Rose Macaulay, Compton Mackenzie, and Jacob Bronowski. He also travelled to Rapallo to record a series of broadcasts with Max Beerbohm. 
Cleverdon produced programmes of folk-song with A. L. Lloyd and Alan Lomax, and commissioned new music from Humphrey Searle, Alan Rawsthorne, Lennox Berkeley, Aleksandr Tcherepnin, Peter Racine Fricker, and Matyas Seiber. He was the first to engage Michael Flanders and Donald Swann for the radio. His most famous commission was 'Under Milk Wood', broadcast in 1954, which he succeeded in wringing out of Dylan Thomas shortly before his death in 1953. 
Cleverdon retired from the BBC in 1969, and, as well as organizing poetry festivals, returned to publishing, with his own Clover Hill Editions, called after the Old English meaning of his own name. His printer was his old friend Will Carter of the Rampant Lions Press, Cambridge. He preserved the same standards he had set himself as a young man, with beautifully produced work by Reynolds Stone, Michael Ayrton, and David Jones, and 'The Story of Cupid and Psyche', an unprinted Kelmscott Press book with wood blocks by William Morris after Sir Edward Burne-Jones. Cleverdon died on 1 October 1987 at his home at 27 Barnsbury Square, London. 
John Wells', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40155


Manio, Jean Baptiste de (1914-1988), radio broadcaster, was born on 26 January 1914 in Hampstead, London, the only child of Jean Baptiste de Manio (died 1913), an Italian aviator, and his Polish wife, Florence Olga. Before he was born his father, the first person to fly across the English Channel in winter, was killed in a flying accident during a race to Lisbon. His mother, an eccentric and fashionable woman, never remarried but had many male admirers. She spoke eight languages but her English was bad, and de Manio later attributed his poor progress in reading and writing to this. He left Aldenham School without any academic qualifications, and got a job as an invoice clerk in a brewery in Spitalfields in the East End of London. For a time he then tried to make a career in the hotel business, first on the kitchen staff at Grosvenor House and as assistant to the wine waiter at the Ritz, and later as a waiter at the Miramar Hotel, Cannes. On 2 March 1935 he married Juliet Graveraet Kaufmann ('b'. 1911/12), daughter of Louis Graveraet Kaufmann, bank president. They had one son. Following his marriage de Manio lived in the United States for a short while, working on his wife's family's farm. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War de Manio was called up into the Royal Sussex regiment. In 1939-40 he fought with the 7th battalion in the British expeditionary force in France, and from 1940 to 1944 he was with the 1st battalion, Middle East forces. He was awarded the MC in 1940, and a bar was added to it in north Africa. In 1944 he joined the forces broadcasting unit in Beirut. On leaving the army in 1946 he was able to get a job with the BBC Overseas Service as an announcer. His marriage to his first wife (who remained with their son in the United States throughout the Second World War) ended in divorce in 1946, and on 8 August 1947 he married Loveday Elizabeth Matthews ('b'. 1916/17), a widowed secretary and daughter of Evelyn Robins Abbott (1873-1956), civil servant in India and chief commissioner of Delhi from 1924 to 1928. There were no children of this second marriage. 
De Manio was transferred from the BBC's Overseas Service to its Home Service in 1950. He managed to survive the furore over his slip of the tongue when he announced a talk by the governor of Nigeria, Sir John Macpherson, 'The land of the Niger', as 'The land of the nigger', and in 1958 he was invited to join the new BBC programme 'Today'. This was a daily breakfast time magazine programme on the Home Service (renamed Radio 4 in 1967) 'bringing you news, views, and interviews'. Despite his inability to give the correct time, de Manio survived as presenter from 1958 until 1971. Although one listener demanded compensation after he had crashed his car in surprise after hearing the wrong time announced on his car radio, most listeners got used to his misreading the studio clock, and his mistakes made him seem more human, a real person. With his relaxed, informal style and his friendly manner he became very popular, regarded by millions of listeners as a personal friend. To the listening public he was the 'Today' programme, a national institution. In 1969 he was the first radio broadcaster to interview Prince Charles. He was voted radio personality of the year by the Variety Club of Great Britain in 1964, and by the British Radio Industries Club in 1971. But in 1970 the new editor of morning current affairs programmes decided to add a co-presenter, and to make 'Today' more of a current affairs programme. For a year de Manio was joint presenter with John Timpson. He never felt happy with the new format, feeling that two presenters tended to talk to each other, rather than directly to the listeners. 
For the next seven years (1971-8) de Manio presented his own afternoon programme, 'Jack de Manio Precisely'. He also presented 'With Great Pleasure' (1971-3). His one venture into television, when he was asked to present 'Wednesday Magazine', a women's programme, was not a success. For a short time from 1979 onwards he contributed to 'Woman's Hour', but he did little broadcasting in the 1980s. 
De Manio's career and the development of the informal interview marked the end of the old style of impersonal and impartial radio broadcasting. On the air he behaved naturally, and Brian Johnston's advice, when asked how to become a good broadcaster, was 'be like Jack de Manio: be yourself'. As a radio broadcaster it was his voice rather than his face which was well known. The slightly hoarse, gravelly tones became instantly recognizable, and despite his foreign antecedents, he was the epitome of the middle-class, middle-brow Englishman, a 'Daily Telegraph' reader. He died at St Stephen's Hospital, Chelsea, London, on 28 October 1988, of cancer of the liver. He was survived by his second wife and the son of his first marriage. A memorial service was held at All Souls, Langham Place, on 18 January 1989. 


@@@@@


doc= 40156


Haley, Sir William John (1901-1987), broadcasting executive and newspaper editor, was born on 24 May 1901 in St Helier, Jersey, the son of Frank Haley of Bramley, Leeds (who died when Haley was two years old), and Marie Berthe Sangan, a Jersey Frenchwoman. French-speaking until the age of five, he was educated at Victoria College, Jersey, but left school at sixteen and served as a wireless telegraph operator on a tramp ship during the last two years of the First World War. He was inspired to become a journalist, he later said, after reading Philip Gibbs's 'The Street of Adventure', and after a short period at a Jersey weekly, in 1919 he joined 'The Times' as a shorthand copy-taker in the foreign news department. There he met Edith Susie Gibbons, secretary to the foreign editor, whom he married in 1921. On his suggestion the newspaper sent them to Brussels, where Haley successfully reorganized the paper's European news-gathering operation. He also contributed a freelance weekly letter from Brussels to the 'Manchester Evening News', on the strength of which he was offered a job as a reporter in 1922. 
Haley, a deeply shy man, was not a success as a reporter and was soon moved to sub-editing, where he excelled. He was promoted to chief sub-editor in 1925, and in 1930 was appointed both managing editor of the 'Manchester Evening News' and a director of its parent company, Manchester Guardian and Evening News Ltd. His task was to develop the paper to withstand the increasingly competitive evening newspaper market of the 1930s. As managing editor Haley proved a brilliant newspaper technician with an instinct for popular journalism, and demonstrated the single-minded and austere professionalism that would become his defining characteristic. Reserved in manner, he was forceful, even ruthless, in both business dealings and moral judgements. He led by example, working the longest hours of any of his staff, maintaining a desk in every department, and constantly checking every aspect of production. His own office had no chair, just a standing desk, where he revised proofs and lunched on a bun and a glass of milk. A large man with a resemblance to G. K. Chesterton, he had no social life beyond the office and his young family of four children. He was a non-smoker and almost teetotal, joined no clubs or social organizations, and repelled all attempts at workplace friendships (though he did permit himself twenty minutes of ping-pong each evening -- he was office champion -- and the occasional game of golf). Despite the considerable financial constraints under which the newspaper operated, Haley ensured the reputation of the 'Manchester Evening News' as one of the leading evening papers in the country. He also managed to pursue in print his passionate love of literature (particularly Victorian literature), writing a weekly book review column under the pseudonym Joseph Sell (the name itself a literary allusion, to Borrow). To his fellow journalist A. P. Ryan these books took the place of the comradeship Haley's life lacked. 
The Spanish Civil War politicized Haley's editorial journalism. His leader articles for the 'Manchester Evening News' became far more hard-hitting, in particular his denunciation of the bombing of Guernica ('the bombs of Guernica may be the forerunners of our doom') and of the Munich agreement, which the 'Manchester Evening News' opposed in the strongest moral terms. On the outbreak of the Second World War J. R. Scott, manager of Manchester Guardian and Evening News Ltd, appointed Haley joint managing director, and with his success at the 'Evening News' having helped save the 'Manchester Guardian' from closure he was made one of the original Scott trustees. From 1939 to 1943 he was also a director of the Press Association and of Reuters. He became a director of the Reuters Trust on its establishment in 1941, and travelled to the USA and Australia on its behalf to negotiate new news-gathering agreements. His success here, where so many had failed before, spread his reputation well beyond Manchester. He was by now, however, suffering from a severely debilitating form of anaemia, as yet undiagnosed. This caused a drastic weight loss that dramatically altered his appearance. 
In 1943 Haley, after some initial doubts, accepted the newly created post of editor-in-chief at the BBC. The increased importance of broadcasting during the war had placed enormous strain on the relationship between the BBC and the government, and the new post (which ranked barely below that of director-general) was designed specifically to bring high-level journalistic expertise into the corporation as well as to strengthen leadership at the top. Haley's faith in the value of public service broadcasting, and his uncompromising belief that the BBC should provide the best possible of whatever it broadcast, echoed that of the first BBC director-general, John Reith, and Haley brought to the BBC the same single-minded conviction. With his illness now successfully diagnosed and treated, he proved both a successful administrator and a tireless defender of the corporation. His first task as editor-in-chief was to visit the Italian battle front to discuss BBC provision with British servicemen and BBC war correspondents; this led to the launch of the BBC's new General Forces Programme (amalgamating the domestic Forces Programme and the General Overseas Service that had previously provided programmes for servicemen abroad), which both saved the BBC money and, by providing a single forces service for soldiers abroad and their families in Britain, raised morale. The renewed sense of confidence at the BBC in the last part of the war was in no small part due to Haley's decisiveness and clarity of purpose -- as well as to the cordial and trusting relationship he developed with the minister of information, Brendan Bracken. In 1944 he was the natural choice to succeed Robert Foot as director-general. 
After the end of the war Haley reshaped the post-war BBC. His reorganization of the corporation in 1947 was the most wide-ranging since 1933, recentralizing important aspects of its administration and creating a new central board of management, which historians later came to consider one of the most important institutional developments in the BBC's history. He also set his stamp on the corporation's post-war output. No director-general since Reith had believed so forcefully in the cultural importance of broadcasting, but Haley recognized the need to maintain the BBC's wartime popularity even while answering widespread criticism that the wartime BBC had become too populist. To this end he oversaw the redesignation of the two wartime BBC wavelengths as the Light Programme and Home Service, and was the driving force behind the launch in 1946 of the Third Programme, a new service specifically devoted to high culture, music, and the arts. It was Haley who coined the image of the post-war BBC as a cultural pyramid, whereby listeners, attracted first to the populist Light Programme, might progress gradually upwards via the middlebrow Home Service to the summit of the resolutely elitist Third Programme. In many respects the Third Programme was typical of Haley himself. Quixotically highbrow, even on its inception it was looked on by many as a Reithian anachronism at the heart of the BBC's modernization programme. Yet it offered unprecedented scope for innovation and experiment, gave opportunity to a new generation of musicians and literary figures, and made classical music, literature, and the arts available to all who cared to listen. Praised and mocked in equal measure, often attracting only tiny audiences, the Third Programme nevertheless represented an essential facet of the BBC's 'raison d'etre' as a public service institution: the provision of high culture for its own sake and in disregard of merely commercial imperatives. It survived until 1967, when it was subsumed into BBC Radio 3. 
In common with most other BBC executives, Haley considered television (which began re-broadcasting in 1946 after its wartime suspension) as secondary in importance to radio. In part, this was because he recognized television's innately populist appeal and feared that, left unchecked, it would come to dominate the home; however, his relative neglect of the BBC's television service in favour of the 'spoken word' alienated more forward-looking staff members (some of whom -- notably Norman Collins -- left the BBC to help set up commercial television). Haley fought the creation of commercial television in the early 1950s, fearing it would inexorably undermine broadcasting values and standards. Although his achievements at the BBC were singled out for praise by the Beveridge committee on broadcasting in 1950, when he left the BBC in 1952 he knew that the battle to maintain the BBC's monopoly had been lost. 
In 1952 Sir William Haley (he had been appointed KCMG in 1946 as well as being appointed to the Legion d'honneur in 1948) succeeded William Casey as editor of 'The Times'. Here, as at the BBC in 1943, morale was low. Newsprint was still rationed, and 'The Times' in particular struggled to maintain its role as the newspaper of record, hampered in addition by outdated working practices and staff tensions between the 'gentlemen' (specialist commentators) and 'players' (journalists). Although Haley was hardly a revolutionary, over the next fourteen years he changed 'The Times' from a moribund national institution into (in the words of Lord Beaverbrook) a 'real newspaper'. He fought successfully to end newsprint rationing, and used the space gained for far wider coverage of the arts and of women's features. He introduced cartoons and a corrections column to the newspaper. He challenged the Oxbridge and public-school tone of much of the paper, and brought in more professional journalists. He presided over the replacement of 'The Times''s Victorian offices with a modern open-plan working environment. In May 1966 he made history by returning news to the front page for the first time in nearly two centuries. However, he continued to devote considerable space to obscure and erudite topics, and resisted any attempt to change the newspaper's long-standing tradition of anonymous journalism, despite the difficulties this caused in retaining some of his best journalists. (It was left to his successor as editor, William Rees-Mogg, to institute this long-overdue change in 1967.) Haley's one personal indulgence was his own renewed weekly literary column, written on his one day off a week under the new pseudonym Oliver Edwards. Its eclecticism attracted a certain amount of derision from the younger literati, but it eloquently expressed his own love of reading. 
Meanwhile, Haley sought to break the long-standing perception that 'The Times' was the newspaper of the establishment. He sought to distance the paper from Whitehall and the City. He brought a new scepticism and independence to its reporting of government, for example famously publishing a report about the stationing of US Polaris submarines in Scotland, in defiance of the Ministry of Defence and 10 Downing Street. He discouraged sycophancy towards royalty (and always personally referred to the duke of Edinburgh as 'that young man who looks like a soda syphon'). Characteristically, he deplored 'The Times''s (highly successful) advertising campaign 'Top people take 'The Times'', and insisted on the inclusion of scientists and engineers as well as bishops, judges, and generals in the advertisements. Above all, he restored a passionate moral tone to 'Times' leaders. His editoral philosophy was eloquently summed up in his last speech before his retirement from the paper: 'The truth is that there is a difference between right and wrong... no half-way house between honesty and dishonesty... things which are bad and false and ugly and no amount of argument or specious casuistry will make them good or true or beautiful. It is time that these things were said, and time for the Press to say them.' Haley's leading article on 11 June 1963 at the height of the Profumo affair, 'It is a moral issue', became a historic indictment of the Macmillan government (whom he considered a 'bunch of thugs'). A 'Manchester Liberal' by inclination, he supported the Conservative Party in all elections, but regretted that the Liberal Party was not stronger. His moral outlook shaped his attitude to government policies: he supported the move towards colonial change in Africa, for instance, and (cautiously) endorsed Britain's quest for membership of the EEC. 
Throughout his tenure at 'The Times' Haley remained the unclubbable, distant, and driven figure he had been at the 'Manchester Evening News' and the BBC. He was an exacting taskmaster ('Working fourteen to sixteen hours a day himself, Haley cannot understand why others wilt after twelve hours', said one executive), rarely took holidays, kept a close eye on every part of the newspaper, and could be harshly unforgiving of mistakes, though protective of his staff against unjustified criticism from outside. As before, he discouraged personal relationships with his staff (he never, apparently, addressed any employee by his or her Christian name), and avoided social occasions. He was a wooden public speaker. Yet he inspired fierce loyalties among many of his staff. His relaxations were reading (an estimated three Victorian novels a week) and listening to music. He accumulated many honours, including several honorary degrees, and from 1955 to 1962 was president of the National Book League. 
In his last years at 'The Times' Haley was principally concerned with business matters. In 1965 he became chief executive and director of the Times Publishing Company Ltd, but was unable to resolve the economic crisis that hit the entire newspaper industry in this period and especially 'The Times'. At one point he entered into talks with Alistair Hetherington, then editor of 'The Guardian', to consider a merger. However, in 1966 Haley oversaw instead the change of proprietorship from the Astor family to the Thomson organization (owners of the 'Sunday Times'), serving as the first chairman of Times Newspapers Ltd in 1967. In 1968-9 he left 'The Times' to become editor-in-chief of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', based in Chicago, but his plans for the new edition were opposed and the appointment was short-lived. He retired to Jersey, where he acted as the island's commissioner of appeal for income tax (1971-83) and chairman of the Jersey Arts Council (1976-7), and continued to read and to review until a debilitating attack of shingles when he was eighty curtailed this lifelong pleasure. Sir William Haley died in a nursing home in Jersey on 6 September 1987, aged eighty-six, and was buried in Gouray churchyard, Jersey. He was survived by his wife, two sons, and two daughters. 
Sir William Haley's contribution to the mass media in twentieth-century Britain was profound. Yet, despite holding two of the most powerful posts in the British media, he was a self-effacing figure whose public profile never matched that of, for instance, John Reith, or C. P. Scott. To most who worked for him Haley remained an enigma: an outstanding modernizer whose inspiration was his uncompromising Victorian conscience; the man who took broadcasting into the second half of the twentieth century but whose passion was the literature of the nineteenth, who left school at sixteen but rose to edit the most celebrated newspaper in the English-speaking world. 


@@@@@


doc= 40157


Hamilton, Sir (Charles) Denis (1918-1988), newspaper editor, was born on 6 December 1918 in South Shields, co. Durham, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Charles Hamilton, engineer, and his wife, Helena Trafford. He left Middlesbrough high school at seventeen, became a reporter on the local 'Evening Gazette', and as a territorial in 1938 got a commission in the Durham light infantry. In 1939 he married Olive (1915-2012), younger daughter of Thomas Hedley Wanless, farmer. They had four sons, of whom one, Nigel, became a writer. 
In September 1939 part of the Territorial Army was embodied and Hamilton soon found himself in France. He was one of the few officers in his battalion who got back from Dunkirk. In 1940 he became a captain and in 1942 a major during a spell in Iceland. In 1944 he was promoted to lieutenant-colonel and commanded the 11th battalion, Durham light infantry, in the Normandy invasion. After the breakthrough in Normandy, Hamilton was posted to the 7th battalion of the duke of Wellington's and led them in an inspired defensive action near Nijmegen, Holland, which won him a place in military history and the DSO (1944). General Montgomery wanted him to remain in the regular army after the end of the war. However, Hamilton went back to provincial journalism and within a few weeks J. G. Berry, first Viscount Kemsley, summoned him to London to be his personal assistant; he held this post until 1950. Now he was at the centre of the Kemsley newspaper empire and was soon exercising influence. The brigadier, as the staff called him (he had ended the war as an acting brigadier), still looked a soldier with his discreet suits, polished shoes, slim, tall figure, and military moustache. If he never failed to find a military analogy to illustrate a newspaper problem, at least he never barked out his commands. He spoke quietly and could be disconcertingly silent when it was his turn to say something. Kemsley made him editorial director in 1950 -- when he was thirty-one -- whereupon he improved the organization and created a training scheme that became the model for a national scheme; he remained in this post until 1967. 
Turning his attention to the 'Sunday Times', edited by Henry Hodson, Hamilton believed that new readers would be attracted if they were given plenty to read every Sunday -- the 'big read'. He persuaded his wartime friend Viscount Montgomery to let him serialize extracts from his memoirs, with the result that the circulation was increased by 100,000 copies over fourteen weeks; the new readers stayed. (Montgomery's life was later written by Hamilton's son, Nigel.) In 1959 Kemsley sold his newspaper group to Roy Thomson, a Canadian who had acquired 'The Scotsman' and Scottish commercial television. Two years later Thomson made Hamilton editor of the 'Sunday Times' and the paper became remarkably successful. Within six years it increased its sales by half a million copies. Hamilton, who did not himself write for the paper, recruited ardent young people and pioneered a bulky Sunday paper in separate sections, which included business news and a colour magazine. His 'Insight' team of investigative journalists had outstanding successes. Thomson was a model proprietor, giving editors the widest freedom and in turn Hamilton delegated great responsibility to his assistants. 
When Thomson acquired 'The Times' in 1967, he made Hamilton editor-in-chief of both that and the 'Sunday Times' and chief executive of Times Newspapers. Hamilton appointed as editors William Rees-Mogg for 'The Times' and Harold Evans for the 'Sunday Times'. He behaved very much as a constitutional monarch, guiding, encouraging, and occasionally warning both men. A successful promotion drive for 'The Times' had to be dropped, for it was too costly to earn the expected profits. Difficulties multiplied in the late 1970s. Both 'The Times' and the 'Sunday Times' were suffering severe losses because militant Unionists, who resented wage restraint and feared the advent of new technology, were hampering production. Roy Thomson, who had died, was succeeded by his son Kenneth, who wanted to know from his Canadian base what the strengthened hierarchy in London was going to do about the dispute. In the end it was decided, despite the reluctance of Hamilton and another director, to stop the presses, in the hope that this would bring the unions to their senses. It did not and the costly stoppage lasted almost a year (1979). Shortly after publication was resumed, the journalists decided to strike. This was the last straw for Hamilton, who advised Thomson to sell for what he could get. The only bidder who looked likely to preserve the precious heritage and to stand up to the unions was the Australian Rupert Murdoch, who acquired Times Newspapers Ltd in 1980. 
Hamilton did not stay long after the take-over, resigning as chairman in 1981, and concentrated on his chairmanship of the expanding Reuters (1979-85). A trustee of the British Museum from 1969, he jointly sponsored the great 'Tutankhamun' (1972) and 'Treasures of China' (1973) exhibitions. He was an active trustee of the Henry Moore Foundation from 1980 and was president of the International Press Institute (1978-83), the worldwide protector of press freedom. He was president or chairman of many other institutions. Towards the end of his life, he struggled with the help of his son Nigel to produce a slim but valuable book of memoirs, 'Editor-in-Chief' (1989). Appointed TD in 1975 and knighted in 1976, he had honorary degrees from Southampton (1975), City University (1977), and Newcastle upon Tyne (1979). 
Hamilton died of cancer, after a long illness, on 7 April 1988 at his home, 78A Ashley Gardens, Thirleby Road, Victoria, London. 
John Beavan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40158


Harty, (Fredric) Russell (1934-1988), television broadcaster, was born on 5 September 1934 in Blackburn, Lancashire, the only son and elder child of Fred Harty, greengrocer (who, his son claimed, introduced Blackburn to the avocado pear), and his wife, Myrtle Rishton. He was educated at Queen Elizabeth's Grammar School, Blackburn, and Exeter College, Oxford, where he read English and was taught by Nevill Coghill, who noted of an early essay, 'Sex in the 'Canterbury Tales'', 'Energetic and zealous but very naive'. He took a third-class degree (1957) and taught briefly at Blakey Moor secondary modern school in Blackburn before moving in 1958 to Giggleswick School in Yorkshire. Giggleswick was a school and a village with which he was to have close connections for the rest of his life. In 1964 there followed a spell at City College, New York, and at Bishop Lonsdale College of Education, Derby, but with many of his friends and contemporaries busy in the theatre and broadcasting he was increasingly dissatisfied with teaching. 
In 1966 Harty made his first foray into television, an inglorious appearance as a contestant on Granada TV's 'Criss Cross Quiz'; the only question he answered correctly was on Catherine of Braganza. It was such a public humiliation that his mother refused to speak to him. Still, it was a beginning and in 1967 he was taken on by BBC radio as an arts programmes producer, his hankering to perform whetted by the occasional trip to the studio down the corridor whenever 'Woman's Hour' wanted a letter read in a northern accent. 
As an undergraduate Harty had invited Vivien Leigh round for drinks and this precocious appetite for celebrity stood him in good stead when, in 1969, he became producer and occasional presenter of London Weekend TV's arts programme, 'Aquarius'. He might not have seemed the best person to film Salvador Dali, but the elderly surrealist and the boy off Blackburn market took to one another and the programme won an Emmy award; in another unlikely conjunction he set up an encounter on Capri between the eminent Lancashire exiles Sir William Walton and Gracie Fields. Harty was never abashed by the famous (his critics said that was the trouble), but it was his capacity for provocative half-truths and outrageous overstatement, which made him such a good schoolmaster, that now fitted him for a career as the host of a weekly talk show ('Eleven Plus' and later 'Russell Harty') and made him one of the most popular performers on television. Plump, cheerful, and unintimidating, he was particularly good at putting people at their ease, deflating the pompous, and drawing out the shy. 
In 1980 Harty returned to the BBC, but his output remained much as it had been for the last ten years, the same mixture of talk shows varied by occasional films like 'The Black Madonna', and his 'Grand Tour', shown in 1988. He wrote regularly for 'The Observer' and the 'Sunday Times', publishing a book of his television interviews, 'Russell Harty Plus' (1976) and also 'Mr Harty's Grand Tour' (1988). He was a regular broadcaster on radio besides presenting the Radio 4 talk show 'Start the Week'. 
'Private faces in public places are wiser and nicer than public faces in private places' (W. H. Auden) did not anticipate television, where the distinction is not always plain. For his friends Harty was naturally a private face but for the public he seemed a private face too and one that had strayed on to the screen seemingly untouched by expertise. That was why, though it infuriated his critics, so many viewers liked him and took him to their hearts as they never did more polished performers. He giggled, he fumbled, and seldom went for the right word rather than the next but two, and though his delivery could be as tortured as his mother's on the telephone, it did not matter. It was all part of his ordinariness, his deficiencies, his style. 
Harty never made much of a secret of his homosexuality. He did not look on it as an affliction, but he was never one for a crusade either. His funniest stories were always of the absurdities of sex and the ludicrous situations it had led him into, and if he was never short of partners, it was because they knew there would always be laughs, sharing a joke being something rarer than sharing a bed. 
In the second half of the 1980s the spread of AIDS enabled the tabloid press, and in particular those newspapers owned by Rupert Murdoch, to dress up their muckraking as a moral crusade, and they systematically trawled public life for sexual indiscretion. Harty, who had not scrupled to question his more celebrated interviewees about their sex lives, knew that he was in a vulnerable situation. Early in 1987 a young man who had had a previous fling with Harty was wired up with a tape recorder by two 'News of the World' reporters and sent to call on Harty at his London flat. To the reporters' chagrin nothing newsworthy occurred, but the paper fell back on printing the young man's account of the previous association, thus initiating a campaign of sporadic vilification in the tabloid press which ended only with Harty's death just over a year later. 
The cause of Harty's death was liver failure, the result of hepatitis B, but in the hope that he was suffering from AIDS the press laid siege firstly to his home at Rose Cottage, Giggleswick, and then to St James's Hospital in Leeds, where he was in intensive care. A telescope was trained permanently on the window of his ward and a reporter tried to smuggle himself into the ward disguised as a junior doctor, in order to look at his case notes. When Harty was actually on his deathbed one of the journalists responsible for the original 'scoop' could not be restrained from retelling the tale of her exploits on television. Harty died in Leeds on 8 June 1988 and was buried in Giggleswick, the gravestone evidence of the vulgarity from which he never entirely managed to break free. 
Alan Bennett', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40159


Hill, Charles, Baron Hill of Luton (1904-1989), doctor, politician, and broadcaster, was born in Islington, London, on 15 January 1904, the youngest in the family of two sons and a daughter of Charles Hill, maker of pianoforte parts, who died in 1906, and his wife, Florence Madeleine Cook, bookkeeper, the seventh of eight children of a seller of mineral water. His mother remarried in 1916, her husband being W. E. Hulme, linotype operator in the 'Morning Post'. 
Educated at St Olave's School, Tower Bridge, Hill was awarded a Drapers' Company scholarship and a sizarship at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1921, and went on to read in parallel both medicine and part one of the natural sciences tripos, in which he received first-class honours in 1925. He completed his medical education at the London Hospital, obtaining his MRCS, LRCP in 1927 and MB, BChir in 1929. He then took up a hospital post in Nottingham and became deputy medical officer of health in Oxford in 1930. He obtained his DPH in 1931. Determined and ambitious and more interested in administration than in medical practice, Hill was appointed an assistant secretary of the British Medical Association (BMA) in 1932. He stayed at the BMA headquarters in Tavistock Square for the next eighteen years (gaining his MD in 1936), climbing a ladder which took him to the top rung, when in 1944 he achieved the position of secretary, the senior full-time officer post, which he held until 1950. 
Convinced of the importance of winning public support to buttress the BMA's cause, Hill had by 1944 become one of the best-known figures in the country in his own right, though not under his own name, after being invited in 1941 to take part in the BBC's 'Kitchen Front' programmes. In a remarkable series of wartime broadcasts, mainly given live, which came to cover a wide range of health problems, Hill, giving helpful advice as the 'radio doctor', soon won a huge audience. His rich, warm, and homely -- if often booming -- voice, so different from most BBC voices even in wartime, contributed to his success as a broadcaster, but did not guarantee it. His secret was careful preparation, meticulous selection of points to emphasize, and intuitive choice of exactly the right words. One of his broadcasts, which deserves the adjective classic, was delivered after the war on Boxing day in 1949. It began 'This is stomach speaking. Yes I mean it, your stomach'. This broadcast was addressed to children. Hill, who in 1931 had married Marion Spencer, daughter of Moses Wallace, a Halifax mill owner, whom he had met at Cambridge, knew a lot about children. He had two sons and three daughters, and for all his ebullience he always gave the reassuring air of being a real family doctor. As secretary of the BMA, he fought hard between 1945 and 1948 to ensure that the new National Health Service would incorporate family choice of doctor and that the profession would not become a state-salaried service for general practitioners. Hill revelled in the rough and tumble of contest with Aneurin Bevan, the minister of health, whose political skills he came greatly to admire, but he could also show patience and forbearance in dealing both with politicians and professional colleagues. 
It was through struggles about health policy that Hill was drawn into party politics, which had never interested him at Cambridge, and eventually in 1957 into the cabinet, although his attitude to party was as unorthodox as that of the first Lord Beaverbrook, the intermediary who arranged for him to be summoned to an interview at the Conservative Party central office in 1944. Indeed, when Hill first stood (unsuccessfully) for parliament, for Cambridge University, at the general election of 1945, it was not as a Conservative but as an independent. When he won Luton at the next general election in 1950, it was as a Conservative and Liberal. Hill used his formidable oratorical talents at that election to deliver one of the outstanding controversial political broadcasts before the age of television. 
Hill did not have to wait long for governmental office, and having served from 1951 to 1955 as parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Food -- an unenviable post, for most back-benchers in his party wished to see his ministry abolished -- he was made postmaster-general by Sir Anthony Eden in April 1955, being sworn of the privy council at the same time. This post greatly appealed to him and, surviving Suez, he went on under Harold Macmillan to become chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster in January 1957. His responsibilities for supervising government information services straddled these last two posts. Finally, Macmillan made him minister of housing and local government in October 1961, combined with the ministry of Welsh affairs, before removing him in his sudden, and to Hill premature, government reshuffle in July 1962. In any event Hill would have retired at the next election. 
A new career now began, first in business and then in broadcasting. Hill was so successful a chairman of the Independent Television Authority, a post to which he was appointed in 1963, refurbishing its image and presiding over the recasting of the television company structure, that a Labour prime minister, Harold Wilson, moved him from Brompton Road to become chairman of the BBC in 1967. This was a highly controversial move much resented in the BBC, particularly by Sir Hugh Greene, the director-general, and Hill's first years there were difficult. But he outlasted Greene, and had his tenure extended in 1972 in order to preside over the BBC's golden jubilee. Hill was a strong, eloquent, and effective supporter of BBC autonomy. 
Hill kept a diary during his years as chairman of the BBC and wrote two volumes of compact and readable memoirs, 'Both Sides of the Hill' (1964) and 'Behind the Screen' (1974). His only other published work, a joint one, was 'What is Osteopathy?' (1937). His appearance was as memorable as his voice. Short, plump, and brimful of energy, he was a favourite of cartoonists, but he liked rather than objected to this. Hill was made a life peer in 1963 and awarded an LLD by Saskatchewan University in 1950. He died in Harpenden, Hertfordshire, on 22 August 1989. A memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 17 November 1989. 
Asa Briggs', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40160


Hopkinson, Sir (Henry) Thomas (1905-1990), journalist and magazine editor, was born on 19 April 1905 in Victoria Park, Manchester, the second child and second son in the family of four sons and one daughter of John Henry Hopkinson (son of Sir Alfred Hopkinson), lecturer in classical archaeology at the University of Manchester, who soon took holy orders and eventually became archdeacon of Westmorland, and his wife, Evelyn Mary, schoolteacher, daughter of the Revd Henry Thomas Fountaine, vicar of Sutton Bridge, Lincolnshire. Hopkinson went to St Edward's School, Oxford, with the financial assistance of a wealthy uncle, Austin Hopkinson MP, and then won a classical scholarship to Pembroke College, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in classical honour moderations (1925) and a third in 'literae humaniores' (1927). 
For seven years Hopkinson lived in London by freelance journalism and copywriting in Crawford's advertising agency. After the publication of his first book, 'A Strong Hand at the Helm' (1933), an acerbic commentary on the failings of Ramsay MacDonald's government, Hopkinson transferred in 1934 to Odhams Press, where he became assistant editor of 'The Clarion', a weekly that combined cycling news with Labour youth propaganda. In the same year this was incorporated into 'Weekly Illustrated', which Stefan Lorant, a gifted Hungarian refugee, had persuaded Odhams to launch. When in the summer of 1938 Lorant achieved the backing of Edward Hulton in launching 'Picture Post', Hopkinson joined as assistant editor, taking over as editor when Lorant, fearing a German invasion, emigrated to the USA in July 1940. The magazine had been expected to sell 250,000 copies at most; soon it was selling more than 1,500,000 a week. 
Lorant was an outstanding photojournalist and trained Hopkinson to use pictures with equal flair. Hopkinson added a campaigning streak of his own, often contrasting the lives of the rich with the reality of poverty and deprivation, picturing, he hoped, the lives of ordinary people with the eye of a Rembrandt. Hopkinson was an excellent caption writer and always stressed the need for words to reinforce the message of his pictures. He gained the affection and devotion of his staff, displaying an almost donnish approach to their work and a total lack of pretension. His cool professional judgement contrasted with some turbulence in his emotional life, just as a remarkably tidy office contrasted with the turmoil and tension needed to bring out a weekly magazine. His slightly enigmatic personality and ability to adapt to people masked his true political convictions. He certainly attempted to encapsulate the socialist dream of a more just society. As the Second World War progressed, he paid particular attention to the problems that would arise when peace finally arrived. With a talented team of photographers and reporters, hand-picked by Hopkinson, 'Picture Post' became immensely influential in setting the mood of the country and may well have made a contribution to the Labour victory in the 1945 election. 
Growing tension between Hulton, who was a Conservative, and Hopkinson finally came to a head in October 1950 over a powerful picture story, from photographer Bert Hardy and journalist James Cameron, highlighting the appalling plight of so-called political prisoners in Korea, some of them children, under the western-backed regime of Syngman Rhee. Hulton refused to allow the magazine to print it and, with the support of a pliant board including his second wife, Nika, sacked Hopkinson. Without his inspired editorship 'Picture Post' soon lost its way and was closed in 1957. After freelancing for a few years Hopkinson joined the 'News Chronicle' in 1954. He resigned two years later because he believed the paper was destroying itself. In 1957 he was asked to edit 'Drum', the African picture magazine based in Johannesburg, and he took up the post early in 1958. However, the magazine did not offer quite the same opportunities and eventually he fell out with the proprietor, resigning in 1961, after three and a half years. In March 1963 he launched the International Press Institute's training centre for black journalists in Nairobi, Kenya, staying there as director until 1966. He then moved on to the academic training of journalists, becoming senior fellow in press studies at the University of Sussex (1967-9). Finally, in 1970 he became the first director of the centre for journalism studies at University College, Cardiff, a post he held until 1975. Eventually he became the virtual godfather of photojournalism and did much to increase the standing of photographers in their profession. Hopkinson was also fairly successful as a writer of short stories and novels. As a writer he was a perfectionist, sometimes staying up all night to find the right word. He was appointed CBE in 1967 and knighted in 1978. He was an honorary fellow of the Royal Photographic Society (1976) and won its silver progress medal (1984), and had an honorary degree of LittD from Wales (1990). 
Hopkinson was always beautifully dressed, a neat composed figure with a rather florid face, which gave him the air of a countryman. In 1930 he married the novelist Antonia White (died 1980) ['see 'Hopkinson, Eirene Adeline], daughter of Cecil George Botting, senior classics master at St Paul's School. She became increasingly unbalanced and they were divorced in 1938. In October 1938 he married Gerti Deutsch, an Austrian photographer, whose father Victor Deutsch was a rope manufacturer. The marriage was dissolved in 1953 and in the same year he married Dorothy, daughter of Thomas Vernon, musician, and widow of Hugh Kingsmill. Hopkinson had one daughter from his first marriage and two from his second. Towards the end of his life he came to believe in reincarnation. He died of cancer on 20 June 1990, in Oxford, where his home was 26 Boulter Street, St Clements. 
Charles Wintour', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40161


Hulton, Sir Edward George Warris (1906-1988), magazine publisher and writer, was born on 29 November 1906 in London, the only son and elder child (the daughter died when she was twenty-two, in 1932) of Sir Edward Hulton, baronet (1869-1925), of Downside, Surrey, a Manchester newspaper publisher, whose business expanded to include the London 'Evening Standard' and the 'Daily Sketch'. His mother, Millicent Warris, a beautiful actress, daughter of John Warris, was Edward Hulton's second wife, but the couple were unable to marry until ten years after their son's birth, and so the baronetcy conferred on Edward Hulton in 1921 became extinct on his death in 1925. Hulton was a lonely, sensitive child. His parents descended at the weekend, when his mother would dote on him, while his father, ambitious for the boy's success, was awkward and irascible. On medical advice his father gave up the newspaper business in 1923, selling it to Lord Beaverbrook. From Harrow School, Hulton won a history scholarship to Brasenose College, Oxford, which he entered in 1925 and where he edited the undergraduate magazine 'Cherwell' and spoke frequently in Oxford Union debates. He left in December 1926 without a degree. 
Hulton was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1936. He had stood unsuccessfully as a Conservative unionist in the general elections of 1929 (the Leek division of Staffordshire) and 1931 (Harwich). Not until he was thirty did he realize control over his father's fortune and set about becoming a publisher in his own right. He founded the Hulton Press in 1937, with the prosaic purchase of 'Farmers' Weekly'. The business grew to include a variety of magazines, such as 'World Review' and 'Leader Magazine'. His children's magazines, notably 'Eagle' and 'Girl', were highly successful in their day and set new standards of content and design. But the weekly publication which made Hulton widely known was 'Picture Post', launched on 1 October 1938. Its genius was the Hungarian refugee Stefan Lorant, who had founded (and now sold to Hulton) the popular monthly pocket magazine 'Lilliput'. Under the steadying influence of Hulton's manager, Maxwell Raison, and Lorant's successor, Thomas Hopkinson, 'Picture Post' developed a style of photojournalism in which striking pictures and design were supported by good writing and a progressive editorial line. For more than a decade this formula was popular and profitable, with sales of nearly 1.5 million in the 1940s. Hulton used the magazine to boost the war effort, pioneering (and initially funding) the Home Guard training school at Osterley Park, Middlesex, in 1940, and briefly even organizing the private supply of weapons from the USA. In August 1945 he gave 'a resounding welcome' to the government formed by C. R. Attlee. 'I am not personally a socialist... Yet I rejoice that latter-day conservatism has been overthrown.' This attitude was foreshadowed by 'Picture Post''s publication of a post-war 'Plan for Britain' in 1941 and by Hulton's involvement in lobbying activities such as the progressive 1941 Committee, of which he was one of the founders and which met regularly in his house, and in support of the report by Sir William Beveridge. His book 'The New Age' (1943) summed up his support for a mixed economy and welfare state. 
Hulton blamed shifts in reading habits more than the growth of television for 'Picture Post''s decline in the 1950s. His renewed support for the Conservative Party provoked a break with Hopkinson, who resigned in 1950 when Hulton refused to publish a story about the ill-treatment of North Korean prisoners of war. A vacillating market strategy, frequent changes of editor, and mounting losses led Hulton to close the magazine in 1957. Two years later the Hulton Press was taken over by Odhams. 
Increasingly Hulton spent time on European affairs. He was editor-in-chief of 'European Review' and held office in the European Atlantic Group (president 1969-70), the European League for Economic Cooperation, and the British council of the European Movement. In 1957 he was knighted and in 1969 he received the NATO peace medal. The Hulton Picture Library, later to become the Hulton Getty Collection, which contained photographs taken for 'Picture Post', was founded in 1947. 
Hulton had a lively, enquiring mind, as ready to experiment with a model farm at Salperton, his estate village in Gloucestershire, as with the possibilities of a new Sunday newspaper in the 1950s. He belonged to half a dozen London clubs and was fond of social life. He could be brusque and changeable in his opinions. Hopkinson found him donnish and kind-hearted but difficult to work with. 
Hulton was stout, shortish, and florid. His manner was vague and authoritative, as if he were accustomed to both giving orders and having them disobeyed. His dress was always formal, as were his manners. He married first, in 1927, Kira Pavlovna, daughter of General Pavel Goudime-Levkovich, of the imperial Russian army. There were no children. The marriage was dissolved in 1932 and in 1941 he again married a Russian, Princess Nika Yuryevich, whose father, Prince Sergey Yuryevich, was a sculptor and had been a chamberlain at the court of the tsar. Of this marriage there were two sons and a daughter. The marriage was dissolved in 1966, but the couple lived together for the last nine years of Hulton's life. Hulton died on 8 October 1988 in his sleep at his home, 11 Carlton Gardens, St James's, London, after a long illness. 
Colin Seymour-Ure', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40162


Jacobson, Sydney, Baron Jacobson (1908-1988), newspaper editor and political commentator, was born on 26 October 1908 in Zeerost, Transvaal, the only son and elder child of Samuel and Anna Jacobson, a Jewish couple who had emigrated from Germany and were running an unsuccessful ostrich farm. In the summer of 1914 the family returned to Frankfurt am Main to visit friends and were unfortunate enough to stay on until August, when they were all interned. Jacobson thus obtained his primary education in a German camp, a more humane version of the camps which were to fire his hatred of Germans in the 1930s and 1940s. His father was drowned when the ship in which he was attempting to return to South Africa sank off the south-west coast of England. His mother then took her children to live in Britain with relatives, the family of Lewis Silkin, later a government minister. 
Jacobson attended Strand School and then King's College, London, where he obtained a diploma in journalism. He began his journalistic career on weekly papers in Sussex. He soon left for India, however, where he became assistant editor of 'The Statesman' (1934-6), a reservist with the Delhi light horse, and a daring steeplechase jockey. On his return to England he worked for the pocket-sized magazine 'Lilliput' (1936-9). In 1938 he married Phyllis June (died 1988), daughter of Frank Steele Buck, stockbroker; they had two sons and one daughter. He enlisted as a private immediately war was declared, was commissioned in the Middlesex regiment, was awarded the MC in 1944 for his resolute defence of a bridge during the 1944 fighting in the Low Countries, and was promoted lieutenant-colonel and given command of his battalion. On demobilization he wrote for 'Picture Post' (1945-8) and obtained his first editorship at the 'Leader Magazine' (1948-50), a paper which was a journalistic success but a financial failure. Soon after it ceased publication he began his association with the Mirror group, writing first for the 'Sunday Pictorial' (1951) under Hugh Cudlipp and then for the 'Daily Mirror' as its political editor (1952-62). 
The 'Daily Mirror' was a noisy, disputatious paper but Jacobson, a quiet man who was erudite, sceptical, and mordant, nevertheless fitted in perfectly. With Cudlipp he produced coruscating attacks on the governments of Churchill, Eden, and Macmillan. Although he was on the far left when young he moved sufficiently to give notable support to Hugh Gaitskell, whose speeches he occasionally helped to write. During the Suez crisis of 1956 Jacobson was instrumental in shifting the 'Mirror' from early acquiescence to outright opposition, a policy which reduced its circulation by 70,000. In fact it was prepared to lose many more readers. 
When the Mirror group bought Odhams Press in 1961 Jacobson was made editor of the loss-making 'Daily Herald' (1962-4), the organ of the Trades Union Congress and the Labour Party. He remained editor (1964-5) after it was transmuted into 'The Sun', a middlebrow paper created to fill what was thought to be a gap in the market but which was proved not to exist. As its losses mounted the paper was sold (almost given away) to Rupert Murdoch in 1969 and Jacobson returned to the 'Mirror', where he became editorial director (1968-74) and later deputy chairman (1973-4) of the group. 
In the two general elections of 1974, in February and October, Jacobson was at his peak. Determined that the Labour Party should win, he produced a series of famous poster-type front pages, inspired every leading article, and oversaw all the political stories. With election results as close as they were in both elections, his contributions must have been significant. He had refused a knighthood when he was editing the 'Daily Herald', but after his retirement he accepted the offer of a life peerage in 1975. 
Jacobson had hoped to play an active part in the House of Lords, but his later years were affected by ill health. They were also marred by the misfortunes of the Labour Party and by what was happening at the 'Daily Mirror'. After Robert Maxwell became its publisher in 1983 Jacobson stopped buying the paper he had served for so long. 
Jacobson was a tall, distinguished-looking man with a large nose and sardonic smile. He died on 13 August 1988 in St Albans, Hertfordshire, where his home was at 6 Avenue Road. 
Terence Lancaster', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40163


King, Cecil Harmsworth (1901-1987), publisher, was born on 20 February 1901 at Poynter's Hall, Totteridge, Hertfordshire, the fourth child in the family of three sons and three daughters of Sir Lucas White King, professor of oriental languages at Dublin University, and formerly of the Indian Civil Service, and his wife, Geraldine, daughter of Alfred Harmsworth, barrister, and sister of the first viscounts Rothermere ['see 'Harmsworth, Harold Sidney] and Northcliffe ['see 'Harmsworth, Alfred Charles William]. Cecil King's boyhood was unhappy. A brother was killed at Ypres, another when the ship taking him to school was torpedoed. 'Life has always been difficult for me because this is not my world', he wrote in his candid autobiography, 'Strictly Personal', published in 1969. 'Until recently I have hated myself and always wanted to commit suicide'. He remembered his father as 'an irascible old gentleman' and his mother as violent and selfish. He hated his school, Winchester College, and liked Oxford because at Christ Church (he gained a second class in modern history in 1922) he could always be alone. There he fell in love with Agnes Margaret (died 1985), daughter of George Albert Cooke, canon of Christ Church, Oxford, and regius professor of Hebrew, and his wife, Frances Helen (died 1932), 'nee' Anderson. He married her in 1923, and there were three sons and a daughter of the marriage (two sons were to die in his old age). King also adopted his deceased nephew's three children. 
After Oxford, King's uncle Viscount Rothermere arranged for him to begin work on two of his newspapers, the 'Glasgow Record' and 'Sunday Mail'. While in Glasgow he developed the skin disease psoriasis, which troubled him for the rest of his life and which precluded him from being called up in the Second World War. King then returned to the south and joined the staff of the 'Daily Mail' in 1923, in the advertisement department. In 1926 he transferred to the 'Daily Mirror', of which he became a director in 1929. In its heyday the 'Mirror' was not a comfortable habitat for a withdrawn Wykehamist, but when he joined the paper, it was Conservative, middle-class, and failing. With King's support, Guy Bartholomew, editorial director for many years, set about transforming it into an American-style tabloid, seeking a big working-class audience and willing to sympathize with Labour. King kept 'Bart's' extravagances at bay. 
King was made editorial director of the 'Sunday Pictorial' in 1937 and wisely appointed the 24-year-old Hugh Cudlipp as editor. He was self-educated, had been brought up in socialist south Wales, was full of passion, and had the journalistic flair that King lacked. After the war, Bartholomew fired Cudlipp, but King ousted Bartholomew in 1951 and brought back Cudlipp as editorial director of Mirror Newspapers. King himself became chairman of the Mirror Group in 1951, a post he held until 1963. 
King, Cudlipp, and the papers prospered. King built a vast world publishing empire on this small, rich base. In England, they acquired in 1958 the Amalgamated Press from the Berry family and then took over the Odhams group in order to rationalize the women's magazines. In so doing, they acquired 'Labour's own (and only) paper', the 'Daily Herald'. The Labour Party's opposition to this was stifled when King promised to maintain the failing 'Herald' for seven years. Halfway through this term the Trades Union Congress parted with their interest in the 'Herald' and King changed its title to 'The Sun'. 
King and Cudlipp were now deeply involved in politics. The Mirror Group was almost a wing of the labour movement. King had greater hopes of Harold Wilson than he had had of his predecessor, Hugh Gaitskell, and believed that without the brilliant campaign conducted by Cudlipp, Wilson would not have won his marginal victory in 1964. Although King hoped to be Wilson's 'eminence grise', Wilson was unable to take his advice. Consequently when he offered to make King a peer and minister of state, King scornfully rejected the opportunity. As the government got into deeper economic difficulties, King became more hostile to Wilson and encouraged ministers to be disloyal to him. 
In 1963 the Mirror Group was renamed the International Printing Corporation (IPC), with King as chairman. In 1965 he became a part-time director of the Bank of England. He was also a part-time member of the National Coal Board (1966-9) and a member of the National Parks Commission (1966-9). King felt that what he believed to be his special gifts as an administrator might be put at the service of the nation when the inevitable catastrophe came. He tried, at the dinner parties he gave in his ninth-floor suite in the 'Mirror''s glass building, to persuade other business leaders that there would have to be an emergency government containing men like themselves. King feared there would be hyperinflation and even bloodshed in the streets. Cudlipp and his political executives had a hard time keeping this nonsense out of the paper. They tried in vain to convince King that, though the government deserved criticism, his fears were wildly excessive. 
King got Cudlipp to take him to see Earl Mountbatten of Burma in May 1968. He outlined his fears and asked Mountbatten if he would be titular head of an emergency government. Mountbatten had taken care to be accompanied by Sir Solly Zuckerman, the government's scientific adviser, who said at once that this was rank treachery and Mountbatten should have nothing to do with it. Mountbatten agreed with Zuckerman. 
Two days later, King published an article in the 'Mirror' under his own name entitled 'Enough is enough'. It read: 'Mr Wilson and his government have lost all credit and we are now threatened with the greatest financial crisis in history. It is not to be resolved by lies about our reserves but only by a fresh start under a fresh leader.' The City was appalled. King had resigned the previous night from his directorship of the Bank of England. The pound had a bad day. The Labour Party's reaction was to give stronger support to Wilson. Three weeks later the directors of IPC unanimously dismissed King. 
King had served Fleet Street well as chairman of the Newspaper Publishers Association from 1961 to 1968. He put a stop for a year or two to cheque-book journalism and made the Press Council more credible. In his retirement he wrote articles for 'The Times', and produced his autobiography and diaries. The diaries further injured his name because many people felt he had betrayed their confidences. 
To lift his low spirits, King required stimulating company and people found him a likeable host at luncheons and dinners. The whole of his professional life was spent in newspapers. He shared his uncle Rothermere's gift for finance but lacked his uncle Northcliffe's genius for popular journalism. King was 6 feet 4 inches tall, a commanding, burly figure with penetrating blue eyes, a quick smile, and, in later life, abundant grey hair. 
King retired eventually to Ireland with Dame Ruth Railton (1915-2001), musician and founder and musical director of the National Youth Orchestra. They had married on 6 October 1962, after King and his first wife were divorced in the same year. She was the daughter of David Railton, army chaplain and rector of Liverpool. Her lively personality brought him prolonged happiness for the first time. King died on 17 April 1987 at his home, The Pavilion, 23 Greenfield Park, Dublin, where he had lived for the last part of his life. 
John Beavan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40164


Morris, (John) Marcus Harston (1915-1989), magazine editor and publisher, was born on 25 April 1915 in Preston, Lancashire, the second child and eldest of three sons, the youngest of whom died in childhood, of the Revd Walter Edmund Harston Morris and his wife, Edith Nield. In 1918 his parents moved to Southport. He was educated at Dean Close School in Cheltenham and at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in 'literae humaniores' in 1937. He then moved to Wycliffe Hall and gained a second in theology in 1939. A curate from 1939 to 1940 at St Bartholomew's, Roby, he was ordained priest in 1940 and went to Great Yarmouth (1940-41). He was a chaplain in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve from 1941 to 1943 and rector of Weeley thereafter. In 1945 he became vicar of St James's, Birkdale, in Southport, where his talents as a Christian publicist were shown in a unique magazine, 'Anvil', which circulated far beyond the parish. 
In 1948 Morris engaged a young artist, Frank Hampson, to work first on 'Anvil' and by 1949 on a new project, a strip cartoon magazine for boys. Morris saw clearly that boys were buying horror comics, produced for American servicemen of limited intelligence, because they wanted action stories in strip cartoon form, and not because they wanted pictures of savage sexual assaults on busty women. Hampson turned out to be a great strip cartoon artist, devising his own stories and characters and inventing spaceships and futuristic gadgets. He devised a cartoon about Dan Dare, space pilot, and he and Morris sent the dummy of a new paper, 'Eagle', to publishers. In October 1949 the dummy was bought by Hulton Press, which employed Morris and Hampson. 
After unprecedented publicity, the first issue of 'Eagle' went on sale on 14 April 1950 and was an immediate success. It was printed on good paper in four-colour rotogravure, on presses built by Eric Bemrose of Liverpool. The stories boys wanted, and features they did not know they wanted until they had them, such as adventures of Christian heroes (these last proved fifth in popularity), were told in strip cartoon form. The depiction of historical scenes and clothing had to be accurate and the science in Dan Dare, space pilot of the future, must be beyond criticism: Hampson could invent what did not yet exist, provided there was no reason why it should not, but Dan must never do anything impossible, such as travelling at more than the speed of light. 
The Morris family moved to Epsom in 1950 and Hampson's team was given a studio in the house. Although many girls read 'Eagle', the majority wanted their own paper; 'Girl' appeared in November 1951, to be followed in January 1953 by 'Robin' (to teach smaller children to read), and in March 1954 'Swift' bridged the gap to the papers for older readers. The popularity of these magazines was not weakened by the fact that parents and teachers approved of them. They gave rise to annuals, the Eagle Club, and other expressions of belonging, including carol services, which filled St Paul's and other cathedrals. Morris dressed as a parson only for these events. His brilliance as an editor was recognized when Edward Hulton made him managing editor of 'Housewife' in 1954, a post he held until 1959, and included him as a member of the Hulton Press management committee. 
Morris left at the end of 1959 to join the National Magazine Company (a subsidiary of the Hearst Corporation of America) as editorial director in 1960. From 1964 until 1982 he was managing director and editor-in-chief. In the 1960s the company published eleven magazines, including 'Good Housekeeping', 'She', 'Vanity Fair', and 'Connoisseur'. In the 1970s Morris bought 'Queen' and amalgamated it with 'Harper's', and launched 'Cosmopolitan' in Britain. In association with Conde Nast he formed COMAG, perhaps the biggest media distribution company in the country. He became deputy chairman of the National Magazine Company in 1979 (the chairman had to be American). He increased the circulation of his company's magazines at a time when other magazines were struggling or going out of business. He retired in 1984. From 1952 to 1983 he was honorary chaplain of St Bride's, Fleet Street. 
Morris's nine years at Hulton Press were exceeded in responsibility and success by his twenty-five years at the National Magazine Company, and yet it was for his creation of 'Eagle' and 'Girl' and for his powerful influence for good on a whole generation that he is remembered and revered. He was appointed OBE in 1983. 
Morris was tall, thin, and fair, and looked like a sardonic Leslie Howard. In 1941 he married Jessica, one of two actress daughters of John Hamlet Dunning, a representative for Clark's shoes. They had a son, who died in a car accident in 1968, and three daughters. Morris, who lived latterly at the Mill House, Midford, Bath, died on 16 March 1989 at the King Edward VII Hospital for Officers, London. His memorial service filled St Bride's in Fleet Street to overflowing. 
Chad Varah', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40165


Muggeridge, (Thomas) Malcolm (1903-1990), journalist and broadcaster, was born on 24 March 1903 in Croydon, Surrey, the third of five sons, one of whom died in 1922 (there were no daughters), of Henry Thomas Benjamin Muggeridge, Labour politician, and his wife, Annie Booler, from Sheffield. His father, elected MP for Romford in 1929, was a self-educated Fabian with an unwavering dedication to socialism. He was the formative influence on his son's early years and as a small boy Malcolm accompanied him on his street-corner electioneering. After attending Selhurst grammar school, Muggeridge went to Selwyn College, Cambridge, where he studied natural sciences but left with a pass degree (1923). It was here that, under the influence of Alec Vidler (a lifelong friend) and later of Wilfred Knox, his religious instincts were first aroused and he even thought at one stage of following Vidler into the Anglican ministry. However, he opted instead for a teaching post at Union Christian College, Alwaye, near Madras, India, where he remained for two years (1925-7). 
But Muggeridge was perpetually restless and, after quarrelling with the college principal, he returned to England and took a job as a supply teacher in Birmingham. Shortly afterwards, in 1927, he married Katherine Rosalind 
(Kitty; died 1994)
, daughter of George Cumberland Dobbs (an employee of the famous travel agent Sir Henry Lunn) and his wife, Rosie, the youngest sister of Beatrice Webb. Kitty thereafter was to be the only permanent fixture in his life. 
Muggeridge taught English for a time at Cairo University (1927-30) and while there began to submit reports of the Egyptian political scene to the 'Manchester Guardian'. In August 1930 he arrived in Manchester and was recruited on to the staff of the paper as a leader writer, on the recommendation of Arthur Ransome. He would perhaps have risen high on the staff but for the sudden death by drowning of E. T. Scott, who took over the editorship from his famous father C. P. Scott. Muggeridge had developed a strong antipathy to Scott's successor, W. P. Crozier, and was in a mood of disappointment following the formation of the National Government in 1931. In September 1932 he and Kitty decided to go and live in Russia, which they regarded, like many young nonconformists of the time, as the new Jerusalem. 
Muggeridge, however, was quickly disillusioned, and after reporting first hand on the Ukraine famine -- almost the only western journalist to do so -- he went to Switzerland and worked for the League of Nations. In 1934 he took a job in India as assistant editor of the 'Calcutta Statesman' and then worked for a short time on the staff of the London 'Evening Standard'. Muggeridge always chafed at being a mere journalist and had already written a play and three novels (one of which, 'Picture Palace', a satirical account of his time on the 'Manchester Guardian', had been recalled and suppressed by the publisher). In 1936, encouraged by his great friend Hugh Kingsmill, he abandoned full-time journalism and went to live at Whatlington in Sussex. In 1936 he published a critical biography of Samuel Butler and in 1938 another novel, 'In a Valley of this Restless Mind'. He also wrote 'The Thirties' (1940), a social survey of the decade, which first revealed his formidable powers as a political satirist and was remarkable for its anarchic wit and skilful use of quotation (a hallmark of Muggeridge's style). 
At the outbreak of the Second World War Muggeridge joined the intelligence corps and after a few months was transferred to MI6. He was sent to Delagoa Bay in Mozambique, where he proved an effective agent in the fight to prevent the sinking of allied shipping by German U-boats. He also served in north Africa, Italy, and, at the end of the war, in Paris, where he was instrumental in protecting P. G. Wodehouse, then under suspicion of collaborating with the Germans. He was decorated with the Legion d'honneur and the Croix de Guerre with palm. 
Muggeridge always liked to swim against the tide and in 1945 joined the Conservative 'Daily Telegraph' as a leader writer. He then became the 'Telegraph''s Washington correspondent (1946-7). He was the paper's deputy editor from 1950 to 1952. Later that year, to universal surprise, he accepted the editorship of 'Punch', the first non-member of staff ever to do so. He proved an effective editor, transforming the staid old periodical with his lively and satirical journalism. But, after an initial rise, the circulation fell again and Muggeridge resigned in 1957. By now he was already involved in television as a presenter of the BBC's 'Panorama', a magazine programme devoted to politics and the arts. Muggeridge had a natural flair for television and with his outspoken views, drawling voice, and long cigarette holder quickly became a household name. Briefly suspended by the BBC in late 1957, after he had published in the USA an article attacking the cult of monarchy, he appeared on a wide variety of programmes throughout the 1960s and 1970s, notably a series of autobiographical documentaries, including 'Twilight of Empire' and 'Ladies and Gentlemen it is my Pleasure' -- an account of a lecture tour in America. He appeared as himself in the notable Boulting brothers' film 'I'm All Right Jack' (1959). 
All his life Muggeridge had been restless, dissatisfied, and tormented by strong appetites for women and drink. At about the age of sixty he made a series of renunciations -- of drinking, meat-eating, smoking, and casual love affairs. He and Kitty had finally settled at Park Cottage in Robertsbridge, an idyllic setting at the end of a long farm track in the Sussex countryside. Here Muggeridge experienced for the first time a degree of contentment and peace. He developed a routine of early rising, writing, and long walks (in which visitors were expected to join). He rediscovered his faith and became in print and on television a formidable apologist for Christianity. He was the first to introduce Mother Teresa to a worldwide audience with his film 'Something Beautiful for God', later published in book form (1971). Muggeridge was received into the Roman Catholic church in 1982. 
Muggeridge was a man of middle height, with bright blue eyes and a bulbous nose. He had an enormous vitality and charm and was blessed with generous instincts which usually won over even his fiercest opponents (of whom there were many). He had no ambition for office of any kind and generally acted on impulse. His enormous success as a television personality came about by chance and may have encouraged a natural vanity. But he never lost the ability to laugh at himself. He was sustained throughout his life by the love of his wife. They had three sons and a daughter. Muggeridge died of bronchopneumonia on 14 November 1990 at Ledsham Court, The Ridge, Hastings, after a long decline and was buried near his father in Whatlington. Kitty Muggeridge died in 1994 in Welland, Ontario, Canada. 
Richard Ingrams', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40166


Thomas, Howard (1909-1986), broadcaster and film and television impresario, was born on 5 March 1909 in Cwm, Monmouthshire, the second son and third and youngest child of William George Thomas, stationer and postmaster, and his wife, Alice Maud Stephens. The family left south Wales when Thomas was eleven and moved to Beswick, Manchester. He went to local schools until he was old enough to start work. 
Thomas took evening classes in advertising and qualified as a copywriter, which led him to a small but aggressive Manchester advertising agency run by F. John Roe, where he developed the enterprise and showmanship on which he was to draw for the rest of his career. He moved to London in 1934 and in that year married Hilda, daughter of Harrison Fogg, a Manchester journalist; they had two daughters. In 1937 he joined London Press Exchange and obtained his first BBC commission. He set up the commercial radio department of London Press Exchange in 1938, writing and producing most of its programmes himself, and also became one of BBC radio's highest paid freelance scriptwriters. 
Rejected for military service in 1940 because of his defective eyesight, Thomas was offered a BBC staff position and in the next three years produced over 500 programmes, among them two of the most notable of the war years. 'Sincerely yours' established Vera Lynn as a musical link between servicemen and their partners back home and made her a star to be remembered ever afterwards as the forces' sweetheart. In 'The Brains Trust', a panel of experts answered listeners' questions. This was a simple formula which became an outstanding popular success because of Thomas's selection of the panellists; three regulars -- biologist Julian Huxley, philosopher C. E. M. Joad, and retired naval commander A. B. Campbell -- became national figures. 
In 1944 Thomas resigned from the BBC, where he saw no future for himself, and moved to the film industry as producer-in-chief of Pathe Pictures, the short-film subsidiary of the Associated British Picture Corporation, where he revitalized Pathe News and Pathe Pictorial and extended production into documentaries, such as his colour film of the coronation of Elizabeth II. Thomas was a passionate advocate of commercial television. When the Associated British Picture Corporation was invited by the Independent Television Authority in 1955 to apply for the weekend contract in the north and midlands, his lobbying was finally rewarded. ABC Television was formed as a subsidiary, with Thomas as managing director, and went on the air in February 1956. 
ABC was the last and smallest of the original 'big four' contractors, alongside Associated Rediffusion, ATV, and Granada. But Thomas's energy and enthusiasm, and his ability to pick the right like-minded lieutenants, propelled the little company into prominence. 'Armchair Theatre', under Sydney Newman, galvanized the single television play; arts programming was pioneered with 'Tempo', religious programming with 'The Sunday Break', adult education with 'Sunday Session'; and London's dominance of popular entertainment at the weekend was successfully challenged with programmes like 'Blackpool Night out', 'Candid Camera', and the stylish thriller series 'The Avengers'. 
When the structure of independent television was reshaped in 1967, the Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA) offered the London weekday contract to a new company formed by the merger of Rediffusion and ABC TV, in which majority control was to be exercised by ABC, with Thomas as managing director. In the words of IBA chairman Lord Hill of Luton, 'the combination of these two companies seemed to the Authority to offer the possibility of a programme company of real excellence'. Thames Television began transmission in August 1968 and realized the possibility of excellence in the ensuing years with a programme output high in both quantity and quality, ranging from 'This Week' and 'The World at War' to 'Rumpole of the Bailey' and 'Minder', from 'The Naked Civil Servant' and 'Edward and Mrs Simpson' to 'This is your Life' and 'The Benny Hill Show'. In 1974 Thomas succeeded Lord Shawcross as chairman. He retired at the age of seventy in 1979. 
Thomas was part of a particularly colourful period in the history of broadcasting in Britain, a bluff, burly showman in both radio and television. Among the founding fathers of independent television, he had the unique distinction of setting up and running two highly successful programme companies. He remained a programme maker throughout his career, brimming with ideas himself and always respectful of the ideas of other programme makers, whose talents he was quick to spot and ready to support. It was remarkable that, apart from his appointment as CBE in 1967, his achievement was never appropriately recognized. He was a governor of the British Film Institute (1974-82) and vice-president of the Royal Television Society (1976-84). He wrote five books, including 'How to Write for Broadcasting' (1940). He also served three times as chairman of Independent Television News. 
Thomas was above average height, thickset, balding from a quite early age, with a bluff manner and a forceful presence emphasized by his horn-rimmed spectacles. He was capable of great charm and persuasiveness, which served him well in both radio and television. Thomas died in hospital in Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire (where his home was Old Ship House, Wharfe Lane), on 6 November 1986. 
Brian Tesler', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40167


Trethowan, Sir (James) Ian Raley (1922-1990), journalist and broadcaster, was born on 20 October 1922 in High Wycombe, the only child of Major James Jackson Raley Trethowan MBE, a retired army officer who combined a life in business and army welfare with writing about sport, and his wife, Winifred Timms. Trethowan followed in his father's footsteps to Christ's Hospital, Horsham, Sussex, where he displayed only modest academic achievement; he left at the age of sixteen to pursue a career in journalism. A short spell as post-boy at the 'Daily Sketch' led to a reporting job on the 'Yorkshire Post', before Trethowan joined the Fleet Air Arm during the Second World War in 1941. After the war he rejoined the 'Post' in 1946. Working for its London staff he rose rapidly to parliamentary lobby correspondent. There his meticulousness began to be widely noticed. His writing was mostly terse and to the point, and he had a good nose for what constituted a story. He also developed fine contacts within the tory party, about which he made no secret, but which never became so blatant as to diminish his effectiveness as a chronicler of politics across the board. 
Trethowan moved to the 'News Chronicle' in 1955 and from there was tempted by Geoffrey Cox to join the fledgeling Independent Television News, where he took an on-screen role between 1958 and 1963. Trethowan did not develop into a permanent newscaster, always preferring to involve himself in a little administration. He served as ITN's deputy editor, before moving on to the larger canvas of the BBC in 1963. Trethowan's main work at the BBC was again political, dealing both with Westminster direct and with the broader world of politics through the weekly programme 'Gallery'. At the same time he was political commentator for the 'Economist' (1953-8 and 1965-7) and 'The Times' (1967-8). 
In 1968 Baron Hill of Luton, an old political comrade and now chairman of the BBC, needed a new managing director for BBC Radio to succeed F. G. Gillard, the veteran correspondent and administrator. Trethowan, somewhat to his surprise, was asked to apply. He was offered the job and took it -- in part, he recorded, because he knew he would never be top-flight on television: 'Not a star', Huw Wheldon had told him, firmly but with kindness. 
Trethowan skilfully negotiated the pitfalls of radio management from 1969 to 1975. Radios 1, 2, 3, and 4 were introduced with less pain than had been anticipated. In 1976 Trethowan was switched back to television, this time as managing director, as part of a deliberate grooming for the top job. He succeeded Sir Charles Curran as director-general in late 1977. In his own view he had had 'a lot of luck'. 
In his first years at the top, Trethowan was fortunate that his chairman was Sir Michael Swann, a clubbable man of clear view. In Swann's opinion, the BBC would work best if the director-general did the driving, while the chairman and his board assisted in reading the map. Although Trethowan was sometimes suspected by radical broadcasters of acting purely as the 'thirteenth governor', his own memoir, 'Split Screen', analyses in some detail a relationship of sturdy delicacy and shows why it worked well. The political world was sufficiently convinced both to renew the BBC charter, and to sustain the value of the licence fee even during difficult inflationary times. Trethowan suffered a heart attack in 1979, but recovered to continue in office until his official retirement in 1982. 
Unlike most BBC directors-general, Trethowan had a full and active life beyond the BBC. He pursued his second love, the turf, as chairman of the Horserace Betting Levy Board between 1982 and 1990, took a directorship at Barclays Bank from 1982 to 1987, and eventually re-emerged in commercial television as director in 1986-7, and then chairman from 1987 to 1990, of Thames Television. There controversy followed him over the 1988 programme 'Death on the Rock', which asked hard questions about the killing of three IRA terrorists. Trethowan stood by the programme and diverted much of the political animus. He again drew on that firm but unfailing courtesy which had stood him in good stead in all his broadcasting and journalistic endeavours. He had a clear vision of the proper province of both commentators and those commentated upon, and throughout his career this enabled him to defuse potentially explosive editorial challenges. In appearance both unassertive and unassuming, he would none the less stand his ground, his determination deepening with each twist and turn of external pressure. 
Among his other activities, Trethowan was a trustee of Glyndebourne Arts Trust from 1982 and of the British Museum from 1984, a governor of the Ditchley Foundation from 1985, and on the board of the British Council from 1980 to 1987. The University of East Anglia made him an honorary DCL in 1979, and he was knighted in 1980. 
Trethowan's life was cut short by the onset of motor neurone disease, which he bore with good grace, even in its latter wheelchair stages. In 1950 he had married Patricia, daughter of Colonel John Elliott Nelson, retired army officer. They had no children. The marriage was dissolved in 1963 and in the same year he married Carolyn, daughter of Alfred Brian Challen Reynolds, retired army officer and company director. They had three daughters, and it was Trethowan's greatest consolation that he lived to see them into maturity. He died on 12 December 1990 in the Cromwell Hospital, London. A memorial service was held in St Martin-in-the-Fields on 5 March 1991. 
Brian Wenham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40168


Utley, Thomas Edwin (1921-1988), journalist and political analyst, was born on 1 February 1921 in Hawarden, Flintshire, the second of five children (two sons, two daughters, and one deceased in infancy) of Thomas Cooper, chemist, of West Derby, Liverpool, and his wife, Emily Utley. In 1931 he was adopted by his maternal aunt, Anne Utley, by whose surname he was thenceforward known. He was born blind in one eye owing to infantile glaucoma and lost the sight of the other eye at the age of nine, but, with the help of a series of amanuenses, courageous determination, and a prodigious memory, offset this handicap almost completely in adult life. Educated privately, Utley took first-class honours in both parts one (1941) and two (1942) of the history tripos at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. 
Utley joined the Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House) in 1942, as secretary to the Anglo-French relations post-war reconstruction group, and worked there until 1944, when he became a temporary foreign leader writer at 'The Times' for one year. From 1945 to 1947 he was foreign leader writer at the 'Sunday Times'. He spent a year at 'The Observer' in 1947-8, and then rejoined 'The Times' as a leader writer. He stayed there for six years, becoming associate editor of 'The Spectator' in 1954-5. He married in 1951 Brigid Viola Mary (1927-2012), younger daughter of Dermot Michael Macgregor Morrah, journalist, historian, and Arundel herald-extraordinary. There were two sons and two daughters of the marriage. In 1955 Utley began life as a freelance journalist and broadcaster, until in 1964 he joined the 'Daily Telegraph' as a leader writer. He was that newspaper's chief assistant editor in 1986-7. From 1987 until his death a year later he was obituaries editor and a columnist at 'The Times'. 
Utley's frequently signed articles on political subjects gained for him a widespread reputation as a political philosopher, and during his later years he was regarded as its most articulate and reflective exponent by that wing of the Conservative Party which designated itself distinctively as high tory. The party in general during the last twenty years of his life was influenced more than it might have cared to admit by the views expressed in Utley's leading and other articles in the 'Daily Telegraph'. 
Never inclined to inhabit an ivory tower, Utley served as chairman of the Paddington Conservative Association in 1977-9 (president, 1979-80) and as consultant director (1980-88) of the research department of Conservative central office; but his only venture into practical politics, when he contested Antrim North at the general election of February 1974 against the sitting Democratic Unionist member, Ian Paisley, proved abortive. Northern Ireland was one of the many subjects to which he brought his ability to provide policy with a well-developed structure of logically sustainable argument; but this quality was most practically effective during the premiership (1979-90) of Margaret Thatcher, who held him in high regard. In some degree he paved the way intellectually for the changes in the direction of Conservative policy which she initiated and implemented. He also had an unswerving religious belief, and regretted changes to the Church of England which would damage its careful compromises. 
A collection of Utley's signed publications appeared after his death under the title 'A Tory Seer' (ed. Charles Moore and Simon Heffer, 1989). His own books included 'Modern Political Thought' (1952), 'Not Guilty: the Conservative Reply' (1957), 'Occasion for Ombudsman' (1961), 'Your Money and your Life' (1964), 'Enoch Powell: the Man and his Thinking' (1968), and 'Lessons of Ulster' (1975). His influence was magnified by the spellbinding effect which his fluent and incisive discourse produced, especially upon young hearers. It was not without significance that the group of younger officials who sat at his feet at the Conservative Research Department became known as the 'Utley play school'. 
Utley (known to his many friends as Peter) was of striking, if frail, appearance; and those introduced to him sensed no disposition on his part to conceal the severity of the disability under which he laboured. He wore a black patch over his right eye. An inveterate smoker, unable to see where he flicked his ash, he caused Margaret Thatcher to bob up and down from her chair to move the ashtray in order to preserve the carpets. 
Utley was overtaken by a cancer-induced stroke while working at his home, and died the following evening at the Cromwell Hospital, London, on 21 June 1988. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 24 October 1988. 
J. Enoch Powell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40169


Thomas, (Lewis John) Wynford Vaughan- (1908-1987), author and broadcaster, was born on 15 August 1908 at 9 Calvert Terrace, Swansea, the second of three sons (there were no daughters) of Dr David Vaughan Thomas, professor of music, and his wife, Morfydd Lewis. He attended Swansea grammar school, where he just overlapped with Dylan Thomas, the poet, of whom he became a close friend. He won a history exhibition to Exeter College, Oxford, and obtained a second class in modern history in 1930. 
Having graduated at the depth of the depression Vaughan-Thomas (he had added Vaughan to his name) made a precarious living by lecturing. In 1933 he became keeper of manuscripts and records at the National Library of Wales and in 1934 area officer of the South Wales Council of Social Service. In 1937 he joined the outside broadcasts department of the BBC's office at Cardiff, in order to be close to the girl he was to marry ten years later. Outside broadcasts were then the only BBC programmes where words spoken were not read from a script. The challenging task of an outside broadcast commentator was to convert an event, as it unfolded, into vivid words and structured sentences which immediately conveyed the scene visually to audiences who could only use their ears. 
Vaughan-Thomas was a dark-haired, somewhat chubby man of great vitality. His natural effervescence, his Celtic eloquence, his humour, and his well-stocked mind soon brought him to the fore as a commentator on major occasions in both English and Welsh. He gave the Welsh commentary on the coronation of King George VI. On the outbreak of the Second World War he transferred to the London outside broadcasts department as a home front reporter and in 1942, after covering the blitz, he became a war correspondent. He was the first BBC reporter to fly in a Lancaster bomber on a night raid on Berlin (1943). The bomb run which he brilliantly described, as the aircraft was caught by the German searchlights and dodged the flak, gave listeners a vivid picture of the gruelling perils the RAF crews endured. 
Later Vaughan-Thomas recorded memorable dispatches on the Anzio beachhead and covered the liberation of Rome. He also 'liberated' the vineyards of Burgundy, remarking typically, 'We had three marvellous days in a cellar and I emerged with the Croix de Guerre' (1945). The closing stages of the war found him in Hamburg, broadcasting from the studio which William Joyce, Lord Haw-Haw, had been using only days before. He visited the Belsen concentration camp shortly after it was opened and was outraged by the assault on human dignity that he found there. In 1946 he married Charlotte, daughter of John Rowlands, a civil servant. There was one son of the marriage, who became a film director. 
For the next three decades Vaughan-Thomas was a leading commentator on state occasions, most notably the wedding of Princess Elizabeth to the duke of Edinburgh. He covered the granting of independence to India and many similar celebrations as former colonial territories hauled down the union flag. He went on overseas tours with the royal family. He took the popularity of his broadcasts in his stride. In his television commentary at the memorial service in Westminster Abbey for Richard Dimbleby he said: 'Ours is a transient art, our words and pictures make a powerful immediate impact, and then fade as if they never had been'. 
Vaughan-Thomas was happier as a performer on radio than on television, but in 1967 he became a leading member of the group headed by the fifth Baron Harlech, which was unexpectedly awarded the franchise for the commercial television channel serving Wales and the west of England. Vaughan-Thomas became the first director of programmes for Harlech Television (HTV) in Cardiff and three years later was promoted to be executive director of HTV. His return to Wales brought him into active participation in the affairs of the principality. He was a director of the Welsh National Opera, chairman of the Council for the Preservation of Rural Wales, and an honorary druid (1974). He was also a governor of the British Film Institute (1977-80). 
Vaughan-Thomas wrote a number of books, especially about the countryside. He continued to broadcast radio talks about the changing seasons and made regular forays to London where he would regale his friends with scatological limericks involving complicated Welsh place names, composed by himself. He had an infectious good humour. He was made OBE in 1974, CBE in 1986, and an honorary MA of the Open University in 1982. Vaughan-Thomas died on 4 February 1987 in Fishguard, where his home was Pentower, Tower Mill. He was survived by his wife. 
Leonard Miall', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40170


Watt, (John) David Henry (1932-1987), journalist, was born on 9 January 1932 in Edinburgh, the only son and second of three children of the Revd John Hunter Watt and his wife, Helen Garioch, daughter of Reuben Bryce, accountant. His childhood years were spent principally in Kent, where his father was vicar of Boxley, near Maidstone. He was educated at Marlborough College and did two years' national service with the Royal Artillery (partly in the canal zone and after that on secondment to the Mauritian guard). He then went up to Hertford College, Oxford, with a classics scholarship in 1951. He obtained second-class honours in both classical honour moderations and 'literae humaniores' (1953 and 1956). He had only just taken moderations when his university career was interrupted by his falling victim to poliomyelitis. The effects were to stay with him all his life, bringing a slightly lopsided look to his previously tall, erect figure, with his left arm hanging limply by his side. He was seldom without pain, which he bore with remarkable stoicism. He continued to experience breathing difficulties, which involved in later years the regular use of a portable respirator. Nevertheless, the illness forged and shaped his whole character, transforming a conventional, public school, games-playing product into the acerbic possessor of one of the shrewdest minds and sharpest pens in British political journalism. 
Polio also gave Watt his start as a writer. His first published article was called simply 'Last gasp' and appeared in 'The Spectator' of 14 October 1955, when he had just ceased undergoing treatment in an iron lung. It was a detached description of what it felt like to live, as he put it, in 'a long box, monstrous and coffin-like, with bellows attached'. As a piece of spare, cool prose, it sufficiently impressed 'The Spectator''s editor, Ian Gilmour, for Watt to be offered a job when, a year later, he left Oxford. He spent two years (1956-7) with 'The Spectator', ostensibly as the paper's drama critic, but in reality as the office dogsbody. In 1958 he moved to 'The Scotsman' as its London-based diplomatic correspondent, and from there was tempted in 1960 to join a revamped 'Daily Herald' as its Common Market correspondent. A year later the 'Herald' passed into the ownership of the International Publishing Corporation, and Watt did not, under the new proprietorship, linger long. Instead he went back to 'The Spectator', this time in the rather grander capacity of political correspondent (1962-3). 
It was his second coming at 'The Spectator' that marked Watt's real arrival as an influential journalist. After a brief flowering with Henry Fairlie -- and a rather longer one with Bernard Levin -- 'The Spectator''s political commentary had become spasmodic and patchy. In less than a year and a half Watt provided it with consistency, coherence, wit, and intelligence. It was no surprise when, towards the end of 1963, the 'Financial Times' snapped him up to be its correspondent in Washington. 
Although without any economic training, Watt soon vindicated his selection and became, in the words of the 'Financial Times''s own official history, 'the pick of the [paper's] foreign correspondents'. Starting from scratch, he rapidly built up an impressive network of sources, prompting the International Monetary Fund once to complain that it had to read a London newspaper to discover what was going into its own minutes. But Watt was equally penetrating in covering American politics and by 1967 had returned to London -- and to the important appointment as political editor of the paper. The next ten years, in which his Friday column came to be recognized as the best-informed example of 'insider' journalism in Britain, probably represented the high point of Watt's influence over public affairs. 
In 1968 Watt married Susanne, daughter of Frank (Fritz) Adolf Burchardt, statistician and fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford; they had four sons. By 1977, having been disappointed in his bids for two editorships (for 'The Economist' in 1974 and 'The Observer' in 1975), Watt had become bored. He had grown tired, as he characteristically phrased it, of 'turning the prayer wheel'. So, when the offer came in 1978 to take over from Andrew Shonfield as director of the Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House), he accepted it. He was afterwards to regret doing so. Cut off from its Foreign Office subvention, Chatham House was going through a difficult phase and its new director had little appetite for fund-raising. It was with some relief that he laid down his burden at the end of his five-year term. 
While at Chatham House, Watt had already put a toe back into journalism, writing a weekly column in 'The Times' from 1981 until his death. He was a visiting fellow of All Souls, Oxford, in 1972-3 and was a research fellow there in 1981-3, appointments which gave him great pleasure, as did his joint editorship of the 'Political Quarterly' from 1979 to 1985. He was once described as having 'a clergy-boned face', and it was typical of this aspect of his personality that he should have served on the board of visitors of Wandsworth prison for five years (1977-81). In the last period of his life he also became a highly valued political consultant to the multinational company Rio Tinto Zinc, which, a year after his death, established in his memory a prize for journalism. Watt died on 27 March 1987 at his country cottage in Lewknor, near Oxford, after, on a stormy night, picking up an electric cable that turned out to be live. He was instantly electrocuted. 
Anthony Howard', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40171


Wheldon, Sir Huw Pyrs (1916-1986), television broadcaster, was born on 7 May 1916 at his grandmother's home in Prestatyn, the eldest in a family of two sons and two daughters of Sir Wynn Powell Wheldon (1876-1961), solicitor and civil servant, and his wife, Margaret (Megan) Edwards. His father worked in David Lloyd George's law practice before the First World War, had a brave military career, and went on to become registrar of the University College of North Wales in Bangor and then permanent secretary to the Welsh department of the Ministry of Education. Huw Wheldon was educated at Friars School, Bangor (he did not speak English until he was seven) and later at the London School of Economics and Political Science where he graduated BSc (Econ) in 1938. He joined the staff of the Kent education committee, and then war interrupted his career. Enlisting in the East Kent regiment as a private, he was commissioned into the Royal Welch Fusiliers (1940), and volunteered to join the airborne forces. He served in both the 1st and 6th airborne divisions, ending the war as a major in the Royal Ulster Rifles, having won the MC shortly after D-day in 1944. 
In 1946 Wheldon became director of the Arts Council in Wales, and in 1949 joined the directorate of the Festival of Britain. He helped to ensure the festival reached all of Britain, and for his work he was appointed OBE in 1952, the year he joined the BBC as publicity officer, television. He wanted to be involved in programmes and first made his mark on the screen as the presenter of the children's programme 'All your Own'. He became a national figure when he devised a conkers competition that drew 58,000 conkers from all over Britain. In 1954 he was appointed senior producer, television talks, although he had never directed or produced a programme. His first series was 'Men in Battle' with Lieutenant-General Sir Brian Horrocks, and his second 'Orson Welles's Sketchbook'. 
From 1958 to 1964 Wheldon devised, edited, and presented 'Monitor', the first arts programme on television. In this pioneering fortnightly programme he introduced a growing audience to major artists, in numbers and range remarkable for its time. He built around him a team of talented people including John Schlesinger, Ken Russell, Humphrey Burton, David Jones, Patrick Garland, and Melvyn Bragg. He required of all his programmes fidelity and attention to the subject, to the audience, and to the integrity of the programme maker. 
Inevitably Wheldon progressed to the most senior posts in BBC television: he was the first television producer to become controller of programmes (1965-8) and he was the first holder of the new post of managing director (1969-75). This was the time when BBC television was at its best with some remarkable series ('Civilisation' with Sir Kenneth Clark, 'The Ascent of Man' with Jacob Bronowski, and Alistair Cooke's 'America'), challenging drama, refreshing comedy, and lively current affairs and sports programmes. Despite the restrictions of his office (concerned with the BBC's strategy, standards, and finances), programmes and programme makers were what Wheldon cared about most. In his own phrase, he wished programmes to 'give delight and insight'. Although he was a candidate for the post of director-general when Sir Hugh Greene retired, the BBC governors, led by Baron Hill of Luton, preferred to give the job to someone with a lower profile, Charles Curran. Wheldon served him loyally as his deputy until his own retirement in 1976, the year he was knighted. 
Three factors helped to shape Wheldon's life: Wales and the advantages of a close-knit family life, the army and its discipline, and the BBC and its creative ethos. They gave him a reference for language and for institutions and for the need to protect them and keep them alive. Wheldon was a tall man, slightly stooped. It was his face that was remarkable: piercing eyes, a pointed chin, a hawk's nose. He was the most generous and companionable of men, the best and sometimes longest teller of stories, and he had an enormous zest for life. 
After he left the BBC, Wheldon returned to programme making and wrote and presented the 'Royal Heritage' series (1977) and 'Destination D-Day' (1984), on the fortieth anniversary of the allied landings in Normandy. He became an honorary fellow (1973) and chairman of the court of governors of the London School of Economics (1975-85). He was the president of the Royal Television Society (1979-85) and received every honour possible in television. From 1976 he was a trustee of the National Portrait Gallery and from 1983 a trustee of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. He had five honorary doctorates, from Ulster (1975), Wales (1978), London (1984), Loughborough (1985), and the Open University (1980), which he helped to establish. 
In 1956 Wheldon married Jacqueline Mary 
(Jay; died 1993)
, the daughter of Hugh Clarke, who had a tool-designing business in Chiswick. They had one son and two daughters. Their family house at 120 Richmond Hill, Richmond, Surrey, was an exceptionally happy home and he died there, from cancer, on 14 March 1986. He was cremated at Mortlake crematorium and his ashes were buried in Kew Gardens. A memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 7 May 1986, which would have been his seventieth birthday. 
Paul Fox', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40172


Young, Stuart (1934-1986), accountant and broadcasting executive, was born on 23 April 1934 at home in Stamford Hill, London, the younger child and younger son of Joseph Young, who was in the flour business, and his wife, Rebecca (Betty) Sterling. The family were religious Jews and his mother made Young very conscious of his religious and charitable duties. Indeed, he met his wife on a charity committee when he was only sixteen, and he continued to be active in Jewish and other charities until his death. His brother, David, later became Baron Young of Graffham. He was educated at Woodhouse grammar school, North Finchley, Middlesex, left school at sixteen, and qualified as a chartered accountant in 1956. In that year he married Shirley, daughter of Harry Aarons, a fashion company director; there were two daughters of the marriage. 
Young was a highly successful accountant. He set up his own practice in 1958, when he was only twenty-four. From 1960 he was the senior partner of his own firm, Hacker Young. He was hard working and decisive, with a very logical financial mind. In the early 1960s, when his practice was already well established, he began to get business from the interests of Sir Isaac Wolfson, including Great Universal Stores. He became a director of many companies, including Tesco, the food store group (from 1982), and of Caledonian Airways (from 1973). 
In the summer of 1981 Young was appointed a governor of the BBC. From the beginning of his term he was uneasy about what he regarded as the financial laxity and the overmanning of the corporation, though he felt great admiration for its broadcasting quality. This contrast between financial concern and admiration for the broadcast product marked his work both as a governor and as chairman of the BBC. Within a few weeks the financial concern led to a confrontation, which he won. The governors had to approve a new contract to promote BBC sales in American television. Young and another governor asked to see the contract; they were told that this would not be customary and that Alasdair Milne, the managing director of BBC television, was reluctant to agree. Young told the chairman, George Howard, that he would not approve a contract that he had not read, whereupon he was shown the contract. When Howard's term came to an end in 1983 Young was appointed chairman of the BBC governors. Margaret Thatcher, as prime minister, wanted the BBC to be put under stronger financial control. By that time Alasdair Milne had succeeded Sir Ian Trethowan as director-general. Young promoted and encouraged Michael Checkland, who was eventually to succeed Milne as director-general, as the member of the board of management who was to carry out the financial reforms he considered urgently necessary. 
Within a few weeks of his appointment as chairman Young suffered the first symptoms of the lung cancer which proved fatal to him, and his whole period as chairman was conducted under this disability, which he bore with great courage. His illness allowed him to form a personal link with Alasdair Milne, whose wife suffered from recurrent cancer; Milne had a sympathetic understanding of Young's condition. Yet Young did not feel that Milne had an adequate grasp of the business aspects of running so large a corporation and he did not find in him the partner who might have welcomed necessary reforms. If he had been in better health he might have been more ruthless in dealing with the problems that he recognized. None the less the reforms and the demanning, which were later associated with the chairmanship of Marmaduke Hussey, his successor, were started in Young's time. 
During Young's chairmanship, which he regarded as a high honour, there were a number of BBC crises of a characteristic kind. One was the libel action which arose out of 'Maggie's Militant Tendency', a television attack, which proved to be defamatory, on some right-wing Conservative MPs; another was the dispute in late July 1985 between the board of governors and the board of management over the 'Real Lives' interviews with Irish terrorists (made contrary to BBC producer guidelines); and a third was the dismissal of Richard Francis as managing director (radio) by Alasdair Milne. In all of these matters Young took a moderate position, trying to reconcile the warring parties in the interest of the BBC as a whole. His period as chairman was circumscribed by his illness; instead of being the radical reforming chairman that he, and Margaret Thatcher, had hoped he might be, he could only start to turn the tide from the extravagant BBC triumphalism of Howard and Milne toward the neo-puritanism of Hussey and John Birt, a later director-general. Young was courteous and friendly to his colleagues and staff. His balanced judgement and diplomatic approach were matched by firmness of purpose. 
Young did much charitable work, which included aid for Israel, and he was treasurer of the Joint Israel appeal; he was also involved in local charities in north London, and in heritage appeals. He was a trustee of the National Gallery from 1980. From 1977 he was a member of the finance and investment committee of Wolfson College, Cambridge, of which he became an honorary fellow in 1983. He was 6 feet tall, good-looking, and always well dressed, and he had a calm and friendly expression. His two passions were chess and golf. Young died of lung cancer at his home in Hampstead Garden Suburb, 29 Ingram Avenue, on 29 August 1986, and was survived by his wife and daughters. A celebration of his life and work was held at Guildhall, London, on 10 December 1986. 
Rees-Mogg', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40173


Dunderdale, Wilfred Albert (1899-1990), intelligence officer, was born in Russia on 24 December 1899, the son of Richard Albert Dunderdale, a British shipowner, whose vessels traded between Constantinople and the Russian ports on the Black Sea, and his wife, Sophie. He was educated in Russia, at the 'Gymnasium' in Nikolayev, Ukraine, and was studying naval engineering at Petrograd University when the Russian Revolution broke out in 1917. Much of the Russian navy remained in White Russian hands. Dunderdale was contacted by the Royal Navy, who found his great knowledge of the Russian language and the Russian navy invaluable. 
At this time Constantinople, where Dunderdale had numerous friends, had been occupied by the allies. On one occasion in 1919 a submarine was being handed over by the allies to the White Russian navy. Dunderdale discovered that the crew were Bolsheviks who intended to murder the tsarist officers together with the liaison officer (himself) as soon as the vessel sailed. The crew was arrested and Dunderdale was appointed MBE in 1920. In the same year he became a sub-lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. During this period he was also sent as the British observer and interpreter to accompany the imperial procurator on his investigation into the murder of the Russian imperial family at Yekaterinburg, which had been recaptured by the White Russian army. As a result he remained convinced of the falseness of the pretender Anastasia, who he said was merely the Polish girlfriend of one of the Bolshevik gaolers who had occasionally done some sewing for the tsarina. 
The world of Constantinople, from the end of the First World War until Kemal Ataturk deposed Sultan Muhammad in 1922, was one of classical Byzantine intrigue on a grand scale. The only stabilizing factor was the heavy guns of the Royal Navy, which were trained on the centre of the city. Dunderdale was in his element and in 1921 he was recruited by MI6, with whom he remained until 1959. He had found his spiritual home. He always maintained that his first job for MI6 was to pay off, with gold sovereigns, all the foreign members of the sultan's harem and to repatriate them through the good offices of the Royal Navy. 
In 1926 Dunderdale was posted to Paris to represent MI6's interests and to liaise with the French Deuxieme Bureau. He stayed in Paris until 1940. The central weapon in his armoury was his personality. He spoke several languages well, and was debonair and a wonderful host. There was about him an element of the pirate; he was a romantic with enormous vitality and a gift for friendship. If the truth of past dramatic events was occasionally expanded in telling the story, his friends readily forgave him. His flat in Paris became a meeting-place for international visitors and a venue for political gossip. His relations with the Deuxieme Bureau became close and he played a major role in one great intelligence coup. He had become a close personal friend of Colonel Gustave Bertrand, the Deuxieme Bureau chief signals officer, and they were both friendly with the Polish intelligence service in Paris. Shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, they managed to smuggle out of Poland to Paris a model of the top secret German encoding machine known as Enigma. Dunderdale took it over to London himself, in romantic circumstances. It was the biggest single contribution to the vital intelligence results achieved by the British decoding centre at Bletchley Park, and was perhaps the greatest allied intelligence coup of the war. He was appointed CMG in 1942. 
In the summer of 1940 Dunderdale had to return to London. He ran a small group of agents into French seaports, but his contribution gradually diminished. Part of the reason for this was that, as Charles de Gaulle became increasingly powerful in London and set up his own intelligence organization, Dunderdale's contacts with the old Deuxieme Bureau became an object of suspicion: a number of its officers were indeed working with the Vichy government. After the war Dunderdale refused to have an office in MI6's headquarters because the aura of Whitehall was intolerable to him; he was allowed to set up a small office nearby. There, with lovely oriental carpets, portraits of the queen and the tsar, a whiff of incense, and a fine model of a Russian destroyer of 1912, he provided a home from home for many foreign visitors from pre-war days. He also made two further contributions. When de Gaulle resigned early in 1946 an intelligence amalgamation took place in Paris between the pre-war professionals and those who worked for the French general. Dunderdale played a useful role in bridging the gap between the new generation of MI6 officers and his pre-war French colleagues. Second, in his final period with MI6 his company and his worldly knowledge were a constant pleasure and profit to his younger colleagues. He was an officer of the French Legion d'honneur, a holder of the French Croix de Guerre (with palm), and an officer of the American Legion of Merit. 
Always known as Biffy, Dunderdale was neat, dark, immaculately dressed, and stubby in build, and he always had a Balkan cigarette, in a long, black, ivory holder, in his hand. In 1928 he married June Woodbridge Ament-Morse of Washington, USA. The marriage was dissolved in 1947 and in 1952 he married Dorothy Mabel Brayshaw Hyde, daughter of James Murray Crofts DSc. They had a happy marriage and lived in London until her death in 1978. After his wife died there was little left to keep Dunderdale in England and he went to live in New York, where he had some old friends. In 1980 he married Deborah, widow of Harry McJ. McLeod and daughter of Eugene B. Jackson, of Boston, Massachusetts. There were no children of any of the marriages. Dunderdale died on 13 November 1990 in New York. 
John Bruce Lockhart', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40174


Easton, Sir James Alfred (1908-1990), air force officer and intelligence officer, was born in Winchester on 11 February 1908, the youngest in the family of two sons and five daughters of William Coryndon Easton, chemist and botanist, and his wife, Alice Summers. He was educated at Peter Symonds School, Winchester. He passed into the Royal Air Force College at Cranwell in 1926, and was commissioned into the RAF in 1928. He held a series of flying appointments, including a spell in biplanes co-operating with the army on the north-west frontier of India (1929-32) and duties in Egypt (1934-6). He was also increasingly regarded as an able young officer with a promising future. In 1937 he was posted to Canada as RAF armament liaison officer with the Canadian national ministry of defence (1937-9). There he met and married in 1939 Anna Mary (died 1977), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel John Andrew McKenna, of the Royal Canadian Engineers, from Ottawa. Not only was it a very happy marriage, but it had a strong influence on his subsequent career. They had a son and a daughter. 
Jack Easton was posted back to the UK in May 1939 to resume operational flying duties at RAF Wyton with 139 squadron of Bomber Command. A period of intensive training of new pilots and crew followed until, at short notice, he was transferred in October of the same year to staff duties within the intelligence directorate of the Air Ministry. His initial appointment was to set up and develop a new section, AI2G, as a nationwide organization designed to secure technical intelligence from crashed German aircraft. Promoted wing commander in 1940 and group captain in 1941, as well as being mentioned in dispatches that year, he and his staff gradually concentrated increasingly on the problem of technical innovations introduced by the Luftwaffe, particularly in the field of navigational aids and radar. In 1943 he became an air commodore, and was director of the intelligence (research) department at the Air Ministry. He represented the RAF's interests on Winston Churchill's Crossbow committee, whose function was to consider all means of countering the threat of the V1 flying bomb and the V2 rockets. He also became involved in the allocation of RAF aircraft for the clandestine dropping of agents into north-west Europe. All this brought him increasingly in touch with organizations and individuals outside the Air Ministry, including the Special Operations Executive and the Secret Intelligence Service (MI6), where he worked closely with the gifted young Professor R. V. Jones. His clear mind, considerable administrative ability, cool temperament, and gift for getting the best out of different groups with differing vested interests, made him an increasingly respected figure in the intelligence world. 
Immediately after the Second World War, Easton was guided towards MI6, for which he had excellent qualifications. Sir Stewart Menzies, the chief of the service at that time, was glad to accept him. When Menzies retired in 1951, and Major-General John A. Sinclair took over as 'C' or head of the service, Easton was appointed his deputy, with the clear understanding that he would eventually take over. 
Easton made a substantial contribution towards rationalizing and uniting a service that had developed too fast in the war. Within the service he was liked and trusted. Aside from his wide management responsibilities, he gave particular attention to the burgeoning relationship with the American intelligence services and to the creation of the Australian external intelligence service, as well as to political affairs in south-east Asia and the Far East. When the treachery of H. A. R. (Kim) Philby, Guy Burgess, and Donald Maclean was discovered in 1951, Easton was one of those whose minds remained calm and objective at a time when Whitehall in general, and the Foreign Office in particular, wrung their hands. He decided in the summer of 1951, after a careful review of the evidence, that Philby was guilty. It was in this context that he first worked closely with Dick White of the Security Service (MI5). He dealt with the Americans pragmatically over the case. He understood the clear distinction in Britain between a firm belief in guilt and the many difficult security problems involved in an open trial in a public court before a British jury. The fact that the Philby case did not destroy relations between MI6 and the CIA for very long was partly due to Easton's calm pragmatism. 
For the next few years Easton worked closely with Sinclair. However, the world was changing and the influence of the armed services in Whitehall was gradually declining. The year 1956 was a climacteric, with the twentieth party congress in Moscow, the disaster and folly of the Suez affair, the Commander Lionel Crabb incident, and the Soviet invasion of Hungary. The Crabb case, in which Easton was in no way involved (he was in Malaya at the time), was in itself of little importance and did not upset the Russians. But time and chance turned it into a political and governmental time bomb, and it was used as a reason for dismissing Sinclair. Dick White, the head of MI5, was appointed to replace him (as the first civilian head of MI6) late in 1956. Easton served him loyally, and with grace, as his deputy, but he was told that the succession would not be his; he was not prepared to accept this. That he did not become chief of MI6, as planned, was not due to any failure on his part, but was perhaps the result of a switch of power in Whitehall from the armed forces to the Cabinet Office and the Foreign Office. 
In 1958 Easton was offered a respectable job as consul-general in Detroit, Michigan. He accepted the post without outward bitterness. He was for ten years a popular consul-general there. On his retirement in 1968 he decided to remain in the area which he had found so congenial. He became a much respected member of various Detroit-based industrial concerns, and a convivial golfing companion at the Grosse Pointe country club. In 1988 he caused a sensation when he publicly discussed the Kim Philby affair with the author Anthony Cave Brown before the latter's biography of Sir Stewart Menzies was published ('The Secret Servant', 1988). In 1980 he married Jane, widow of William H. Walker, of Detroit, and daughter of Dr Joseph Stanley Leszynski, surgeon, also of Detroit. 
Easton was slim and dark-haired, of medium height, and dressed neatly. He was appointed an officer of the American Legion of Merit in 1945, CBE in 1945, CB in 1952, and KCMG in 1956. He died on 19 October 1990 at Grosse Pointe, Michigan. 
John Bruce Lockhart', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40175


Jones, Sir Eric Malcolm (1907-1986), intelligence officer and administrator, was born on 27 April 1907 in Buxton, Derbyshire, the third in the family of four sons and one daughter of Samuel Jones, who ran the family business of Samuel Jones & Son, textile manufacturers, of Macclesfield, Cheshire, and his wife, Minnie Florence Grove, of Buxton. Jones went to King's School, Macclesfield, and left at the age of fifteen to join the business in Manchester. In 1925 he set up on his own, and built up a large textile agency. In 1929 he married Edith Mary (Meg) Taylor (1904-1984), daughter of Sir Thomas Taylor, silk merchant, of Macclesfield. They had a son and a daughter. 
In 1940 Jones handed over his business to a manager in order to enlist in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve. He was posted to the Air Ministry intelligence branch. In 1942, as squadron leader, he was sent to the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park to stand in temporarily for the senior RAF officer in Hut 3, which housed the group responsible for the analysis and dissemination of the deciphered German Enigma messages to the ministries and principal commands. So impressive was he to Edward Travis, director of the Government Code and Cypher School (later the government communications headquarters, or GCHQ), that in April 1943, when Travis decided that a formal head of Hut 3 was needed, he asked the RAF for Jones, who was then posted to Bletchley as head of Hut 3 and promoted to group captain. Jones provided the mainly academic staff in Hut 3 with wise leadership and demanded the highest standards of speed and accuracy in the production of their intelligence reports. 
From 1945 to 1946 Jones was in Washington as representative of British signal intelligence and it was his discussions with American agencies which were the basis for American-British co-operation in this field in the future. This proved of great importance to both governments in the succeeding years, most notably in the cold-war period. 
Jones was formally transferred from the RAF to GCHQ at assistant secretary level, was made deputy director in 1950, and succeeded Sir Edward Travis as director in April 1952. He stayed as director until 1960, when he took early retirement, believing that eight years was long enough in the post. During that time he established the organization and the ethos under which GCHQ was to operate in succeeding years. For a man who left school at fifteen, he had a remarkable interest in the English language; H. W. Fowler's 'Dictionary of Modern English Usage' (1926) was a favourite work. Jones produced instructions, and a system for enforcing them, to ensure that GCHQ's reports and correspondence were of the highest possible accuracy and clarity. 
Jones's directorship spanned a period of great expansion in Soviet military capability, encompassing conventional and non-conventional weapons and rocketry to deliver them. With colleagues in the services, he made sure that British signal intelligence had the staff and technical resources to provide information on these developments. He believed that his task was management of the intellectually brilliant and technically qualified staff by whom he was surrounded, to give them the best chance to exercise their skills. A man of the highest integrity, it was said of him that corruption was unthinkable in his presence. 
Jones aimed, quite simply, to be the best, whether in his work, as a games player (he played golf at the highest amateur level), or in skiing, which he took up at the age of fifty. When GCHQ moved to Cheltenham he bought Bredons Hardwick Manor, near Tewkesbury, and with his wife and family became a keen gardener and grew high-quality carnations. 
A handsome man, Jones was deliberate in both speech and gait, and some found him ponderous or pompous. Perhaps for this reason, or through a lack of empathy between Whitehall mandarins and a man from a quite different background, he was not given further government employment after his retirement in 1960, at the age of fifty-three. Thereafter he accepted non-executive directorships in a number of companies, including Simon Engineering Ltd (1966-77). 
Jones was appointed CBE in 1946, CB in 1953, and KCMG in 1957. His standing among American government and service officers was very high. He was awarded the US Legion of Merit in 1946. When the US Air Force decided to have its own signal intelligence organization in the early 1950s, the British government was asked to lend Jones to set it up. He felt bound to refuse the offer, but arranged to provide advice. He died on 24 December 1986 in Wotton Nursing Home, 49 Barnwood Road, Gloucester, and his remains were cremated at Gloucester crematorium. 
D. R. Nicoll', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40176


Rothschild, (Nathaniel Mayer) Victor, third Baron Rothschild (1910-1990), zoologist and public servant, was born on 31 October 1910 in Palace Green, Kensington, the only son and second of the four children of (Nathaniel) Charles Rothschild (1877-1923), banker and naturalist, and his wife, Rozsika (1870-1940), daughter of Captain Alfred von Wertheimstein of Csehtelek, a part of Hungary later annexed by Romania. His elder sister, Dame Miriam Rothschild, was a noted naturalist and entomologist and his younger sister, Nica de Koenigswarter, a patron of American jazz musicians. Their father, Charles, younger son of Nathaniel Mayer de Rothschild, first Baron Rothschild, took his life in 1923 while suffering from the effects of encephalitis (inflammation of the brain). During his days at Harrow School, Victor shone only as a cricketer. It was as an undergraduate at Trinity College, Cambridge, that he first revealed an ingenious mind. The university department of zoology was impressed enough to excuse him the long grind of the natural history tripos so that he could at once embark on research. A change of regulation required him nevertheless to sit for a pass degree. In 1935 he was elected to a fellowship at Trinity for work of high promise on the fertilization of frogs' eggs. He obtained a PhD in 1937 and an ScD in 1950. 
Much was to be made in later years of Rothschild's membership of the Apostles at Cambridge. Like most of his Cambridge contemporaries, Rothschild was mildly left-wing but never a Marxist. Nor did he share the belief of such Apostles and close friends as Anthony Blunt and Guy Burgess that the rise of Nazi Germany demanded uncritical adulation of the Soviet Union. And although he regarded homosexuals with amused tolerance at a time when their practices infringed the criminal law, he was not one himself. He excelled at tennis, golf, and cricket, as a driver of fast cars and a jazz pianist. Like most Rothschilds he was an obsessive collector. He began even as an undergraduate to assemble the finest library in private hands of English eighteenth-century first editions, manuscripts, and book bindings, some 3000 items which he later presented to Trinity. He also pursued silver of the same period and impressionist paintings. 
Rothschild married, on 28 December 1933, Barbara Judith (1911-1989), only daughter of St John Hutchinson, barrister. Although Rothschild never subscribed to the beliefs and practices of Judaism, he thought it seemly that his wife should be converted to the Jewish faith. They had one son and two daughters. 
Succession to the peerage of his bachelor uncle (Lionel) Walter Rothschild in 1937 did not alter the rhythm of Rothschild's laboratory life. Refusing to be burdened by possessions or a role in national affairs, he sold the family mansion, no. 148 Piccadilly, together with its plethoric contents, and most of the country estate at Tring. Rothschild spent much of the Second World War in charge of the tiny but effective counter-sabotage section of MI5. The precision with which he had learned to dissect frogs' eggs served him well in the defusing of explosive devices. For dismantling a new type of bomb placed by German agents in a cargo of Spanish onions bound for Britain, he was awarded the George Medal in 1944 after the personal intervention of Winston Churchill. Colonel Rothschild was also responsible for analysing anonymous gifts to the prime minister of food, wine, and cigars in case they concealed poison or explosives. The USA awarded him the legion of Merit and the bronze star. 
Rothschild's marriage, exhilarating but precarious, ended in divorce in 1945. He married on 14 August 1946 his assistant in MI5, Teresa Georgina (Tess) Mayor ['see below']. They had two sons, one of whom died at birth, and two daughters. Resuming his experiments at Cambridge on fertilization, Rothschild produced much original work on the speed and heat of spermatozoa, and with Michael Swann discovered how a single sperm, on penetrating the egg of a sea urchin, was able to exclude all others. In 1953 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. He published, as well as many papers, 'Fertilization' (1956) and 'A Classification of Living Animals' (1961). 
Only weeks after Labour's sweeping victory in the general election of 1945 Rothschild formally joined the Labour Party: a mistimed gesture by a rich young patrician that invited cynical comment. He was appointed to several official bodies. As chairman of the Agricultural Research Council from 1948 to 1958 he increased both its budget and its standing. From 1961 to 1970 he was employed by Royal Dutch-Shell, rising to be co-ordinator of research for the entire group worldwide. Shell accustomed him to a customer-contractor relationship, which he believed should also be imposed on government research establishments (even though he had opposed it at the Agricultural Research Council). 'A Framework for Government Research and Development' (1971) was ill-received by his colleagues in Cambridge laboratories and at the Royal Society, who felt betrayed at the application of payment by results to their work. 
The report was the first fruit of the Central Policy Review Staff (CPRS) set up by Edward Heath in 1971 with Rothschild as its first director-general, to offer the cabinet independent advice on important issues, such as race relations, nuclear reactor policy, Concorde, and coal. Even under the influence of Rothschild's office hospitality -- smoked salmon sandwiches and cider cup consisting almost entirely of brandy -- permanent under-secretaries could see little merit in a band of intellectual 'condottieri' sabotaging the established procedures of the civil service as they roamed the corridors of Whitehall. He was appointed GBE in 1975. 
Retiring from the CPRS in 1974, Rothschild presided over the Royal Commission on Gambling in 1976-8 and published in 1978 an exhaustive report. He was consulted by Margaret Thatcher on the reform of local government finance, but bore no responsibility for the rigidity of the subsequent poll tax introduced by her government. In spite of an aversion to the practice of banking, he was persuaded in 1975 to become chairman of N. M. Rothschild & Sons, and from 1976 to 1988 chairman of Rothschilds Continuation Ltd; he could not, however, heal its internal dissensions or prevent the departure of his son, Jacob Rothschild, to found his own more adventurous merchant bank -- an episode that strained beyond repair an already uneasy relationship between father and son. Rothschild himself continued as a director and brought both scientific experience and flair to the chairmanship of its successful subsidiary, Biotechnology Investments Ltd. He had ten honorary degrees. 
Byronically handsome in youth, Rothschild acquired a senatorial countenance in middle age. He was an accomplished host, but a guest only on his own terms: no formal clothes, a very small company, and an early night. He gave generously to charities and to individuals, often by stealth, and administered family trusts for the support of the Weizmann Institute in Rehovot and other Israeli causes. He preferred the pen to the telephone. The terseness of his epigrammatic style delighted his friends but was feared in controversy. He wrote, with professional help, two monographs on family history: one on N. M. Rothschild, founder of the English line, the other on Baron Lionel's role in acquiring the Suez Canal shares in 1875. 
The carefree friendships of Rothschild's early Cambridge years that had continued throughout the war cast a shadow over the last decade of his life. The defection of Burgess to Russia and the uncovering of Blunt as a Soviet agent exposed Rothschild to innuendo and vilification in press and parliament. Rather than let his name, his courage, and his record of public service speak for themselves, he sought unwisely to clear himself through the testimony of Peter Wright, who as an investigator employed by MI5 had every reason to know of his innocence. Clandestine association with so volatile a character aroused further suspicions that Rothschild had broken the 'Official Secrets Act'. Only after voluntarily submitting himself to a long interrogation by Scotland Yard did he emerge with honour and patriotism intact. But the ordeal took a toll on both his pride and his health. He died of a heart attack at St James's Place, London, on 20 March 1990 and at his express wish was buried near the tomb of N. M. Rothschild in a long-disused cemetery in Stepney. He was succeeded in the barony by his elder son, (Nathaniel Charles) Jacob Rothschild ('b'. 1936). 
Rothschild's second wife, 
Kenneth Rose', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40177


Stephenson, Sir William Samuel (1897-1989), businessman and intelligence officer, was born William Samuel Clouston Stanger on 23 January 1897 in Point Douglas, near Winnipeg, Manitoba, the son of William Hunter Stanger, an immigrant from Orkney who worked in a flour mill at Point Douglas, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Johnston, who was of Icelandic origin (Macdonald, 26-9). On his father's death in 1901 his mother was left to bring up three infants and he was looked after by a neighbour, Kristin Stephenson, wife of Vigfus Stephenson, a labourer in a lumber yard, whose surname he took. He was educated at Argyle elementary school, Winnipeg. After leaving school he worked in a lumber yard, and then delivered telegrams. In January 1916 he enlisted in the 101st battalion, Winnipeg light infantry (giving his date of birth as 11 January 1896, the date later given in works of reference) and served in France. In 1917 he joined the Royal Flying Corps and underwent pilot training in England before returning to France, where he was shot down in July 1918. He was decorated with the MC and DFC and was officially credited with six air victories. 
Between the wars Stephenson was in business in England, his principal interests being the radio transmission of photographs and film production. He married, on 22 July 1924 at Emperor's Gate Presbyterian Church, South Kensington, Mary French (died 1978), daughter of William H. Simmons, of Springfield, Tennessee. In the 1930s he occasionally provided information obtained on business journeys to Germany to the British intelligence services. In 1940 he went to New York as head of an organization called British Security Co-ordination, intended to promote co-operation with the US Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Originally sent by the SIS (Secret Intelligence Service, MI6), he was responsible also for security (MI5) until March 1942 and for the Special Operations Executive (SOE). Stephenson was energetic and effective. He formed close relationships with the powerful Herbert Hoover, head of the FBI, and with William Donovan, head of the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), who acknowledged Stephenson's aid in creating the OSS. In 1945 he was knighted in recognition of his valuable services; from the United States he received the medal for merit, on Donovan's recommendation. 
About fifteen years after the end of the war Stephenson began to commission books by various authors to give a more colourful and imaginative slant to his wartime career. The first choice was C. H. Ellis, a former SIS operative; but his draft was not flamboyant enough to satisfy its subject, who gave the task to H. Montgomery Hyde, an established biographer. The result, 'The Quiet Canadian', was published in 1962. Its numerous invented stories, based on briefing from Stephenson, created a certain sensation but it still came short of Stephenson's inflated ideas; and as fresh revelations of British successes in the intelligence sphere continued to appear -- for instance the Ultra secret -- he clearly wished to claim credit for them. He accordingly commissioned another biographer, William Stevenson (no relation of his), and provided him with careful guidance, a fund of fresh stories, and misleading and wrongly captioned photographs. The publication of Stevenson's book, 'A Man Called Intrepid', in 1976, brought enormous publicity and record sales, especially in North America. It is almost entirely a work of fiction. 
Stephenson's First World War record was embellished with twenty extra air victories, the Legion d'honneur, the Croix de Guerre with palms (in his 'Who's Who' entry from 1984 onwards he added two bars to his DFC), and also the amateur lightweight boxing championship of the world. About the Second World War Stephenson's fantasy was unrestrained. The principal claim is that he was so close to Winston Churchill that he was appointed his 'personal representative in the western hemisphere'. In truth there is no evidence that he ever met Churchill and much evidence to the contrary. In 1976 he quoted in support a letter attributed to Churchill, which was immediately denounced as a fabrication; in a biographical note of 1982 he withdrew this claim and substituted another story that can also be proved fictitious. Stevenson's book used as a frontispiece a well-known press photograph of Churchill and Brendan Bracken; in the caption, supplied by his mentor, Bracken's name is changed to Stephenson. 
The principal purpose of 'A Man Called Intrepid' is to enumerate the best-known successes of British wartime skill and intelligence and ascribe them to Stephenson: the decipherment of German 'Enigma' transmissions, the development of nuclear weapons, and the organization of European resistance. Stephenson was supposedly involved in them all and found time also to invent petroleum warfare and the V sign, and to help with the production of the Spitfire and the jet engine. He is described as an invisible man directing the work of all four intelligence agencies: SIS, SOE, security executive, and MI5; invisible is the 'mot juste'. Film clips misrepresented as genuine archival material were used to suggest a wholly imaginary connection between Stephenson and the famous SOE agent Madeleine. The book, later made into a successful film, was strongly criticized by knowledgeable reviewers in Britain who called it 'worthless', 'ludicrous', and 'dishonest'; this did not affect Stephenson's reputation in North America. 
Stephenson was short in stature and often called Little Bill. He spent the last years of his life in Bermuda. In 1980 he was appointed a companion of the order of Canada. After his wife's death he adopted as his daughter the person who had nursed her during her final illness. He died in Bermuda on 31 January 1989 and was buried there. 
David Hunt', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40178


Winterbotham, Frederick William (1897-1990), airman and intelligence officer, was born on 16 April 1897 in Stroud, Gloucestershire, the younger child and only son of Frederick Winterbotham, solicitor, of Painswick, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Florence Vernon Graham. He was educated at Charterhouse School. On the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 he joined the Royal Gloucestershire hussars, transferring to the Royal Flying Corps when it was formed in 1916. The following year he was taken prisoner after being shot down during a dogfight over Passchendaele. His family thought he was dead, for he was reported as killed in action, and he was later to read his own obituary in a local paper. Upon his release in 1918 he went to Christ Church, Oxford, to study law, taking the shortened course for returning servicemen. He obtained his BA in 1920 (such degrees were unclassified). 
Winterbotham spent nine years as a pedigree stock breeder, but in 1929 had a complete change of career when the deputy chief of air staff drew him into MI6, to run a new air intelligence section. From 1934 to 1938 he spent much time in Germany, with a cover story that he was 'persuading people in Britain to see things the Nazi way', but in actuality spying on German developments in air warfare. He used Baron William de Ropp and Alfred Rosenberg as his main contacts, through them arranging meetings with Nazi leaders from Hitler downwards. He learned much by listening, but was disappointed by the reception of his reports in Britain. He later wrote about this period in 'Secret and Personal' (1969), which was revised as 'The Nazi Connection' (1978). With Sydney Cotton he developed a pioneer system of high-altitude photo-reconnaissance, which was to be extremely useful in the Second World War. He was also a firm supporter of Barnes Wallis's bouncing bomb, being instrumental in getting it taken seriously by the air staff, who sanctioned the 'dambuster' raid. 
In 1940 Winterbotham moved to the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park, to work on the penetration of German ciphers encoded by the Enigma machine. This began to succeed when the Luftwaffe signals were broken; the next step was to convey the information to commanders in the field. Winterbotham devised and supervised the special liaison units of young officers and technical sergeants stationed at battle command headquarters, who received enciphered radio messages from Bletchley (Ultra) and communicated them to the commanders. He was also the route by which Ultra intelligence reached the prime minister. His other role was, upon Winston Churchill's instructions, to indoctrinate American commanders before they could receive Ultra messages, for Churchill was concerned about the security of the Ultra system when America joined the war. Winterbotham thus became known to and respected by the American military leaders -- generals Dwight Eisenhower, Omar Bradley, and Karl Spaatz. 
The Americans soon began to develop their own system of special liaison units. In March 1944 the allies signed an agreement to unify the handling of Ultra intelligence throughout the world. That this happened was mainly due to Winterbotham. The 'Ultra secret' was never known by the Germans. It is ironic, therefore, that a confidential system known to thousands who honoured their wartime oath of silence was ultimately revealed by Winterbotham himself. This corporate act of silence was broken in 1974, when he produced 'The Ultra Secret', which aroused universal interest. Ultra was shown to be a factor of the highest importance in the allied prosecution of the war; the book described how the Second World War was really won. Winterbotham was criticized by many for revealing the truth, but he had had the text of his book vetted by the authorities, who finally allowed him to publish it, though they did not endorse it. 
In 1943 Winterbotham was appointed CBE. From 1945 to 1948 he worked for the British Overseas Airways Corporation. Thereafter he ran a small farm in Devon. In 1989 he produced his autobiography, 'The Ultra Spy'. He was a charming and companionable man, tall, clean-shaven, with a fresh complexion, fair hair, and blue eyes. Distinctly handsome, he had a disciplined air. In 1921 he married Erica, daughter of Frederick John Horniman, tea merchant, MP, and founder of the Horniman Museum. They had one son and two daughters. They were divorced in 1939 and he had a brief second marriage, which lasted until 1946. In 1947 he married Petrea, formerly wife of John Jowitt, army officer, and daughter of Alfred Samuel Trant, ironmonger, of Brixham, Devon. They had one daughter. After his third wife's death in 1986 he married in 1987 Kathleen Price, an old friend from his youth. Winterbotham died on 28 January 1990 at his cottage, West Winds, Westbury Farm, Tarrant Gunville, Blandford, Dorset. 
C. S. Nicholls', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40179


Young, George Kennedy (1911-1990), intelligence officer, was born in Dumfries on 8 April 1911, the younger son and youngest of three children of George Stuart Young, grocer, and his wife, Margaret Kennedy. He was brought up in the old covenanting traditions of the United Free Church to which his parents belonged. He was educated at Dumfries Academy and at St Andrews University, where he was an outstanding figure with his great height, red hair, outstanding intellectual ability, quick wit, and strong Independent Labour Party views. He took six years to obtain his degree, during which time he spent a year each at Giessen and at Dijon universities, and he achieved first-class honours in both French and German in 1934. He was then awarded a Commonwealth scholarship (1934-6) to Yale University, where he obtained an MA in political science. 
In 1936 Young joined the staff of the 'Glasgow Herald', which he left in 1938 to join the British United Press. When war was declared in 1939 he joined the King's Own Scottish Borderers; he was commissioned in 1940 and finally achieved the rank of lieutenant-colonel. He was transferred to field security on the basis of a rather sketchy knowledge of Italian, and served with distinction in the Abyssinian campaign, during which he was mentioned in dispatches (1941). He joined MI6 in Cairo in 1943. After the war he did a stint as British United Press correspondent in Berlin in 1946. Later in the same year he was invited to rejoin MI6 and he accepted; his first job was to investigate the ramifications of German penetration of British intelligence activities in the Low Countries. 
Young had the qualities to make a success in this field: a deep knowledge of and interest in politics, a first-class brain, a gift for languages, and an ability to attract the loyalty of his staff. After stints in London and Vienna he was posted to Cyprus, in 1951, as the controller of all MI6 personnel and operations in the Middle East. This task he discharged with a firm hand, and in the process he became a believer in 'covert action', encouraged in this by the success in 1952 of MI6, working with the CIA, in restoring the shah of Iran to his throne. As the Middle East drifted nearer to a major crisis and to confrontation some people in London became anxious about Young's independent plans. Sir Dick White had been appointed head of MI6, and Young was recalled to London late in 1956. He was put in charge of that part of the office concerned with the collation and distribution of intelligence. In this capacity he modernized an out-of-date system, particularly in the scientific and technological field. He was disappointed that he was unable to acquire an unmanned high-flying photo-reconnaissance plane. 
After the resignation of Sir James Easton in 1958 Young was appointed vice-chief of MI6, with the rank of under-secretary in the Ministry of Defence from 1960. He became much involved in the Far East, studying the dangers of further involvement by the Americans in Vietnam. By the end of the 1950s his political views, particularly on racial matters, had moved so far to the right that he found it increasingly difficult to conform to official policies, whichever of the major parties was in power. His position as vice-chief of MI6 became difficult to sustain, and it was with some relief on both sides that he resigned in 1961. 
Shortly afterwards Young joined the merchant bankers Kleinwort Benson; he worked with them more or less full-time from 1961 to 1976. The two banks had only recently amalgamated and had decided to expand their overseas business. Young's international contacts enabled him to play a quasi-ambassadorial role in this expansion, particularly in Iran, France, and Belgium. He quickly learned the broad principles of banking but was not involved in day-to-day banking operations. This happy arrangement with Kleinworts suited both parties; it gave Young space to develop his increasing interest in home politics, and time to write several books on contemporary problems. These included 'Masters of Indecision' (1962), a diatribe against Whitehall in general and the Foreign Office in particular; 'Merchant Banking' (1966); 'Who is my Liege?' (1972); and 'Subversion' (1984). He stood as Conservative parliamentary candidate at Brent East in 1974 -- a gesture of principle rather than of political ambition. 
Young's influence on many people lay in what he was rather than in what he achieved. His ability might have taken him to the top in several fields. If he never quite succeeded it was perhaps because, while his views on policies and people were strongly held and pungently expressed, they were often unfashionable, and just occasionally his judgement was suspect. Whether politically involved with the left or the right his attraction and influence lay in his total independence of outlook. He remained at heart a militant Scottish covenanter, believing deeply in the rights of the individual against the central forces of bureaucracy. He was appointed MBE (1945), CMG (1955), and CB (1960). 
In 1939 Young married Geryke, daughter of Dr Martin August Gustav Harthoorn, a distinguished Dutch lawyer who had spent most of his life in Batavia in the Dutch East Indies; there were no children of the marriage. Young and Geryke remained devoted to each other. She was a strong-minded person who forcibly expressed her views about the roles of different ethnic groups. It is hard to estimate the degree of influence she had over Young's change from a left-wing student of the 1930s to a powerful figure in the right-wing Monday Club, but it was substantial. Young died in the Charing Cross Hospital, London, on 9 May 1990. 
John Bruce Lockhart', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40180


Moore, Doris Elizabeth Langley (1902-1989), writer on fashion and museum founder, was born on 23 July 1902 in Liverpool, the second daughter in the family of three daughters and one son of Joseph Langley Levy, writer and newspaper editor, and his wife, Mabel Ada Rushden, theatrical designer. The family moved to South Africa when she was eight, and she was educated at convent schools there. In 'Pleasure: a Discursive Guide Book' (1953) she described her comfortable and indulged childhood. Although she had no formal education, she read widely, under the guidance of her father. 
Moore moved to London in the early 1920s, and her first book, 'Anacreon: 29 Odes' (1926), was a verse translation from the Greek. This was followed by 'The Technique of the Love Affair' (1928) by 'a Gentlewoman', a manual of advice to a woman on how to catch a husband. 'Pandora's Letter Box, being a Discourse on Fashionable Life' (1929) was written for her two-year-old daughter. She wrote six romantic novels between 1932 and 1959, and several books on household management, including 'The Bride's Book' (1932, revised in 1936 as 'Our Loving Duty'). Her biography of Edith Nesbit (1933; revised, 1967) drew on extensive conversations with members of the novelist's family and family letters, transcripts of which were invaluable for later biographers. 
Moore was passionately interested in clothes, and dressed in the height of fashion each season. She loved hats, and early in life decided that, when depressed, one should go out and buy a hat. Her own clothes formed the basis of a collection of costumes, to which she added historical costumes, discovered in salerooms, country house auctions, and attics. She admitted to a certain amount of bargaining, plotting, and machination in obtaining such items. Her most exciting acquisition was the Albanian costume bought by Lord Byron on his grand tour of 1809, which he wore for the portrait painted by Thomas Phillips in 1814. She was one of the first to study the history of fashion seriously, and all her life she wrote and lectured on it, organized exhibitions, and produced television programmes. In 1949 she brought out 'The Woman in Fashion', a history of fashion in which some of the most famous beauties of the day, most of them personal friends, were photographed wearing costumes from her collection. In 1955 followed 'The Child in Fashion'. 
Moore campaigned for many years for a museum of costume to be founded in London, persuading Christian Dior to bring his collection over from Paris in order to raise money for the project. The museum was opened in 1955, housed temporarily in Eridge Castle, near Tunbridge Wells, Kent, and then in the Brighton Pavilion. It moved permanently to the rebuilt assembly rooms in Bath in 1963. 
Moore was anxious to keep the museum up to date, and created a modern room for clothes from 1907 to the current year. Each year new specimens were added, chosen as representative of current fashion, and a different fashion expert was asked to choose one outfit as 'dress of the year'. The dress for 1963 was designed by Mary Quant, and the 1967 'dress' was a trouser suit. Moore retired as adviser to the museum in 1974, and left her collection to the city of Bath. 
Moore's interest in costume extended to the stage and to films, but the decor for her ballet 'The Quest', first performed at Sadler's Wells in 1943, was done by John Piper. The scenario was adapted by her from Edmund Spenser's 'The Faerie Queene', showing the victory of St George over the forces of evil. William Walton wrote the score especially for the ballet, Frederick Ashton was the choreographer, and the soloists were Margot Fonteyn, Robert Helpmann, Beryl Grey, and Moira Shearer in her first role. Moore also worked as a costume designer for the theatre and films, and designed Katharine Hepburn's dresses for 'The African Queen' (1951). 
Doris Langley Moore first came across Byron when she was fifteen, when her father gave her a copy of 'Don Juan'. She remained devoted to him all her life. 'I was perhaps the only woman to whom nothing but pleasure has come from loving that poet.' In 1924, the centenary of Byron's death, she was invited to join the commemoration committee, and in 1931 she accompanied the Greek prime minister on a visit to Byron's tomb. She was present when his tomb in Hucknall church was opened in 1938 to see if he really was buried there. She became a founding vice-president of the Byron Society in 1971. She was the first person, apart from Byron's family, to be allowed access to the large collection of uncatalogued Wentworth and Lovelace papers in the possession of Lady Wentworth, Byron's great-granddaughter. Her last novel, 'My Caravaggio Style' (1959), about the forgery of the lost Byron memoirs, was written while she was immersed in these papers. 
The first of her three scholarly works on Byron, 'The Late Lord Byron', appeared in 1961. 'Lord Byron, Accounts Rendered' (1974) won the British Academy's Rose Mary Crawshay prize in 1975. Based on Byron's accounts, found among the papers of his Italian secretary, this book examines Byron's finances as a means of gaining insight into his domestic life. 'Ada, Countess of Lovelace' (1977) is a biography of Byron's daughter. The publication of these works had enormous influence on the subsequent course of Byron studies. Doris Langley Moore was appointed OBE in 1971. 
Moore was an attractive woman, with a high forehead and a handsome profile. She moved in fashionable London circles, but she was a difficult person, and some of her friendships ended in bitterness. In 1926 she married Robert Sugden Moore, wool merchant, the son of Fred Denby Moore, also a wool merchant. They had one daughter, Pandora. They were divorced in 1942. She died in the Middlesex Hospital, London, on 24 February 1989. 
Anne Pimlott Baker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40181


Hunt, Norman Crowther, Baron Crowther-Hunt (1920-1987), constitutional scholar and television and radio broadcaster, was born on 13 March 1920 at Bradford, Yorkshire, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Ernest Angus Hunt, master butcher, of Eccleshill, Bradford, and his wife, Florence, 'nee' Crowther. He was educated at Belle Vue high school, Bradford, and at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he was an exhibitioner (1939-40) and, after war service in the Royal Artillery and the War Office, a scholar (1945-7). He married Joyce, daughter of the Revd Joseph Stackhouse, of Walsall Wood, Staffordshire, in 1944; they had three daughters. Hunt took a first in both parts of the history tripos (1946 and 1947), was a research fellow of Sidney Sussex (1949-51), and then spent a year as Commonwealth Fund fellow at Princeton, studying American politics. In 1952 he was elected to a tutorial fellowship in politics at Exeter College, Oxford, where he spent the rest of his academic career. 
Hunt was the very antithesis of the cloistered don, however. A square, stocky, round-faced man of enormous energy and indefatigable good humour, he took delight in challenging closed establishments, devising schemes and drafting papers for reform of matters great and small, and proving his stamina in new fields. He had won a Cambridge football blue as goalkeeper (1940), and continued to be an agile opponent in most ball games and in politics at every level. His years as domestic bursar of Exeter (1954-70) were christened the Norman Conquest by those who felt their impact. He was not a man for the long-considered haul of quiet research. He published part of his historical Cambridge PhD thesis (1951) as 'Two Early Political Associations' (1961), edited 'Whitehall and Beyond' (1964), and (with Graham Tayar) 'Personality and Power' (1971), and wrote (with Peter Kellner) 'The Civil Servants' (1980). But his academic gifts lay in teaching, not scholarship. 
Hunt was an invigorating, forceful tutor for generations of Oxford undergraduates, and, thanks to the BBC, a challenging political guide and familiar voice to a much wider audience. From 1961 he appeared regularly on both television and radio, and his 'People and Politics' was a weekly feature of the World Service for many years. His long service to the BBC culminated in his appointment as chairman of its General Advisory Council in 1986. It had also initiated a lasting friendship with Harold Wilson, a fellow Yorkshireman, whom Hunt interviewed (and greatly impressed) shortly after Wilson's election as leader of the Labour Party in 1963. While Wilson was prime minister (1964-70, 1974-6) Hunt was able to promote the two constitutional issues about which he felt most deeply, and which he helped to place firmly on the political agenda: reform of the civil service and devolution. 
Hunt's was the chief radical voice in the committee on the civil service (1966-8) chaired by Lord Fulton. He led its management consultancy group and drafted much of the final report which condemned the 'generalist' (and Oxbridge) bias of civil service recruitment and sought to open senior posts to specialists. In 1969 he was appointed to the royal commission on the constitution, chaired first by Lord Crowther and then by C. J. D. Shaw (later Lord Kilbrandon). Hunt was once again on the radical wing, though this time in a minority. He was principal author of a long memorandum of dissent to the final report (1973), in which he argued that devolution to the English regions must go hand in hand with the devolution to elected assemblies in Scotland and Wales which Kilbrandon recommended. 
In 1973 Hunt was made a life peer (he took the title Baron Crowther-Hunt of Eccleshill), and on Wilson's return to power in 1974 he was appointed constitutional adviser to the government (March-October), with a brief to develop its devolution proposals. He dealt with the same issue as minister in the privy council office in 1976. In the interim, from 1974 to 1976, he was minister of state at the Department of Education and Science; but he was less successful at handling the public controversies aroused by his proposals for manpower planning in higher education than he had been as a backroom advocate and elaborator of policy. He was disillusioned also by the extent to which narrowly party-political considerations determined the government's attitude to devolution, and although civil service reform had proceeded further, he chafed at what he saw as continuing Whitehall obstruction. He returned to full-time teaching at Exeter College in 1976, not disappointed (he was the last man ever to have regrets), but with some relief. 
Hunt's election as rector of the college in 1982 began the final, and personally most satisfying, part of his career. He enjoyed the distinction, as he enjoyed his honorary fellowship of Sidney Sussex (1982) and his honorary degrees from Bradford University (1974) and Williams College, Massachusetts, USA (1985). But he was as determined as ever to use his position to reshape institutions and open their doors to fresh talent. He helped to reform the university's admissions procedures, and initiated an ambitious and successful college appeal. He made the rector's lodgings a welcoming centre of college activity, where undergraduates met public figures, where he could share his interests in music, and where his closeness to his family, and dependence upon them, were visible. Still full of plans for the college, and with seven months to go before retiring from office, he died suddenly of a heart attack in the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 16 February 1987 and was buried at Wolvercote cemetery in Oxford. 
Paul Slack', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40182


Baker, John Norman Leonard (1893-1971), geographer, was born on 12 December 1893 at 33 Beaumont Street, St Clements, Liverpool, the first son of the Revd John William Baker, Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Louisa (1858-1945). From Liverpool College (1911-13) he went up to Jesus College, Oxford, as an exhibitioner in 1913. Apart from military service, and a brief period as lecturer at Bedford College, London (1922-3), he retained an association with Jesus College for the rest of his life. 
Baker's undergraduate career, when he read modern history, was interrupted by the First World War. Wounded on the Somme, he was required to convalesce, and during this period he married Phyllis Marguerite Hancock (1892-1981) on 8 November 1917. There followed two years in the Indian army, which were important in awakening his interest in geography; he later published several papers on India. After completing his history degree in 1920, Baker turned to geography, obtaining the diploma in geography with distinction in 1921, and gaining the Herbertson memorial prize. In 1923 he joined the small staff of the Oxford school of geography when he was appointed assistant to the reader and librarian. He was subsequently university lecturer from 1927, reader from 1933, and reader in historical geography from 1935. In these capacities he was heavily involved in teaching, first for the diploma and then, from 1932, for the new honour school of geography, the planning and arrangements for which owed much to his influence. He was active in geographical organizations outside Oxford: he was a fellow and council member of the Royal Geographical Society, but had more influence on other societies where he was not in the shadow of Kenneth Mason; as founder member of the Institute of British Geographers (a group of academic geographers who felt that the RGS with its continuing emphasis on exploration could not fully meet their professional aspirations), of which he was president in 1946; and in section E (Geography) of the British Association for the Advancement of Science of which he was section president in 1955. 
Baker's scholarly research was concerned principally with the history of geography, exploration, and discovery. He was painstaking in his collection of factual material and had little time for modish theory. He published numerous papers on the great explorers and his book, 'A History of Geographical Discovery and Exploration' (1931) became the standard work on the subject. In 1963, six of his former pupils -- all on the staff of the school of geography -- edited and presented to him a selection of his writings under the title of 'The History of Geography'. In 1964 he was awarded the prestigious Victoria medal of the Royal Geographical Society 'for contributions to the history of geography'. He was also an active member of the Hakluyt Society from 1924 onwards, and he served as its president between 1955 and 1960. 
In 1939 Baker was elected to an official fellowship of Jesus College on his appointment as senior bursar, a position he held until 1962. During the Second World War he was engaged in intelligence work, but thereafter his college duties occupied an increasing proportion of his time and he resigned his readership in 1947, though he continued to give tutorials to his college students and to those in the department who studied his option on exploration. His withdrawal to his college probably reflected his disappointment that he was not appointed professor of geography at Oxford in 1932 and perhaps his lack of sympathy with the appointee, Kenneth Mason: it certainly reflects his intense college loyalty and love of tradition. As bursar he guided his college through its period of wartime growth and also published articles on its history in the college magazine, and a 150-page history, 'Jesus College, Oxford, 1571-1971' (1971). 
Baker was elected a university member of Oxford city council in 1945 by the constituency of college heads and bursars. From then on, he gave generously of his time to civic affairs, drawing on his bursarial skills on behalf of the finance and estates committees, and on his geographical knowledge to the benefit of city planning, including the vexed issue of Oxford roads. He was alderman in 1963 and lord mayor, 1964-5, the first university member to hold the latter office. He continued to serve the council until 1967. Baker died in Oxford on 16 December 1971 and was cremated on 21 December 1971 at the Oxford crematorium. 
Baker, or J. N. L. B. as he was always known, made a significant contribution to the early study of exploration and the history of geographical ideas from the earliest times to the early twentieth century, and although post-war developments in the subject left him somewhat intellectually isolated, his writings remain a valuable basis of reference. He combined broad scholarship with administrative skills backed up by down-to-earth common sense. These qualities were evident in his contribution both to learned societies and to the day-to-day running of his Oxford college. He was held in great affection by his pupils and his wider interest in people and their welfare is evident in his contribution to civic life in Oxford. This sense of public responsibility was a legacy he passed on to his two daughters, the elder of whom, Janet Mary Young, Baroness Young (1926-2002), played an active role in Oxford and national politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 40183


Maclean, Alistair Stuart (1922-1987), novelist, was born on 21 April 1922 in Shettleston, Glasgow, the third of four sons (there were no daughters) of the Revd Alistair Maclean, Church of Scotland minister, of Glasgow and Daviot, Inverness-shire, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Archie Lamont, warehouseman, of Possil Park, Glasgow. He spent the first fourteen years of his life in the highland districts of Daviot and Dunlichty, where his father was ministering. At home in the manse only Gaelic was spoken, a curious restriction when the father both wrote and delivered the English language with a fine eloquence and must have known that his children would require it later in life. Maclean was educated at Daviot School, Inverness Royal Academy, and Hillhead high school in Glasgow, and Glasgow University, from which he graduated MA in 1950. In 1983 he was awarded an honorary DLitt by Glasgow University. He served in the Royal Navy from 1941 to 1946, much of the time as a leading torpedo operator on HMS 'Royalist', on the notorious Russian convoys to Murmansk. 
From 1946 until 1956 Maclean taught English, history, and geography at Gallowflat School, Rutherglen, Glasgow. After winning a short-story competition run by the 'Glasgow Herald' he came to the attention of Ian Chapman, who worked at the Collins publishing house. Chapman persuaded him to write 'HMS Ulysses', which was published in October 1955. It was an instant best-seller, with 250,000 copies sold in the first six months. 'HMS Ulysses' was a Book Society choice, as was 'The Guns of Navarone' (1957); they were followed by 'Ice Station Zebra' (1963). Maclean then left his native Scotland and became a tax exile in Switzerland. In his subsequent nomadic life, he moved back to England and then to the south of France, California, and Yugoslavia. During these years he completed a total of thirty-two books, of which twenty-six were novels; they brought him gross earnings of around $20 million. Many of the books became films, notably 'The Guns of Navarone' (1961), 'Ice Station Zebra' (1968), 'Where Eagles Dare' (1969), and 'When Eight Bells Toll' (1971). The books were fast-moving thrillers, without great literary stature. Women rarely featured in them. 
Maclean was of spare build and about 5 feet 7 inches tall. He had sleek dark hair, with a middle parting: he was not unattractive, but was not an imposing figure. He had a thick Scottish highland accent, which at times made him difficult to understand. He was highly intelligent, with a fascination for medical science in general and cancer research in particular. His life was greatly influenced by the early death of his brother, Lachlan, while a 21-year-old medical student at Glasgow University. He was a very complex character, full of inhibitions and strange moods, with a wry sense of humour which only appeared when he was relaxed in the company of friends. He was introverted and shy and, although his behaviour could be boorish, he was extremely generous, not only with his material possessions but in his willingness to encourage and help other writers in their careers. His charitable acts were never flamboyant or publicized. 
On 2 July 1953 he married Gisela Heinrichsen, of Schleswig-Holstein, Germany. They had two sons of their own and adopted a third. Whether it was because, as a very shy and guilt-ridden man, Maclean found his success difficult to cope with or because of a growing drink problem, his marriage latterly was unhappy, and ended in divorce in 1972. In the same year he married, at Caxton Hall, London, Mary Marcelle Georgius (1934/5-1985), daughter of Georgius Guibourg, a well-known French music-hall entertainer. Marcelle wasted his money on attempted film productions and other extravagant enterprises and a lifestyle which was in total contrast to Maclean's very modest and unspectacular way of life. She died of cancer in Los Angeles in 1985, aged fifty and penniless, in spite of having had a substantial divorce settlement in 1977. 
Maclean returned to England in the mid-1960s, having bought Jamaica Inn on Bodmin Moor. But restlessness soon took him to Geneva where he spent most of the early 1970s. He died on 2 February 1987 at University Hospital, Munich, during a winter holiday with his first wife, Gisela, in the Black Forest. He had been controlling his hard drinking, and his death followed a series of strokes. He lived the last eight years of his life alone in a rented villa just outside Dubrovnik, overlooking the Adriatic, with a view which reminded him of his Scottish west-coast origins. The landlord kept his apartment as a shrine after his death, but the typewriter, books, and other symbols of his writing den were plundered by federal troops during the breakup of Yugoslavia in 1991. 
Ian Chapman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40184


Boothby, Robert John Graham, Baron Boothby (1900-1986), politician, was born on 12 February 1900 at 5 Ainslie Place, Edinburgh, the only child of Sir Robert Tuite Boothby (1871-1941), manager of the Scottish Provident Institution and a director of the Royal Bank of Scotland, and his wife, Mabel Augusta (died 1948), daughter of Henry Hill Lancaster, Edinburgh advocate. Robert, known throughout his life as Bob, was educated at Eton College and Magdalen College, Oxford, where he enjoyed himself and made many friends, but secured only a pass degree in modern history (1921). Between Eton and Oxford he trained as a guards officer, but was too young to take an active part in the First World War. 
In 1923 Boothby contested Orkney and Shetland on behalf of the Conservative Party, whose new leader, Stanley Baldwin, was a friend of his father. Although he did not win there, his campaign provided ample evidence of his political assets, which included dark and dramatic looks, a lively and independent mind, an easy way with people, and the ability to make compelling speeches enhanced by humour, wit, and a voice well described as 'of golden gravel'. He was soon selected as the Conservative candidate for another seat, East Aberdeenshire, which he won in 1924 and held for nearly thirty-four years, until he left of his own accord. He gave his constituents, mainly fishermen and farmers, superb service as their MP, and they showed their gratitude by backing him loyally through the many vicissitudes of his career. 
In parliament Boothby at once made his mark with a successful maiden speech and was soon regarded as a rising star. But some of his views were unorthodox, notably on economics -- he was an early Keynesian -- and his sympathies, personal and political, were by no means confined to his own party. He was quick to denounce the decision by the chancellor of the exchequer, Winston Churchill, to return Britain to the gold standard at the pre-war parity. Nevertheless, Churchill chose him as his parliamentary private secretary in 1926, and he held the post until the government fell at the next election, in 1929. Over the years his relations with Churchill, though intermittently close, were scarred by differences of opinion, for instance on India and the abdication of Edward VIII, and above all by Boothby's natural incapacity to be a disciple or courtier. 
From his position on the left of the party Boothby contributed to the publication 'Industry and the State, a Conservative View' (R. Boothby and others, 1927), to which another contributor was Harold Macmillan, his closest associate in politics. In 1929 he began an affair with Macmillan's wife, Lady Dorothy Evelyn, 'nee' Cavendish (1900-1966), which lasted on and off until her death. The affair was soon well known in political circles and was used by Boothby's enemies to discredit him, though Macmillan himself remained ostensibly friendly. Lady Dorothy claimed that Boothby was the father of one of her daughters, Sarah, but there are grounds for doubting this; she may have been making the claim in the vain hope of provoking Macmillan into divorcing her. Boothby himself was doubtful, but nevertheless accepted responsibility and treated Sarah with much kindness and affection. 
The liaison with Dorothy Macmillan caused some colleagues to regard Boothby as a rackety character, while his attempts to make money in the City, necessitated by his extravagant and generous habits, earned him the reputation of a gambler, which was equally damaging to him politically. Yet he deserved to be taken seriously, not least because he was one of the very few MPs with a consistent anti-appeasement record in the 1930s. He took a stronger line than Churchill on Hitler's reoccupation of the Rhineland and on the Hoare-Laval pact, and he was among the thirty Conservatives, including Churchill, who refused to support the government over Munich. In May 1940 he was among the forty-one who voted against the government at the end of the Norway debate, with the result that Neville Chamberlain resigned and Churchill came to power. In the coalition then formed he was appointed under-secretary at the Ministry of Food. Since the minister, the first earl of Woolton, was in the House of Lords, Boothby was spokesman for the department in the House of Commons. 
Boothby proved an excellent minister. The national milk scheme that he worked out was widely praised, and he reacted imaginatively to the problems created by the blitz. His regular broadcasts were practical and inspiring. He gained Woolton's warm confidence. Then suddenly, in October 1940, he was suspended from his duties while a select committee investigated his activities the previous year in connection with emigre Czech financial claims. When the committee reported that his conduct had been 'contrary to the usage and derogatory to the dignity of the House', he resigned. The verdict of Sir Robert Rhodes James, after careful analysis of the committee's report, was that it was 'heavily, and unfairly, loaded against Boothby' (James, 281). Though he was not quite blameless in the matter, the penalty he paid was out of all proportion to his offence. After delivering a resignation speech (January 1941), which won him much support, he served for a time as a junior staff officer with RAF Bomber Command. Later in the war he worked with the Free French, and after it his services to France were recognized by his appointment as a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur (1950). 
In the late 1940s Boothby worked enthusiastically in Churchill's movement for a United Europe, but when Churchill became prime minister again in 1951 there was no post for him. He had to be content with his appointment as KBE in the coronation honours (1953). From 1949 to 1957 he was a British delegate to the consultative assembly of the Council of Europe, and from 1952 to 1956 vice-chairman of the committee on economic affairs. He opposed the Suez adventure in 1956, though he was a fervent Zionist. Macmillan's advent to the premiership brought him no office, perhaps understandably, but when a heart attack forced him to give up his seat, Macmillan recommended him, in 1958, for a life peerage. In the House of Lords he sat on the cross-benches and was a frequent contributor to debates. 
Meanwhile, in the 1950s, Boothby's appearances in current affairs programmes on television and radio had made him a household name, which did not endear him to colleagues lacking his eloquence and engaging personality. At the end of the decade he was elected rector of St Andrews University, a post he held from 1958 to 1961; he was immensely popular with the students. Music played a great part in his life; he was chairman of the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra (1961-3) and a founder member of the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra Society. 
In July 1964 the 'Sunday Mirror' ran a story linking Boothby with the gangster Ronald Kray. A photograph was published of the two men together at Boothby's flat, and the police were said to be investigating a homosexual relationship between them. Scotland Yard issued a denial, and Boothby wrote a powerful letter to 'The Times', in which he denied being a homosexual but admitted having met Kray three times at his flat to discuss a business proposal which he had turned down. He denied having any knowledge of the criminal activities for which Kray and his brother were later imprisoned. The 'Mirror' management apologized unreservedly and made Boothby a voluntary payment of $40,000 as compensation. After his death, however, further evidence suggested that his 'Times' letter had not been wholly candid. Boothby was, in fact, bisexual, and his connection with Kray may well have involved some homosexual activity (then still criminal) with youths procured by Kray. Another photograph suggests this, but there is no evidence of any more sinister involvement. 
Boothby published a volume of autobiography, 'I Fight to Live', in 1947, and another, 'Boothby, Recollections of a Rebel', in 1978. He also published 'The New Economy' in 1943, and a collection of articles and speeches, 'My Yesterday, your Tomorrow', in 1962. His ambition was insufficiently concentrated, and his temperament too reckless, for complete worldly success. Yet he was right on most of the major issues of his career, and showed outstanding promise during his brief innings as a minister. He was also, as Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother, said, ''such' a jolly man'. 
Boothby was twice married. On 21 March 1935 he married Diana (1909-1992), fourth daughter of Lord Richard Frederick Cavendish, landowner and former politician. The marriage ended in amicable divorce in 1937. In 1967 he married Wanda, daughter of Giuseppe Sanna, a Sardinian import-export wholesaler. She gave him nearly twenty years of comfort and security at the end of his life. There were no children of either marriage. Boothby died in Westminster Hospital, London, on 16 July 1986, following a heart attack, and his ashes were scattered at sea off the coast of his old constituency. 
John Grigg', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40185


Macmillan, (Maurice) Harold, first earl of Stockton (1894-1986), prime minister, was born on 10 February 1894 at 52 Cadogan Place, London, the youngest of the three children (all boys) of Maurice Crawford Macmillan (1853-1936), publisher, and his wife, Helen Artie Tarleton (Nellie), 'nee' Belles (1856-1937), the only surviving daughter in the Methodist family of Joshua Tarleton Belles (1826-1896), surgeon, of Spencer, Indiana, USA, and his wife, Julia, 'nee' Reid (1836- 'c'.1860). This was Nellie Belles's second marriage: her first husband, Mr Hill, a young painter, had died in November 1874, five months after their marriage. About 1876 she made her way to Paris, where she moved in artistic circles. In 1884 she married for the second time. Maurice Crawford Macmillan was the second son of Daniel Macmillan (1813-1857), co-founder of the publishing firm of Macmillan, and his wife, Frances Eliza, 'nee' Orridge (1821-1867). Following Daniel Macmillan's death, Maurice and his siblings were brought up in the household of their uncle, Alexander Macmillan (1818-1896), who established the firm as one of the leading London publishers ['see 'Macmillan family]. 
Though both publishing and the United States were to be central to Macmillan's career, his mother seems to have made little of her Indiana connections, her son not visiting the state until 1956 when he was foreign secretary (on the other hand, childhood visits to Arran and the family croft, from which Daniel Macmillan had set out, aged ten and very much a 'lad o'pairts', made a strong impression on the youthful Harold). Nellie Macmillan certainly retained, however, the thrusting ambition for her children characteristic of some mid-western mothers, and was not afraid to make a fuss on their behalf. Her son recalled, 'This was sometimes embarrassing both to my father and us' ('Winds of Change', 56). She was also strongly anti-Catholic. Her fluent French was passed to her sons. The young Harold suffered from an English diffidence which belied his American origins and the Scottish background he later made so much of, and at his dancing class he 'first experienced my distaste for any form of joint performance' ('Winds of Change', 32). His retiring, distant father and dominant, omnipresent mother provided an unbalanced and rather uncertain parental background for a shy and sensitive child. 
Macmillan attended Mr Gladstone's day school near Sloane Square from the age of about six until he was nine. The school was connected with Summer Fields, a preparatory school in Summertown, Oxford, which he attended from 1903 until 1906. From there he won a scholarship to Eton, the chief purpose for which Summer Fields existed. 
The young Macmillan had little of the inevitability of success about him. At Summer Fields he was always sent to bed early instead of doing evening preparation and in his first half at Eton he was near death from pneumonia. His body grew too fast, his heart was thought to be overstrained, and he left the school through ill health after three years, spending many months in bed. His lifelong hypochondria dated from this time, initially with justification. At Eton he none the less made important lifelong friendships, including with Henry Urmston Willink, Harry Frederick Comfort Crookshank, and Julian Lambart. He played in the Eton wall game in the year a goal was scored -- an unusual event -- but he was not a notably affectionate old boy, rarely visiting the college, even when his son was there. 
Macmillan's parents were intent on his attending Oxford University and to this end he was privately tutored at home, first by (Alfred) Dilwyn Knox, who proved cold and unsympathetic, and then by his brother Ronald Arbuthnott Knox (sons of the bishop of Manchester). Ronnie Knox was an Eton and Balliol contemporary of Macmillan's eldest brother, Daniel. Harold Macmillan's relationship with Knox was among the most rewarding of his life. Knox was then an Anglo-Catholic, later to be ordained priest in the Church of England (he converted to Rome in 1917). He quickly moved into the moral role of a tutor and encouraged his charge to consider his religious beliefs, taking him to a neighbouring Anglo-Catholic church. 'Catholic' to Mrs Macmillan meant Roman Catholic (like many protestants she thought the Anglo-Catholic version more pernicious than the 'real' thing) and her reaction was sharp. It was perhaps the swifter for the intensity of the relationship which had developed between Macmillan and his tutor: the latter was, as he wrote in November 1910, 'by now extremely (and not quite unreturnedly) fond of the boy' (Waugh, 106; Evelyn Waugh's biography of Knox, published in 1959 when Macmillan was prime minister, described him and his mother as 'C' and 'Mrs C'). Knox was peremptorily dismissed. Macmillan won the Williams classical exhibition to Balliol College, Oxford, a less glittering prize than his brother Daniel, who had earlier won the top scholarship: 'I jogged along behind; but, still, I jogged' (Horne, 1.21). 
Macmillan matriculated from Balliol in October 1912. He took a first class in classical moderations in Trinity term 1914, but his war service prevented him taking Greats. His two years at Balliol and Oxford were a liberating experience for him, but not as liberating as for many, for his mother maintained a brooding and intrusive presence in his life. He took his first, vital steps into politics in the Oxford Union, being elected secretary in November 1913 and treasurer in March 1914 (president in June 1914 for the autumn term would have been the natural consequence). Given his diffidence about public speaking, this showed considerable political intention, an intention otherwise absent in his youth. He recorded as lifelong friends met at Oxford, Geoffrey Madan, Victor Mallet, Alan Herbert, Lord Cranborne (later fifth marquess of Salisbury), (Benedict) Humphrey Sumner, and Vincent Massey. But these were the survivors of the war: Macmillan and Sumner were the sole survivors of the scholars and exhibitioners of their year. Knox was Anglican chaplain at Trinity College, next door to Balliol, and their relationship resumed. Rather like that of W. E. Gladstone and A. H. Hallam at Eton a century earlier, it had an intense quality with sexual overtones but almost certainly without sexual fulfilment. Like J. H. Newman, Knox had a circle of which he was the dominant intellectual and emotional focal point; like Newman, when Knox 'poped' some followed and others did not. Macmillan, by then at war, was in the latter group, and he remained a devout Anglican for the rest of his life. 
For Macmillan, those two years at Oxford later took on a golden hue. Though he always faced the future bravely and was not a nostalgic tory, his good fortune as a surviving representative of that 'jeunesse doree' impressed him throughout his life, suffused, perhaps, with the guilt which such survivors often felt. In the inter-war years he would only visit Oxford reluctantly: it was for him a 'city of ghosts' ('Winds of Change', 98). 
Recovery from an operation for appendicitis in July 1914 prevented Macmillan immediately joining up, as he wished to do. He then joined the Artists' Rifles, drilling at the inns of court, and was commissioned second lieutenant in the King's Royal Rifle Corps. His mother got him transferred to the prestigious and clubbable Grenadier Guards in March 1915, and in July he joined its new battalion. He first saw action at the battle of Loos in September 1915, being wounded lightly in the head and seriously in the right hand. Such was his bravery on this occasion that, as a contemporary later recalled, 'during the next two years or so anything brave was described by the Guardsmen as 'nearly as brave as Mr. Macmillan'' ('The Times', 9 Jan 1987). After convalescence, he returned in April 1916 to the 2nd battalion, being stationed at the Ypres salient, and was lightly wounded on 19 July when encountering a German patrol during a reconnaissance mission to approach the German lines and listen. At the battle of the Somme in mid-September 1916 he was seriously wounded in the pelvis and left thigh, though without any bone being fractured, for the bullet was slowed by his water bottle. He lay for a day in a shell hole in no man's land: 'I had in my pocket Aeschylus's 'Prometheus' in Greek. It was a play I knew very well, and seemed not inappropriate to my position... I read it intermittently'. He also feigned dead to deceive a German patrol (Macmillan, 'Winds of Change', 88). He was rescued at darkness by Company Sergeant-Major Norton, but had to make his own way, in a state of panic, to the dressing station, where his wounds were dressed but not drained, allowing abscesses to form. On his return to London his mother, sensing his imminent death, short-circuited medical protocol and, in Macmillan's opinion, saved his life. He spent the rest of the war in and out of hospital, and unable to return to France. The war left Macmillan with 'a limp handshake, a dragging gait, and sporadic pain' ('DNB'). 
Macmillan and Clement Attlee are the only British prime ministers to have been seriously wounded in battle, and to both of them it gave compassion, resilience, and perspective. Macmillan realized he was lucky to be wounded; he wrote of his war: 'It was sharp. But it was short' ('Winds of Change', 91). He admired those who had had to stick it out, despised the contempt for life which he believed some generals had shown, and also felt 'a certain contempt' (in both wars) for those who did not join up ('Winds of Change', 99). He was initially supportive of Asquith's premiership -- 'Mr. Asquith's 'Wait & see' is after all the watchword of Nelson, of Wellington & of Pitt. They waited for nearly 20 years, amid disloyalty & impatience at home, until the final moment came' (letter to his mother from the front, 29 April 1916, Bodl. Oxf., Macmillan MSS d 2/2, fol. 24) -- but he readily transferred his loyalty to the Lloyd George coalition, believing that Asquith 'had tolerated too long the mistakes of the High Command', and that Lloyd George was 'the man who would get things done' ('Winds of Change', 96-7). Despite his wounds, he found army life fulfilling, especially 'the knowledge one gets of the poorer classes' ('Winds of Change', 100). His war service and war wounds were of great advantage to him in tory politics, for until the 1960s to have had 'a good war', and especially to have been wounded, counterbalanced many an intellectual and political eccentricity. Macmillan did not play the patriotic card; his body played it for him. 
While convalescing, Macmillan broadened and deepened his already well-read mind (he was with Asquith one of the best-read twentieth-century prime ministers). Nevertheless, at the end of the war he had no wish to complete his studies at Oxford (he was awarded an MA for his war-shortened course in 1933), and little inclination to enter the family firm: he sought experience of the world by travel, and hoped the army might provide this. After a series of unsuccessful applications he joined, through his mother's influence, the staff of the ninth duke of Devonshire, then governor-general of Canada. In Canada, in what he recalled as a time 'of almost unalloyed enjoyment' ('Winds of Change', 115), he wooed Lady Dorothy Evelyn Cavendish (1900-1966), the third of five daughters and fourth among the seven children of the duke and duchess of Devonshire. She was the first woman to whom Macmillan had been seriously attracted, and was his only love. Said by some to be a shrewd judge of character, she sought, perhaps, a wider intellect than the aristocratic youths among whom she grew up provided. He wrote to her on the eve of their wedding: 'I shall always be your lover', and remained true to his word (Horne, 1.57). His wife's position was to be very different. 
Macmillan married into the Devonshires in a society wedding at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 21 April 1920 -- the bride's side packed with peers, the groom's with publishers and authors who wrote for Macmillans, including six OMs led by Thomas Hardy. After the marriage Macmillan left the army and entered the family firm as junior partner to his brother Daniel and cousin George. Authors for whom he was directly responsible included Rudyard Kipling, Thomas Hardy, J. G. Frazer, W. B. Yeats, Hugh Walpole, and Sean O'Casey. J. M. Keynes was a close friend and contemporary of Daniel Macmillan, and Harold recruited several distinguished economists including G. D. H. Cole and Lionel Robbins, and later, among many others, the historian Lewis Namier (who had graduated from Balliol the year before Macmillan arrived there). 
There was thus a sharp contrast between Macmillan's professional and domestic 'milieux'. Within the family, he became friendly with the duke of Devonshire, who enjoyed his conversation, but he was patronized by many of his aristocratic relatives and in the early years of his marriage was rather uneasy at Chatsworth. He bridged the gap somewhat by making himself into a competent shot and playing his part on the grouse moors. He lived during the week at his parents' home in Chester Square and at weekends at Birch Grove, the family home in Sussex, his wife usually living there rather than in London. In 1921 the Macmillans' first child, Maurice Victor (died 1984) was born, followed by (Ann) Caroline in 1923 and by Catherine (died 1991) in 1926. From 1930 their family included a third girl, Sarah (died 1970). Birch Grove (which was rebuilt in 1926) was shared until their deaths in 1936 and 1937 with Maurice and Nellie Macmillan. Dorothy Macmillan's children remembered finding their mother sticking pins in a wax effigy of Nellie (Horne, 1.81). 
Macmillan's interest in politics led him, and his family connections enabled him, to stand at the general election of 1923 as a Conservative (with protectionist overtones) for the industrial northern town of Stockton-on-Tees, an area with which he had hitherto no contact and of which he knew little. He was defeated by a margin of seventy-three votes in a seat traditionally Liberal but always closely contested. Benefiting from the collapse of the Liberal vote, he won the seat in 1924 with a majority of 3215. He was from the first an assiduous constituency MP, his archive being an unusually rich source for the north-east, and he developed a considerable affection for the people of Stockton. He remained an active partner in the family firm, and, like his publisher colleague John Buchan, attended the Commons from the mid-afternoon on. This somewhat distanced him from the increasing specialization of politics, and gave him independence of position. His business experience gave him authority when he wrote on business and the economy. Though he was keen for ministerial office, he had no need to toe the line, and he did not. He made his maiden speech on the budget on 30 April 1925, supporting its social innovations. Though he never seems to have considered joining any other party than the Conservatives, he was soon seen by the tories as something of a maverick. In 1927, with Robert Boothby, Oliver Stanley, and John Loder, he published 'Industry and the State: a Conservative View'. Influenced in different ways by both Alfred Milner, who had died in 1925, and David Lloyd George, they sought a 'middle land' between 'unrestricted individualism' and socialism, with the chief branches of industry organized by self-regulating industrial associations (Ritschel, 39). Less systematic but similar views were held by many Conservatives in the inter-war period. Macmillan proposed to Winston Churchill (the chancellor of the exchequer) a scheme for alleviating industry by derating; Churchill took it up and it was enacted in the 'Derating Act', passed in February 1928, a very remarkable achievement for a young back-bencher. It also indicated what was to be Macmillan's position for the rest of the inter-war years: an ideas man, but not an executive politician. 
1929 was a disastrous year for Macmillan. In the general election he lost his seat to the Labour candidate, Frederick Riley, and about the same time his wife embarked on an affair with the bisexual tory maverick, Robert Boothby. Sarah Macmillan, born in August 1930, was later claimed by Dorothy Macmillan to be Boothby's child (she was not recognized in Burke's 'Peerage' as one of Macmillan's children; though she was registered by Dorothy Macmillan with Macmillan as the father, the birth was not registered until six weeks after the event, on the last legal day for registration; Sarah was not named on the certificate, nor by the standard procedure for later naming). Boothby accepted responsibility for Sarah, though with considerable doubts of his own. It may be that Dorothy Macmillan hoped her claim would encourage her husband to sue for divorce. Macmillan considered divorce (then a disaster for a politician) but, perhaps because of his mother's influence, and more certainly because of his religious convictions and his continuing love for his wife, did not pursue the matter: 'She filled my life; I thought in everything I did of her', he later told Alastair Horne in a poignant interview (Horne, 1.89). A 'modus vivendi' was agreed, which lasted until Dorothy's death in 1966 (Boothby being briefly married to Dorothy's cousin in the interim): Dorothy was to be an impeccable and very effective political wife, Harold a celibate and unenquiring husband. For him it was a dismal lot, but one which in due course settled into something like convenience, bearable since he was not a strongly sexed man, and since he had the consolation of knowing, as he told Horne, that Boothby was 'a hopeless fellow' from whom his wife needed a degree of protection. Lady Dorothy's affair with Boothby was well known among the social and political elite, but was, remarkably, never publicized until after her death. With the start of her liaison, and a recurrence of trouble from his war wounds, Macmillan suffered 'what in fact seemed to have been a full-scale nervous breakdown' (Horne, 1.98). He was for several months in a sanatorium at Neu Wittelsbach, near Munich. 
In 1931 Macmillan easily recaptured Stockton at the general election in a straight contest with the Labour candidate (again Frederick Riley), and he held it in 1935 by a majority of 4068 in a three-cornered fight. He continued his publishing work and became one of those most prominent in seeking inter-party solutions to Britain's apparently intractable economic malaise. He had written to 'The Times' on 27 May 1930 supporting Sir Oswald Mosley's famous memorandum on the economy and after Mosley's resignation from the Labour government had had close contact with him; he did not, however, join Mosley's New Party, though he sympathized with some of its economic objectives. Disillusioned with the National Government of 1931, which he had hoped would provide the sort of integrated approach he sought, he wrote 'Reconstruction: a Plea for a National Policy' (1933) and formed, with Henry Mond, second Baron Melchett, the Industrial Reorganization League to promote 'industrial self-government' and 'orderly planning' of the economy (Ritschel, 195). The league received wide support from both industrialists and financiers. In 1934 Melchett introduced the 'Industrial Reorganization (Enabling) Bill' in the Lords, and Macmillan introduced it in the Commons in 1935 (in 1934 he had carried a motion in its favour at the tory conference, against the platform's opposition). The bill was 'perhaps the one single instance of an attempt to legislate a corporatist economy in Britain' (Ritschel, 209), and it exposed the difficulties of genuinely integrating capital, labour, and government. Macmillan feared that inaction would make revolution possible and perhaps inevitable. He became associated with Reginald Clifford Allen, Baron Allen, a National Labour supporter. Their plans for a political journal failed but they published, together with A. Barratt Brown, principal of Ruskin College, 'Liberty and Democratic Leadership' (1934) and 'Liberty and Democratic Leadership: a Further Statement' (1934), advocating all-party agreement. Other pamphlets followed, such as 'Planning for Employment' (1935), drafted by Macmillan, though in fact marking something of a retreat from central planning. 
This movement reached its zenith in 'The Next Five Years: an Essay in Agreement' (1935). As Daniel Ritschel has shown, this was in its specific recommendations much less corporatist than in its general tone. Macmillan tried unsuccessfully to encourage the National Government, of which he was still a supporter, to accept Lloyd George's 'New Deal' and he spoke from the platform when Lloyd George launched his council of action in July 1935. Lloyd George in return called for a parliament 'filled with Macmillans' (Ritschel, 277). Macmillan fought the 1935 election as one who both supported the National Government and pursued the objectives of the Next Five Years group. He voted against the government's 'Unemployed Insured Bill' and kept in close touch with Keynes, whose 'General Theory' had recently been published by Macmillans, and whose views, with some reservations, Macmillan commended to the Commons in May 1936. The group around Macmillan was in fact the best political base for Keynesianism, and Macmillan and G. D. H. Cole worked to advance the idea of a popular front against unemployment. But, as with the 'Derating Bill' in the 1920s, sectional interests prevented united action, and the front collapsed. 
Macmillan developed his ideas in 'The Middle Way', published in 1938. Whereas Keynes's 'General Theory' aimed at a non-technical statement of a theoretical critique, 'The Middle Way' tried to offer a reasoned programme of action, Keynesian in character -- 'a kind of popular version of some of Keynes's ideas' ('Winds of Change', 490) -- but with a much stronger emphasis on industrial policy than Keynes had offered. It was intended to offer a middle way politically as well as in terms of policy. It was much the most cogent work on the state and the economy published by any of those who became prime ministers in the twentieth century. It left Macmillan still uncertain in his intellectual and political relationship to his party, while, ironically, staking out much of what was to be the tory party's position after 1945. In the late 1940s the book's case against socialism and in favour of a managed capitalism seemed to many tories self-evidently sensible, though in 1938 many saw it as dangerously interventionist. 
Macmillan always favoured linking economic intervention with an interventionist foreign policy. This was one of the difficulties between himself, Clifford Allen, and many of the Labour members of his various groups in the 1930s, not in the case of hostility to the Hoare-Laval pact -- he resigned the government whip when sanctions against Italy were dropped in June 1936 (the only back-bencher to do so), though he resumed it when Neville Chamberlain replaced Baldwin as prime minister in May 1937 -- but rather over policy towards Germany. In 1936 he established links with Churchill, despite his reservations about Churchill's views on India, and helped to organize the 'Arms and the Covenant' meeting at the Albert Hall on 3 December 1936. Baldwin's revival and Churchill's odd behaviour over the abdication of Edward VIII spoilt this movement, but from then on Macmillan moved on the fringes of the Churchill circle (though less directly involved in it than his wife's lover, Boothby). He was more directly associated with the group centred on Anthony Eden after February 1938, known by the whips as the glamour boys. Macmillan was a useful go-between with the Labour Party as it moved towards a more active anti-fascist position. He recalled: 'I thought, as did many with me, that we ought to have fought at Munich' ('Winds of Change', 579). Hesitant up to that point -- like most members he had cheered Chamberlain's announcement that Hitler had agreed to a four-power conference -- and anti-interventionist on Spain, he now became 'a violent partisan' ('Winds of Change', 583). He campaigned for national service and against Quintin Hogg in the Oxford by-election in October 1938, and wrote 'The Price of Peace', which was privately circulated. He was also active in the parliamentary committee on refugees and put up Jews fleeing from Germany and Czechoslovakia at Birch Grove. In 1939 he published 'Economic Aspects of Defence' (with his earlier pamphlet as an appendix), in the compilation of which Thomas Balogh assisted. In March 1939, after Hitler's coup, he wrote to 'The Times' (21 March) advocating 'a National Government on the broadest possible basis', a prelude to the Commons' motion of 29 March which marked the appearance of a tory anti-appeasement group willing to vote against the government. 
The start of the Second World War thus found Macmillan in a curious position. His plans for domestic reform, the focus of his political efforts over fifteen years, had come to no direct effect; his recent association with Churchill was soon to bring him close to the heart of government. He had not acted accommodatingly in his economic reform proposals, in the sense that a less strident tone might well have brought him ministerial office, and his association with Churchill was likewise unrelated to short-term political ambition. But not for the last time, a quite dramatic political move placed him in line for power. 
Churchill and Eden were at once given office by Chamberlain at the outbreak of war, but not their followers. Nevertheless Macmillan was chosen to lead, with the elderly David Davies, first Baron Davies, a fact-finding mission to Finland in January 1940. Finland had been invaded by Russia following the Hitler-Stalin pact, but defended itself effectively. Britain, which had entered the war to defend Poland from a similar sort of attack, was in an awkward position, since for the Finns Russia (not Germany) was the enemy power. Macmillan assessed the Finns' position as bad but not hopeless, and telegraphed Chamberlain and Churchill for support. Anglo-French support was promised, but arrived too late, and the possibility of the allies fighting Russia as well as Germany was avoided. In the Commons debate in March 1940, Macmillan wounded Chamberlain through the effectiveness of his criticism. He noticed that neither Churchill nor Eden was present, taking this to imply support for his criticism of the prime minister; but it might have implied embarrassment on their part at the victory of Russia as a necessary evil. He was one of forty-three Conservative MPs who voted against Chamberlain on 8 May 1940, leading to the end of his government. 
In Churchill's coalition government Macmillan became parliamentary secretary to Herbert Morrison, minister of supply, a rather lowly appointment but one which reflected Macmillan's reputation as a go-between (Morrison being a Labour minister). His private secretary was John Wyndham (later first Baron Egremont), who was closely associated with him politically and personally until his death in 1972. Macmillan remained at supply until February 1942, with Sir Andrew Duncan and Max Aitken, Lord Beaverbrook, also successively his ministers. Beaverbrook was not in the Commons, so Macmillan handled ministry business there from June 1941. He wisely felt that with Beaverbrook it was sensible to maintain 'a certain aloofness, for there were aspects of his character which I found distasteful' ('The Blast of War', 85). Macmillan made a potentially difficult relationship work, and Beaverbrook, when they later had political differences, gave Macmillan an easy ride in his papers. The ministry gave Macmillan the opportunity (backed by government fiat) to introduce the planning he had so long advocated. He did this with some success, though he felt that top-level disputes, especially between Beaverbrook and Ernest Bevin, the minister of labour, unnecessarily complicated matters. His memorandum of 28 October 1941 led eventually to a restructuring of the department, and the creation of a new Ministry of Production, initially under Beaverbrook. Since Beaverbrook was not to have a parliamentary secretary, and since the Ministry of Supply was now to be downgraded in importance, Churchill agreed to find Macmillan a new post. 
On 4 February 1942 Macmillan became under-secretary at the Colonial Office. It felt, he wrote, 'like leaving a madhouse in order to enter a mausoleum' ('The Blast of War', 161). He was simultaneously sworn of the privy council, an unusual honour for a junior minister. With Lord Moyne and Lord Cranborne successively as his ministers, Macmillan continued to speak for his department in the Commons. Working with Cranborne was pleasant for Macmillan: they were already doubly connected by marriage and that year Maurice Macmillan married one of Cranborne's nieces. Macmillan dealt with colonial economic and trade questions and his energy generated a good deal of planned economic development in the colonies, especially in rubber and tin production. He oversaw conscripted labour in certain colonies. With others, he established the colonial research committee, the start of what under the Attlee government became a Fabian-led policy of colonial economic development. 
To Macmillan's dismay he found himself in November 1942 with a new chief, Oliver Stanley, and with his own rather autonomous position, with its Commons responsibilities, potentially circumscribed. There was a possibility that Macmillan might be given a peerage, to speak for the Colonial Office in the Lords. However, on 22 December Churchill invited him to become minister resident at allied forces headquarters in Algiers, with a roving commission, not very clearly spelt out, to act as political adviser to the supreme allied commander, north Africa (General Eisenhower), and to represent the British government in the development of allied policy in north Africa and the Mediterranean by travelling in the area and liaising with the American and French generals. He was to report directly to Churchill rather than via the Foreign Office, an arrangement which Eden, as foreign secretary, resented. He immediately found himself an important go-between at the Casablanca conference in January 1943, with special responsibility for liaising between the French generals Giraud and de Gaulle, Macmillan having considerable sympathy for the position of the latter. Soon after, when taking off from Algiers for Cairo, Macmillan's plane crashed; he extricated himself from the burning fuselage, but with wounds to his legs, his face badly burnt, and his eyes saved only by his spectacles. A French admiral who had lost his hat remarked in shock, 'Ma casquette! J'ai perdue ma casquette'; Macmillan replied, showing the droll humour which was becoming his hallmark: 'I don't care a damn about your casquette. J'ai perdu my bloody face' ('The Blast of War', 271). Macmillan in fact suffered from shock as well as his wounds, but recovered remarkably quickly, being back at work within a fortnight, against his doctor's advice. He was then also affected by delayed shock, and it was not until early March 1943 that he was fully operative, and he suffered periodically from depression for some time afterwards. 
Macmillan's tasks in summer 1943 were to negotiate the incorporation of the portion of the French Vichy fleet under Admiral Godfroy with that of the allies, and to arbitrate further between de Gaulle, Giraud, Churchill, and Eisenhower. Both of these he did with skill, discreetly protecting the angular de Gaulle from his exasperated colleagues, and gaining in the process the respect and friendship of his French equivalent, Jean Monnet. On several occasions his diplomacy saved the day. The upshot was the recognition of de Gaulle and Giraud as joint leaders of the French committee of national liberation (a provisional government) and a certain irritation with Macmillan on the part of Churchill, who thought he was 'much too pro-French' and helpful to de Gaulle ('The Blast of War', 442). Macmillan, in the midst of this, accompanied the king on his visit to Malta in June 1943, in which month he was also given a degree of responsibility for liaising on Italian as well as French policy. From July 1944 he was based at the palace of Caserta, near Naples. He successfully negotiated with the Italian exiles and, after the invasion of Italy, with the king of Italy, Victor Emmanuel III, to gain agreement for a provisional government of Italy, led by Badoglio, one of whose members was Benedetto Croce, the historian, whom Macmillan had published in translation, and whom he went to visit at Sorrento. Macmillan was a strong supporter of operation Armpit (an advance on Austria through Trieste and the Ljubljana gap, with the effect of allowing immediate Anglo-American access to the Balkans and eastern Europe) and succeeded in gaining Churchill's enthusiasm for it; but the plan was rejected by the Americans in favour of operation Anvil (landings in the south of France to accompany those in Normandy). Macmillan believed that the American insistence on landings in southern France was a mistake which let the Russians dominate eastern Europe and was 'one of the sad turning points of history' ('The Blast of War', 511). 
Throughout this period Macmillan was able only indirectly to influence events and policies: his effectiveness depended on his capacity to persuade. His donnish manner and resolutely civilian appearance emphasized his oblique role in a central theatre of the war. He used the strengths and weaknesses of his position cannily, and, with the exception of his sally into grand strategy over operation Armpit, with a good deal of success (and on that, the defeat was ultimately Churchill's, not Macmillan's). He had become, as John Wyndham dubbed him, 'Viceroy of the Mediterranean' ('DNB'). He also developed a close relationship with General Alexander, and they disconcerted their London colleagues by frequently sending joint telegrams and reports. 
On 10 November 1944, Churchill gave Macmillan executive authority, as acting president of the allied commission for Italy (though this was by no means a dictatorial role, for a chief purpose of the commission was gradually to hand over control to the provisional Italian government). He was also given responsibility for liaising between the Foreign Office and the army on Balkan and Greek questions. In Greece, British influence was by agreement with Russia to be predominant. It was Greece, rather than Italy, which in fact took up most of his time. Following the German withdrawal from Greece, he spent several weeks during the winter of 1944-5 in Athens, for much of the time under sniper fire in the besieged British embassy with Reginald (Rex) Leeper, the ambassador, and Osbert Lancaster, the press attache. To prevent a communist victory, Macmillan controversially (and initially against the wishes of King George II) supported the appointment of Archbishop Damaskinos as regent, a proposal which annoyed but finally convinced Churchill during his visit at the end of December 1944. 
Macmillan superintended the political arrangements for the German surrender in Italy on 29 April 1945, and on 26 May he ceased to be minister resident in the Mediterranean and acting president of the allied commission for Italy. During those last weeks of the war he was involved in a series of what became highly controversial issues. Though in Italy and Greece his chief political purpose had been to exclude the communists as far as possible from power in the post-war settlement, in Yugoslavia different conditions obtained: there, Tito and the communist partisans were firmly in control. In north-eastern Italy, Macmillan and Alexander went beyond their instructions in proposing two zones -- the eastern one under Tito and the western one under allied military government, though with Yugoslav participation. The purpose was to avoid a further campaign in which British troops would have to fight against the Yugoslav partisans. Macmillan noted: 'Neither British nor American troops will care for a new campaign in order to save Trieste for the 'Eyeties'. On the other hand, to give in completely may be a sort of Slav Munich' ('Tides of Fortune', 12). After a period of considerable anxiety caused by the intransigence on the one hand of Tito and on the other of the American president, Macmillan and Alexander's proposal was eventually accepted, and formed the basis of the territorial settlement agreed in 1954. 
It was in the context of possible further military action against the Yugoslavs that Alexander and Macmillan had to deal with the problematic fate of non-German troops who had been fighting for the Nazis, whether willingly or by compulsion. The surrender of Germany left large numbers of these in allied hands, as well as surrendered Germans. There was also the question of British prisoners formerly in German but now in Russian hands. The Yalta agreement established categories of troops to be returned to the Russians, with (as it transpired) an all too certain fate awaiting them. Macmillan discussed the question with General Charles Keightley, commander of 5th corps, at Klagenfurt on 13 May 1945. He advised General Keightley to hand over to the Russians about 40,000 'Cossacks and 'White' Russians, with their wives and children', as he called them in his diary ('War Diaries', 756). 'We have decided to hand them over', Macmillan noted, suggesting that the decision was a joint one, though technically he was the political adviser, Keightley the officer in charge ('War Diaries', 757). Most of these were exchanges within the Yalta categories, but they included a considerable number, including White Russians, who fell outside them (notably through having left Russia before the Soviet Union was established). Also handed over to Tito, though Macmillan was only obliquely associated with the relevant decisions, were 'anti-partisans' (that is Yugoslavs, many of them Chetniks and Ustashi, who had supported the Germans). Macmillan, in the pressure of events in May-June 1945, was party to a process of prisoner exchange which the Anglo-American leadership soon attempted to stop. He may or may not have been aware of the likely fate of the prisoners, but he knew the importance of the Yalta agreement which determined allied policy and action, and he laid considerable personal emphasis on the importance of the simultaneous rapid recovery of British prisoners from the Russians. He was not duplicitous (the charge that he deceived his friend and close colleague Alexander has been disposed of by Alistair Horne), but his priorities were not those of close distinctions between the different domiciles of non-German troops who until a month before had been fighting with the Germans. Moreover, Macmillan advised the military; he was not responsible for giving orders, and it was not he who killed the troops who were handed over to the Russians or to the partisans. A little-noticed episode at the time and in the context of the Europe-wide unravelling of the Second World War, Macmillan's advice to Keightley and their decision to 'hand them over' was, more than thirty years later, to become a point of major controversy. 
Macmillan's war thus had a curious circularity. In 1940 he had found himself advocating assistance to the Finns in their war against the Russians; by 1945 he found himself blocking the Russians as best he could 1000 miles to the south. In between, he had played a notable role in the defeat of German Nazism, by managing expertly the balance between military and political considerations in the Mediterranean and south-east Europe. He finished the war with his political reputation clearly enhanced within the political and military elite, though necessarily not much with the public, for his function was to work discreetly behind the scenes. He now stood in a powerful position in British politics: his pre-war experience had made him an important figure in the Keynesian approach to the economy which during the war gained much ground, and his wartime experience had given him great diplomatic experience and extensive contact with many of those who were to be central figures in the post-war world, particularly Eisenhower, Monnet, and de Gaulle. Together with R. A. Butler (whose career was the obverse of Macmillan's: a Foreign Office appeaser before the war and a domestic reformer during it), it would be fair to say that Macmillan by 1945 was one of Britain's best-equipped all-round tory politicians. 
Macmillan returned to Britain on 26 May 1945 and became secretary of state for air and for the first time a member of cabinet, in Churchill's caretaker government, pending the outcome of the general election held on 5 July, its result being announced on 26 July. In September 1944 Duff Cooper had offered to arrange for Macmillan to succeed him in his very safe seat, St George's, Westminster. After initially accepting privately, Macmillan, motivated by 'fondness' for his constituency and by a desire not 'to give up Stockton without even a fight', and encouraged by Lord Beaverbrook, eventually decided to stand again for Stockton ('Tides of Fortune', 30). He nevertheless 'had little hope of success' ('Tides of Fortune', 31). Beaverbrook had offered the assurance of a safe vacancy should Macmillan be defeated at Stockton, as indeed he was, heavily, by George Chetwynd. However, the death of Sir Edward Campbell (before the Stockton result was declared) created a safe vacant seat at Bromley, for which Macmillan was selected (Randolph Churchill withdrawing his candidacy). He was comfortably elected on 16 November 1945. He sat for Bromley, a predominantly middle-class suburban seat in south London, for which he never felt the same affection as for Stockton, for the rest of his time in the Commons. How far this change of constituency itself affected Macmillan's political style and domestic policy in the post-war years cannot be known: it certainly made easier the emergence of a tory gent, inter-war in style and dress, making speeches which sometimes seemed embarrassingly mannered. Although the policies of 'The Middle Way' now had a much clearer run, the politician who had promoted them seemed, in style if not in substance, somewhat distanced from their modernizing intentions. This may have been an intentional insurance against right-wing tory hostility -- Macmillan's toffishness emphasized what many Conservatives thought were impeccable tory qualifications to lead -- but it may have reflected a genuine change in emphasis. The need to disguise the failure of his marriage -- his wife's affair with Boothby continued -- and the will needed to maintain his composure during an exhausting and often quite solitary war, may have made it impossible for him to avoid a fusion between political acting and his own character. The personality which Macmillan presented from the mid-1940s remained remarkably consistent for the rest of his life. 
At that time the tory opposition did not mimic government with specifically assigned shadow ministers: Churchill as leader decided who should speak on which subject. Macmillan thus spoke for the opposition in both domestic and foreign policy debates. Churchill made R. A. Butler head of the Conservative Research Department, but Macmillan's writings were a fertile influence on it and he was involved in drafting the tories' 'Industrial Charter', published in May 1947, which committed the party to full employment and strategic control of the economy, and accepted the Labour government's nationalization of coal, the railways, and the Bank of England as irreversible. In his memoirs, published in 1969 at the end of a later Labour government, Macmillan wrote that nationalization was 'pure State capitalism. However, I accepted the fact that this controversy must now be settled... the achievements of the Labour Party in this Parliament [1945-50] have stood... [but] as time has passed, this classical form of State capitalism seems out of date. ('Tides of Fortune', 73-5)' Though Macmillan became an effective political sniper in the late 1940s, he did not seriously question the new economic and welfare structure the Labour Party put in place -- indeed his complaint with coal nationalization was that it was insufficiently radical in changing management practices with respect to the welfare of the staff. Despite his acceptance of Labour's achievement, Macmillan also argued that free enterprise still had a vital role to play, and that 'socialism' (as he believed the Labour Party to be promoting) was a dangerous threat. To meet it he suggested in 1946 that the tories and Liberals combine. He proposed a 'New Democratic Party' and suggested proportional representation in large cities (Horne, 1.298-9). These ideas -- essentially a continuation of his 1930s tactics -- were strongly disliked by some sections of his party, who wanted a free market rhetoric and only a tacit acceptance of Labour's achievements. Nevertheless he believed 'that with the exception of the extreme Right of the Conservative Party and the extreme Left of the Labour Party, there was a general acceptance of something like the Middle Way which I had preached so long' ('Tides of Fortune', 81). 
Macmillan's war years had placed him in a position where the vulnerability of Britain's position as a world power was increasingly apparent. But like most of his contemporaries he was slow to draw any conclusions from this. In the post-war world he initially sought no basic reappraisal of Britain's aims, though he visited India in February-March 1947 and did not dissent from the British government's policy -- announced while he was returning to Britain -- of an end to British rule by July 1948, though it was clearly bolder than he himself would have advocated. He followed Ernest Bevin (Labour's foreign secretary) and Churchill in their view of the USSR. Bevin was, in Macmillan's view, 'the strongest figure in the Labour Government' ('Tides of Fortune', 137). Macmillan suspected that Churchill's 'iron curtain' speech at Fulton, Missouri, might be an over-simplification -- but, with respect to the facts, 'who could resist his battering-ram of argument?' ('Tides of Fortune', 107). Macmillan argued in his memoirs that 'following the example of India, Burma and Ceylon, the 'wind of change' soon began to blow rapidly through the whole Colonial Empire. The course, therefore, was already set by the time the Conservative Party came into power in 1951. ('Tides of Fortune', 277)' This was true, but the link between the end of the Indian empire and rapid decolonization elsewhere was not one made by most members of the Conservative Party (including, in the late 1940s and early 1950s, Macmillan himself), nor, indeed, by most members of the Labour government. 
Macmillan, influenced in part by his wartime discussions with Jean Monnet, was an early enthusiast for Churchill's united Europe movement (and was on its managing committee from 1947). He attended the congress of Europe at the Hague in 1948, from which developed the Council of Europe at Strasbourg, from 1949, of which he was a founder member, sitting on its consultative assembly for three years. He thought the British government's decision not to join the discussions in June 1950 which arose from the Schuman plan for a European coal and steel community marked 'a black week for Britain; for the Empire; for Europe; and for the peace of the world' ('Tides of Fortune', 191). Schuman's initiative 'may well be a major turning-point in European history. It is certainly a turning-point in the fortunes of the Tory Party. This issue affords us the last, and perhaps only, chance of regaining the initiative' ('Tides of Fortune', 193). But he did not at this stage see any incompatibility between this view and the belief that (as he put it in 1949) 'the Empire must always have first preference for us' ('DNB'). 
Churchill formed his third government in October 1951 following what Macmillan felt was a disappointingly narrow tory victory in the general election. Churchill appointed and announced his nine core cabinet posts before inviting Macmillan to be minister of local government and planning (the ministry also including housing), or failing that, president of the Board of Trade. Macmillan was not much attracted to either post but after some hesitation accepted local government and planning (which was renamed housing and local government). It was a high-risk choice, for the 1950 party conference had adopted the building of 300,000 houses a year as a Conservative government's target. This was difficult to achieve, and implied possible distortion of industrial investment, an increase in inflation, and even some effect on supplies for rearmament and the Korean war. Macmillan set about his task with relish; it was unusual for a minister to be given such a constructive role, the 300,000 target being seen as a major test of the government's effectiveness. It gave him the authority to badger the Treasury to an exceptional extent, a privilege of which Macmillan took persistent advantage. He set up regional housing boards, on the advice of Sir Percy Mills, reduced the mandatory proportion of new private (as opposed to municipal) houses from one in ten to one in two, reduced the minimum required size of houses, and introduced the sale of municipal houses. A new 'Town and Country Planning Bill' was enacted in November 1954. 
Energetically supported by his parliamentary secretary, Ernest Marples, and by the civil servant Dame Evelyn Sharp, Macmillan reached the annual target in December 1953, and in fact faced the prospect in 1954 of building too many houses. The building programme was accompanied by rent increases, proposed in his white paper 'Houses -- the next step' in November 1953 and enacted in the 'Repairs and Rent Act' (1954): its aim was the reduction of slum buildings by the raising of rents for houses in good repair -- a controversial and politically sensitive matter. Macmillan came to think that Aneurin Bevan's criticism -- that the additional rent would be insufficient inducement to landlords -- was 'probably right... Nevertheless our plan broke the ice of rigid rent control' ('Tides of Fortune', 458). The critics were indeed right: rents went up but landlords made little progress in slum clearance or housing improvement. The aftermath of this policy was the rent scandals of the late 1950s and early 1960s, which did the tories' reputation considerable harm. Rent questions apart, Macmillan's housing achievements were substantial: they showed what a determined government could achieve with a proactive domestic policy, if it so chose. Macmillan, aware of the tension between tory anti-state rhetoric and the policies of his ministry, presented the housing programme in the context of 'ad hoc' wartime-style crisis management. But they were a peacetime achievement, even so, and Macmillan looked back on this period as 'in many ways the happiest and most rewarding of my time as a Minister' ('Tides of Fortune', 373). 
Macmillan's formidable task at housing to an extent marginalized him with respect to the government's other actions. He found Eden's caution over Europe depressing and he contemplated resigning in March 1952 when the cabinet showed little interest in the question; but he circulated a further paper on Europe in March 1953 opposing a federal Europe as against Britain's national interest. In September 1954 he successfully persuaded Eden to offer a way out of the impasse created by France's rejection of the European Defence Community (the 'Pleven plan') by means of a solution based on West Germany's adherence to the Brussels treaty -- thus earning, temporarily at least, the gratitude of Britain's continental neighbours. Macmillan hoped for the Foreign Office, but, with Churchill prevaricating about his retirement and Eden ensconced in the Foreign Office until that time, there was no immediate prospect of it. 
In October 1954 Churchill moved a reluctant Macmillan to the Ministry of Defence, a post whose holder the premier regarded as almost personally responsible to him. (Indeed, Churchill had held the post in conjunction with the premiership for the first six months of his administration.) Macmillan found himself rather in his wartime relationship to Churchill, but with the latter no longer at the height of his powers. Macmillan had already decided that Churchill ought to resign, and, especially after Churchill's second stroke in June 1953, had played a leading role in encouraging him to fix a date. He did so partly on the ground that in Eden there was a worthy successor being unfairly denied advancement. His approaches to Churchill were much more direct than those made to Gladstone in the somewhat analogous case of 1894. Nevertheless Macmillan's forthright behaviour did not diminish Churchill's respect for him. In the meantime, Macmillan encouraged a review of the over-bureaucratic structure of NATO and defended Britain's decision to develop her own hydrogen bomb. He had already become a convinced supporter of the independent British nuclear deterrent and of the view that its possession implied a considerable reduction in conventional forces. 
Churchill finally retired in April 1955. When Eden succeeded him as prime minister he put Macmillan in his own former position as foreign secretary, another post whose holder was seen as personally responsible to the prime minister -- whether Churchill, Eden, or in due course Macmillan himself. The relationship between Eden and Macmillan was by no means as close as this appointment and Macmillan's earlier representations to Churchill about Eden seemed to suggest. Eden would have preferred Lord Salisbury as his foreign secretary but (remembering Chamberlain's unhappy experience after appointing Lord Halifax as foreign secretary in 1938) was unwilling to cause a row by having his foreign secretary in the Lords, or to shoulder the extra burden it might have meant for him in the Commons. (Ironically, Macmillan would later appoint a foreign secretary from the House of Lords, Lord Home.) Macmillan had worked in tandem with Eden at various points since 1942, but the relationship was by no means always easy, and Macmillan differed quite strongly with Eden on Europe, while admiring his diplomatic gifts. Serving as foreign secretary, with a premier whose only government experience was in the Foreign Office, was difficult. 
As with defence, Macmillan's time at the Foreign Office -- which he stated in his memoirs to be 'the summit of my ambitions' ('Tides of Fortune', 582) -- was uneasy. On almost all the issues, he found Eden had left a clear policy in place. Some such policies -- for example, that Britain should play no part in the Messina conference from which derived the Spaak committee, which in turn designed the treaty of Rome -- were not those Macmillan would have devised. He got the cabinet to agree that Britain should send a 'representative' to the meetings of the Spaak committee (Russell Bretherton; Macmillan would have preferred a 'delegate'), but the critical moment was missed. In missing it, Macmillan was acting no differently from the rest of the Foreign Office, where questions such as those of Cyprus and Egypt seemed of central importance. Macmillan spent much time on the Cyprus question, and even more on Egypt, the traditional area of imperial strategic concern. 
Macmillan was getting into his stride as foreign secretary when Eden -- perhaps precisely because of that -- moved him on 21 December 1955 to the chancellorship of the exchequer. Macmillan strongly resented this move, which could not but be seen as a comment on his tenure of the foreign secretaryship (though Eden emphasized how important it was that R. A. Butler should have a strong successor at the Treasury). Macmillan in return held out against Butler being given the title of deputy prime minister and, consequently, in favour of the establishment of his own claim to the premiership on a basis of parity with Butler (Eden's health was already unpredictable). This was his most decisive move towards the premiership, and it worked well; moreover, Butler, now merely lord privy seal and leader of the house, no longer had a government department. 
The move to the exchequer to an extent unleashed Macmillan: Eden had no special standing on financial matters, and Macmillan was soon using an authoritative, even officious, tone in letters to Eden impossible during his Foreign Office days. Macmillan, in the budget due for March 1956, wished to increase taxation, including income tax, to reduce purchasing power. He wished to link this to cuts in government expenditure, particularly in defence (in line with his view that an independent nuclear deterrent made units such as Fighter Command redundant). Eden, however, prevented both of these. Macmillan's first (and it turned out only) budget, on 17 April 1956, was chiefly notable for the introduction of premium bonds (redeemable bonds whose interest was distributed by lot in the form of prizes) and the start of a vigorous ecclesiastical row over whether the government was encouraging gambling. 
In 1956, Macmillan as chancellor found himself in a situation of exceptional complexity, involving the future relations of Britain with Europe and America, the traditional question of imperial suzerainty in Egypt, and that regular phenomenon of post-war Britain, a sterling crisis. 
Macmillan, like almost everyone in British politics, underestimated the capacity and determination of the west European states to progress towards union. But he realized that, whatever the process under way was, Britain was not sufficiently part of it. He worked with Peter Thorneycroft (at the Board of Trade) to propose British association with the Spaak plan through an industrial free-trade area (thus preserving preferential access to the British market for Commonwealth agricultural products and raw materials). Just as this was being proposed, Egypt's nationalization of the Suez canal company in July 1956 (contrary to previous assurances) brought to the boil the long-simmering issue of what, if any, role Britain had in Egypt and in the running of the canal (the British military presence in Egypt had ended in June 1956, having lasted since 1882). Macmillan was a member of the Egypt committee established by Eden to deal with the situation, and took a forceful line in encouraging Eden to move towards military intervention. Macmillan seems to have been among the first to suggest encouraging Israeli involvement and though he had reservations about the tactical aspects of the initial invasion plans, he took the lead in August 1956 in developing them, so much so that Eden reined him in. Macmillan used analogies of Nasser with Hitler and Mussolini as energetically as any of the other tory leaders. 
With the sterling reserves already depleted, Macmillan visited the USA at the end of September 1956, receiving an honorary degree from the University of Indiana and visiting his mother's home town of Spencer before proceeding to Washington. A conversation with President Eisenhower on 25 September was understood by Macmillan to have established that Eisenhower distrusted the United Nations and wished to 'get Nasser down' without UN permission being necessary ('Riding the Storm', 134). Other accounts, by both British and Americans, later stated that Macmillan had seriously misunderstood Eisenhower's position. Roger Makins, who had been Macmillan's assistant at allied forces headquarters, Mediterranean, in 1943-4, and was now the British ambassador in Washington and the only witness to the conversation, recalled: 'I was expecting Harold to make a statement, say something important on Suez -- but in fact he said nothing... Nor did Eisenhower say anything. I was amazed' (Scott Lucas, 211). Making the assumption of Eisenhower's sympathy was an important error, as Eden was emboldened and reassured by Macmillan's subsequent dispatch, and Macmillan himself failed to take the sort of financial precautions made by the French, Britain's ally in invasion. Macmillan's error was the more remarkable, given that his international career had been built on just this sort of diplomacy, and that Robert Murphy, the American diplomatist with whom he had worked for most of his time in north Africa, was among those he saw both in Washington and in London. Though the Americans may be blamed for not making clearer their hostility to British-French-Israeli military action, it was for the protagonists to be sure that they had clearance, or at least benevolent neutrality, especially as they were clients rather than equals of the USA in financial and military power. 
When the Americans reacted strongly against the Anglo-French invasion (following Israel's co-ordinated attack on Egypt on 29 October), Macmillan moved quickly to reverse British policy. He belatedly requested a loan from the International Monetary Fund and urgently advised a ceasefire to gain it. 'First in, first out' was Harold Wilson's jibe ('Riding the Storm', 163), to which there was no effective response. Macmillan recalled to Alistair Horne that Suez was 'a very bad episode in my life' (Horne, 1.447). So it undoubtedly was, but Macmillan had the capacity, and the political time, to learn lessons from it. Eden had neither. 
Eden resigned the premiership through ill health on 9 January 1957, making no recommendation to the queen as to his successor, but suggesting she ask Lord Salisbury to consult with leading tories. With Lord Kilmuir, the lord chancellor, Lord Salisbury took soundings ('Well, which is it, Wab or Hawold?' (Earl of Kilmuir, 'Memoirs: Political Adventure', 1962, 285)) and on 10 January Macmillan, rather than the widely anticipated R. A. Butler, was summoned to Buckingham Palace and kissed hands on being appointed prime minister and first lord of the Treasury. (Among those whom Salisbury consulted was Churchill, who unhesitatingly supported Macmillan.) He took office in unpropitious circumstances, both for him and his party. He had held three major offices in as many years, with the quality of his performance quite severely questioned with respect to each, and especially the two most recent. His record on Suez was transparently bad, with both his diplomatic and his political judgement seriously questioned. His earlier reputation as a cross-party sort of person had been replaced, largely through his own political tone, by one of toffish arrogance, good-humoured but energetically partisan. His party had enjoyed the advantages of the post-war recovery and of the Labour Party's internal strife. It had won the general elections of 1951 and 1955 with increasing majorities. Yet the Conservative Party of the 1950s was ill at ease with respect to foreign, imperial, and Commonwealth policy, the very area in which it had always claimed special authority. The new prime minister's recent career was almost a personification of that unease. 
Macmillan's distribution of cabinet posts was shrewd. Lord Salisbury was persuaded to stay on as lord president and leader of the House of Lords. Mindful that 'there would be plenty of gossips and ill-wishers who would try to make trouble between us' ('Riding the Storm', 185), Macmillan offered Butler a free choice of post; he chose the home secretaryship. This enabled Macmillan to retain Selwyn Lloyd as foreign secretary. Peter Thorneycroft, a pro-European, was promoted from the Board of Trade to the Treasury. Duncan Sandys was made minister of defence, to oversee the necessary expenditure cuts. Julian Amery (Macmillan's son-in-law), hitherto an outspoken Suez rebel, was given a junior post, but charges of nepotism were deflected by the voluntary resignation of James Stuart (Macmillan's brother-in-law). The new prime minister put on a brave face to the Commons and to the public; with the party rallying to him, encouraged by the chief whip, Edward Heath (whom Macmillan retained), he avoided what some thought might be a rapid failure of his government. 
The immediate post-Suez confusion in which Macmillan took office made long-term planning difficult and, though he had not discounted becoming premier, he was not prepared for the office in the sense that he would have been if in opposition. Mending fences was necessarily his first task, and it was some time before the grand reorientation of British policy which was to be his chief achievement became apparent, even to him. At the Bermuda conference with Eisenhower in March 1957, fair relations with America were restored. Macmillan probably deceived himself as to the extent that the Americans believed there was a 'special relationship' to restore; nevertheless Eisenhower agreed to pursue revision of the restrictive 'McMahon Act' in order to resume the sharing of nuclear technology with Britain (agreements signed by Eisenhower and Macmillan on 3 November 1957 and ratified on 3 July 1958 enabled Britain to gain uniquely privileged access to American nuclear technology) and the USA moved towards taking direct responsibility in the Middle East -- so that during the 1958 crisis involving Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon, Britain and America acted in harmony. However, the wooing of the USA into the Middle East was in fact an admission that Britain, even with France, could not act without American backing. 
A vital decision was the acceptance of the defence white paper drafted by Duncan Sandys and published in April 1957, which gave a greater emphasis to independent nuclear deterrence and made a consequent reduction in conventional forces (one result was the phasing out of national service). This had profound implications for Britain's foreign, economic, and scientific policies as well as for her defences, perhaps more than Macmillan at the time realized. It was also to have significant domestic political consequences. Though much British research was given over to nuclear development, with considerable distortion to the British scientific community, the British were not in fact in a position to implement Sandys's policy. Britain could make nuclear weapons, and had made important technical progress in the 1950s, but she lacked adequate means of getting them to the target area, especially as the effectiveness of the bomber force was by the later 1950s declining. The upshot was that Macmillan spent much time persuading the Americans to supply the means of delivering the nuclear weapons to their targets. His aim was to gain a British deterrent which was as independent as possible. He pursued this objective, ironically, at just the time that the American government became more favourable to sharing nuclear technology with Britain and when British policy became in practice dependent on the purchase of American systems. 
Macmillan earned the gratitude of his party by refusing any inquiry into the Suez debacle and in the debate on Suez in May 1957 only fourteen tories abstained in the Commons. Encouraging the dissidents was Lord Salisbury, who had resigned from the government in March 1957 over the release of Archbishop Makarios of Cyprus. Despite family connections and a long friendship, Salisbury's resignation was accepted with some alacrity by Macmillan, in the same spirit that a previous Salisbury had 'lanced a boil' by gratefully accepting the resignation of Lord Randolph Churchill in 1887. Macmillan's acceptance of Salisbury's resignation emphasized his political strength, his 'unflappability', and his determination to pursue a bold course in colonial policy; it may also have represented, as Alistair Horne suggested, 'a triumph over all the slights and humiliations at the hands of Cecil and Cavendish grandees that Macmillan had suffered in the 1920s and 1930s -- a kind of break with the past' (Horne, 2.39). 
Letting Salisbury go was a risky tactic: the tory right was to be a vociferous though never very effective force throughout Macmillan's government. Much more serious was the resignation of the whole of his Treasury team on 6 January 1958 (Thorneycroft, the chancellor, Nigel Birch, the economic secretary to the Treasury, and J. Enoch Powell, the first secretary). Thorneycroft had demanded cuts of $153 million in the civil estimates for 1958. Some $100 million of spending cuts were agreed, but Macmillan thought it neither financially necessary nor politically possible to insist on the remainder (Eden had overruled him as chancellor on much the same grounds). Macmillan was committed intellectually and emotionally to economic expansion, in which he was encouraged by his private economic adviser, Sir Roy Harrod, who was even more expansionist than Keynes, whose friend and biographer he was. With some aplomb Macmillan famously dismissed the resignations as a 'little local difficulty' (he was leaving for a tour of the Commonwealth at the time). He later recorded it as his opinion that Thorneycroft had been led into resignation by Birch and Powell, who 'seemed to have introduced into the study of financial and economic problems a degree of fanaticism which appeared to me inappropriate' ('Riding the Storm', 372). But to have dissident retrenchers as well as dissident imperialists in his party was becoming dangerous. 
Macmillan, however, remained his party's best hope for a general election. Unemployment was at its lowest level since 1945 (though it was shortly to rise again) and Macmillan spoke the truth when he remarked on 20 July 1957 to a large meeting in Bedford, 'Let us be frank about it: most of our people have never had it so good' ('The Times', 22 July 1957). The Labour opposition made such capital as they could with incidents such as the Hola camp episode (the deaths from beating of eleven Mau Mau prisoners in March 1959 in Kenya, which led to the setting up of an Africa committee of the cabinet and to considerable alarm on Macmillan's part; he later described it as 'an anxious, if minor, incident' ('Riding the Storm', 735)). The Devlin report on riots in Nyasaland was a serious indictment of British policy, and was rejected by the government in July 1959, an alternative report being rapidly written and accepted. Already tarred with the brush of defending the Suez episode, Macmillan's government began to seem much more a defender of 'imperial' positions than was in the long run to prove the case. Though the opposition made some impact with these and other imperial issues -- attempting to link them to the general charge of incompetence which Suez permitted -- they were never likely to be issues which could damage the government in a fundamental way. Macmillan was an able television interviewee, and his public persona was if anything enhanced by his depiction as 'Supermac' by the left-wing cartoonist, 'Vicky'. Sustained by the long 1950s boom, and well-led in the campaign by the prime minister, who chose the autumn rather than the spring to go to the country, the tories at the general election in October 1959 gained their highest-ever vote (13,749,830), and an increase in their majority from 58 to 100. This was a notable defeat for Labour, who -- in the immediate aftermath of Suez -- had expected to regain office. 
With his political flanks to left and right now apparently secure, Macmillan gained a breathing space. Between 1959 and 1961 occurred a series of decisions and initiatives of profound importance for Britain's place in the world. The extent to which these policy changes were intentionally related remains uncertain, but of their adjacent significance there can be no doubt. That Macmillan was already thinking in grand terms was shown by an all-day meeting he summoned at Chequers on 7 June 1959, to discuss 'what is likely to happen in the world during the next ten years': this led to the appointment of a committee 'to draw up a paper -- for the use of the next Government' (diaries, 7 June 1959). The review, chaired by Norman Brook, was completed in February 1960, its report (drafted by Patrick Dean) circulated as 'Future policy study, 1960-1970' (TNA: PRO, CAB 129/100, C(60) 35, 24 Feb 1960). The report recognized that Britain was 'slipping backwards in relative economic power' and that her 'relative power in the world will certainly decline, though it does not follow that our status need necessarily do the same'. It anticipated that the Commonwealth would become 'less of an 'economic' unit'. The general assumption of the report was that while Britain's economic and political power base was diminishing, she should none the less maintain 'a leading position among the Powers and a higher place in their counsels than our material assets alone would strictly warrant'. With respect to Europe: 'It is impossible to be sure that Western Europe will continue along its present path towards integration. Our tactics must, therefore, be adjusted to suit the needs of the moment'. Though the report was made for Macmillan rather than by him, its criteria and findings accorded closely with his views at this time. The pursuit of an influence and a status which were greater than the capacity to sustain them (or playing the cards above their value, as Macmillan described it) was an abiding objective of his years as prime minister, and his diaries frequently recorded the extent to which Britain was noticed as a participant, rather than the achievement of the policy objective. 
The pursuit of status was not, however, a chief determinant of colonial policy. After the election Macmillan made Iain Macleod colonial secretary. There was a considerable fear that retention of colonies by force would open them to Soviet influence (the 1959-60 review considered the main area of future conflict would be in the under-developed world, requiring 'sustained and expensive' aid and political activity to keep such countries in the 'non-Communist world'). Under Alan Lennox-Boyd's tenure of the Colonial Office Ghana had become independent in 1957, and steps had been taken towards self government in Nigeria and elsewhere. Nevertheless Macleod greatly accelerated the movement towards independence of colonies and protectorates; Jomo Kenyatta and Hastings Banda were released from gaol, and conferences arranging independence were almost forced on some of the colonies and protectorates involved. By the end of Macmillan's government most of British Africa bar Southern Rhodesia was independent within the Commonwealth. This was a remarkable achievement, and especially for a Conservative prime minister, whose party rhetoric had for so long rested on an imperial bass line. The complicating factor was the Central African Federation, and the possibility of the deterioration of Southern Rhodesia into a British Algeria. At the end of a long tour of rather surprised African nations in January-February 1960, Macmillan visited Southern Rhodesia and South Africa. In Southern Rhodesia he reiterated the government's support for the federation (finally dissolved during R. A. Butler's mission in 1964), but in South Africa, on Monday 3 February in Cape Town, he delivered a very carefully prepared and instantaneously famous speech, in which he told the South African parliament: 'the most striking of all the impressions I have formed since I left London a month ago is of the strength of this African national consciousness. In different places it takes different forms, but it is happening everywhere. The wind of change is blowing through this continent, and, whether we like it or not, this growth of national consciousness is a political fact. ('Pointing the Way', 156)' The speech infuriated the Salisbury wing of the tory party, for whom 3 February was in every sense 'Black Monday', and led to the formation of the Monday Club. South Africa was effectively driven out of the Commonwealth at the prime ministers' meeting in March 1961, when (despite Macmillan's efforts to dissuade them) other member countries made clear that they would not allow South Africa to renew its membership, which it was obliged to apply to do following a plebiscite in favour of a republican constitution in October 1960. 
Side by side with decolonization went two other streams of external policy: negotiations with the Soviet bloc and Britain's first application to join the European Common Market. Macmillan believed that he and Britain had a major role to play in the politics of nuclear detente -- a role underpinned by Britain's status as a nuclear power, but also made more urgent by the difficulties encountered in maintaining that status. He devoted much energy to promoting the summit meeting held in Paris on 16 May 1960 and felt 'disappointment amounting almost to despair' when it broke down despite his series of personal interviews with the other participants ('Pointing the Way', 213). Britain's chief nuclear weapon, the Blue Streak, was developed in the face of the hostility of the British chiefs of staff, but in February 1960 their opposition to its inflexibility led to the abandonment of its development. During his visit to Washington in March 1960 (chiefly to prepare the ground for the summit), Macmillan gained from Eisenhower an agreement that the USA would allow Britain to use either Skybolt missiles (fired from bombers) or Polaris missiles (fired from submarines). The British chose Skybolt, the Americans gaining in return a submarine base for Polaris submarines at Holy Loch in Scotland. Macmillan's search for a British nuclear deterrent was persistent, but the cancellation of Blue Streak made Britain dependent on American delivery systems, however much they might be presented as under British control. Perhaps ironically, given his emphasis on upgrading Britain's nuclear weapons, Macmillan took especial pride in negotiating an agreement for strict control of their testing, the nuclear test ban treaty being agreed on 10 August 1963, following an ambassadorial conference in Moscow (Kennedy had rejected Macmillan's wish for a summit meeting) and signed by Lord Home (who had replaced Lloyd as foreign secretary) on 10 October 1963. 
Macmillan increasingly found himself stretched by three competing forces: the USA, the Commonwealth, and the European Economic Community (for, despite the experiment of the introduction of the European Free Trade Association in 1959-60, he perceived the gradual elimination of other possibilities). On 9 July 1960 he wrote in his diary: 'Shall we be caught between a hostile (or at least less and less friendly) America and a boastful, powerful 'Empire of Charlemagne' -- now under French but later bound to come under German control. Is this the real reason for 'joining' the Common Market (if we are acceptable) and for abandoning ('a') the Seven [ European Free Trade Association or EFTA countries] ('b') British agriculture ('c') the Commonwealth? It's a grim choice. ('Pointing the Way', 316)' Macmillan had in his career recognized better than most the tension that these forces created. His difficulty, perhaps, was that he had a sentimental and a political sympathy for each of them. It was also the case that no leader of a large British party could have a sole commitment to any one of them. 
In 1961 Macmillan developed close ties with the new American president, John F. Kennedy, skilfully avoiding the mistakes other tory leaders made when dealing with a Democrat in the White House and exploiting to the full his personal and family connections. Kennedy was a relative by marriage, as a brother-in-law of Dorothy Macmillan's late nephew, Lord Hartington. Macmillan sent as ambassador to Washington David Ormsby-Gore, the brother of Maurice Macmillan's wife, Katie, and an intimate long-term friend of Robert Kennedy, the president's brother. Macmillan's attempt to re-forge the 'special relationship' was thus underpinned by close personal relations. 
Despite his success in restoring Anglo-American relations, Macmillan was haunted by the prospect that the EEC (now successfully established, and enjoying growth rates significantly higher than Britain's) would supplant Britain as America's key partner in Europe. EFTA, though much trumpeted as a 'bridge' to the EEC, was clearly not viewed as such by the six member countries of the latter, nor indeed by the United States, which regarded it as embodying all of the economic disadvantages and none of the political advantages of the EEC. It was therefore partly to maintain Britain's standing with America (and its usefulness to the Commonwealth), as well as to regain its influence in Europe, that Macmillan reluctantly came to the conclusion that Britain must attempt to join the European Communities (the European Coal and Steel Community and Euratom were not merged with the European Economic Community until 1967). He appears to have taken this decision by May 1960. In July that year he reshuffled his cabinet to ensure that pro-Europeans were in key positions -- Sandys as secretary of state for Commonwealth relations, Christopher Soames as minister of agriculture, and Heath as lord privy seal, charged with the conduct of negotiations. Butler, the leading potential dissident, was later effectively neutralized by being given the task of liaising with the National Farmers' Union. Macmillan announced in the House of Commons on 31 July 1961 (just before the summer recess) that Britain would be seeking negotiations, and Britain's application was formally tabled on 10 August 1961. 
In announcing his decision to the House of Commons, Macmillan emphasized that Britain would join the European Communities only if satisfactory arrangements could be made for the Commonwealth, EFTA, and British agriculture. These three issues dominated the subsequent negotiations, and the public debate in Britain. While Heath and Macmillan were upbeat in reporting the progress of negotiations in Brussels, it gradually became clear that the Europeans were in no mood to contemplate significant concessions. Future arrangements for the Commonwealth proved a particularly intractable and emotive issue. In 1956 Macmillan had gone on record as saying that Britain could never agree 'to our entering arrangements which, as a matter of principle, would prevent our treating the great range of imports from the Commonwealth at least as favourably as those from the European countries' ('Hansard 5C', 26 Nov 1956, cols. 37-8). Nevertheless, with a few small exceptions, the most that the EEC countries would offer was a gradual imposition of the external tariff. The hostility of Commonwealth countries to any British application had been made clear during a tour of Commonwealth capitals undertaken by Heath, Sandys, and others in July 1961. The Commonwealth prime ministers' meeting in London in September 1962 passed off better than Macmillan had feared, but nevertheless resulted in a communique expressing disquiet at the extent to which Commonwealth interests had not been met. The prime ministers' meeting was also the occasion for Gaitskell to come out against membership of the EEC on the terms then likely; and it emboldened Macmillan's opponents within the Conservative Party, who were increasingly well organized through the Anti-Common Market League. 
Despite Heath's and Macmillan's willingness to compromise, the negotiations were also overshadowed by the antipathy of de Gaulle. Even before the announcement of Britain's application, Macmillan had been advised that de Gaulle was highly unlikely to agree to British membership. In de Gaulle's view, Britain was insufficiently 'European' and would, if admitted, use its influence within the EEC to derail the European project; in particular, he regarded Britain as akin to an American 'Trojan horse'. His views were not altered by a series of personal discussions with Macmillan at the Chateau des Champs in June 1962. Macmillan then recorded: 'I am not at all sure how far de Gaulle and the French really feel it to be in France's interest to have us in' ('At the End of the Day', 121). Nevertheless, he continued to hope that he could either win over or out-manoeuvre de Gaulle. In this he was undoubtedly over-optimistic. 
Intervening, largely unexpectedly and certainly so with regard to the sphere of action (an attack on Berlin was considered more likely), was Khrushchov's attempt to site Soviet missiles on the island of Cuba. Kennedy kept Macmillan informed from early on in the crisis (though after he had taken 'my first decision on my own responsibility'). With Ormsby-Gore playing an active role in the discussions in the White House, Macmillan offered advice and support to Kennedy in phone calls, sometimes three a day and, shortly before Russia's climb-down in November 1962, telegraphed Khrushchov supporting the American demand that the missiles be taken out of Cuba. The upshot, Macmillan believed, was that 'We were 'in on' and took full part in (and almost responsibility for) every American move' ('At the End of the Day', 216). He perhaps overestimated Britain's standing with the USA, for whom Cuba was an essential national interest irrespective of the views of allies, but at the personal level Kennedy found his telephone discussions with Macmillan a helpful way of clearing his mind, given the variety of views about Cuba among the White House staff, and he was grateful for Britain's firm support. 
The dominant tensions in British foreign policy again came into play between December 1962 and January 1963. Macmillan visited de Gaulle at Rambouillet, near Paris, on 15-16 December 1962; the talks left him with no doubt that de Gaulle intended to block Britain's application to join the EEC. Two days later, Macmillan met Kennedy in the Bahamas and after considerable difficulty persuaded the Americans to allow the British to change from Skybolt (which the Americans wished to phase out) to Polaris submarines, with a British right to use the weapons independently 'for supreme national interest' ('At the End of the Day', 361). A month later (and undoubtedly influenced by this evidence of British dependence on America), on 14 January 1963, de Gaulle announced France's veto to Britain's EEC application, citing irreconcilable differences between the interests of Britain and those of the EEC member states. In public, Macmillan put on a brave face, suggesting that the negotiations had been broken off 'not... because the discussions were menaced with failure', but 'because they threatened to succeed' ('At the End of the Day', 377). In his diaries, though, he recorded his despair: 'All our policies at home and abroad are in ruins... We have lost everything, except our courage and determination' ('At the End of the Day', 367). 
In the context of rapid, deliberate, and for the most part voluntary decolonization, Macmillan's government undertook a remarkable confluence of foreign policy initiatives. Frustrating though their pursuit often seemed at the time, Macmillan gained from them a quasi-independent nuclear deterrent which lasted the rest of the century, and, despite the failure of the first application, he set the United Kingdom on the road to Europe: the choice might be 'grim', but Macmillan's decision was not one from which any subsequent British cabinet, regardless of party, seriously dissented. 
A considerable portion of Macmillan's time was devoted to foreign and Commonwealth policy-making and activity, and his memoirs on the period of his government were largely about such questions. His peregrinations as prime minister recalled the constant movements and meetings of his war years. He probably travelled more during his premiership than any other British peacetime prime minister. At home his government was not noted for legislative proposals, and was chiefly concerned with administrative and economic matters. Macmillan had four chief domestic objectives: full employment, stable prices, a favourable balance of payments, and economic expansion. But to ride these horses he appointed what Robert Blake called 'two singularly mediocre chancellors of the exchequer [Derick Heathcoat Amory and Selwyn Lloyd]' ('DNB'). Macmillan's natural political tendency was to be expansionist, and in this he was encouraged by Sir Roy Harrod, who acted as an unofficial economic adviser. An incomes policy was established to try to maintain price stability while also encouraging growth. Unemployment rose from 500,000 to about 800,000, which genuinely shocked the prime minister as well as calling into question the tories' claim to be the party of prosperity. He became convinced, on not much evidence, that there was 'a real risk of a world deflation' ('At the End of the Day', 89). 
Lloyd was by this stage tired; he had allowed various aspects of domestic economic policy to go awry; and Macmillan resented having to take personal charge of incomes policy. Macmillan determined both to replace Lloyd and to use the occasion of his replacement for a thorough pruning of the dead wood in his government: he thought it better to introduce new ministers while his party was in power, even though it might soon lose it, and he blamed A. J. Balfour for not having done this in 1905. On 12-13 July 1962 he accordingly dismissed or accepted the resignations of the chancellor of the exchequer and six other cabinet members (one-third of his cabinet), followed by numerous junior ministers. Known immediately as 'the night of long knives', this was the most extensive reconstruction of a cabinet by a prime minister since MacDonald formed the National Government in 1931, but it did not provide the same bonus for the tory party. The party was confused, the public mocked, members of the government sensed panic in the prime minister, and the Labour opposition was considerably encouraged. Several ministers (notably Lord Kilmuir, the lord chancellor, and Lord Mills, minister without portfolio) had earlier asked to resign. It was also true that few of those sacked were missed. Macmillan nevertheless concluded that he 'was led into a serious error' by adding other changes to the essential one, the replacement of Selwyn Lloyd ('At the End of the Day', 92). Coincidentally, Hugh Gaitskell's death in January 1963 produced in Harold Wilson an opposition leader whose gifts were well-suited to exploiting tory weaknesses. The sackings occurred at a time when a general anti-establishment feeling was gaining ground, reflected in the BBC programme 'That Was The Week That Was' and in Peter Cook's satirical depiction of Macmillan in 'Beyond the Fringe'. As Robert Blake remarked, 'It was not exactly pro-Labour, but it was certainly anti-Conservative' ('DNB'). 
The reputation of Macmillan's government was thus already considerably eroded when he had to meet a series of spy and sex scandals. These culminated in the spring of 1963 with the 'Profumo affair', when the secretary of state for war first denied in the Commons 'any impropriety' with Christine Keeler (who, as Macmillan put it, 'was said to share her favours with the Russian Naval Attache, a certain Ivanov'), and then admitted that he had lied to the Commons. Profumo resigned on 6 June 1963. The trial and suicide of Stephen Ward, supposedly Keeler's procurer, created a remarkable, febrile atmosphere, particularly in London, in the summer of 1963. Other governments had suffered bouts of scandals, but those of 1962-3 would have seemed fantastic in a novel, and indeed -- as the makers of 'Scandal' (1989) discovered -- were hard to depict on screen. 
Macmillan's old-fashioned manner, so carefully cultivated and so often effective, was now a liability, for it now seemed reality rather than an act. De Gaulle's veto of Britain's application for Common Market membership demanded serious national self-appraisal, but in spring and summer 1963 the wider context was quickly forgotten. Macmillan had set a fast pace throughout his government and was tired. He took a holiday in May 1963, but the Profumo affair spoiled it. The party conference due in October could not but be an embarrassing occasion. Preparing for it, Macmillan contemplated retiring. He told the queen he would announce both that there would be no election in 1963 (one was due in 1964) and that he would not lead his party at the next election. 
The ground for his resignation early in 1964 was thus quite well prepared, when on 7 October 1963 Macmillan changed his mind: he would stay on to fight the next election. Next day, however, he was admitted to hospital for an operation on his prostate gland. Before entering hospital, he dictated a minute for Lord Home (coincidentally chairman of the conference as well as foreign secretary) to read to the imminent party conference, announcing his intention to resign. Despite pain and post-operative fatigue and trauma, Macmillan was determined to play an active and decisive role in selecting his successor. Senior party members were to take soundings and report to him: he would then make a recommendation to the queen. This reversed the procedure followed at the time of Eden's resignation (who resigned recommending that soundings be then taken), for it placed the sick premier at the centre of events. In circumstances of considerable drama Macmillan resigned on 18 October in his hospital bed, the queen unprecedentedly coming to receive his resignation and his advice (which was to send for Lord Home, as she then did). Macmillan need not have so precipitately resigned, for his health soon recovered. He appears to have believed that his prostate gland was cancerous (which his doctors had told him was at least possible). It may be that his operation caused him to return to his abandoned view of September 1963 (that he should resign) and that illness offered a convenient occasion. It was also a factor that both he, and Eden (in 1957), believed they should learn from the last months of Churchill's peacetime premiership and resign rather than linger in post. Macmillan's role in the choice of his successor was later much criticized, and was held by some to have denied Butler the premiership. 
Macmillan did not stand for the Commons at the general election in October 1964. He declined the earldom traditionally offered to prime ministers on leaving the Commons (partly, at least, because he did not wish to stymy his son Maurice's political career), and also declined the Garter, but he recommended a barony for John Wyndham, his private secretary throughout his premiership (he wrote Wyndham's memoir for the 'Dictionary of National Biography', appositely comparing him to Montagu Corry, Disraeli's secretary). It is possible that Macmillan hoped in due course to return to office as leader of an all-party coalition. 
One dignified office continued to be his. In 1960 he was elected chancellor of the University of Oxford in a stiff contest with Oliver Franks. Franks was the 'official' candidate of the university establishment, and Macmillan, though prime minister, stood as something of an outsider, his campaign being organized with ruthless cunning by H. R. Trevor-Roper (whom Macmillan had controversially appointed regius professor of modern history in 1957). While prime minister, Macmillan's activities as chancellor were necessarily circumscribed, but in his long retirement he transformed the office, being frequently present in the university and making amusing speeches. He dined in all the colleges and notably favoured several which were regarded as unfashionable. With his ability to recall the supposedly golden years of Oxford before the First World War he fascinated the young and the middle-aged. He proved an effective fund-raiser in the USA and elsewhere. In retirement he continued to travel widely, including to China in 1979. 
Macmillan's other focus of activity was publishing. He remained active in the family firm, and his publishing nose remained as keen as ever. He had already taken over the chairmanship from his brother Daniel in 1963, and following his retirement from politics he oversaw a period of substantial expansion in Africa and in Asia, and the development of educational publishing. He was especially involved in promoting the 'New Grove Dictionary of Music' and the 'Dictionary of Art'. (On his death, the management of the firm largely passed to non-family directors and in 1995 the family sold its majority stake to the German publishers Holtzbrinck.) He also devoted much time to the preparation of his memoirs, published between 1966 and 1972. His journals and diaries, kept systematically from the early 1940s, were from the start intended to form the basis of memoirs: he had observed Churchill's habit of preserving documents especially for this purpose, but in his case a diary was the preferred method. The diaries were candid in a controlled way, and clearly intended for posterity. There were gaps, notably during the crucial period of the Suez crisis. Intended as three volumes, the memoirs spread into six, for the author was his own publisher. But the expansion should not be regretted: the volumes are an unusually candid account of a political life, in the sense that they follow very closely the contemporary diaries (even when the latter are not being quoted). Even more unusually for a prime minister's memoirs, they admit mistakes. He also published his 'War Diaries' (1984) which, among others matters, set in context the meeting on 13 May 1945 which became the focus of intense scrutiny in the mid-1980s as a result of the allegations by Count Nicolai Tolstoy, summarized in his 'The Minister and the Massacres' (1986), with respect to Macmillan's responsibility for the return of prisoners of war to the Soviet Union in 1945 -- a controversy which gave Macmillan intense private distress, though he made no public riposte. He also published 'The Past Masters: Politics and Politicians, 1906-1939' (1975), a nod towards Churchill's 'Great Contemporaries'. 
Unsurprisingly the diaries and consequently the memoirs are discreet about Macmillan's personal and family life. Though reconciled with his wife, especially from 1960 onwards -- indeed, their later married years turned into something of an Indian summer -- Macmillan was to the end scarred by her affair with Boothby. He even suggested to his biographer, Alistair Horne, that the Boothby affair played a part in his erratic behaviour at the time of his resignation (Horne, 2.542). Lady Dorothy's death in 1966 left Macmillan bereft. His son Maurice overcame alcoholism and his modest political success was a joy to his father. Sarah Macmillan was also an alcoholic. Whether or not he was her father, Macmillan showed her special affection and, after Lady Dorothy's death, devoted much time to helping Sarah and looking after her two adopted sons; she died in 1970. 
Especially after the death of his wife, Macmillan saw Oxford, and London clubland, as places of conviviality, and he quite often appeared without much notice. When visiting Oxford he frequently stayed at nearby Garsington Manor with his friend the historian Sir John Wheeler-Bennett, or at All Souls with the warden, John Sparrow. He enjoyed the company of women 'who make me feel safe' (Horne, 2.606), including Ava Waverley, Ruth Wheeler-Bennett, Lady Diana Cooper, and Eileen O'Casey. The last -- the widow of the playwright Sean O'Casey, and herself a noted actress -- claimed after Macmillan's death that their friendship had included a romantic element (though of the nature of their relationship she gave varying accounts). Throughout his life Macmillan was shy in dealing with forceful women, and he made a mortal enemy of Dame Rebecca West after turning his back on her at a literary luncheon and speaking to Diana Cooper throughout. 
Without membership of either house of parliament, Macmillan's political presence after 1964 was at best marginal. He assisted behind the scenes, but effectively ceased to be a force in national politics. He remained, however, an occasional presence through television programmes and after Margaret Thatcher's monetarist tendencies had become apparent (he was initially rather favourable to her leadership of the tory party and was consulted by her in the early stages of the Falkland crisis, recommending to her the establishment of a small war cabinet, as subsequently adopted) he used television with some effect to voice critical views (notably in 'The Way Ahead', made with Robert Mackenzie). He had accepted the Order of Merit in 1976, but no other public honours. However, on his ninetieth birthday, 10 February 1984, it was announced that he was to become earl of Stockton, the first hereditary peerage for a generation. (His son Maurice was by then extremely ill, and died a month later.) After his maiden speech on 13 November 1984 he became a frequent attender at the House of Lords, often making anti-monetarist comments. But it was in a speech to the Tory Reform Group on 8 November 1985 that his remark (subsequently repeated in the House of Lords) that the government's privatization policy amounted to 'selling the family silver' hit a raw nerve. It made no difference to government policy, but the remark stung, especially as it cleverly used the same simplistic language of domestic finance commonly employed by Mrs Thatcher to justify her policies. 
Though Macmillan lived at Birch Grove in Sussex all his life, he played no special role in county life. The staff at Birch Grove had mostly served there most of their working lives; he was well known among them for endearing behaviour. In old age, he became something of a national treasure. He played the part well. A lone survivor of the wartime government, he had no difficulty, when he chose, in upstaging the pedestrian characters of British politics in the 1980s. 
Despite his war wounds, his many operations, and his own fear of physical decline, Macmillan's body stood up remarkably well. But by 1985 he suffered not merely from the long-term afflictions which had kept him in pain for much of his adult life, and which in his latter years caused constant insomnia, but now also from pleurisy, shingles, and gout. His last Oxford appearance was in November 1986. On 29 December 1986 he died at Birch Grove. He was buried on 5 January 1987 next to his wife and Sarah in the nearby churchyard of St Giles, Horsted Keynes, Sussex. On 10 February 1987 a memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey. He was succeeded as second earl by his grandson, Alexander Daniel Alan Macmillan ('b'. 1943). 
Macmillan seemed a gift for an artist or cartoonist, but proved easier for the latter. His strong features, languid moustache, and fine head of hair gave him, especially in his later years, a powerful physical presence. The donnish element so obvious in wartime photographs (deliberately contrasting with the surrounding uniforms) was subsumed into the character of the 'gent' which Macmillan so sedulously exploited. Bryan Organ's double portrait for Oxford University (1980) brilliantly captures this aspect of his character, but other portraits, which include that of James Gunn (1962, Balliol College, Oxford) of Macmillan in his chancellor's robes, are for the most part pedestrian, as is the bust by Angela Conner (1973, NPG). The cartoons by Vicky depicted Macmillan in various guises, often on the 'Supermac' theme, and remain powerful images. 
Though Macmillan's memoirs staked out the biographical ground on his own terms, he was the subject of a striking study, 'Macmillan: a Study in Ambiguity', by Anthony Sampson (1967). Macmillan chose Alistair Horne as his official biographer, and gave Horne many interviews which, together with the full version of the diaries, played a central part in Horne's well-researched two-volume life (1988-9), especially with respect to Macmillan's complex personal life. His was not the first prime-ministerial biography to be commissioned during the subject's lifetime, but it was unusual in the extent to which it was prepared with the help of the subject, particularly through extensive interviews. Several members of the Macmillan circle published recollections, including Lord Egremont (John Wyndham), 'Wyndham and Children First' (1968), and Harold Evans, Macmillan's press secretary, 'Downing Street Diary: the Macmillan Years' (1981). Numerous biographies and political studies followed, especially after the papers of the Macmillan government were made available to researchers at the Public Record Office under the thirty-year rule. Macmillan's private papers and diaries were deposited in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, after the completion of Horne's biography. 
Macmillan's premiership was a decisive period in terms of Britain's self-appraisal as a world power and the decisions consequent on that appraisal. But he took care to play down the extent of changes in British policy, and to disguise some of the more disquieting conclusions which arose. In personal terms, Macmillan tried to distance himself from the all-consuming embrace of professional politics. He read widely and was genuinely erudite on a wide range of subjects, often disguising his erudition until a suitable tactical moment in the conversation. His complex personality puzzled and sometimes unsettled his colleagues. His old-world manner was in some respects a perfect cover for modernization, but it was never clear how seriously either the manner or the modernization was to be taken. 
Macmillan handed over to Lord Home, a man apparently in his own style of Conservatism. But this, like so much else that Macmillan did, was an uncertain message. Macmillan was not in fact a county tory, for all his love of the grouse moors and his Devonshire relations. In his two constituencies he represented working-class and then suburban Britain, and in doing so he followed the character of his century. He had a better grasp of economic issues than any prime minister of the century, with the possible exception of Harold Wilson; and, unlike Wilson, he combined wide reading and theoretical understanding with practical knowledge of the running of a business. He co-ordinated with skill, cunning, and a certain degree of deception Britain's retreat from world power status. He was sometimes unwilling to do more than hint to his party and his nation the direction in which he was leading, but this was perhaps because he saw that the Britons of his day could not and would not face the facts. 


@@@@@


doc= 40187


Herbertson, Andrew John (1865-1915), geographer, was born on 11 October 1865 at Church Bank, Galashiels, Selkirkshire, the eldest of four children of Andrew Hunter Herbertson, a prosperous building contractor, and Janet Matthewson. He attended Galashiels Academy (1872-9) and the Edinburgh Institution, later Melville College (1879). On leaving school he worked briefly for a firm of surveyors in Edinburgh before matriculating at the University of Edinburgh in 1886. He studied sciences at Edinburgh in 1886-9 and 1891-2 with considerable success, but took no degree. The single greatest influence on him was exerted by Patrick Geddes, whom he met at Edinburgh. In the 1890s he worked enthusiastically with Geddes in Edinburgh and followed him to Dundee as his demonstrator in botany in 1892. He undertook meteorological research in 1892-3 at the Ben Nevis and Fort William observatories which, with further work at Paris and Montpelier, bore fruit in the publication with Alexander Buchan of the important 'Atlas of Meteorology' (1899). At the same time he worked on the 'Challenger' enterprise which had its offices in Edinburgh. He visited the University of Freiburg im Breisgau in 1895 and 1898 and graduated PhD of that university with a dissertation on world rainfall patterns in 1898: the work was published by the Royal Geographical Society (RGS) in 1901. 
On 5 October 1893 at 3 North Fort Street, North Leith, according to the rites of the Evangelical Union church, Herbertson married Fanny Louisa Dorothy (1864-1915), classics mistress, daughter of the late John Collingwood Richardson, journalist, and Louisa Moore. Dorothy was a scholar who wrote a biography of Le Play as well as collaborating with her husband in his geographical work. They had one son, Andrew Hunter (1894-1917), and one daughter, Margaret Alice Louise. 
Herbertson was lecturer in political and commercial geography at the University of Manchester (1894-6), and from 1896 to 1899 lecturer in industrial and commercial geography at Heriot-Watt College, Edinburgh, during which time he was an active member of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society. 
In June 1899 Herbertson went to the newly founded school of geography in Oxford as assistant to the reader (Halford Mackinder, who had personally sought him out after hearing that he had been offered a post in America) and lecturer in regional geography. He stayed at Oxford until his death, succeeding Mackinder as reader in 1905 and being appointed to a personal chair in geography in 1910. On arrival in Oxford he was highly unusual in having a higher degree in geography and an active research interest: yet in Oxford he effectively abandoned research to throw himself into promoting geography in the university, in schools, and among those in professional life. In the university he worked tirelessly, not least because Mackinder was so often preoccupied with other interests. He lectured badly but doggedly, gave countless tutorials, and led numerous field excursions which his pupils remembered warmly. In 1910 he secured money from Abe Bailey, a South African entrepreneur, which allowed the school of geography to rent larger premises at Acland House, Broad Street, in addition to its rooms on the upper floor of the Ashmolean Museum, and to establish a library of colonial geography and history. Though he had abandoned research he did see awarded the first Oxford research degrees in geography (the BSc and BLitt), and was an active member of the RGS's research department from its foundation in 1903 (he had been elected fellow in 1892). Though no explorer himself he encouraged explorers such as Nansen, Shackleton, and Hedin to visit the school. 
University geographers, like practitioners of other new disciplines, had to establish their subject in secondary schools to secure it a future at university. Through unremitting work, considerable powers of organization, and genuine enthusiasm Herbertson made a distinguished contribution to school geography. Following Mackinder he organized biennial summer schools at Oxford at which distinguished university teachers from Britain and abroad taught schoolmasters and schoolmistresses in the class and in the field. The schools were inspired by those of Geddes where the Herbertsons had first met, and R. N. Rudmose Brown described the couple during the summer courses: 'Herbertson... the small active man, the eager encouraging teacher, restless, continually at work, never learning to play or rest; or Mrs Herbertson, busy, energetic -- even more so than Herbertson, a driving force at the summer schools, always everywhere, keeping everyone up 'to scratch'. (Brown, 107)' More than 850 teachers attended the five schools organized by Herbertson between 1909 and 1914 and the influence he thus exerted on British school geography was immense. The Herbertsons were prolific authors of school textbooks: more than 1.4 million copies of their textbooks were used in the specialist secondary school teaching required under the 1902 'Education Act'. He produced a new series of wall maps (published 1914-15). He was secretary of the Geographical Association (the professional society for geography teachers) from 1900 to 1915 and founding editor of its journal, 'Geographical Teacher', from 1901 to 1915; he used both roles to argue for more and better geographical education in schools, particularly through field classes and practical work. He successfully argued for the extension of the association's membership, hitherto confined to teachers from public schools, to those from council schools and persuaded the Ordnance Survey to supply sheet maps to schools at reduced cost so that less well funded schools could undertake map work. His patient negotiations won the support of the RGS for the association which might otherwise have seemed a rival. 
Herbertson also promoted geography among professional men on imperial service. He organized lectures for Indian Civil Service probationers and taught surveying to probationers for the Egyptian and Sudan civil service. The school of geography provided facilities for colonial civil servants on furlough. Herbertson was concerned about the geographical ignorance of those in positions of influence in the empire. In his presidential address to the geographical section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1910 he suggested that each colonial government have a geographical-statistical department supplying information to a central imperial intelligence department, staffed by university trained geographers. 
The imperial theme underlay all his activity. For university geographers he edited with his colleague O. J. R. Howarth the six-volume 'Oxford Survey of the British Empire' (1914), described by Symonds as 'a fascinating picture of Oxford's perception of the empire at its highest tide' (Symonds, 147): and he dreamed (in vain) of setting up an institute of imperial geography and history in Oxford. Works presented to the school of geography during Herbertson's readership by the India Office, the War Office, and various colonial governments gave Oxford geography a clear imperial focus. The imperial theme was also evident in his school textbooks and from his work for those on imperial service, but it was more complex than has sometimes been suggested. He argued that geography should foster first a local patriotism, and then successively affection for and loyalty to country, empire, and the world (in 'Geography' in 'The Practice of Instruction', ed. J. W. Adamson, 1907, 191-248). Later commentators interpret this as a vision of geography as a tool of empire (Symonds, 143), but earlier observers saw instead a vision of geography as a medium for understanding between peoples at a time when imperialism and militarism were at their height (Cossar, 486-90; W. L. G. Joerg, 'Recent geographical work in Europe', 'Geographical Review', 12, 1922, 432). Similar differences of opinion surround his regional geography. Inspired by Geddes, Herbertson's classic statement of regional geography in 'The major natural regions of the world' ('GJ', 25, 1905, 300-12) long governed geographical practice. He argued for the delimitation of natural regions which 'should have a certain unity of configuration, climate and vegetation' (p. 309). In his lifetime and afterwards regional geography degenerated into an oversimplified and often racist matching of human type on to physical, usually climatic, region. Even Gilbert in a very kind memoir admitted that he had been 'surprised... by the crudity of some of [Herbertson's] deterministic statements' (Gilbert, 'Geography', 326). Yet Herbertson had intended his regions to be natural as opposed to artificial and hoped that their use would help students, particularly school pupils, make sense of the world, not just learn facts about it, and draw together the physical and human sides of geography. Indeed towards the end of his life his concern for regions had a rather visionary quality, rejecting the 'superficial geographical inventory' in favour of a 'regional psychology' based on a 'loving familiarity' with the region (A. J. Herbertson, 'Regional environment, heredity and consciousness', 'Geographical Teacher', 8, 1915-16, 153). 
Herbertson was short, fair, and stocky and wore a pince-nez above a drooping moustache. His long-standing heart problems worsened greatly towards the end of his life, but did not stop his drilling with the reservists during the war, or lead him to cut back his teaching. He died suddenly at his country house at Spriggs Holly, Radnage, Buckinghamshire, on 31 July 1915 and was buried in St Cross churchyard, Oxford, on 2 August. His widow died at Spriggs Holly just over a fortnight later, on 15 August 1915. His sudden death, combined with the effects of war, left geography at Oxford without an honour school, let alone the grand institute of which he had dreamed. His death also left him with no award or medal from any learned society and without having taken up his seat on the RGS council. It was marked by only brief obituaries from colleagues obviously greatly saddened, but none the less caught up in the war. 
He is remembered by the Herbertson memorial lecture, founded in 1917 by the Geographical Association (the last was given in 1994); the Herbertson Society founded in 1924 as the undergraduate geography society at Oxford, and in its early days with a life members' section to organize the excursions which Herbertson enjoyed (it survived for some fifty years and is still periodically revived); and the Herbertson prize offered in the geography final honour school at Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 40188


Cruger, Henry (1739-1827), merchant and politician, was born in New York city on 22 November 1739, one of four sons of Henry Cruger (died 1780), merchant and member of the New York assembly and council, and his wife, Elizabeth Harris. The Cruger family belonged to an Atlantic community of traders, centred in Bristol, England, with commercial links in North America and the West Indies. The first of the family to settle in North America was Cruger's grandfather John Cruger, who reached New York in 1698 and, in what was to become the family pattern, combined a successful merchant career with involvement in local politics. His son John (1710-1791), as mayor of New York between 1756 and 1765, is known for having twice averted conflict in the city over imperial issues, and was a delegate to the 'Stamp Act' congress of 1765. Henry Cruger's eldest brother, John Harris Cruger, followed in his father's footsteps, becoming a member of the governor's council in 1773. Two other brothers, Nicholas and Telemon, were in the West India trade; Nicholas had a counting-house in St Croix. Henry Cruger himself was educated at King's College in New York, whence his father removed him in 1757 and sent him to receive commercial training in the counting-house of Henry Cruger & Co. in Bristol. 
Cruger married, in December 1765, Hannah (died 1767), the daughter of Bristol merchant Samuel Peach. Through his father-in-law he gained connections with the local radical movement. He was a member of the Bristol common council from the year following his marriage until 1790 and he was a sheriff of the city in 1766-7. In 1766 he went to London with a delegation of Bristol merchants to urge repeal of the 'Stamp Act'. After 1768 Peach and Cruger were among the leaders of an independent society that petitioned against the Middlesex election and endorsed the radical principle of the right of electors to instruct their members of parliament. Cruger's radical connections earned him a reputation as a 'hot Wilkite', in the words of the prime minister, Lord North (Underdown, 16), and probably ensured that his candidature for parliament had been informally agreed upon by his political associates by 1772. 
Cruger is best known as one of only three mainland American colonists to be elected a member of parliament during the late colonial period. The election of 1774, which was overshadowed by the growing crisis with America, was also one that saw both Cruger and Edmund Burke standing in opposition to the incumbent pro-ministerial members for Bristol. Burke had been viewed by Cruger's radical supporters in 1774 as an appropriate second because it was felt that he could attract moderate votes. Nevertheless Burke and Cruger were unlikely political associates, who had clear differences both of principle and temperament. Although some co-operation took place between their respective committees and among their supporters the two did not stand together. In the event Cruger was returned as head of the poll, with Burke in second place. Cruger's acceptance speech, in which he affirmed his support for the right of electors to instruct their members, prompted Burke's famous response setting forth his traditional views on the duty of MPs to rely on their own judgement. 
Cruger took his seat in parliament in the wake of the 'Coercive Acts' of 1774, which had triggered a renewal of political conflict between Britain and her North American colonies. Cruger's moderate attitude to the American crisis reflects his Anglo-American origins and Atlantic perspective. As a member of parliament he was determined to dispel his image as a radical, writing that 'the whole House shall be undeceived if a moderate and modest speech can affect it' (Van Schaack, 'Henry Cruger', 13). His motive was to win the ears of the ministers in order to influence them to take a more conciliatory approach to the burgeoning conflict with the colonies. In his first speech he struck a middle road, warning that coercion would only serve to alienate the affections of the colonists and suggesting that parliament should adopt a constitutional line that would secure colonial liberties while maintaining the supremacy of the British legislature. In subsequent debate he lost his temper defending the colonists from Colonel Grant's charge of cowardice; once hostilities began, however, he wrote that the colonists would be 'utterly undone' if they did not make immediate concessions (Dartmouth MS D (W) 1778.lii.1144). He was disappointed by the terms of Lord North's conciliatory proposal, and by June 1775 he confessed that he had despaired of influencing the ministry to adopt more moderate measures. 
Five months later, through the intervention of Sir William Meredith, Lord North met Cruger to consult on the crisis. North was exploring the prospect of a commission to the colonies in order to forestall prolonged war. The Cruger family was influential in the strategically important colony of New York, and the British government had secretly been monitoring Henry Cruger's correspondence with his family since early 1775. The interview of November comprehended Cruger's father, who in 1775 had left New York to join his son in Bristol. Father and son urged that a delegation of pro-American politicians be sent to the colonies to resolve Anglo-American differences, but nothing came of their suggestion. As hostilities escalated Cruger continued to oppose both the war and American independence. He supported Lord Chatham's policies over those of the Rockinghams. In late 1777 he supported Wilkes's motion for repeal of the 'Declaratory Act', and the following year he issued handbills reprinting Lord Chatham's speech to the House of Lords of 20 January 1775. It was not until 1780 that he spoke openly in support of American independence as the only means of ending the war. 
Cruger failed in his bid for re-election to parliament in 1780, in part because of his persisting rivalry with Edmund Burke. His supporters, however, secured his election as mayor of Bristol in the following year. He stood again as member for Bristol, as a supporter of William Pitt, in 1784, this time successfully. His campaign was assisted by his eldest brother, John Harris Cruger, who by now was living in England as a loyalist exile. Cruger himself was in America during the campaign, attempting to re-establish trade links there; he had experienced difficulties in gathering his American debts in the years before the war and the conflict itself had done irreparable damage to his merchant business. Unable to restore his fortunes, in 1789 he attempted, through Pitt, to obtain an appointment as British consul in the United States. 
Cruger's subsequent career reflects the Atlantic character of his connections and outlook, and the ambiguous nature of his loyalties in an era of Anglo-American conflict. His bid for a consular appointment in America having failed, he declared in the following year that he did not intend to stand again as MP for Bristol. In 1790, while still formally a member of parliament, he departed for New York, taking with him his second wife, Elizabeth Blair, who died that same year. There, two years later, he was elected to the New York state senate, despite opposition protests that, as one who had resided in England and taken oaths as a British government official throughout the war, he was not an American citizen. On the American side of his family, however, he could claim an unimpeachable patriot association in the form of his brother Nicholas, who had fought with the American forces during the war and was a friend of George Washington. 
Cruger resided in New York city for the remainder of his life. After serving in the senate, he retired from business and lived privately. With his second wife he had had a daughter; in 1799 he married his third wife, Caroline Smith, with whom he had four more children. Samuel Peach Cruger, his only child by his first wife, did not accompany his father to New York; he remained in Bristol and subsequently changed his name to that of his maternal grandfather, Samuel Peach. Henry Cruger died in New York city on 24 April 1827, and was survived by his third wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 40189


Maugham, (Gwendoline Maud) Syrie (1879-1955), interior decorator, was born on 10 July 1879 at The Cedars, Banbury Road, Hackney, London, the eldest daughter and third of seven children of Thomas John Barnardo (1845-1905), medical doctor and philanthropist, and Sarah Louise (Syrie) Elmslie (1850?-1945?), daughter of William Elmslie, Lloyd's underwriter and charity worker, and his wife. Her father was Irish, and her mother English; both their families were members of a religious sect, the Open Plymouth Brethren, and their eldest daughter, Syrie (a compression of Sarah Louise), grew up in a paradoxical background of philanthropy and affluence, reading the 'Bible' with her family and forbidden from attending the theatre. 
At sixteen Syrie Barnardo was engaged to the son of a wealthy family from Richmond, only to discover that the man had a mistress. In 1901 she escaped from this unhappy situation -- and her religious family life -- on a trip to Egypt, and met Sir Henry Wellcome (1853-1936), the wealthy American pharmaceutical manufacturer, twenty-six years her senior. Their marriage, which took place on 25 June 1901, lasted nine years, during which she 'acquired poise and sophistication but grew weary of an elderly companion who was said by her to be sexually inadequate' (Connon, 'Somerset Maugham', 57). A son, Henry Mounteney, born in 1903, was diagnosed as mentally handicapped, and was later fostered by a farming family. Irritable and distrustful, Wellcome accused his wife of infidelity with an American financier, Archer Harman. In 1910 the couple separated. 
Living independently on an allowance of $2400 a year, in 1913 Syrie Wellcome was introduced to (William) Somerset Maugham (1874-1965), already one of London's best-known playwrights, and a relationship developed. Their daughter, Elizabeth Mary (Liza), was born in Rome on 5 May 1915, at which point Syrie was still married to Henry Wellcome (who named Maugham as co-respondent and uncovered 'proof' of his wife's infidelity with several men, among them Gordon Selfridge). 
During the war Somerset Maugham became an ambulance driver, and met Gerald Haxton, with whom he began a disastrous relationship. He was now working for the secret service, and Somerset Maugham and Syrie married in Jersey City, New Jersey, on 26 May 1917. With her husband often away -- usually with Haxton -- Syrie pursued her interest in interior design, having acquired experience when working for the antiques department of Fortnum and Mason. The American decorator Elsie de Wolfe, Lady Mendl, is said to have told her in 1920 that 'the decorating field is already overcrowded' (Fisher, 16). None the less she launched her decorating business in London's Baker Street in 1922, financed by the sale of her own house. 
Combining French art deco (with its eighteenth-century references) and European modernism, Maugham produced her distinctive look: sleek, sophisticated interiors, a de luxe hedonism of lambskin carpets and elongated sofas. She patronized designers such as Marion Dorn and Oliver Messel; her motifs were the plaster palm frond and the sea shell in a 1920s version of rococo. 'With the strength of a typhoon she blew all colour before her,' wrote Cecil Beaton. 'For the next decade Syrie Maugham bleached, pickled or scraped every piece of furniture in sight' (Beaton, 208). Above all, white became her signature. Her house in the King's Road, Chelsea, and the Villa Eliza in Le Touquet became society showrooms for her wares (Somerset Maugham complained that bits of furniture would vanish from their house overnight). Like her Chelsea neighbour and rival, Sibyl Colefax, Syrie Maugham was an adept hostess, claiming to have thrown the first-night party for Noel Coward's 'The Vortex', a sensational success much compared to Maugham's play 'Our Betters' (1923, written after hearing Syrie's stories of her affairs and Gordon Selfridge's offer to settle $5000 per annum on her). Her interiors of 1927 and 1930 respectively for Coward's country and town houses resembled sets from his plays: the Syrie sofas, zebra-print cushions, and limed Louis Quinze chairs as upholstered, seductive symbols of an elegant if amoral age. 
The Maughams were now leading separate lives; they divorced in May 1929, leaving Syrie to bring up their daughter, Liza. Pursuing the lucrative American market, she opened shops in New York, Chicago, Palm Beach, and Los Angeles; in England her commission in 1936 to decorate Fort Belvedere, on the edge of Windsor Great Park, for the then prince of Wales was 'perhaps her best job', claimed 'House and Garden', 'a series of romantic rooms... enhanced by the reflection, in huge mirrors, of swans on the lake outside' (Fisher, 34). 
But reality was encroaching on this inter-war fantasy. Maugham spent part of the Second World War in New York, and in 1944 returned to London, her finances 'much reduced' (Fisher, 68). She continued to work -- mostly abroad -- until illness prevented her. She died at her Park Lane flat on 25 July 1955, aged seventy-six, and was buried in the Oxfordshire village where her daughter (later Lady Glendevon) lived. In 1964 Beaton, Coward, Rebecca West, Beverley Nichols, and others presented a bust by the Russian sculptor Fyodor Shubin of Catherine the Great to the Victoria and Albert Museum in her memory. 
It was a memory already vilified by Maugham's memoirs, 'Looking Back', published in 1962, claiming that he was not the father of their daughter, Liza. Enraged by Maugham's treatment of his wife, Nichols published his own gossipy diatribe, 'A Case of Human Bondage' (1966); to Coward this was just 'another essay in bitchiness' ('Coward Diaries', 633). The playwright's own response to 'Looking Back' was 'A Song at Twilight' (also 1966) in which an embittered writer is confronted with his homosexuality by his ex-wife. 
Richard Fisher described Syrie Maugham as 'strikingly beautiful... of average height, with jet black hair, an ivory skin of Rossettian perfection, and an exquisite figure' (Fisher, 8). Her voice was high pitched, and her manner autocratic; yet she attracted loyal friends and remained supportive of Maugham, refusing to return his vindictiveness. Coward noted, 'One could test the intelligence of one's friends by seeing if they had noted that Syrie was much more intelligent than Willie' (Morgan). Although forever associated with her 'no-colour' phase -- Beaton noted that she later adopted 'the vivid colours of lobster salad' (Beaton, 209), as her designs for Stephen Tennant at Wilsford Manor, Wiltshire, in 1938 indicated -- she was the first English woman to pursue interior decoration as a career, and was a lasting influence on such decorators as David Hicks. 


@@@@@


doc= 40190


Fowler, John Beresford (1906-1977), interior decorator, was born on 20 June 1906 at the Old Mill House, Lingfield, Surrey, the son of Robert Richard Fowler and his wife, Blanche Beresford, 'nee' Forster. His father was clerk of the course at the fashionable Edwardian race course at Lingfield. The comfortable circumstances of Fowler's childhood ended in 1915 with his father's early death, and the family moved to the artistic London suburb of Bedford Park and a life of genteel poverty at 12 Woodstock Road (a house designed by Norman Shaw). There was still just enough money for Fowler to be sent to Tormore, a boarding preparatory school, and on to Felsted School, which his elder brother and father had also attended. However, his mother was compelled to remove him in 1923, at the age of sixteen. A series of humble jobs followed and, after a breakdown, he spent a year on a cousin's farm in Kent. He enjoyed this stint, for he was a countryman at heart and deeply knowledgeable about rural ways. 
Fowler made the first step towards his later career when he was taken on by Thornton Smiths, a large decorating and antique business in Soho Square. There he was given the task of painting 'Chinese' wallpapers, so fashionable at that time; he began with leaves and soon graduated to flowers and birds, for he was a natural draughtsman with a light touch and great technical skill. These papers, having been suitably distressed, were sold as genuinely of the eighteenth century. In Soho Square Fowler also learned and perfected many of the techniques, such as marbleizing and graining, that he later taught to the many craftsmen whom he employed. His next step was to join the decorative painting studio of Margaret Kunzer. She was soon asked to set up a studio for painting furniture and objects to supply the decoration department of Peter Jones (1929). There Fowler gathered around him a small band of talented assistants, and when he decided to set up on his own in 1934 he took them with him, to 292 King's Road, Chelsea -- a gimcrack Regency house, part of which he rented. Existence was precarious and funds short; accounts were done on the kitchen draining board and the sewing by somebody's nanny. 
Fowler's style of what he famously called 'humble elegance' was refreshingly new, and brought a breath of the country to the town. The showroom was on the first floor because the ground floor had another tenant, but a coffin-shaped showcase on wheels was trundled daily into the front garden and its fresh and unusual stock-in-trade caught the beady eyes of two well-known decorators, Mrs Somerset Maugham and Sybil Colefax, Lady Colefax (1874-1950), who both lived nearly opposite. Both asked Fowler to join them; he chose Lady Colefax, whom he considered marginally less formidable, and joined her firm in Bruton Street in 1938. Little survives of his pre-war work, and it is hard to discern from black and white photographs why his growing band of fashionable patrons found his work so fresh and exciting. 
When war came Fowler, who was hopelessly myopic, was excused call-up. He plunged into dangerous and arduous work as an air raid warden and hospital orderly; meanwhile wartime restrictions meant very little decorating, even on his one day off a week. The first years of peace were still times of privation and rationing, but the most important point in his life came when Mrs Nancy Lancaster acquired the firm, which was by then at 39 Brook Street, premises that had formerly been the office of the Gothic architect Sir Jeffry Wyatville and had been discovered by Fowler in 1944. Mrs Lancaster did not herself decorate professionally but had consummate taste; Kelmarsh, Northamptonshire, and Ditchley Park, Oxfordshire, designed by the baroque architect James Gibbs -- two houses that she had decorated when married to Ronald Tree MP -- were considered pinnacles of pre-war luxury and taste. She used her newly acquired business to buy at cost the wherewithal to furnish Haseley Court, Oxfordshire; more importantly she had exclusive use of the services of John Fowler, who was made a partner in the firm. It was a stormy relationship: her aunt Lady Astor called them the unhappiest unmarried couple in England. Lancaster contributed scale and comfort, and Fowler his incomparable colour sense and eye for detail, to the splendid result. When photographs of Haseley appeared it became the wonder of the age, and the concept of decoration of country houses was changed forever. 
In 1947 Fowler bought a miniature Gothic folly: the Hunting Lodge, Odiham, Hampshire. His decoration of it was the acme of simplicity, but not in the least cottagey; it had supreme elegance yet was not over-grand. When photographs of the Hunting Lodge were published it too had enormous influence, as did the remarkable garden that Fowler created around it. He advised on numerous gardens over the years, and so severe were his views on which plants were acceptable that many of his friends dared not plant anything unless it was 'Fowler approved'. 
In spite of the lengthening queue of people clamouring to be 'Fowlerized', as restrictions were eased the business was chaotically run and, until more businesslike partners were taken on, scarcely prospered. Fowler himself earned a pittance. Apart from potboiling Mayfair flats, which he loathed doing, he worked on at least thirty-five grand country houses and on many lesser ones too. His favourite jobs were perhaps Daylesford, Oxfordshire (for Lord Rothermere), Tyninghame, East Lothian (for Lady Haddington), and Grimsthorpe, Lincolnshire (for Lady Ancaster). The last is open regularly to the public. Fowler called his decorating haute couture but his approach was scholarly and his knowledge of the past profound; he never forgot a detail or a date. As a young man he had haunted museums, especially the Victoria and Albert, which was often open late. In those less scientific days he relied on scrapes and intuition to reveal original colours, and he was a master of the application of paint in an aesthetically pleasing but nevertheless authentic way. Much of this expertise is enshrined in 'English Decoration in the 18th Century' (1976), which he wrote in collaboration with John Cornforth. 
Through friendship with some of its officials Fowler was asked quite early on to advise the National Trust, although some were suspicious of employing a fashionable Mayfair decorator. After he had retired from his firm, in 1975, he worked almost exclusively for the trust for little more than his expenses. An amazing total of thirty houses benefited from his advice. Three stand out, at two of which -- Clandon Park, Surrey, and Sudbury Hall, Derbyshire, both almost completely stripped of their original contents -- he created a wonderful warm atmosphere. The third, Errdig, in Denbighshire, was an untouched, almost ruined house that was saved from complete dereliction from mine subsidence as a result of Fowler's impassioned letters to the reluctant grandees of the National Trust. 
In youth Fowler had been inclined to long hair, sandals, and left-wing politics. In maturity he was distinguished-looking -- slim, upright of stature, and beautifully tailored -- but the left-wing politics remained. He was a perfectionist and a hard taskmaster, but those whom he castigated knew that he could carry out what they had failed to do far better himself. Almost all who worked for him became devoted friends for life. He was a brilliant teacher and a lavish host (with a superb cook) and inspired much laughter, often laughing himself until he cried. He was a good talker but listened too, and proved a reliable friend for those with troubles. He could be high-handed with clients and dismissed several in mid-job when they proved intractable, but took endless trouble for those whom he liked. He was not interested in money and turned down many of the rich and influential whom he sensed would prove incompatible. 
Among official buildings that Fowler worked on are Buckingham Palace, Holyroodhouse, Chequers, Chevening, Christ Church, Oxford, and the Bank of England. He was appointed CBE in 1973. He died, after a long struggle with cancer, on 27 October 1977 at the Hunting Lodge, which he left to the National Trust; his ashes were scattered on the lake there. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 40191


Colefax, Sibyl Sophie Julia, Lady Colefax (1874-1950), hostess and interior decorator, was born on 4 December 1874, at The Poplars, Wimbledon Common, Surrey (the house of her uncle, Walter Bagehot). She was the third but only surviving daughter (and fifth and last child) of William Stirling Halsey (1831-1902), and his unhappily married wife, Sophie Victoria (1840-1926), daughter of James Wilson. Living mainly at Cawnpore until her father's retirement from the Bengal civil service in 1883, she was bright and imaginative but felt excluded and neglected. After schooling in Putney and Wimbledon she lived in genteel indigence as her mother's travelling companion, 'running after old ladies with their knitting' (Woolf, 'Diary', 3.116). Conversations about books and art with John Lockwood Kipling initially showed this receptive, lonely young woman how her life might be enhanced and enriched. A visit in 1894 to Italy, where she befriended Bernard Berenson, gave further intellectual and emotional nourishment. 
In July 1901 Sibyl married (Henry) Arthur Colefax (1866-1936), barrister, the son of Joseph Samuel Colefax, a chartered accountant. They had two sons. Her husband, who was Unionist MP for South-West Manchester (January to December 1910) and took silk in 1912, specialized in Anglo-German patent and trade-mark law. He suffered a serious and permanent diminution of his practice in 1914, but was consoled with legal offices and was created KBE in 1920. A tolerant and good-humoured husband, he was described by Kenneth Clark as 'a heavy man with a very large face, who was thought by those who had never visited the provinces to be the biggest bore in England' (Clark, 212). 
The Colefaxes had many political and legal friends, but were also connoisseurs of literature, music, drama, and the fine arts. Living first at 85 Onslow Square and later Old Buckhurst in Sussex, but famously from 1921 at Argyll House in Chelsea, Sibyl Colefax fulfilled her appetite for life and curiosity about people by creating a salon which represented the height of intelligent, discriminating pleasures. 'The Coalbox', as she was nicknamed, first won wider fame in London society by organizing a poetry reading in aid of charity (12 December 1917). 'Mrs. Colefax's star-climbing wagon', as her fellow organizer Robert Ross called it (Ross, 318), was chaired by Edmund Gosse; T. S. Eliot, three Sitwells, and Aldous Huxley recited (Siegfried Sassoon and Robert Graves declined). 
Sibyl Colefax was not one of those brittle society women who are no more than a smart address, or present a surface as hard and varnished as a front door. Her memory of books, pictures, and people was keen. She was kind, loyal, practical, and unmalicious. Though she could be devious or insincere, her charms and stratagems were enticing. She never competed with the wit of her guests or domineered. In drawing out the merits of her friends -- the clever young as well as veteran celebrities -- she gave apt praise rather than flattery. She had a hunter's instinct for capturing lions and a brave's ruthlessness in collecting scalps. The term 'colefaxismus' was coined to describe those claiming special acquaintanceship with celebrities or inside knowledge of great events: she was notorious for exaggerating her intimacy with the famous dead like Henry James. Yet she loathed publicity. Her energy was formidable. While London still slept, she would write and address some sixty postcards and the telephone would start shrilling before the postman dared call. Her illegible letters were littered with relentlessly dropped names, and could be irresistible. 'Do dine Tuesday', she scrawled to J. C. Squire. 'Just ourselves and Pirandello' (Pryce-Jones, 66). Virginia Woolf described her in 1923 as 'painted and emphatic... broadcheeked, a little coarse, kindly, glass-eyed, affectionate to me almost, capable, apparently disinterested' (Woolf, 'Diary', 2.275); later she likened her 'to a bunch of red cherries on a hard black straw hat' (Woolf, 'Moments of Being', 189). Lady Plunder in Edith Wharton's 'The Gods Arrive' (1932) is modelled on her. 
Sibyl Colefax was a well-informed and energetic traveller with cosmopolitan cultural interests: Valery made his London debut under her auspices. Her son Peter went to work on Wall Street in 1926, and she lost her investments there (estimated at $50,000) in 1929. To recuperate her finances, she began on a fee-paying basis to advise her friends on the interior arrangements of their houses. After several commissions, she inaugurated Sibyl Colefax Ltd in 1933. The reception rooms at Argyll House were compact, immaculate, and varnished: pale almond greens, greys, and opaque yellows provided discreet colouring. Her work for paying clients was, however, more theatrical and derivative. It was influenced by Edward Knoblock, an American dramatist who had cultivated an English taste for Regency Revival decorations and furnishings during the 1920s. Cecil Beaton pictured a typical room arranged by Lady Colefax: 'somewhat sparsely furnished, with a couple of delicate black and gold chairs, a settee, striped curtains, and a colour scheme of yellow and grey' (Beaton, 210). She worked initially in collaboration with the Bruton Street antique dealers Stair and Andrew, but in 1938 recruited a gifted young decorator, John Fowler, and the Mayfair interior decorating firm of Colefax and Fowler was formed. The combination of her contacts and his flair brought prosperity until the war. Sibyl Colefax was industrious, but an inefficient manager and inconsiderate employer. The enforcement, during the post-war period, of official austerity measures limited the firm's opportunities for profitable work, as did its senior partner's failing health. The Anglo-American millionaire Ronald Tree was consequently able to buy Colefax and Fowler as a gift for his wife, afterwards known as Nancy Lancaster, at the time of their divorce in 1947. The subsequent Colefax and Fowler style -- richly coloured chintzes, fringed and tasselled curtains, braided upholstery, bright colours, floral patterns -- was the antithesis of the earlier Colefax interiors. 
After Arthur Colefax's sudden death of pneumonia in February 1936, Sibyl Colefax left Argyll House. Her last dinner party there, on 11 June 1936, was perhaps her finest. King Edward VIII attended with Wallis Simpson. Artur Rubinstein played three Chopin piano pieces; Noel Coward sang. Guests included Lord Brownlow, Winston Churchill, Duff Cooper, Robert Vansittart, and Kenneth Clark with their wives, as well as Lord Berners and Robert Bruce Lockhart. She resumed entertaining at a small house in Westminster in May 1937. During the Second World War, she ran a canteen in Belgrave Square, and, despite dangerous operations and broken limbs, held regular dinners called 'ordinaries' at the Dorchester Hotel, at which her guests paid their own expenses. Latterly some of her attractions waned but her dinner parties continued to draw guests. One of her last, on 21 February 1950, brought together Vivien Leigh, Lord Esher, Terence Rattigan, Beverley Nichols, Robert Lutyens, Osbert Lancaster, Edward Sackville-West, Viscountess Waverley, and Lady Jebb (there were no politicians in election week). Sibyl Colefax died of cancer of the lungs and left breast on 22 September 1950 at 19 Lord North Street, London. Her ashes are presumed to have been buried, as she had intended, in a wood near Old Buckhurst, Sussex. On the hall table her visitors' book lay open at the last dinner she had given. 


@@@@@


doc= 40192


Evans, Caleb (1737-1791), Particular Baptist minister and college head, was born on 12 November 1737 in Bristol, the first child of Hugh Evans (1712-1781), Particular Baptist minister and principal of the Bristol Baptist Academy, and his first wife, Sarah Browne (died 1751), daughter of Joseph Browne of Bristol. Educated at Mile End Academy, Middlesex, Caleb received baptism as a believer at Little Wild Street Baptist Church, London, on 29 November 1753. He assisted Josiah Thompson at Unicorn Yard, London, from 15 September 1758, moving to Broadmead, Bristol, to assist his father on 12 August 1759. He was ordained co-pastor on 18 August 1767 and appointed tutor at Bristol Academy, succeeding his father as principal in 1781. Caleb married Sarah Jeffries (died 1771), only daughter of the Revd Joseph Jeffries and his second wife, Miss Rickard, at St Andrew's, Pershore, on 19 April 1762; they had five children. Following her death on 7 November 1771, he married Sarah Hazle (died 1817), only daughter of William and Judith Hazle of Bristol, at St James's, Bristol, on 7 December 1774. 
Primarily Evans was concerned to provide able and evangelical ministers for English and Welsh Baptist churches. In 1770 he separated the academy from Broadmead church and put the academy on a sound financial basis as the Bristol Education Society, which provided voluntary support from individuals and churches for the education of 'pious candidates for the ministry... [and] the encouragement of missionaries to preach the Gospel' (C. Evans, 'The Kingdom', 1775, 24). This significant breakthrough in Baptist ministerial training led to the formation of other Baptist colleges in England and Wales. In America a Bristol student, William Staughton (1770-1829), used Evans's model as the basis for Columbian College, the first American national Baptist university, now George Washington University. Evans received two honorary doctorates, one from Rhode Island College (1789), the other from King's College, Aberdeen (1790). 
Evans's ordination statement in 1767 indicated his early commitment to the evangelical Calvinism propounded by Jonathan Edwards in America, and he commended Edwards to all his students. One student, John Sutcliff (1752-1814), minister at Olney, Northamptonshire, was profoundly influenced by Evans's commendation of Edwards and initiated prayer for revival on the Edwards pattern among local Baptist churches in 1784. He introduced Andrew Fuller, founder of the Baptist Missionary Society in 1792, to Evans's 'An Address to the Serious and Candid Professors of Christianity' (1772), in which Evans uses the insights of Edwards to explain the distinction between natural and moral ability in man. Fuller's 'The Gospel Worthy of All Acceptation' (1785), which quoted pages 11-13 of Evans's book verbatim, provided the theological key to liberating English Baptists from a sterile high-Calvinism into a vibrant, worldwide, missionary community. Evans himself undertook itinerant evangelistic preaching tours with students, the first to Cornwall in 1773. In 1769 Evans and John Ash of Pershore edited 'A Collection of Hymns Adapted to Public Worship', the first congregational Baptist hymnbook, which had 412 hymns, 275 of which were by Baptists, including some by Evans's personal friend Anne Steele. 
Evans was a Hanoverian loyalist who celebrated annually Guy Fawkes night and King William's landing at Torbay on 5 November. In his 'Political Sophistry Detected' (1776), he claimed the 'great 'American question'' was intricately interwoven with 'the British constitution and British liberty', and that American resistance was 'one of the best causes in the world' (14, 35). In his 'British Constitutional Liberty' (1775), he advocated radical political reform but refuted republican ideals. When John Wesley contended the king had power to tax his subjects without their consent, Evans disagreed. In 'A Letter to Mr. Wesley' (1775) Evans charged Wesley with inconsistency, for in Bristol Wesley had supported an American-born radical parliamentary candidate, Henry Cruger. In addition Wesley, in his 'Calm Address', was not only guilty of serious plagiarism of Samuel Johnson's 'Taxation No Tyranny' but also defended the legitimacy of the taxation of the American colonists, who had no parliamentary representation. In 'A Letter to Mr. Wesley' Evans exposed these issues and eventually received a public apology from Wesley in 'The Gazetteer' on 13 December 1775. The infamy of the slave trade was opposed vigorously in works by both authors. Among Evans's thirty pamphlets and sermons, those already listed, together with 'The Remembrance of Former Days' (1779) and 'British Freedom Realized' (1788), provide a comprehensive survey of his political thought. 
In May 1791 Evans had a paralytic stroke; a second at Bristol on 9 August 1791 was fatal. His funeral at Broadmead, Bristol, was conducted by the Revd Samuel Stennett, and the Revd John Tommas spoke at the interment in Redcross Street burial-ground, Bristol, on 16 August 1791. 


@@@@@


doc= 40195


Sargant, William Walters (1907-1988), psychiatrist, was born at Bryanston, The Bank, Highgate Hill, Highgate, Middlesex, on 24 April 1907, the fifth child and second son in a family of eight. He was the son of Norman Thomas Carr Sargant, a devout Methodist and a wealthy metal broker who later lost his money, and his wife, Alice Rose Walters. Five of his uncles were Methodist preachers and his younger brother became bishop of Bangalore in India. Sargant lost his faith early but retained the evangelical zeal. He attended St Wilfrid's School, Seaford, and the Leys School, Cambridge, where he spent most of his time playing football. Academically he was above average but not outstanding. Sargant read medicine at St John's College, Cambridge, where he used his sporting talents to meet influential people. He became president of the Cambridge University Medical Society and kept a file called 'Autograph letters of eminent medical men'. He won a 'football' scholarship to St Mary's Hospital, London, where he became captain of rugby and expanded his list of distinguished acquaintances. 
Sargant qualified MRCS and LRCP in 1930 and obtained his Cambridge MB degree in 1933; he also held various house jobs at St Mary's. At the age of only twenty-five he was appointed medical superintendent of St Mary's with 'complete control' over admissions, beds, junior doctors, and nurses, and seemed likely to be appointed to the staff as a consultant physician, which was his ambition. To do this he needed to conduct research and publish papers, a venture which brought further success and then disaster. Sargant developed a largely spurious idea about the treatment of recalcitrant cases of pernicious anaemia and published papers recommending it in both 'The Lancet' and the 'British Medical Journal' (with both of whose editors he had become friendly). His work was praised by uncritical seniors but was eventually discredited by the real experts in the field. About 1934 Sargant became depressed to the point of being mentally ill, spent time as a patient in a mental hospital, and became unacceptable as a future teaching-hospital physician. Sargant suffered from depression all his life, and treated himself with a variety of drugs. 
In the mental hospital Sargant became angry about the state of patients with chronic mental illness who were housed in the back wards of the hospital -- untreated, uncared for, and ignored. He turned to psychiatry and was probably the only prominent psychiatrist in the twentieth century to express concern about the suffering of chronically mentally ill people, though he confined his interest largely to those of 'previously good personality'; his autobiography, 'The Unquiet Mind' (1967), reveals the zeal with which he set about his mission. He obtained a post at the Maudsley Hospital, London, under Edward Mapother, and devoted the rest of his life to trying to prove that psychiatry was a branch of clinical medicine, not a 'metaphysical' exercise. Sargant was enthusiastic in using the new physical treatments in psychiatry -- lobotomy (leucotomy), electro-convulsive therapy (ECT), and psychoactive drugs. He always disliked and despised any form of 'talking cure', though he often practised psychotherapy quietly and skilfully himself. His philosophy did not include self-exploration either for himself or for his patients. 
In 1938 Sargant was awarded a Rockefeller travelling fellowship to study in the United States. He returned to Britain at the outbreak of the Second World War, which he spent working on the outskirts of London at Sutton Emergency Hospital (later the Belmont Hospital), a centre for psychologically disturbed and injured servicemen. Here he used leucotomies, ECT, acute sedation with Pentothal and Amytal, and ether abreactions to treat patients. The clinical director, Eliot Slater, approved of Sargant's ideas and added many of his own. Together they wrote 'An Introduction to Physical Methods of Treatment in Psychiatry' (1944), which became a standard textbook and ran into five editions. However 'the early extravagant claims for the efficacy of these methods, particularly in schizophrenia, failed to be substantiated' ('BMJ', 24 Sept 1988, 789). Sargant was largely unsupervised in what he did and during these years he worked out and refined the techniques of physical treatments in mental illness for which he became both famous and infamous. On 10 August 1940 Sargant married Dorothy Margaret Katz Heriot Glen ('b'. 1919/20), daughter of Heriot Riddock Glen, a company director; there were no children. 
After the war Sargant returned to the United States and was impressed by Walter Freeman's new modified leucotomy technique. He also became deeply and permanently interested in the 'brainwashing techniques' he saw in some of the churches in the south, which he related to the process of religious conversion. Over many years he made a series of films on the subject. These were later lodged in the Museum of Mankind in London. In 1948 Sargant was appointed consultant psychiatrist to St Thomas's Hospital, London, where he remained until his retirement, apart from a period of illness from tuberculosis. He spent his convalescence in Majorca, where he became friends with Robert Graves, who encouraged him to write his influential best-seller about brainwashing, 'Battle for the Mind' (1957). Graves corrected the book and also contributed to it. 
Determined to be a physician rather than a psychiatrist, Sargant called himself a 'physician in psychological medicine'. He believed passionately that mental illness was a form of physical disorder and he promoted the cause of physical treatments in psychiatry. He always extolled the virtues of dramatic and often extreme treatments and denigrated psychoanalysis and psychotherapy: 'an ounce of phenobarbitone, or rather some modern tranquilizers, may be worth more than a hundredweight of persuasive talk' ('BMJ', 24 Sept 1988, 789). Much of Sargant's success may be attributed more to his therapeutic fervour and dominating personality than to his methods of treatment. He boasted that he could cure cases of schizophrenia, believed strongly in ECT and leucotomy, did everything he could to ensure that psychiatry was part of general (internal) medicine, and predicted that by the year 1990 mental illness would have ceased to exist. In 1956-7 he was president of the section of psychiatry at the Royal Society of Medicine. He gave long service to the Royal Medico-Psychological Association as its registrar but was opposed to its proposed transformation into the Royal College of Psychiatrists because he wanted psychiatry to remain part of the Royal College of Physicians. However, once the establishment of the new college had become inevitable, he was eager to be its first president and was deeply disappointed when he was not elected. 
Sargant was described as 'the most important figure in post-war psychiatry... huge by any standards in stature and charisma' (Munk, 'Roll'). Of all twentieth-century psychiatrists he was one of the best loved and most hated. He died on 27 August 1988 at Cobley House, East Woodyates, Wiltshire, and was buried on 2 September at St Rumbold's Church, Pentridge, Salisbury. He was survived by his wife. A thanksgiving service was held at St Marylebone parish church, London, on 10 November 1988. 


@@@@@


doc= 40196


Millar, Frederick Robert Hoyer, first Baron Inchyra (1900-1989), diplomatist and civil servant, was born on 6 June 1900 in Montrose, the third son and youngest of three children of Robert Hoyer Millar, timber merchant, of Blair Castle, Culross, Perthshire, and his wife, Alice Anne Combe, daughter of Dr James Simson. Frederick (known as Derick) was educated at Wellington College and New College, Oxford, where he took a second-class honours degree in modern history in 1922 and an MA in 1954 on his election as an honorary fellow of the college. He played rugby for the university without, however, getting a blue. 
In 1922 Millar was an honorary attache at the British embassy in Brussels. In the following year he entered the diplomatic service as a third secretary, first at Berlin and then in Paris. He returned to the Foreign Office in 1928 and moved to Cairo as second secretary in 1930. 
In 1931 Millar married (Anna Judith) Elizabeth (known as Bunchie), daughter of Reneke de Marees van Swinderen, the Netherlands minister in London, and his American wife. Bunchie was a strong and attractive character and a great help to her husband in his career. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Millar returned to London in 1934 as assistant private secretary to the secretary of state and, since there was then no personnel department, was responsible for dealing with all appointments in the Foreign Office and diplomatic service. Millar managed this task with sympathy and skill. His judgement of men and events was eminently sound. 
In 1939 Millar went to Washington as a first secretary and head of Chancery. It was a critical time. Both the ambassador and his minister were Christian Scientists and, during the final illness of the ambassador, the eleventh marquess of Lothian, Millar was in a difficult position. He also had to deal with the rapid build-up of the British departmental and military representation in Washington and the initial problems of the ambassadorship of the first earl of Halifax. He became counsellor in 1941 and was secretary of the British civil secretariat in Washington in 1943-4. His administrative skills and his Washington connections served him in good stead in this testing period. 
In 1944 Millar became counsellor and in 1947 assistant under-secretary in the Foreign Office. He returned to Washington as minister in 1948. He played an important part in the establishment and early years of NATO, becoming in 1950 its UK deputy and in 1952 the permanent representative on the NATO council. In 1953 he was appointed UK high commissioner in Germany, where he had an influential role during the transition from allied control to diplomatic recognition, and in 1955 he became the first post-war ambassador at Bonn. 
An excellent administrator and effective operator in the foreign service, in 1957 Millar returned to the Foreign Office as permanent under-secretary of state and head of the diplomatic service, at a time when the foreign service had been badly shaken and divided by the Suez crisis. His robust but sympathetic manner and his administrative ability soon restored morale and made him an outstanding and popular head of the service. He retired in 1961, when he was created a hereditary peer as Baron Inchyra. He took his title from Inchyra House, his Perthshire home, and sat on the cross-benches. He was king-at-arms of the Order of St Michael and St George, and became a member of the queen's bodyguard for Scotland. He was also a governor of Wellington College for many years. 
On his retirement from the foreign service Inchyra accepted a number of appointments in banking, finance, industry, and insurance. He was also chairman of the British Red Cross and of the Anglo-Netherlands Society in London. In between these activities and in his final retirement he energetically pursued his favourite sport of shooting. He was appointed CVO (1938), CMG (1939), KCMG (1949), and GCMG (1956). 
In appearance Inchyra was very tall and rather portly with a florid complexion and a bald head. He generally moved slowly in a dignified manner. He was a good companion, and had been a popular figure in Oxford and a member of the Bullingdon Club. In April 1989 he was incapacitated by a massive stroke, but lingered on until he died at the Royal Infirmary, Perth, on 16 October 1989. He was succeeded in the barony by his elder son, Robert Charles Reneke Hoyer Millar ('b'. 1935). 
Sherfield', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40197


Foot, Hugh Mackintosh, Baron Caradon (1907-1990), colonial administrator and diplomatist, was born on 8 October 1907 in Plymouth, the second son and second child in the family of five sons and two daughters of Isaac Foot (1880-1960), solicitor and Liberal MP for Bodmin, Cornwall, and his wife Eva (1878-1946), daughter of Dr Angus Mackintosh DPH of Fincastle, Perthshire. Isaac Foot's life centred on Liberal politics and Methodism. His children were brought up in a devout Christian home, over-brimming with books and the scholarship of radical philosophy. Hugh was the tallest and strongest of the children and the only one to win a scholarship to his school (the Quaker Leighton Park School in Reading). Unlike his father and three of his brothers, he did not enter the law, and whereas Dingle ['see 'Foot, Sir Dingle Mackintosh], John, Michael ['see 'Foot, Michael Mackintosh], and Christopher studied at Oxford, Hugh went to St John's College, Cambridge, where he rowed and played cricket. Politics and public speaking were a busy part of his life and, following his father's radical Liberalism, he became president of the Liberal Club at Cambridge. Michael wrote of him later: 'He had acquired strange tastes and was ready to indulge in pastimes which the rest of us wouldn't be seen dead at -- such as rowing, playing polo, dressing up in Goering-like uniforms and enjoying it, and occasionally even -- at a pinch -- placing some trust in the word of Tory Prime Ministers.' Four of the Foot brothers, including Hugh (1929), became presidents of their university unions. Hugh Foot obtained a second class (division one) in part one of the history tripos (1927), and a second class (division two) in part two of the law tripos (1929). 
In 1929 Foot joined the colonial service and was posted to Palestine. He became an Arab linguist and learned about the stresses and strains of the Middle East, developing an understanding which was invaluable when in later years he worked at the United Nations. In 1936 he married, in Haifa, (Florence) Sylvia (1910-1985), daughter of Arthur White Millar Tod OBE, director of the Steam Navigation Company of Baghdad. They had three sons, one of them the writer and journalist Paul Mackintosh Foot (1937-2004), and a daughter. Foot was back in London in the Colonial Office in 1938-9. On the outbreak of the Second World War he was appointed assistant British resident in Transjordan, where he stayed until 1942. In 1943 he became lieutenant-colonel in charge of military administration in Cyrenaica and later in the same year was sent as colonial secretary to Cyprus, which was dangerously near to German-occupied Greece, Rhodes, and Crete. In 1945 he went happily to Jamaica as colonial secretary and in 1947 he was posted to Nigeria as chief secretary. The preparatory work he did there contributed to Nigerian independence in 1962. He returned to Jamaica in 1951 as governor and captain-general. He was disappointed that plans for a federation of the West Indies were unsuccessful, Jamaica (which attained full independence in 1961) preferring to proceed alone. 
Foot left the Caribbean in 1957 to become governor of the violent, riven island of Cyprus, which had changed dramatically since 1943. Greece and the Greek Cypriots wanted 'enosis' (union), Turkey and the Turkish Cypriots desired partition, and the British government insisted on holding on to all of Cyprus. By 1960, after years of difficult diplomacy, independence was attained, with Britain retaining two sovereign bases on the island. The Conservative colonial secretary paid tribute in the House of Commons to Foot's 'unfailing imagination, courage and leadership'. Cyprus was Foot's last colony. For over thirty years he had moved with authority in lands of daunting complexity and engineered their metamorphoses from colonies into free countries, working as a mediator rather than a ruler. He believed that the only way to teach people responsibility was to give it to them. Everywhere he respected the individual dignity of his subjects, never patronizing them, and never remote from their human condition. 
Foot's next move to the United Nations was consistent with his experience and his passionate belief that the UN was the only alternative to the division and destruction of the world. In 1961 he became the British representative on the Trusteeship Council, with special responsibility for Africa. However, Foot could not support the Conservative government's policy on Rhodesia. Deeply troubled, he resigned in 1962, writing: 'I do not feel able to speak in the UN or elsewhere in defence of our position in this matter. I simply cannot do it'. Foot was well aware that this might end his UN career. Yet his international reputation and popularity were such that he was invited by the UN to remain in charge of its own development programme. 
After the Labour Party's victory in 1964 Harold Wilson appointed Foot minister of state at the Foreign Office, and ambassador to the UN (1964-70). He was created a life peer as Baron Caradon (1964) and spoke on occasion forcefully in the House of Lords, particularly on the role of the UN charter in dealing with the world's dilemmas of violence and poverty. His efforts produced resolution 242 which formed the basis of the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. In New York his energy and robust optimism could be demanding and sometimes colleagues and staff could not keep up with the speed of his thinking and vision of his arguments. He certainly tried to implement the ideals of the charter. From 1971 he was consultant to the UN Development Programme, a post from which he retired in 1975, but he continued to advise in the troubled places of the world. He had a rare adaptability to peoples and places, which he happily shared with his talented, dedicated wife. 
Foot was appointed OBE (1939), CMG (1946), KCMG (1951), and GCMG (1957). He became an honorary fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, in 1960 and was sworn of the privy council in 1968. Foot was often regarded as a colonial governor who ran out of colonies. He rejoiced that every colony he governed became independent. He was at the axis of an old empire swinging through conciliation to freedom and independence, enfranchising more than 6 million people in twenty years. Caradon died on 5 September 1990 in Plymouth. 
Lena M. Jeger', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40198


Rubbra, (Charles) Edmund Duncan (1901-1986), composer and pianist, was born on 23 May 1901 at 57 Cambridge Street, Northampton, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Edmund James Rubbra, journeyman shoe-last maker, clock and watch repairer, and, later, jeweller, and his wife, Mary Jane Bailey. The name Duncan was not on his birth certificate; it was the surname of his first wife and he used it after his first marriage. According to family tradition, the Rubbras originated from Bologna in Italy. He left school at fourteen and worked briefly as an errand boy and then a railway clerk. In his home there was a deep love of music and as a youngster he was much drawn to the music of Cyril Scott and Claude Debussy. Eventually he took lessons with Scott, and then went on to study composition at Reading University, where Gustav Holst taught, and counterpoint at the Royal College of Music with one of the great theorists of the day, R. O. Morris. 
After leaving the college in 1925, Rubbra pursued a freelance career as a pianist, taking whatever teaching, performing, and journalistic work came to hand. His repertory included both Arnold Schoenberg and Aleksandr Skryabin, and he was a perceptive exponent of J. S. Bach. During the 1930s he attracted increasing attention with such works as the 'Sinfonia concertante' for piano and orchestra (1934) and his first symphony (1937). 
During the Second World War Rubbra served in the army, as an anti-aircraft gunner in the Royal Artillery and then in the army music unit, and made an appearance in battledress at London's Henry Wood Promenade Concerts to conduct the first performance of his fourth symphony (1942). Rubbra spent much of his army service entertaining the troops with the trio he had formed with Erich Gruenberg and William Pleeth (and was very fond of telling how the three were once introduced as being 'at the top of the tree in their various string combinations'). The Rubbra-Gruenberg-Pleeth trio continued for some years after the war until the combined pressures of Rubbra's creative work and teaching led to its demise. In 1947 he was appointed lecturer in music at Oxford University, becoming a fellow of Worcester College in 1963. He remained at Oxford until 1968. In 1961 he also joined the staff of the Guildhall School of Music, where he taught composition until 1974. 
Rubbra belonged to the same generation as Sir William Walton, Sir Lennox Berkeley, and Sir Michael Tippett but had little in common with them and even less with such European contemporaries as Karl Amadeus Hartmann, Luigi Dallapiccola, and Dmitry Shostakovich. It has been said that his music was not of his time, yet could have been composed at no other. It is rooted in place -- England -- and, more specifically, England's musical heritage lies at its heart. There is little of the pastoral school in it, though Rubbra revered Ralph Vaughan Williams and also possessed a keen sense of nature's power, which is clearly evident in the fourth (1941-2) and seventh symphonies (1957). Rubbra's outlook was far from insular: he set to music poetry ranging from the time of the Chinese Tang dynasty and of Icelandic ballads to medieval Latin and French verse, and his interest in eastern culture, which arose in childhood, remained lifelong. In 'Counterpoint' (1960), Rubbra argued that western music had grown out of melody and in particular the interaction of independent melodic lines; this was certainly a dominant principle in his own music. Such was the eloquence and quality of his vocal music that some critics spoke of his symphonies as 'motets for orchestra'. His choral music was finely fashioned and elevated in feeling, and his symphonies likewise were touched by a preoccupation with linear growth. Matter, not manner, was his central concern. 
Rubbra's early symphonies are difficult, though not in the way that some contemporary music is, for the musical language itself is quite straightforward. There is nothing abstruse about the symphonies' tonality and harmony, which is basically diatonic, but they are difficult because the continuity of their melodic and polyphonic growth is logical and unremitting. The first two symphonies were composed in quick succession (both were finished in 1937) and it was obvious that, whatever their failings, Rubbra was a symphonist to be reckoned with. The third, which he finished in 1939, was a positive reaction to the experience of the second, and is outwardly the most genial and relaxed of the early symphonies. The orchestration is much cleaner and the first movement much closer to sonata form. The opening of the fourth symphony is beautiful and free from any kind of artifice, having serenity and quietude. This symphony, like the third, is not so dense contrapuntally as the first two, and though practically every idea evolves in some way or another out of the opening figure, its first movement is a sonata design. Nothing could be further removed from the grim years of the Second World War than this symphony. In 1948 came the fifth and most often played of the Rubbra symphonies; it enjoyed something of a vogue in the 1950s. Sir Adrian Boult gave the work its premiere, Sir John Barbirolli recorded it, and Leopold Stokowski briefly included it in his repertory. 
After the seventh symphony (1957), Rubbra's music fell on hard times and enjoyed relatively little exposure. His eighth symphony (1968) had to wait three years for a performance and the ninth ('Sinfonia sacra', 1971-2), for soloists, chorus, and orchestra, possibly his masterpiece, also suffered relative neglect. It tells the story of the resurrection, and with its soloists and chorus would closely resemble a passion were it not for its symphonic cohesion. Like most of Rubbra's finest music, it unfolds with a seeming inevitability and naturalness, and a powerful sense of purpose that justify its inclusion in the symphonic canon. His scoring has been criticized, but conductors such as Arturo Toscanini, Eugene Ormandy, and Neeme Jarvi recorded his orchestration of Brahms's 'Variations and Fugue on a Theme of Handel'. 
Rubbra was of medium height and was for most of his adult life bearded. He possessed a beatific smile and exercised great personal charm. Always courteous, a supportive and illuminating teacher, he radiated warmth and spirituality. His deeply religious nature shines through much of his music: the canto movement of the sixth symphony (1954), for example, and the eighth, subtitled 'Hommage a Teilhard de Chardin'. (Although he was much influenced by Buddhist teachings, Rubbra was received into the Catholic faith in 1947.) He never lost this feeling for organic growth essential to the symphony: his tenth (1974) and eleventh (1979) are highly concentrated one-movement affairs of much substance. 
Rubbra's output was extensive and ran to over 160 works. Apart from the symphonies, his most important works included a viola concerto in A major, op. 75 (1952); a piano concerto in G major, op. 85 (1956); a violin concerto, op. 103 (1959); an improvisation for violin and orchestra, op. 89; four string quartets: F minor, op. 35 (1933, revised 1946), E[flat] op. 55 (1952), op. 112 (1962-3), and op. 150 (1976-7); two piano trios: op. 68 (1950) and op. 138 (1973); two violin sonatas: op. 31 (1931) and op. 133 (1967); and a cello sonata in G minor, op. 60 (1946). All of his symphonies have been commercially recorded, and there is an extensive discography which includes his two masses. His last work was the 'Sinfonietta' for large string orchestra, op. 163, which he completed in 1980, in his late seventies, shortly before suffering a stroke, from which he eventually died. 
Rubbra was appointed CBE in 1960. He became a member of the Royal Academy of Music in 1970 and a fellow of the Guildhall School of Music in 1968. He had honorary degrees from Leicester (LLD, 1959), Durham (DMus, 1949), and Reading (DLitt, 1978). His music does not possess the dramatic power which characterizes that of Vaughan Williams and Walton but has a sense of organic continuity that is both highly developed and immediately evident to the listener. Perhaps the most distinctive and individual quality that shines through his most inspired music, such as the opening of the seventh symphony or the 'Missa in honorem sancti Dominici' (op. 66, 1948), is breadth and serenity. 
Rubbra's first marriage, which lasted only a few months, was to Lilian Annie Duncan. There were no children. On 25 November 1933 he married the violinist Antoinette Chaplin ('b'. 1901/2), from France, daughter of William Chaplin, engineer; they had two sons. He separated from his second wife during the 1950s and in 1975, following her death, he married Colette Muriel Marian Yardley, daughter of Harold Evans, a Sunbeam Motors salesman. They had one son. Rubbra died on 14 February 1986 in Gerrards Cross, where his home was Lindens, Bull Lane. 
Robert Layton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40199


Bowden, (Bertram) Vivian, Baron Bowden (1910-1989), scientist and educationist, was born on 18 January 1910 in Chesterfield, Derbyshire, the elder child and only son of Bertram Caleb Bowden, primary school headmaster in Chesterfield, and his wife, Sarah Elizabeth, daughter of John Thomas Moulton, of Throwley Hall, Staffordshire. He was educated at Chesterfield grammar school and became a scholar at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he was awarded first-class honours in both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1930 and 1931). He was awarded a PhD at Cambridge for a thesis on the structure of radioactive nuclei. 
Bowden then became an Imperial Chemical Industries fellow at the University of Amsterdam (1934-5), sixth-form master at Liverpool collegiate school (1935-7), and chief physics master at Oundle School (1937-40), before moving to the Ministry of Defence Telecommunications Research Establishment, initially at Swanage and then in Malvern (1940-43). Here he investigated the use of radar to detect aircraft and precisely position them. This work began in Malvern, and in May 1943 moved to Washington, where Bowden led a British team working with the Americans at the naval research laboratories. He showed his capacity to earn the trust of people at all levels in an organization, and to cut through delaying bureaucracy to get things done. In 1973 he was given the Pioneer award by the American Institution of Electrical and Electronic Engineers. The citation, which recognized 'work done at least 20 years before but which remains important and in use', applauded Bowden's 'wartime radar identification system that has become an essential aid for modern air traffic control'. 
After the war Bowden had a brief period at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell (July-December 1946) before becoming a partner with Sir Robert Watson-Watt & Partners (1947-50). He left the partnership when Sir Robert Watson-Watt moved to Canada, and joined Ferranti (Digital Computers) Ltd to attempt to sell digital computers at a profit. He thought it a most peculiar job until he met a man on the 'Queen Mary' who sold lighthouses on commission. In the brief period of this appointment (1950-53) he successfully applied his great energy. He was particularly effective in explaining, with uncanny prescience, the dramatic effect that the digital computer was destined to have. Some of these thoughts he gathered together in his book 'Faster than Thought' (1953). 
In 1953 Bowden became principal of the Manchester College of Science and Technology. At that time it taught a modest number of students on degree courses of the University of Manchester and a large number of part-time students, who studied for the national certificate and other qualifications. Shortly after Bowden arrived, a period of rapid national expansion in higher education was launched, and he exploited this to the full. He attracted substantial resources, which transformed what he referred to as the surrounding dereliction and slums into an attractive campus with fine buildings. The university numbers expanded by a factor of about ten to the point where the city decided to transfer the non-university work to another college, much to Bowden's regret. The Manchester College then became an independent chartered body, the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology (UMIST), and was put on the University Grants Committee's list. 
The development of UMIST was Bowden's great achievement. He had drive and energy, and a clear vision of what he wished to achieve. He did things by impulse, offering chairs to outstanding candidates at chance meetings in airport lounges and leaving his efficient and supportive registrar, Joe Burgess, to tidy up the legal processes afterwards. He made UMIST visible to the media by his public statements, in which he generated quotable aphorisms. He employed striking statistics to back his arguments. In these he often used the truth with some economy, but his conclusions were powerful. His national visibility led Harold Wilson to make him a life peer as Baron Bowden of Chesterfield (1963) and to appoint him minister for education and science (1964). Wilson hoped that Bowden would assist the development of the white-hot technological revolution, but it was not to be. Bowden has been described, accurately, as a man possessing candour without guile. This is not a quality that promises success in dealing with permanent civil servants, his relationship with whom Bowden described as 'like fighting a feather bed; you meet no resistance but you cannot get through it'. So he left the ministry in 1965, after having set up the industrial training boards, which was a brave attempt to persuade industry to contribute to the cost of training the skills it needed. He returned to UMIST. Here he continued to twinge consciences. He criticized the government for a fiscal policy that deterred industrial investment in new plant and processes. He counselled against the bifurcation of higher education. He despaired of the inadequate number of engineering and technology graduates entering British industry, and he was forever petitioning the city to act to reduce the 'decaying slums around the UMIST campus'. He retired in 1976. 
Bowden was a mixture of the ruthless and the humane. He had a portly figure, which could be recognized at some distance by its rolling gait. As he said, 'I walk as if one leg is always shorter than the next one.' His door was always open. He was continually visible around the campus, and took a keen interest in the problems and successes of all his staff, from the humble to the great. His concern with staff morale led him to pioneer the involvement of students in the decision-making bodies of UMIST. For this he was roundly criticized by the traditionalists, but later UMIST was to avoid the excesses of the student unrest of the 1960s. He was honorary fellow of the Institution of Civil Engineers (FICE) (1975) and had honorary degrees from Rensellaer Polytechnic, USA (1974), Manchester (1976), and Kumasi, Ghana (1977). 
Bowden married in 1939 Marjorie Mary (died 1957), daughter of William G. H. Browne, chief government sanitary inspector in British Guiana. They had a son and two daughters. The marriage was dissolved in 1954. In 1955 he married Diana Stewart. They were divorced in 1961 and in 1967 he married Mary Maltby, who died in 1971. She was the daughter of Bernard W. Maltby, of Ilkeston, Derbyshire. In 1974 he married Phyllis, former wife of John Henry Lewis James, and daughter of Stanley Ernest Myson, postman. This marriage was dissolved in 1983. Bowden died on 28 July 1989 in a nursing home in Bowdon, Cheshire. 
K. M. Entwistle', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40200


Shaw, Charles James Dalrymple, Baron Kilbrandon (1906-1989), judge, was born on 15 August 1906 in Martnaham, near Maybole, Ayrshire, the only son and second of three children of James Edward Shaw, of High Greenan by Ayr, solicitor and county clerk of Ayrshire, and his wife, Gladys Elizabeth, 'nee' Lester. He was educated at Charterhouse School, Balliol College, Oxford, and Edinburgh University. He obtained a second class in philosophy, politics, and economics at Oxford (1928) and an LLB at Edinburgh (1932). 
Shaw was called to the Scottish bar in 1932. In 1937 he married (Ruth) Caroline, youngest daughter of Frank Morrison Seafield Grant, landowner, of Knockie, Whitebridge, Inverness; they had two sons and three daughters. By 1939 he had a substantial junior practice, had been commissioned as a territorial officer in the Royal Artillery, and had sustained a knee injury while skiing, which made him lame for the rest of his life. In 1939 he was mobilized and served in the Royal Artillery, mostly on the staff in the rank of major (from 1941), until the end of the Second World War in 1945. On his return to the bar his practice rapidly increased. He took silk in 1949. It then became clear that, despite a tendency to be unbusinesslike and absent-minded, he was destined for the highest appointments. (He was liable to be found in Kilbrandon on the coast of Argyll, having forgotten a professional engagement in Edinburgh. The unaccountably missing brief would be found among his much-loved music.) 
In 1957 Shaw was elected dean of the Faculty of Advocates, the highest honour which can be conferred on a member of the Scots bar. As dean, he was an anxious guardian of the faculty's traditions. In May 1959 he was appointed to the bench of the Court of Session, taking the judicial title of Lord Kilbrandon. From the outset he displayed the highest judicial qualities -- complete impartiality, patience and courtesy, legal scholarship, and a determination not to be prevented from doing justice by any rules of mere procedural law. His judicial career in Scotland ended with his appointment in 1965 as chairman of the Scottish Law Commission, for he retained that office until his elevation to the House of Lords in 1971, as a life peer, privy councillor, and lord of appeal in ordinary. As chairman he found in Sir Leslie Scarman, the first chairman of the English Law Commission, a kindred spirit. Kilbrandon was also a member of the royal commission on the constitution from 1969 to 1972 and its chairman in 1972-3. The commission's report was a major contribution to the contemporary debate on devolution. In 1969 he was elected an honorary fellow of Balliol, a distinction which he particularly cherished, and in 1974 he was elected visitor, a position he held until 1986. He became an honorary LLD of Aberdeen (1965) and an honorary DSc of Edinburgh (1970). 
Kilbrandon's elevation to the Lords was predictable. For three years he sat as the junior Scottish colleague on the judicial committee of the octogenarian Baron Reid. In an apt obituary of Reid, Kilbrandon wrote: 'Counsel found him a formidable figure, and so did I'. Kilbrandon, on the other hand, did not have it in him to be what Ronald Knox called an 'awful presence', unless dealing with someone whose conduct gave him no option. In a line of Scots who have become lords of appeal in ordinary, Kilbrandon was 'sui generis'. Large of frame, heart, and mind, he had the traditional Scottish regard for legal principles but he had more. He had the breadth of outlook, culture, and philosophical learning of James Dalrymple, first Viscount Stair, the father of Scots law. Endowed with a verbal dexterity, analogous to the cartoonist's art, he was able to compress profound and novel ideas into a synoptic phrase. In his Hamlyn lectures (1966) he derided the civil jury as a mere 'bingo session'. His observation in 'Customs and Excise v. Thorn Electrical' (1975), that 'a modern Hampden would in many quarters be pilloried as a tax evader', was worthy of F. X. J. Russell, Baron Russell of Killowen. Kilbrandon's most lasting memorial may be the 'Social Work (Scotland) Act' (1968), which arose from his report for the departmental committee on the treatment of children and young persons in Scotland (1964). Kilbrandon retired as a lord of appeal in ordinary in 1976. 
Kilbrandon was an outstandingly handsome man. Over 6 feet in height, he was a striking figure in his Inverness cape, limping at a smart pace from Westminster to Gray's Inn, where he lived during term. He was elected an honorary bencher in 1971. Until almost seventy he retained a boyish appearance enhanced by his thick, wavy hair. In old age he enjoyed a peaceful retirement in the beautiful setting of Kilbrandon House on the island of Seil in Argyll. The essential Kilbrandon was the man of religion whose faith pervaded his life and outlook. He liked to speak of himself as a Catholic although he was, denominationally, a Scottish Episcopalian of high-church outlook. One who knew him well described him as 'a practising Christian'. This was apt. His amiability, sweetness of character, freedom from prejudice, and kindness were all exceptional. He died from heart disease in Kilbrandon House, Balvicar, by Oban, Argyll, on 10 September 1989. 
D. W. R. Brand', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40201


Davin, Daniel Marcus (1913-1990), writer and publisher, was born on 1 September 1913 in Invercargill, New Zealand, the fourth of the six children of Patrick Davin (1877-1958), railwayman and smallholder, and his wife, Mary Magdalen, 'nee' Sullivan (1878-1944), daughter of Daniel Sullivan and his wife, Nora. The Davins were Irish Catholic smallholders in Galway, their name coming from either the Gaelic 'damh', meaning an ox or a stag, or from 'dahm', a poet. Young Dan always favoured the author over the animal. Although his father and his maternal grandparents had fled the poverty and superstition of the 'old country' at the turn of the century, he would always remain an Irish New Zealander rather than a British subject. This inheritance underlay his lifelong love of the soil and its produce -- the five-year-old's delight in his mother's nasturtiums, the seventy-five-year-old's in his own potatoes. It underlay also an unswerving sympathy for the underdog, the underpaid and underprivileged, manual workers, authors, and soldiers. 
From the age of five, when Dan Davin taught himself to read, he was aware of all these occupations. The First World War took its toll of the menfolk of Gore, the small town to which the family had moved in 1914. Those who survived brought death home to that and many other households in the form of the flu virus whose victims included Daniel and Nora Sullivan and their younger daughter, Nora. These and other deaths -- among them, those of a favourite dog and bull calves routinely slaughtered by his father -- may have exacerbated a tendency to depression, inherited from his mother, that began to manifest itself in Davin's adolescence. 
In 1920 the family moved again, this time to Invercargill, where the following year Davin began as a pupil at the Marist Brothers' School. The conventional Catholic Irish education he received there was supplemented by the myths and legends of an itinerant Irish story-teller, and by the discovery of a cache of books (many of them literary) discarded by a retired schoolteacher. 
Matriculating in 1929, Davin came first in Southland and fifteenth in New Zealand overall 'with special distinction in English, French and Latin' (Brother Egbert's testimonial, 2 Aug 1933, Davin papers). He won scholarships to Sacred Heart College in Auckland and, later, to Otago University, whose Presbyterian traditions he frequently challenged, emerging with formidable debating skills, a first-class degree in English, another in Latin, and -- after a prolonged battle with the custodians of respectability -- a Rhodes scholarship. He was by then in love with a lively fellow student. Winifred (always known as Winnie) Gonley ['see below'] was the daughter of Irish Catholic parents, with ambitions as a writer, and more widely read than her Rhodes scholar fiance with the 'wonderful dark-brown voice' (Denys Hawthorne, quoted in Wilson, 205) to whom she waved farewell from an Auckland wharf in August 1936. 
Davin's introduction to England was London's Cable Street riot of 4 October, which he witnessed: an early flickering of the conflagration soon to engulf Spain and, eventually, the world. A natural republican and freethinker, he was dismayed by the Catholic church's support for Franco, and during his years at Oxford finally lost the faith that had begun to fray in Otago. Its loss and the bitterness of Adam unparadised found eloquent expression in his poem 'Knowledge' that begins: '
God blazed in every gorsebush 

When I was a child. 

Forbidden fruits were orchards, 

And flowers grew wild. 




God is a shadow now. 

The gorse blooms pale. 

Branches in the orchard bow 

With fruits grown stale. 

' For his first term or two at Oxford, a depressed Davin 'hated Balliol and hated everybody' (Davin papers) but a first visit to Ireland made a deep impression on him, and with Winnie's arrival in Europe in summer 1937 his spirits rose. He enjoyed the classical texts he was reading for the honour school of 'literae humaniores'; drafted his first novel; was at the centre of a circle of scintillating friends; and learned to love Paris, which nourished his bohemian instincts. In July 1939 he was awarded a first-class degree and, aware that they might soon be separated by war, he and Winnie were married in Oxford on 22 July 1939. 
Hitler invaded Poland on Davin's twenty-sixth birthday. A recruitment board assigned him to the infantry and, in May 1940, he emerged from an officer cadet training unit as a second lieutenant in the 2nd New Zealand expeditionary force, the principal fighting component of which, 2nd New Zealand division, was known as 'the Div'. He saw action as a platoon commander in Greece and as battalion intelligence officer in Crete, where he was wounded. Released from hospital, he was transferred to the intelligence staff of army headquarters in Cairo, there revelling in the effervescent company of such other poets and scholars as Paddy Costello, Lawrence Durrell, G. S. Fraser, Bernard Spencer, Bill Williams, and Reggie Smith. Many would play a part in his post-war life, as would a young German woman, Elisabeth Berndt, with whom he also revelled. 
In autumn 1942 Davin served with an intelligence unit from the battle of Alamein to the fall of Tripoli; then, after three months at staff college and three on leave, in January 1944 rejoined the Div. as its intelligence officer at the siege of Monte Cassino. He worked closely with General Freyberg in the battle for Monastery Hill and the more successful assault on Monte Lignano. On Freyberg's recommendation, he was then transferred to the War Office in London as a New Zealand representative on the Allied Control Commission for Germany, set up to administer the dismantling of Nazi institutions. 
Reunited with Winnie and two daughters, Anna and Delia, born while he was on active service, he was able to balance an administrative with a literary career, a difficult balance to be maintained -- at some cost to the latter -- for the rest of his working life. A darkly Dostoyevskian, long-delayed novel, 'Cliffs of Fall', was published in 1945 and, at the war's end, he was appointed an editor at the Clarendon Press and returned with his family to Oxford. 
There he was greeted with the dismaying news that in 1943 Elisabeth Berndt had given birth to his child, a daughter to be known as Patty, and now wanted him to help them settle in England. Nothing better illustrates the loyalty characteristic of both Dan and Winnie Davin than their solution to this problem: Elisabeth would join their household, ostensibly as housekeeper, and the four unwitting half-sisters (Brigid Davin was born in 1945) would be brought up together. They lived in commendable harmony for almost four years, their Southmoor Road house becoming a famous oasis for writers and scholars from 'the round earth's imagined corners' (John Donne, 'Holy Sonnet', 7). 
Under the tutelage of Kenneth Sisam, a distinguished medievalist and secretary to the delegates of Oxford University Press, Davin became by day an expert editor. His evenings and weekends he would spend as a writer, at his own desk or a bar in Fitzrovia, then the failing heart of literary London. Both by day and in the evenings he was extraordinarily productive. A volume of his short stories, 'The Gorse Blooms Pale' (1947), was followed over the years by six novels: 'For the Rest of our Lives' (1947), 'Roads from Home' (1949), 'The Sullen Bell' (1956), 'No Remittance' (1959), 'Not Here, Not Now' (1970), and 'Brides of Price' (1972). There were three other collections of his short stories: 'Breathing Spaces' (1975), 'Selected Stories' (1981), and the 'Salamander and the Fire: Collected War Stories' (1986). Davin's fiction has its strengths -- evidenced, most notably, in his autobiographical war novel, 'For the Rest of our Lives', and in his short stories -- but technical innovation is not one of them, and his most lasting contribution as a writer may prove to be two non-fiction works in which the novelist's eye for detail and ear for dialogue assist the historian trained in the school of Thucydides: his volume, 'Crete', in the 'Official History of New Zealand in the Second World War' (1953); and the biographer modelling a memoir on Johnson's 'Lives of the Poets'. Davin once wrote: 'In my arrogant youth, I had wanted to be a 'universal writer' -- poet, historian, novelist. It was only gradually that I realized that, after one's twenties, life is a fighting withdrawal' (Davin, 'My language and myself', 'Round Table', 262, 1976, 22). His memoir, 'Closing Times' (1975), chronicles the fighting withdrawals of seven of his friends: the writers Julian Maclaren-Ross, Bertie Rodgers, Louis MacNeice, Enid Starkie, Joyce Cary, Dylan Thomas, and Itzik Manger. The most memorable presence, however, in this gallery of ebullient, funny, tender portraits is that of the artist himself, cigarette-holder in hand, eyes half closed against the smoke. 
When Sisam retired from Oxford University Press in 1948, to be succeeded as secretary by Arthur Norrington, Davin had become assistant secretary with special responsibility for the Clarendon Press. Over the next thirty years his mastery of the arts of friendship, as much as his intellectual attainments, made him the greatest academic publisher of his time. DMD (as he was always known at the press) could read five languages; knew everyone the press needed to know; knew the book that needed to be written or edited -- and knew how it should be done -- often before its eventual author or editor. His support was absolute, his workload legendary: eighty letters dictated at a sitting. No editorial pencil moved so swiftly or with such surgical precision, and no academic publisher before him initiated and saw to completion so many major projects. He had his eccentricities: 'an uncommon gift for enjoying his own aversions -- parties, dining out, travel, committees, formal social occasions, other people's problems. No man who longed so much for the quiet of his own fireside has been so often out' (Peter Sutcliffe, quoted in Wilson, 156). 
DMD had his weaknesses, some that would have an impact on the history of Oxford University Press. In 1967 Oxford University's hebdomadal council instituted a committee, under the chairmanship of Sir Humphrey Waldock, to report on the structure and operations of the university press. Davin was much involved with this. In 1970 his designation changed from assistant secretary to deputy secretary and academic publisher. The Waldock report was published that year, and as a consequence of its recommendations and the press's poor financial results in 1971 and 1972, management consultants were called in. Davin had already seen the writing on the wall, which he correctly translated as 'Management, Marketing, Money', and did not like what he saw. Last of the scholar-publishers, he was not prepared to lower his standards. He was not a good manager, and disliked delegating and supervising. He was a good officer, a natural leader, generating a loyalty in his staff as absolute as his to them. The handsome lieutenant had become a stocky veteran, wary-eyed and bulldog-jawed, who continued to think, and speak, in military terms -- of tactics, strategy, lines of communication -- and never lost his own tactical sense: in crowded rooms, always taking up a defensive position, backed into a corner with good sight-lines to warn him of the approach of 'difficult' authors. He himself warned the delegates of the press of the qualitative consequences of management decisions taken in the light of the Waldock report, but once they were adopted, he worked to make a success of them. 
The professional disappointments of those years helped prepare Davin for retirement in 1978, the five-hundredth anniversary of printing in Oxford, but he was not prepared for the personal disappointments that followed. Dreams of novels, essays, and stories to be written in a Dorchester-on-Thames cottage -- long his refuge from the world 'of telegrams and anger' (E. M. Forster, 'Howards End', chap. 19) -- were wrecked by bad health and 'writer's block'. He fought them bravely, but was worn out by hard work and hard drinking. The creative capital that might have supported his own writings he had spent too generously refining the writings of others. Failing to make progress with a second volume of memoirs, to be called 'Soldiers and Scholars', he managed nevertheless to write a few stories and more than 100 reviews for the 'Times Literary Supplement'. He was created CBE in 1987 and died at his home, 103 Southmoor Road, Oxford, on 28 September 1990. He was cremated at Oxford on 1 October, and his ashes were scattered in Port Meadow, Oxford, with his wife's, in 1996. 
Davin's last book, 'The Salamander and the Fire' (1986), a collection of his war stories, opened with a characteristic dedication: 'To those who, out of principle, refused to fight, and suffered for it. And to those who fought so that, among much else, that principle should be safeguarded'. This, in its humanity as in its style, expresses the essence of a man worthy to dine at journey's end, as he would have wished, with Boswell and with Johnson. 
Davin's wife, 
Although busy with her three daughters in the post-war years, she was involved in everything Davin wrote and in making the choices for his 'World's Classics' editions of Katherine Mansfield's 'Short Stories', 'New Zealand Stories' (both 1953), and 'English Short Stories of Today' (1958). She was volume editor of the 'Home and health' volume of 'The Oxford Junior Encyclopaedia' (1955) and worked on many of its other volumes. Later she took a full-time job with the education department of Oxford University Press. 
Winnie Davin had a genius for friendship. She nursed the novelist Joyce Cary (1888-1957) through his long last illness and, as his literary executor, edited his incomplete final novel, 'The Captive and the Free' (1959). Friends of the family -- among them writers, artists, teachers, students, many from overseas -- thronged the Davins' house. Winnie was always ready to feed, entertain, listen, and advise. Dan's dedication of 'Closing Times' (his memoir of some important friends) 'to W.K.D. without whom there would have been neither friends nor book' acknowledges this important aspect of their partnership. Winnie made her last visit to New Zealand at eighty-two for Christmas 1991. She remained the centre of an increasingly large family, much loved, respected, and visited by daughters, grandchildren, and friends until her death at the Churchill Hospital, Headington, Oxford, on 26 March 1995; she was cremated on 30 March at Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 40202


Moore, (Charles) Garrett Ponsonby, eleventh earl of Drogheda (1910-1989), newspaper proprietor and opera manager, was born at 40 Wilton Crescent, London, on 23 April 1910, the elder child and only son of Henry Charles Ponsonby Moore, tenth earl of Drogheda, diplomatist, and his wife, Kathleen, daughter of Charles Maitland Pelham Burn, of Grange Park, Edinburgh. He was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, which he left early, without a degree. After two years' bookkeeping at the Mining Trust, the first turning-point of his career came in 1932 when, at Brooks's Club in London, he met Brendan Bracken, and went to work for him at the 'Financial News', selling advertising space. He worked hard at mastering the detail of the newspaper business, made a considerable impression on Bracken, and developed a long, close relationship with him. In 1935 he married Joan Eleanor (1903-1989), daughter of William Henry Carr, who left her mother when she was born. She was an excellent pianist, whose immaculate musical taste stood him often in good stead. They had one child, a son. 
In the Second World War he served briefly in France, as a captain with the 53rd battalion of the heavy anti-aircraft regiment, Royal Artillery, and was then appointed to the staff of the war cabinet secretariat (1941) and later the Ministry of Production (1942-5). By the end of the war he was back at the 'Financial News', as managing director. 
In 1945, at Bracken's instruction, he went out and bought the 'Financial Times'. The two newspapers merged under the one title. For twenty-five years, as managing director of the 'Financial Times' (1945-70), Drogheda (who succeeded his father in 1957) devoted himself to its commercial expansion and editorial improvement, taking particular pleasure in stimulating its coverage of the arts, the other great passion and interest of his life. He allowed the editor, Sir L. Gordon Newton, to edit, but pursued him daily with a string of memoranda, demanding answers to pertinent questions. If none was received Drogheda persisted. 
Drogheda used the same tactic at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, where, after serving as secretary to the board from 1951, he was its chairman from 1958 to 1974. He bombarded the general administrators, Sir David Webster and later Sir John Tooley, with similar missives, which were known as Droghedagrams. At Covent Garden Drogheda attempted to insist that the board was entitled to approve executive artistic decisions, such as the choice of designer for a particular opera. Webster resisted and Georg Solti, engaged by Drogheda as musical director from 1961, never tolerated such interference. Solti's appointment, the decision to give opera in the original language rather than in English, and the high standards that resulted were the principal achievements of Drogheda's chairmanship, which also saw the birth and growth of the Friends of Covent Garden. The Droghedagrams were addressed also to those critics on the 'Financial Times''s pages and elsewhere whose views did not, in the author's opinion, do the opera house justice. These would arrive by messenger on a motorcycle early in the morning the review appeared. It was not unknown for them to be brought round, should the victim live close enough to his house in Lord North Street, by Drogheda himself, in slippers, pyjamas, and dressing-gown. 
Drogheda's handsome looks and languid appearance concealed an iron determination to secure his ends. Charming, but obdurate; a dandy, but determined; debonair, but persistent, he would stop at nothing on the newspaper's or the opera house's commercial behalf, pursuing advertisers or possible benefactors without compunction. He struck up friendships with employees of every rank, and treated very many with great personal kindness. He had an acute mind, which expressed itself fluently and clearly on paper, but was guided, he himself thought, always by instinct. 
Drogheda was chairman of Financial Times Ltd (1971-5) and of the Newspaper Publishers' Association (1968-70). He chaired the London celebrations committee for the queen's silver jubilee in 1977. From 1941 he served as a director of 'The Economist', to which he was much attached. He was a commander of the Legion d'honneur (1960) and of the order of merit of Italy (1968) and was grand officer of the order of Leopold II of Belgium (1974). He was appointed OBE in 1946, KBE in 1964, and knight of the Garter in 1972. 
Drogheda died on 24 December 1989 (eight days after his wife), at Englefield Green, Surrey. He was succeeded in the earldom by his son, Henry Dermot Ponsonby Moore ('b'. 1937). 
Jeremy Isaacs', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40203


Bentinck, Victor Frederick William Cavendish-, ninth duke of Portland (1897-1990), diplomatist and businessman, was born on 18 June 1897 at 16 Mansfield Street, London. He was the younger son and third of the four children of (William George) Frederick Cavendish-Bentinck (1856-1948), barrister, who managed the ducal family's Marylebone estate, and his wife, Ruth Mary Cavendish-Bentinck (1867-1953), who was the illegitimate daughter of Edward Adolphus Ferdinand St Maur, Earl St Maur ['see under 'St Maur, Edward Adolphus, twelfth duke of Somerset], a son of the duke of Somerset, and was reputed to have Gypsy blood. Bill Bentinck was educated at Wellington College, but left at seventeen without making a mark and in August 1916 was appointed honorary attache at the British legation at Christiania (Oslo). In 1918 he enlisted and trained with the household brigade but saw no active service. He entered the diplomatic service in 1919, missing the chance of university education, and was posted as third secretary to the legation at Warsaw. It was as ambassador at Warsaw twenty-seven years later that he ended a diplomatic career in which he achieved special distinction as chairman of the wartime joint intelligence committee (1939-45). In 1922 he began work in the Foreign Office and took charge of administrative arrangements for the Lausanne conference before moving to the embassy in Paris as second secretary. There in 1924 he contracted a marriage that soon cast a shadow over a very promising career. His wife, Clothilde, was the daughter of James Bruce Quigley, a lawyer from Kentucky; her lifestyle was extravagant and she had a talent for quarrelling with other diplomatic wives. Bentinck was a conciliator by nature, though well able to fight his corner. His tall, stooping figure and rather myopic look belied the resolution he displayed in a crisis. 
Back in the Foreign Office in 1925, Bentinck served in the League of Nations department and had a useful role at the Locarno conference. He was promoted first secretary and sent back to Paris in 1928; but, as his domestic problems worsened, assignments grew shorter and further from the 'inner circle': Athens in 1932 was followed by Santiago in 1933. In 1937, however, he was recalled to the Foreign Office as assistant in the Egyptian department and there acquired experience of handling military matters. In the summer of 1939 his wife left without warning for the USA, taking their two children -- a boy and a girl. Her departure coincided with the high point of his diplomatic career, when the Foreign Office, which had been reluctant to pool intelligence with the armed services, appointed him chairman of the joint intelligence committee and he found himself, as a civilian and relatively junior, reporting to the chiefs of staff. His perceptiveness and tact enabled him to overcome service rivalries and weld the joint intelligence committee into a highly effective instrument. He was appointed CMG in 1942 and promoted counsellor to head the newly created services liaison department of the Foreign Office. 
Despite wartime success, Bentinck's diplomatic career was doomed. He had formed a close friendship with a Canadian, Kathleen Elsie, widow of Arthur Richie Tillotson and daughter of Arthur Barry of Montreal, but his absent wife refused to divorce him. He explained his difficulties to the Foreign Office, which persuaded him in July 1945 to take the key post of ambassador to Poland, a country which had fallen under Soviet control. The communist-dominated government did its utmost to sabotage his mission and in February 1947 the Foreign Office withdrew him and applied to Brazil for his 'agrement' as ambassador. In March his suit for divorce came before the court and was exploited by his wife to discredit him. The resultant publicity obliged the Foreign Office to withdraw the request for 'agrement'. He then resigned, thus forfeiting his pension under Treasury regulations. The Court of Appeal finally granted his divorce and in July 1948 he married Kathleen Tillotson. 
Bentinck had lost no time in finding remunerative work as vice-chairman of the committee of industrial interests in Germany, becoming chairman in 1949. In addition to advancing the interests of major British companies such as Unilever, he formed close connections with leading German companies, such as Bayer AG. He promoted the German and Belgian nuclear industries and was awarded a high German decoration (Bundesverdienstkreuz). On the death of his elder brother in 1979, he became the ninth duke of Portland; but he inherited neither land nor capital, since the entail had been broken eight years previously by the seventh duke. His son, William, had died of heart failure in 1966, leaving no children. When he himself died at his home, 21 Carlyle Square, Chelsea, London, on 30 July 1990, the dukedom created in 1716 became extinct. 
Robert Cecil', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40204


Hastings, Francis John Clarence Westenra Plantagenet, sixteenth earl of Huntingdon (1901-1990), artist and politician, was born on 30 January 1901 in Manchester Square, London, the only son and youngest of three children of Warner Francis John Plantagenet Hastings, fifteenth earl of Huntingdon 
('b'. 1868; whom he succeeded in 1939)
, and his wife, (Maud) Margaret (died 1953), daughter of Sir Samuel Wilson, MP for Portsmouth. He was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he played in the university polo team and obtained a third class in modern history in 1923. His forename Plantagenet commemorated the descent of the earls of Huntingdon from George, duke of Clarence, brother of Edward IV, through Clarence's great-granddaughter Katherine Pole, who married Francis Hastings, second earl of Huntingdon. But the claim of his ancestor Henry Hastings, third earl of Huntingdon, to succeed Elizabeth I did not pass to him, having descended through a daughter of the ninth earl. Huntingdon was more interested in an alleged but impossible descent from Robin Hood, described in folklore as the earl of Huntingdon. 
In 1925 Jack Huntingdon, who painted under the name John Hastings, married (Maria) Cristina (died 1953), daughter of the wealthy Marchese Casati, head of one of the families which had ruled Milan for centuries. They travelled extensively in Australia and the Pacific, living for a while on the island of Moorea, after which they named their only child, a daughter. In San Francisco the couple met Diego Rivera, the celebrated Mexican communist mural painter. Huntingdon, who had studied at the Slade School of Art after leaving Oxford, became a pupil of Rivera's and learned the technique of fresco. He became Rivera's assistant, branching out into mural painting on his own account. In 1933 he painted a mural depicting dentistry in the Hall of Science at the Chicago World Fair, to accompany a display of George Washington's teeth. Already inclined to be left-wing at Oxford, he was further influenced by Rivera's ideology, and involved himself in the Spanish Civil War, taking medical assistance to republicans. His parents' anger at his marriage to a Roman Catholic foreigner, who shared their son's political outlook and eventually became a communist, was not assuaged by her high aristocratic lineage and there was a long breach during which the couple had little money other than a legacy from his grandmother. 
On return to England, Huntingdon in 1935 painted a remarkable 10 feet by 20 feet fresco on a wall in the Marx Memorial Library, Clerkenwell Green, London, entitled 'Worker of the Future Upsetting the Economic Chaos of the Present'. Though slightly wooden in the Soviet realist manner, it had distinctive original and pleasing touches. For his friend Lord Faringdon, the eccentric and rich socialist, he painted murals at Buscot Park depicting local Labour Party activities. Despite his far-left phase, he was a second lieutenant (Territorial Army) in the Royal Horse Guards. He was deputy controller of civil defence for Andover from 1941 to July 1945, when he joined Attlee's government as parliamentary secretary at the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries. He stayed there until November 1950, when he left politics for the painting he preferred. 
As Huntingdon's faith in socialism declined, his paintings abandoned ideology for almost surrealist shapes and writhings of serpents in bright colours, expressing cheerful distaste for conventional restraints, whatever their provenance. He was chairman of the Society of Mural Painters in 1951-8 and his works were widely exhibited. Among his murals are those at Birmingham University (1965), the Women's Press Club in London (1950), and the Casa dello Strozzato, Tuscany (early 1970s). He taught fresco at the Camberwell and Central schools of art in London. 
Huntingdon's marriage to the strong-willed Cristina, whose southern temperament did not easily fit with his gentler, more placid English ways, ended with divorce in 1943 and she married Wogan Phillips (previously married to Rosamond Lehmann) who, as the second Baron Milford, was the first communist to take his seat in the House of Lords. 
Tall, athletic, and an expert yachtsman, Huntingdon strongly resembled the portrait he owned of the Elizabethan third earl in the reddish colour of his hair and finely delineated features. He played a number of musical instruments well and was a wine connoisseur with impeccable taste. He was the quintessence of a cultured, civilized man and in addition to his talents as a painter he was the author of two intelligently written books, 'Commonsense about India' (1942) and 'The Golden Octopus' (1928), a book of legends of the south seas. A delightful, convivial companion with a lively, intelligent wit, full of kindness and amusing stories and quick to laugh at himself, he was vague, gentle, courteous, and charming, with exquisite manners sometimes taken for weakness, but he was politely resolute in avoiding inconvenience to himself. When his second wife, the author Margaret Lane (1907-1994), whom he married in 1944, proposed that her father should live with them, he said nothing but quietly packed his bags ready to move out. She was formerly the wife of Bryan Wallace and daughter of Harry George Lane, newspaper editor, of Vernham Dean, Andover. This second marriage ran less excitingly and more smoothly than the first. From it there were two daughters, of whom one, Lady Selina Hastings, wrote a number of successful biographies. Huntingdon died on 24 August 1990 in a nursing home in Beaulieu, Hampshire. He was succeeded in the earldom by a first cousin once removed, William Edward Robin Hood Hastings Bass ('b'. 1948). 
Woodrow Wyatt', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40205


Shaw, Glencairn Alexander Byam (1904-1986), actor and stage director, was born on 13 December 1904 at Addison Road, London, the fourth in the family of four sons and one daughter of John Byam Liston Shaw (1872-1919), artist, and his wife, (Caroline) Evelyn Eunice Pyke-Nott (1870-1959), miniaturist. He went to Westminster School as a day-boy during the First World War and his contemporaries included his elder brother James Byam Shaw who became a distinguished art historian, and John Gielgud, a lifelong friend and colleague. 
Byam Shaw next surfaced on 1 August 1923 as an apparently untrained professional actor in 'At Mrs Beam's' at the Pavilion Theatre, Torquay. In the era of the matinee idol, Byam Shaw's dazzling and lifelong good looks, together with the reported encouragement of his cousin May Ward, a close friend of Ellen Terry, may have been enough to make him take the plunge into acting. His first London appearance in 1925 was as Yasha in 'The Cherry Orchard' (John Gielgud was Trofimov), and in the next four years he had the good fortune to appear in three more Chekhov plays. 
In 1929 Shaw married the actress (Madeleine) Angela Clinton Baddeley (1904-1976), the elder sister of Hermione Baddeley (1906-1986). Their father, William Herman Clinton-Baddeley, was an unsuccessful composer. The Byam Shaw marriage was a supremely happy one, both domestically and professionally, until Angela's death in 1976. They had a son and a daughter. 
After a tour together to South Africa in 1931 Byam Shaw appeared memorably at the Lyceum in 1932 in Max Reinhardt's mime play 'The Miracle', with Lady Diana Cooper as the Madonna. In 1933 the long and mutually rewarding association with John Gielgud began when Byam Shaw took over the Gielgud part in the long-running 'Richard of Bordeaux' by Gordon Daviot (that is, Elizabeth MacKintosh, whose other pseudonym was Josephine Tey). In 1934 he was Darnley in Daviot's 'Queen of Scots', and later Laertes in Gielgud's longest running 'Hamlet', each time directed by Gielgud. In 1935 he played Benvolio in the famous 'Romeo and Juliet' with Laurence Olivier, Edith Evans, and Peggy Ashcroft. During the play's run there was the beginning of a sea change in Byam Shaw's career. He assisted Gielgud in directing 'Richard II' for the Oxford University Dramatic Society -- Vivien Leigh was the Queen and Michael Denison played three small parts -- and he was as stimulating, firm, and courteous to his undergraduate cast as he was always to be to professional companies. He had now found his true metier; he had never enjoyed acting. Until the Second World War, however, he continued to act, mostly in supporting parts in prestigious Gielgud productions, but also, importantly for the future, with Michael Redgrave, George Devine, and Peggy Ashcroft in Michel Saint-Denis's short season at the Phoenix. But he was now directing too, and in 1938 was engaged to direct Gielgud in Dodie Smith's 'Dear Octopus'. 
Byam Shaw had joined the emergency reserve of officers before the war and with his brother James was commissioned into the Royal Scots in 1940. They both served in Burma from 1942 and were both wounded. Byam Shaw ended his service in 1945 as a major making training films in India. By 1946 he had joined Saint-Denis and Devine in running the Old Vic Centre, which combined a school of acting, an experimental project, and the Young Vic Company. Byam Shaw also found time to direct 'The Winslow Boy' by Terence Rattigan (with Angela in a key role) -- the start of another rewarding association -- and also three Shakespeare plays at the Vic. Despite much success in all fields the three partners fell foul of the Vic governors and of the theatre's top-heavy and largely hostile administration and resigned in 1951. 
Fortunately for Byam Shaw and the British theatre there followed his great work at Stratford, first as co-director with Anthony Quayle (1952-6) and then on his own, until handing over to his chosen successor Peter Hall in 1959. Byam Shaw directed fourteen plays at Stratford, notably 'Antony and Cleopatra' (Redgrave and Ashcroft), 'Macbeth' (Olivier and Leigh), 'As You Like It' (Ashcroft), 'Othello' (Harry Andrews and Emlyn Williams), and 'King Lear' (Charles Laughton and Albert Finney), and chose companies which were a magnet to directors of the calibre of Hall, Peter Brook, and Gielgud. He helped transform Stratford from a worthy tourist trap into the country's theatrical capital. Ironically the company became 'Royal' only after he left. 
As a freelance director in the 1960s Byam Shaw was much in demand. Then suddenly, though self-confessedly tone deaf, he turned to opera; and, unencumbered by musical considerations, brought his special gift for clarifying texts to the service of outrageous operatic story-lines, inculcating in principals and chorus his passion for theatrical truth. From 'The Rake's Progress' at Sadler's Wells (1962) to Wagner's 'Ring' at the Coliseum (1973), in all he directed fifteen operas, sweeping the stage before first nights 'to calm his nerves'. The decoration of the Coliseum's safety curtain was taken from a painting by his father. 
Byam Shaw was slim, neatly and untheatrically dressed, with shoes always highly polished; his white hair, ruddy complexion, and searching brown eyes were those of the archetypal senior officer. Even his quiet voice and beautiful manners cloaked a steely authority. He did not aspire to be a virtuoso director, manipulating the playwright's intentions to conform to a subjective vision. He was content to be an interpreter, but he brought to that characteristically modest role the highest level of research, intuition, and love of the theatre and its workers. 
Byam Shaw was appointed CBE in 1954 and was given an honorary DLitt by Birmingham University in 1959. He died in a nursing home in Goring-on-Thames on 29 April 1986, not far from his house at Wargrave. 
Michael Denison', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40206


Greene, Sir Hugh Carleton (1910-1987), journalist and broadcaster, was born on 15 November 1910 at St John's, Chesham Road, Berkhamsted, the youngest of four sons and the fifth among the six children of Charles Henry Greene, headmaster of Berkhamsted School, and his wife, Marion Raymond (a cousin), the daughter of the Revd Carleton Greene, vicar of Great Barford. The novelist Graham Greene was his brother. He was educated at Berkhamsted School and at Merton College, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in both classical moderations (1931) and English (1933). 
Having spent some time in Germany before entering Merton, Greene returned there on leaving Oxford in 1933. From working as a stringer for the 'Daily Herald' and the 'New Statesman' in Munich, he joined the Berlin office of the 'Daily Telegraph', becoming its chief correspondent in 1938. However, he was expelled from Germany in May 1939 in reprisal for the expulsion from London of a German correspondent. The rise of the Nazis, witnessed at first hand, deeply influenced him for the rest of his life, teaching him to hate intolerance and the degradation of character to which the loss of freedom led. The experience confirmed him in his career as a journalist. He was to say in 1969 that he had never considered himself an ex-journalist at any time after. 
Greene's next posting, to Warsaw, was short-lived. Within a week of the German invasion, on 1 September 1939, he was forced to leave Poland. Equipped only with a bottle of beer and a gas mask, he travelled first to Romania, but, as the war spread, moved on to report from a number of other European countries. He finally returned to Britain in June 1940, escaping from Brussels and then Paris just ahead of the German army. 
After a brief spell in the Royal Air Force as a pilot officer in intelligence, a series of delicate negotiations secured Greene's release to join the German service of the British Broadcasting Corporation in October 1940. For its commitment to impartial and accurate reporting and its avoidance of propaganda, the service, of which Greene became the news editor, was known as 'white' in contrast to the non-BBC service of 'black' programmes. Dedicated to undermining the faith of German listeners in their own domestic broadcasts, the latter proclaimed its motto as 'Never lie accidentally, only deliberately.' 
At considerable personal danger, and with hardly less physical discomfort for his large frame, Greene was flown to Sweden in 1942 to discover how badly intensive jamming by the Germans was affecting reception of the BBC's programmes. He reported on his return that, provided the broadcaster's speech was kept clear, measured, and simple, the results were not discouraging. While some of the changes he introduced on his return, including an increase in news broadcasts and a reduction in feature programmes, may have reflected a personal preference, they greatly increased the impact of the BBC's output on German audiences. Eventually those audiences numbered many million, many of whom regularly endangered their lives to listen. 
The BBC's commitment to the pursuit of truth in wartime was to serve as a model in the reconstruction of German broadcasting when the war was over. Seconded as controller of broadcasting in the British zone of Germany from 1946 to 1948, Greene himself made an important personal contribution to the rebuilding process. He imbued a spirit of independence in his staff and, characteristically, tried to limit party-political interference in appointments, but in that, less characteristically, he was not entirely successful. 
Following his return to Britain in 1948, Greene was appointed head of the BBC's eastern European service. Two years later he was seconded again: to the Colonial Office and the emergency information service in Malaya. There he oversaw the conduct of psychological warfare against the communist insurgents. Two senior appointments in external broadcasting followed: the first in 1952, as assistant controller, overseas services, and then, in 1955, as controller. Appointed to be director of administration in 1956, he was temporarily distanced from a direct involvement with programmes. However, it was recognized that Sir Ian Jacob, then director-general, was now identifying Greene as his successor. 
After another two years, as an even clearer signal of preferment, Greene was appointed director, news and current affairs. It was a new post, created, in the BBC's own words, 'to secure overall co-ordination and editorial direction of topical output' in both radio and television. More directly, its purpose was to close the deep rift which existed between a highly conservative news division, which regarded the new medium as little more than an appendix to sound radio, and a television service eager to explore in news the full range of possibilities it was developing in other kinds of output. Greene came almost immediately into conflict with Tahu Hole, head of the news division. The two men differed profoundly in temperament and in their attitudes to broadcast journalism. Since the launch of Independent Television News in 1955, the BBC had been competing unsuccessfully in both innovation and audience numbers. Inside the BBC, Greene was not alone in attributing the poor performance of BBC television news to Hole's leadership. To resolve the hostility between the two men, Jacob accepted Greene's suggestion that Hole should be transferred into the now vacant post of director of administration, a prelude to his early retirement from the BBC on Greene's promotion as director-general in 1960. 
Soon after taking over as director of news and current affairs, Greene instituted a review by three senior television programme makers of the shortcomings of BBC television news and of how it might be transformed into a service worthy of the BBC's traditions. Two of the three belonged to the television talks department, which, from beyond the reach of Hole's news division, had established an independent reputation for its treatment of current affairs, including levels of political discussion news division had not achieved. The group made a series of radical criticisms, and their report found a receptive response. Although Greene considered the criticisms more valuable than the proposed remedies, the report led to profound changes in both management structures and style -- fresh evidence of the dynamism of Greene's attitude towards programme making. 
Formal confirmation of Greene's appointment as Jacob's successor in 1960 was received with general delight among the corporation's staff. Particular pleasure was felt at the appointment of a director-general, the first in the BBC's history, who had made his career very largely within the corporation. To programme makers Greene's transformation of news and current affairs in both television and radio had clearly demonstrated his belief in them as the BBC's foremost asset. Jacob, as a long-serving military man, had been said to treat them as if they were junior officers to be assigned the duties devised by their superiors. 
On taking office Greene abolished the post of director of news and current affairs, retaining for himself the functions of editor-in-chief. He remained a working journalist capable, when the need arose, of dealing expeditiously with those editorial issues that were referred to him. To do so, however, meant keeping closely in touch, as his instinct already was, with the thinking of producers and editors, for whose ideas he retained a ready ear and much imaginative sympathy. 
Greene's appointment was rapidly followed by the creation of a committee of inquiry into broadcasting, chaired by W. H. Pilkington. Greene's approach to the committee was combative, reflecting techniques learned in psychological warfare during and after the Second World War. Objectives once defined were frequently restated, enemies rattled, and friends rallied. A 'black book' recording the interests outside television of the commercial franchise holders was intended to show that they had loyalties conflicting with their public service obligations. In a report which came embarrassingly close to overpraising the BBC, the Pilkington committee recommended that the BBC should be given a second television channel and an opportunity to develop local radio stations. For its part, Independent Television was rewarded with swingeing criticisms of undemanding programme standards and a call for a more forceful assertion of its responsibilities by its regulator, the Independents Television Authority. 
During the two years taken by the Pilkington committee to complete its report, the BBC's hand had been greatly strengthened by an upturn in the fortunes of its television service. Greene had inherited a situation in which BBC programmes were viewed by barely 25 per cent of all viewers (a fact which weakened the effect among some politicians of the committee's strictures on Independent Television). Shortly after the report was published, however, the BBC could point, for the first time since 1955, to a quarter in which it had a majority of the audience. Its revitalized television schedules had wide popular appeal. A variety of light entertainment and drama series, documentaries, and current affairs programmes attracted audiences from across the whole of society. Many of the single plays were written by contemporary writers and, while dismissed as 'kitchen-sink drama' by their critics, often dealt with characters and themes neglected in the commercial theatre. A sure-footedness, owing much to Greene's support, was discernible almost everywhere in the output, not least in areas where Independent Television had been expected to dominate. In a benign economic climate, with a less deferential mood among the generation then reaching maturity, and, at least until the mid-1960s, a tolerant government, the challenges Greene encouraged to many of the orthodoxies of British society could count on favourable responses. 
Inevitably, however, the new spirit which Greene had set at large within the BBC met opposition, especially, but not exclusively, over television programmes. Strong language in comedies, supposedly overexplicit portrayals of sexual activity in single plays, the undermining of authority figures in 'Z Cars', a long-running series about northern policemen, and ridicule directed at politicians and the church all stirred up intense controversies, short-lived in themselves, but contributing, despite the praise which the same programmes drew from other sections of the audience, to a persistent current of unease about the direction in which its director-general might be leading the BBC. 
However, despite differences with some members of the board and influential critics outside the BBC, Greene maintained a strong defence of the corporation's duty to deal responsibly, but vigorously, with major issues in society. He held that provocation could be socially imperative, though outrage was not. By the time he resigned as director-general in 1969, after twenty-nine years of serving the BBC, he was acknowledged by both admirers and critics to have been the most influential director-general since John Reith a generation earlier. For his admirers, he was the champion of liberal values and a great liberator of talent. He himself wished to be remembered as the man who had turned down the central heating at the BBC and opened the windows. For his critics, not all politically on the right, he had been one of the principal agents in what they regarded as the widespread destruction of traditional values throughout the 1960s. 
In 1967 Lord Hill, then chairman of the Independent Television Authority, was appointed chairman of the BBC. In those days of still aggressive competition between the two sets of broadcasters, his transfer was compared in the BBC to the appointment of the German general Rommel to the command of Britain's Eighth Army at the height of the desert war. Greene himself felt affronted, believing, rightly or wrongly, that the appointment was intended as a warning shot across the BBC's bows. As a result, he never settled into an easy relationship with his new chairman. In 1968 Greene, facing his second divorce, proposed that, after more than eight years in office, it was time for him to move on. To make clear that the board had not forced the director-general's hand, Hill suggested that, after a short break, Greene should become a governor. The offer was accepted, and Greene left office on 31 March 1969, flattered at the honour of becoming the first member of staff to reach the board. 
His short period as a governor was personally unsatisfactory. Although the tensions in his relationship with the chairman had eased during his final months on the staff, he was conscious of his waning influence in a BBC that was changing as society changed and of a growing awareness that his presence inevitably complicated the life of his successor. Before two more years had passed he had left the board. 
In retirement Greene made some programmes for the BBC and for Independent Television, the latter arousing criticism from some BBC contemporaries opposed to the idea of so senior a BBC figure working for its competitors. He wrote several books on the rivals of Sherlock Holmes and became chairman of Bodley Head, the publishing house of his brother Graham Greene. Recognizing the totalitarian character of the colonels' regime in Greece, he became active in the opposition being organized against it. 
Greene was appointed OBE in 1950 and KCMG in 1964. He was given an honorary DCL by East Anglia (1969) and a DUniv by York (1973). In 1973 he also received a DUniv from the Open University, in whose establishment he had played a considerable part, despite opposition among some BBC staff who feared that educational interests might exercise an undue influence on programmes. Germany honoured him with the grand cross of the Order of Merit (1977). 
At 6 feet 6 inches tall, Greene resembled his predecessor Lord Reith, but there, with the exception of a mutual commitment to the BBC's independence and the licence fee as the means of securing it, resemblance ended. Reith was an upholder of the establishment, frustrated that, after leaving the BBC, the establishment had not taken him at his own valuation. Greene, however, was anti-establishment. He could be cavalier towards critics, sometimes displaying an impatience which lacked his usual political acuity. A strong element of mischief in his make-up encouraged him to mock the pompous and the pretentious. It was a characteristic which his features could sometimes give away. Ruskin Spear caught the mood so triumphantly in his official portrait of Greene that, on its unveiling in the council chamber in Broadcasting House, the painting drew a gasp of delighted recognition. When necessary, he could be incisive to the point of ruthlessness. An aloof personality, attributed by some to shyness, brought him few close friends and may partly explain the failure of his first two marriages. His first wife (whom he married on 24 October 1934) was Helga Mary ('b'. 1916), the daughter of Samuel Guinness, a banker, of London. They had two sons, but were divorced in 1948. Three years later, on 24 September 1951, he married Elaine Shaplen ('b'. 1920), the daughter of Louis Gilbert, an accountant, of New York, and the former wife of Robert Shaplen. Two more sons were born, but the marriage was ended in 1969. On 11 May 1970 Greene married Else Neumann (1910-1981) (the German actress Tatjana Sais, with whom he had lived in the late 1940s), the daughter of Martin Hofler of Frankfurt am Main, Germany. She died in 1981, and on 19 December 1984 he married Sarah Mary Manning Grahame ('b'. 1941), a script supervisor and the daughter of David Grahame, a concert manager of Brisbane, Australia. Greene, who should not be confused with his near-contemporary, the entertainer Hugh Hughes (Hughie) Green, died from cancer in the King Edward VII Hospital, London, on 19 February 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 40209


Fletcher, Mary (1739-1815), Methodist preacher, was born on 12 September 1739 at Forest House, Leytonstone, Essex, the second of the four children of Samuel Bosanquet (died 1767), merchant and lord of the manor of Leytonstone, and his wife, whose name is unknown, who also died in 1767. Her family was one of the most illustrious, wealthy, and well-connected Huguenot families in London, closely involved in financial trading in the City, where her younger brother Samuel was a director of the Bank of England and lived in a former residence of the earls of Norwich. Mary later testified that she had been conscious of 'the spirit of God striving with me and offering me salvation' from early childhood and that her confirmation at St Paul's Cathedral at the age of thirteen, following personal instruction in the catechism from her father, was 'a very rousing ordinance to me' (Moore, 13, 20). However, rejecting her family's fashionable lifestyle, she left home in 1760 and embraced Methodism, joining the London Foundery Society, where she experienced a deepening of her spiritual awareness during the revival of 1761-2. In 1763, with the help of a legacy from her grandmother and the support of her close friend Sarah Ryan, she established a Christian community at Leytonstone, providing for needy children and adults, and began to read the scriptures at Methodist class meetings, which were held regularly on Thursday evenings. Between 1763 and 1768 some thirty-four adults, including her co-workers Sarah Crosby and Ann Tripp, and thirty-five children, including Sally Lawrence, a four-year-old orphan, who remained devotedly attached to Mary for the rest of her life, joined the community. Notwithstanding her private means, Mary maintained an exceptionally frugal lifestyle from her youth and was 'always sparing of expense upon herself that she might have more to give 'the household of faith'' (ibid., 417). Her portrait reveals a plainly attired, quietly determined, pious woman, with well-defined facial features, wide expressive eyes, an aquiline nose, slightly pursed lips, and hair neatly swept back under a white frilled bonnet, enveloped in a dark hooded cloak. 
In June 1768, in order to establish the work on a more secure financial basis, the community moved to Cross Hall, Gildersome, Morley, near Leeds, where Mary faced the considerable challenge of managing an orphanage, school, dairy farm, and maltkilns without the assistance of Sarah Ryan, who died shortly after moving north. Undaunted, however, she initiated, with Sarah Crosby, regular Wednesday evening religious meetings, and the women were soon seeking advice from John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, about their call to preach. While recognizing women's importance to the Methodist movement, Wesley advised them 'never to take a text' nor 'speak in a continued discourse without some break' (Wesley to S. Crosby, 18 March 1769, Burge, 'Women Preachers', 21). In February 1773, however, Mary, ignoring his advice, made her first explicit reference to a text, explaining later that she felt 'a greater approbation of what we call expounding, taking a part or whole of a chapter and speaking on it' (Burge, 'Impudent women', 97). Moreover, Wesley was evidently later impressed by her preaching, commenting that: 'her words are as fire, conveying both light and heat to the hearts of all that hear her... her manner is smooth, easy and natural, even when the sense is deep and strong' ('Journal', 7.249). The demand for her as a preacher was such that in September 1776 she rode 20 miles across the moors to address 'such a rabble as I scarce ever saw', numbering around 2000, from a rock in Golcar, before conducting a cottage meeting in the village and then preaching from a horse-block to a roadside crowd in Huddersfield. 
On 12 November 1781 Mary married at Batley parish church the saintly evangelical vicar of Madeley, John William Fletcher (bap. 1729, d. 1785), who had written to her unexpectedly on his return from a period of convalescence in his native Switzerland, confessing that he had cherished a twenty-five-year regard for her. After the marriage Mary declared: 'I have such a husband as is in everything suited to me' (Moore, 148), while her husband confided: 'God has found me a partner, a sister, a wife who is not afraid to face the colliers and bargemen of my parish' (Burge, 'Women Preachers', 27). They exercised a remarkably effective joint ministry in the rural industrial parish, which had suffered considerable pastoral neglect during John Fletcher's recent absence. Mary Fletcher conducted regular class meetings and made frequent visits to the sick and infirm, dispensing natural medicines and recording details of her remedies in her commonplace books and in her annotated copy of John Wesley's 'Primitive Physick'. The blissfully happy marriage was curtailed, Mary Fletcher ruefully recorded in her memoirs, after only 'three years, nine months and two days' by 'her heavenly minded' husband's untimely death from a fever on 14 August 1785 (Moore, 178). 'I have trodden deep waters', she recalled, 'but all my afflictions were nothing compared to this', when 'the sun of my earthly joys for ever set' (ibid., 165). 
Mary was allowed by her husband's successor to continue to reside in the vicarage after her husband's death and even to advise on the appointment of curates, but, to avoid giving offence, Mary utilized the adjacent tithe barn for her religious meetings. In 1814, aged seventy-five, she was still preaching five times a week. She held her last religious meeting on 24 September 1815 and made her final entry in her journal on 26 October 1815. She had developed a suspected tumour in her left breast, but died on 9 December 1815 from a respiratory illness, which had caused her acute suffering in the last month of her life, when she was cared for by her faithful friend, companion, and executrix, Mary Tooth, who continued her work for almost another three decades after her death. The Fletchers thereby established an evangelical tradition at Madeley which lasted for three generations, and the census of religious worship reveals that the places of worship in Madeley were better attended than those in some neighbouring Shropshire parishes in 1851. 
The epitaph on their shared grave in St Michael's churchyard, Madeley, records that during the long period in which Mary survived her husband 'she continued to tread the path in which he left her and ministered with ardent zeal and self denying beneficence to the spiritual and temporal wants of his flock', healing dissensions and preventing schism, endeavouring 'to induce all around her to dwell in unity and Godly love' (Burge, 'Women Preachers', 31). 


@@@@@


doc= 40210


Haime, John (bap. 1708, d. 1784), soldier and Methodist preacher, was born in Shaftesbury, Dorset, and baptized at Holy Trinity Church in Shaftesbury on 18 February 1708 (though he gave the date of his birth as 1710 in his autobiography), the son of a gardener. He followed his father's occupation for several years, but disliked it; he left to work with his uncle as a button maker, first in Shaftesbury and then in Blandford, Dorset. At this period he suffered from acute religious depression and gave himself up to 'drinking, swearing, card-playing, lewdness' ('Short account of God's dealings', 209). Tired of button making, he was employed by a tanner, and then enlisted in the Queen's regiment of dragoons. On Christmas day 1739 he parted with his wife and children (of whom nothing further is known) to march for Gloucester, and in the course of the following year was at various camps in Hampshire, Oxfordshire, and Wiltshire. 
In Highworth, Wiltshire, Haime found among other old books John Bunyan's spiritual autobiography, 'Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners': 'I read it with the utmost attention, and found his case nearly resembled my own' ('Short account of God's dealings', 211). The regiment was ordered to march for Scotland, and on the first day he bought 'Grace Abounding' from a bookseller in Banbury, Oxfordshire. Bunyan's account clearly influenced Haime's interpretation of his experiences and the autobiography he was to write at John Wesley's request at the end of his life. Throughout this period he was a regular churchgoer, but he found no solace and was often tempted to blaspheme. By the bank of the River Tweed he felt that God had lifted him out of his dungeon, but he had recurrent experiences of despair and release. He was sent by sea from Leith to London with the camp equipage, and at Deptford went to hear the Calvinist Methodist John Cennick, then one of George Whitefield's preachers. After hearing his account Cennick told him the work of the devil was on him, but he was later comforted by reading Cennick's own life. On rejoining the regiment he heard Charles Wesley preach at Brentford, Middlesex, and was much encouraged by speaking to him. 
In June 1742 Haime's regiment embarked for Flanders, and in February 1743 began their march from Ghent to Germany. After further alternations of relief and despondency, on 22 April, while walking in the fields, he thought God at last answered his prayer: 'My head was as waters, and my eyes as a fountain of tears. I wept: I sung' ('Short account of God's dealings', 215). At the battle of Dettingen (27 June 1743 NS), in which the British, Hanoverian, and Austrian armies defeated the French, he found his heart filled with love, peace, and joy, and stood the enemy fire for seven hours. In winter quarters at Ghent in 1743-4 he started a meeting for prayer and 'Bible' reading with two fellow soldiers, John Evans and Pitman Stag, and their number soon increased to twelve. John Wesley replied encouragingly to his letter of 2 February 1744 asking for advice ('Journal of John Wesley', 3.115-16; 'Letters', 2.19). Haime's success as a preacher was remarkable. At camp near Brussels in May 1744 he usually had 1000 hearers. When he settled in any camp he built a tabernacle with two or three rooms; he soon had 300 members in his society and six preachers beside himself, including Evans and William Clements. He often walked 20 to 30 miles a day and preached 35 times in a week. At the battle of Fontenoy (11 May 1745 NS), in which the allies were defeated by the French, several members of the society were killed -- Evans lost both his legs and died praising God -- though Haime himself was unharmed and went through the battle full of joy. Their bravery was praised in a letter by John Wesley of 26 October 1745, rebuking the troops camped near Newcastle for blasphemy ('Journal of John Wesley', 3.216-17). 
For nearly three years Haime had a full assurance of faith, until on 6 April 1746 he fell instantaneously into despair, the symptoms of which were physical as well as mental: he wept and howled, he partly lost his sight, he thought he was on fire. For seven years he continued to suffer, but he went on preaching and converting others. He returned to England, was discharged from the army, and joined the Methodists as a travelling preacher, sometimes accompanying Wesley. Many thought him 'very unstable', but Wesley assured him that it was good for him to be in the fiery furnace ('Short account of God's dealings', 307-8). He set up a society in his home town of Shaftesbury, and was briefly imprisoned in Dorchester gaol because he would not undertake to give up preaching. He twice went to Ireland as a travelling preacher, still in great distress of mind. 
In 1766 Wesley tried to help by sending Haime to live with John Hoskins, a farmer in Cornwall, as a kind of domestic chaplain. Haime's agony increased, until suddenly he felt freed from his bondage. But he could not bear to stay in one place, and went back on circuit. In looking back over his life for Wesley he divided it into twenty years before his conversion, three years of faith, twenty years in the wilderness, and his present deliverance. His account was designed to show that God did not will that any should perish ('Short account of God's dealings', 313). It is important as a detailed record of Methodist practices in the army in the 1740s, as a powerful analysis by a deeply unbalanced man of his own mental suffering, and as a masterpiece in the tradition of the seventeenth-century spiritual autobiography. Haime died on 18 August 1784 at Whitchurch, Hampshire, worn to skin and bone by fever. 


