@@@@@


doc= 40212


Mather, Alexander (1733-1800), Wesleyan Methodist preacher, was born in February 1733 at Brechin in Forfarshire. His parents, of whom little is known, instructed him 'early in the principles of religion' and consequently he was 'an utter stranger to the vices common among men'. When he was 'about ten years old', on hearing his schoolteacher pray, he 'was struck with strong convictions' and gained 'a desire to be a Christian' (Mather, 91). In 1745 'out of a childish frolic' he fought at the battle of Culloden for the Pretender, and in an attempt to evade the English authorities he spent a brief period living with an uncle near Perth. Although caught and arrested, he was soon released, and commenced work with his father as a baker. 
In May 1752 Mather 'determined to go abroad' and stayed at Perth for several months, during which time he began to attend the Scottish Episcopal church. In June 1752 he travelled to London, where, after a short time working in different households, he gained employment with Thomas Marriott, a baker in Norton Folgate. He was married on 14 February 1753, although his wife's name is unknown. Due to his strict sabbatarian views he persuaded his employer and other local bakers to cease working on Sunday. At the request of Marriott he began to attend meetings at the Foundery, John Wesley's headquarters in London. He heard Wesley preach for the first time on 14 April 1754, at West Street Chapel, and consequently experienced an evangelical conversion, all his 'sorrow, and fear, and anguish of spirit, being changed into a solid peace' (Mather, 99). He soon became a bandleader, the leader of a class, and a preacher. Having 'not eight hours sleep in a week' (Mather, 148), he would preach in the evening, work most of the night, and preach again at five in the morning. In 1757, due to the 'searching preaching of Thomas Walsh', Mather professed the experience of Christian perfection, claiming 'uninterrupted communion with God, whether sleeping or waking' (ibid., 203). Later in August of that year he was appointed as an itinerant preacher. 
As a preacher Mather faced fierce opposition and violence at various places, including Darlaston, Birmingham, and Monmouth. At Wolverhampton the chapel in which he preached was pulled down and his effigy burnt, while at Boston he was so severely molested by the mob that, as he stated, 'it was a full year, before I quite recovered the hurts which I then received' (Mather, 151). In 1761, assisted by his wife, his preaching brought about a significant holiness revival at Wednesbury. Three years later, at the request of Wesley, he visited Wales to 'regulate the Societies there' (ibid., 157). A successful and tireless preacher, Mather became a close friend of Wesley. In 1788 he, with Thomas Rankin and Henry Moore, was ordained superintendent by Wesley for the English work. In 1792 he was elected president of the Methodist conference. His high-church principles were revealed in his criticisms of Alexander Kilham in 'An Affectionate Address to the Members of the Methodist Society, in Leeds, and Elsewhere', published jointly with John Pawson in 1794. Mather sat on all conference committees until 1797 and served as district chairman on five occasions from 1791 to 1796. 
Mather died at York on 22 August 1800. In character many saw him as 'a man of strict integrity, of exemplary conduct, and of great zeal' (Benson, 552). Abel Stevens, in recognition of his contribution to the establishment of the Methodist connection, described him as 'a main pillar of the Wesleyan edifice' (Stevens, 2.354). 


@@@@@


doc= 40213


Seward, William (1711-1740), promoter of Methodism and friend of George Whitefield, was born into a family of independent landed means at Badsey, a hamlet near Evesham, Worcestershire. Of his brothers, Thomas became a clergyman of the Church of England, and was in Genoa when William accompanied the Calvinistic Methodist leader George Whitefield to Georgia; a second brother, Henry, married a Baptist and became a strong opponent of Methodism; a third, Benjamin, enjoyed a Cambridge education, was converted by William in 1739, and occasionally wrote hymns. William himself succeeded in business as a stockbroker sufficiently well to enable him to devote himself to the evangelical movement to which he was exposed through active work for the London charity schools in the late 1720s, raising an income of $150 per annum for the Hackney school despite opposition from the parish's minister, churchwardens and vestrymen. Whitefield told Seward later that his 'nine years round of duties were no effects of the new birth at all', being merely ''preparation' for conversion itself' ('Letters of George Whitefield', 180); Charles Wesley also took a modest view of his spiritual maturity, assessing him on 13 November 1738 as a 'zealous soul knowing only the baptism of John' ('Journal of the Rev. Charles Wesley', 1.135). A week later, however, he noted that 'Mr Seward testified faith', and in January 1739 was present at a conference of Oxford Methodists. 
Seward now began to travel with Whitefield, and joined him on his first and most triumphant American tour, in August 1739. There he acted as Whitefield's publicist, providing newspapers and booksellers with extracts of Whitefield's own writing as well as a series of partly fabricated stories which, blurring the boundary between news reporting and advertisement, did much to enhance the apparent impact of the tour. Not least he also supported Whitefield generously from his own pocket, a liberality which incensed his brother Henry. The latter now 'fell upon' Charles Wesley with accusations: 'I was the downfall of his brother, had picked his pocket, ruined his family, come now to get more money, was a scoundrel, rascal and so forth and deserved to have my gown stripped over my ears. He concluded with threatening how he would beat me, if he could but catch me on Bengeworth Common. ('Journal of the Rev. Charles Wesley', 15 March 1740, 1.195)' And he did in fact have him forcibly removed from the neighbourhood.Three months later William, who had given Whitefield valuable service in America by securing the advance contacts he needed to make his tours a success, was back in England on Whitefield's instructions, partly to mend family relations but still more to further urgent Georgia business. He was to bring out John Hutchings, one of the Oxford Methodists, to manage Whitefield's orphan house in Georgia; to persuade the Georgia trustees that their colony would not succeed without negro slavery, allowing a title to lands there and an independent magistracy; to collect money for a negro school in Pennsylvania; and to bring over money already in the hands of trustees for building a church at Savannah. Seward had already bought Whitefield 5000 acres on the forks of the Delaware to establish an evangelical refuge in the style of Herrnhut, and a negro school. Moreover Seward was a widower, and he wished to remove his daughter's education from a governess, and complete it at the orphan house. His arrival increased the theological tension between Whitefield and the Wesley brothers, who did not care for Seward's 'Journal of a Voyage from Savannah... to England', published in 1740. Falling under Baptist influence, Seward now quarrelled bitterly with Charles Wesley. These disputes were, however, overshadowed by Seward's sad fate. While accompanying Howell Harris on Whitefield's begging mission in south Wales, he lost his sight in a fracas at Caerleon and then, on 22 October 1740, died suddenly, perhaps as a result of a stone being thrown at his head while he was preaching, and traditionally at Hay-on-Wye, Brecknockshire. The earliest reference to the injury describes Seward being attacked in Gloucestershire, and it is possible that Seward's death at or near Hay was the result of the assault at Caerleon. Whatever the cause of his death, Charles Wesley was shocked by it. Seward was buried in the churchyard at St Mary, Cusop, Herefordshire, near Hay. The Seward family disappeared from evangelical history. 


@@@@@


doc= 40214


Staniforth, Sampson (1720-1799), soldier and Methodist preacher, was born in December 1720 in Sheffield, Yorkshire, the son of a cutler. His parents had thirteen children, of whom only four lived to maturity. In the autobiography he wrote for John Wesley at the end of his life he said that no care was taken of his education and that he learned nothing of religion or morality; in this he was untypical of Methodist preachers. From fourteen to seventeen he was apprenticed to a baker; he was diligent in his work, but he fell into bad company and took to gaming. Late in 1739 he enlisted in the army, to his mother's distress (she had bought him off once before), and marched to Edinburgh. He heard George Whitefield preach several times in Glasgow (probably in 1742), but could not understand what he said. In Perth he narrowly escaped being killed by the relations of a young woman he refused to marry. In spring 1743 his regiment shipped to Ostend, and after a long and dangerous march joined the grand British, Hanoverian, and Austrian army a few days after the battle of Dettingen. For the next year he and his comrades devoted much time to plundering the countryside and its inhabitants, even though it was a hanging offence. He was 'engaged with a negro-man's wife' who was passionately fond of him ('A short account', 19). He was then aged twenty-four, and the first, irresponsible, part of his life was about to come to an end. 
Staniforth now met a Methodist soldier called Mark Bond, who had been converted by John Haime, William Clements, and John Evans, and who in turn took Staniforth to the preaching. The effect on him was immediate: 'I was as it were knocked down like an ox' ('A short account', 68). One of the members of the society gave him a piece of an old 'Bible', which he read with great joy. Under Bond's care he gave up all his old habits and began to invite others to the preaching. At winter quarters in Ghent, with Clements as preacher, the society hired two rooms for their meetings. All this time Staniforth was in increasing distress because of his past life. 'I thought the very stones in the street, and the timber in the wall cried out against me for my enormous wickedness' (ibid., 71). One night on guard duty he had a vision of Christ on the cross, and knew that his sins were forgiven. 'My chains fell off; my heart was free' (ibid., 72). He wrote a long letter to his mother, who had regularly sent him money, asking her forgiveness; the letter came into the hands of a dissenting minister, John Wadsworth, who sent him a 'Bible', and a Methodist, John Wilson, who sent him a hymnbook. 
In May 1745 Staniforth took part in the battle of Fontenoy, in which the allies were defeated by the French, and despite witnessing the deaths of many members of the society he thought he would not change his way of life for any other under the sun. Because of the number of losses he was transferred to the artillery at double the pay. The greater part of the British army was now ordered back to England because of the Jacobite rising, and at the end of October 1745 Staniforth was camped on Deptford Heath. Wherever his regiment marched he asked after the Methodists. He reached Stafford, but when the rebels turned aside to Derby he was ordered back to Deptford, where he lay until April 1746. His commanding officer allowed him to go to London twice a week to hear Wesley preach at the Foundry or at West Street Chapel, and here he met his future wife, of whom further details are unknown. He left her on his wedding day, 12 June 1746, to embark for the Netherlands. She wanted him to apply for a discharge, but he refused to do this when a battle was imminent, 'lest I should seem afraid to fight, and so bring a scandal upon the Gospel' ('A short account', 239). In the disastrous campaign in Flanders of September 1746 (which he described in a letter to Wesley of 17 October 1746) his regiment covered the British retreat, and his close friend Mark Bond was killed. For a time he wished he had died by his side. His wife renewed her request, and he bought his discharge for 15 guineas, eventually returning to England on 22 February 1748. 
For the rest of his life Staniforth was active as a local preacher in Deptford. In the early stages he had to apply to a magistrate to control the rioters at preaching time. Initially he read out some of Wesley's sermons once a week, and preachers were supplied from London. He organized a subscription for building a preaching-room at a cost of $225; it was opened by Charles Wesley in 1757, and in due course Staniforth himself began to preach, despite his initial fear. He was now a preacher, steward, visitor of the sick, and band and class leader for the Methodists, and in 1760 and 1761 parish constable and overseer of the poor. In 1764 he was involved in an ill-judged experiment of John Wesley: he was ordained with three others by the Greek 'bishop' Erasmus, but wisely made no use of this privilege. In 1771 he arranged for the building of a preaching-room at Rotherhithe, at a cost of nearly $200, for which he lent $100 of his own. He turned down several invitations to leave the Methodists, presumably from dissenting congregations, at a salary of $40 or $50 p.a. After he gave up his business (unidentified in his autobiography, though he seems to have prospered) he moved to Shoreham as assistant preacher at the request of the vicar, Vincent Perronet, but later returned to Deptford. His wife, an asthmatic, predeceased him; they had no children. He died in Deptford in 1799 (before 3 April), aged seventy-eight. He was described as 'of a remarkably calm, mild temper, and of a peaceable and healing spirit' ('Methodist Magazine', 22.462), a sharp contrast to his critical self-portrait as a young man. His surviving relations and legatees evidently resented his Methodism, and invited none of his friends to the funeral, though his fellow preachers attended him to the grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 40215


Told, Silas (1711-1778), schoolmaster and prison visitor, was born at the Lime Kilns in Bristol on 3 April 1711 of 'very creditable' parentage. His father, a physician like his paternal grandfather, lost money invested in the building of a wet dock and died at sea. His mother was the daughter of Captain Thomas Suckabitch or Sucksbury of Topsham. He was admitted at age eight to the charity school founded by Edward Colston, where he had a vision of eternal bliss after nearly drowning. In 1725 he went to sea as an apprentice to Moses Lilly, captain of the merchantman 'Prince of Wales'. The hazards of the voyages he experienced and his harsh treatment at the hands of those under whom he served are described in his autobiography, 'An Account of the Life, and Dealings of God with Silas Told' (1786), a second edition of which appeared in 1790 under the title, 'The Life of Mr. Silas Told, Written by himself'. After several transatlantic crossings and voyages to west Africa and the Mediterranean, he and his fellow crewmen were press-ganged into the navy; but he was fortunate to serve under a humane, Christian captain. In 1736 he was discharged, two years after marrying Mary Verney ('c'.1713-1744), and found employment first at a charity school at Stapleford Tawney, Essex, then as a clerk, and eventually as bookkeeper to a London builder. Under the influence of one of the young bricklayers, Charles Caspar Graves, Told reluctantly went to hear John Wesley preach at Short's Gardens and the Foundery Chapel, where he was convinced of sin and attached himself to the Methodists, despite family opposition. Following his wife's death, he was persuaded to take charge of the charity school at the Foundery. Wesley described him as 'a man of good understanding, although not much indebted to education' ('Life', preface). His temporal circumstances were improved by a second marriage, the details of which are unknown. For about three years he suffered bouts of spiritual anguish until convinced of the forgiveness of his sins while walking alone in the fields one morning. Influenced by Wesley's sermon on 'Matthew' 25: 43, he began to visit prisoners in Newgate and other London gaols and to accompany condemned felons to the gallows at Tyburn. He maintained this ministry for many years and Wesley thought 'no man for this hundred years has been so successful in that melancholy office' ('Journal', 6.221). Told died in December 1778 and was buried in London on the 20th. 


@@@@@


doc= 40216


Turnbull, George (1698-1748), theologian and teacher, was born on 11 July 1698 in Alloa, Clackmannanshire, the third of nine children of the minister George Turnbull the elder (1657-1744) and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Alexander Glass of Sauchie. He entered the University of Edinburgh in the autumn of 1711 and began to study for divinity in 1717, but did not graduate MA until May 1721. While in Edinburgh Turnbull became a member of the Rankenian Club, founded in 1716 or 1717 by a circle of iconoclastic students and their friends, which included two of his closest associates, the preacher William Wishart ('c'.1692-1753) and the surgeon George Young (1692-1757). Turnbull was then apparently preoccupied with fashioning a rational form of Christianity, which prompted him to attempt to initiate a correspondence with John Toland (1670-1722) in November 1718, and to write a passionate defence of religious toleration which he later claimed had remained unpublished because booksellers had baulked at its advocacy of freethinking in religion. 
Turnbull was elected a regent at Marischal College, Aberdeen, on 14 April 1721. His two published graduation theses, 'De scientiae naturalis cum philosophia morali conjunctione' (1723) and 'De pulcherrima mundi cum materialis tum rationalis constitutione' (1726), show that he was the first Scottish academic to advocate in print the use of the Newtonian method in moral philosophy, and that he continued to engage with the ideas of heterodox thinkers like Toland. Along with his colleague David Verner (1688-1752), Turnbull expounded the ideas of Lord Shaftesbury (1671-1713) and promoted instruction in natural jurisprudence and history. Additionally, he seems to have championed the ideology of 'old whigs' such as Lord Molesworth (1656-1725), with whom he corresponded in 1722-3. Yet he also dwelt on the moralists of classical antiquity, whose writings he regarded as an antidote to the pedantry of scholasticism. Through this intellectual diet, Turnbull aspired to produce virtuous citizens and rational Christians who were schooled in polite and useful knowledge. 
Despite his success in the classroom and his influence on pupils such as Thomas Reid (1710-1796), Turnbull rapidly became disillusioned with Marischal. As early as May 1723 he was seeking a position elsewhere through the patronage of Molesworth and, in March 1725, Turnbull and his friend, the professor of mathematics Colin Maclaurin (1698-1746), quarrelled with the principal, Thomas Blackwell the elder (1660?-1728). Maclaurin resigned, and Turnbull left without permission to serve as tutor to the Udney family. He was summoned back from the continent, and resumed teaching in January 1726. In the spring of 1727 he finally resigned, and was awarded an honorary degree of LLD from the college. 
Turnbull now became tutor to Andrew Wauchope of Niddry, and during the next five years travelled to Edinburgh, Groningen, Utrecht, and various stops in the Low Countries, Germany, and France. He was back in London by May 1732 looking for further employment, and received a second LLD degree, from the University of Edinburgh, on 13 June. Letters to a friend, the Edinburgh professor of universal history Charles Mackie (1688-1767?), show that Turnbull was cultivating the patronage of the Jacobite Lord Cornbury (1710-1753), among others, but he temporarily failed to secure another suitable position. Turnbull evidently decided at this juncture that he might seek preferment in the Anglican church, for he matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, in the Michaelmas term of 1733 and was granted a BCL degree. 
Despite serious misgivings about leaving England to act as a tutor, Turnbull's precarious finances forced him to travel to Italy in 1735 with the son of Lord Rockingham, Thomas Watson (1715-1746), where they remained until 1737. On his return Turnbull again sought gainful employment in London and, after an unsuccessful bid in early 1739 to become the secretary of the Society for the Encouragement of Learning (to which he had belonged since its foundation in 1735), he used his connections with Thomas Birch (1705-1766) and the latitudinarian divine Arthur Ashley Sykes (1684?-1756) to secure ordination by the bishop of Winchester, Benjamin Hoadly (1676-1761). He also began to move in court circles, and in 1741 was appointed as a chaplain to the prince of Wales, while continuing to ply his trade as a tutor at Kew. The following year Turnbull was made rector of Drumachose, co. Derry, by the bishop of Derry, Thomas Rundle (1688?-1743). Presumably through connections at court, Turnbull became tutor to Horatio Walpole (1723-1809), and embarked on another tour of Italy in 1744. After stops in Milan and Turin, Turnbull and his pupil resided in Florence in 1745-6 and then left for Rome, partly because the duke of Newcastle wanted Turnbull to obtain intelligence about the Jacobites. 
During the 1730s and early 1740s Turnbull issued a series of pamphlets and books which owed much to his Marischal College lectures and to his earlier theological concerns. In 1731 he published a small tract written in 1726 and inspired by a passage in Shaftesbury, 'A philosophical enquiry concerning the connexion betwixt the doctrines and miracles of Jesus Christ', in which he argued that just as experiments prove the validity of scientific propositions, Christ's miracles prove the truth of the Christian doctrine of the afterlife. This tract was intended to counteract the views of Anthony Collins (1676-1729) and Matthew Tindal (1657-1733), and Turnbull again attacked Tindal in 'Christianity neither False nor Useless, Tho' not as Old as the Creation' (1732), which took up the question of miracles as part of a defence of Samuel Clarke's account of the relation between natural and revealed religion. 
While he was in Italy in the mid-1730s Turnbull seems to have conceived the idea for a work on the art of classical antiquity, and back in London he was able to secure a fine set of illustrations by Camillo Paderni through his fellow Scot, the painter Allan Ramsay the younger (1713-1784), who was then in Rome. After delays caused by money problems, which were exacerbated by his failure to secure the sponsorship of the Society for the Encouragement of Learning, Turnbull's 'A Treatise on Ancient Painting' finally appeared in 1740. Although the book was satirized a decade later in William Hogarth's print 'Beer Street', Turnbull developed an innovative case for the educational purposes of the fine arts based on his theory that painting is a language which conveys truths about nature or morality, and in so doing challenged the common assumption that history painting was superior to other genres such as portraiture and landscapes. 
The year 1740 also saw the publication of another brief religious work, 'An Impartial Enquiry into the Moral Character of Jesus Christ', wherein Turnbull claimed that Christ was the greatest of all moral philosophers and that the purity of his morals demonstrated the truth of his teachings, along with the most comprehensive statement of his philosophical ideas, 'The Principles of Moral and Christian Philosophy'. Drawing on his Aberdeen lectures as well as his contacts with professors of natural jurisprudence in the Netherlands, Turnbull produced in 1741 an annotated translation of a Latin text by J. G. Heineccius, 'A Methodical System of Universal Law', which contains an important appendix in which he affirms that the study of natural law is an empirical science grounded on the anatomy of human nature. His last major work, 'Observations upon Liberal Education', appeared in 1742 and advanced a novel view of the interconnections between the various branches of human knowledge; it had a profound impact on curriculum reforms undertaken at Marischal and King's College in Aberdeen in 1753. In addition, Turnbull issued three minor translations, of which 'Justin's 'History of the World'' (1742) is the most noteworthy for its lengthy preface, which amplifies his remarks in the 'Observations' regarding the value of historical knowledge. Following his appointment as rector at Drumachose in 1742 Turnbull lived in obscurity. He died from unknown causes in The Hague on 31 January 1748 while gathering information on the Jacobites for Lord Newcastle. 


@@@@@


doc= 40217


Wishart, William (1691/2-1753), Church of Scotland minister and educationist, was the elder son of William Wishart (1660-1729), minister of South Leith and later principal of Edinburgh University, and his wife, Janet Murray (died 1744). In 1706 he entered Edinburgh University, where his regent was William Law (1662-1729), whose emphasis on natural theology deeply affected him. After graduating MA in 1709 Wishart undertook ministerial training, probably under William Hamilton, and was licensed by the presbytery of Edinburgh in 1717. He spent a year or two in the Netherlands, preaching in the Scots churches there and studying at Leiden. His matriculation in the philosophy faculty at Leiden on 18 October 1718 provides the sole information on his birth: he was then twenty-six. He returned to Edinburgh in 1719. 
Wishart was appointed preacher at Skinner's Close within the Tron parish where his father was then minister. He characterized his congregation as 'Common People, Educated & Grown up, nay Grown Old, in Prejudices & Enthusiasm' (Wishart to Molesworth, 13 Oct 1722). He joined other young professionals in creating the Rankenian Club, a discussion group that originally met at Ranken's tavern; other early members included George Turnbull and Robert Wallace. They admired the writings of Shaftesbury, Molesworth, and Hoadly. Under such influences Wishart abandoned the austerity of traditional Calvinism. He saw charity rather than retribution as the heart of the Christian message and stressed the potential good rather than depravity in human nature. Virtue was the only guarantee of happiness, but Wishart's conception of virtue was formed by stoic ideals of humanity, civil harmony, and public service. He and Turnbull associated with members of a corresponding club in Glasgow. These included Irish dissenters like James Arbuckle, who were active theologically in the debate over confessional subscription, and politically in a campaign that would eventually restore the students' right to elect the university rector. This brought Wishart into correspondence with Molesworth, who had offered parliamentary support for the Glasgow students' cause. 
Wishart himself moved to Glasgow in 1724, accepting a call by the magistrates of the city to the Tron church. He was ordained on 17 September. He had in 1723 become heir to part of the estate of his uncle Admiral Sir James Wishart, including a property at Bedale, Yorkshire, which would later become his vacation retreat. On 30 November 1724 he married Margaret (died 1746), daughter of the theologian Thomas Halyburton. Four daughters and one son survived infancy, all born between 1736 and 1746. The marriage united two prominent church families who had been close allies in the previous generation, but the younger generation on both sides moved away from their parents' narrow orthodoxy. Observers noted that Wishart modelled his preaching on Tillotson, that he was friendly with Irish non-subscribers and evasive on the more speculative dogmas of the creed, and that he introduced like-minded colleagues to preach on special occasions. He attended student debates and retained his interest in Glasgow University politics. When William Robertson (1705-1783) was expelled as an agitator in 1725 Wishart kept in touch. In several local causes he supported the Argyll party interest. When the dean of faculty's post fell vacant in 1728 Wishart obtained the nomination and thereby helped secure Francis Hutcheson's election, by one vote, to a vacant philosophy chair in 1729. He was virtually alone in the Glasgow presbytery in opposing the prosecution of John Simson, and published anonymously in 1729 a limited defence of the beleaguered professor, 'A Short and Impartial State of the Case of Mr John Simson', which has been wrongly attributed to his father. He condemned the pressures placed on country laity to judge issues of scholastic metaphysics that they were incapable of understanding. 
In 1730 Wishart became minister of the Scots congregation at Founders' Hall, London, and received a DD degree from Glasgow University for his recent services. He moved freely in London dissenting circles and among liberal Anglicans like Hoadly and Rundle; he acknowledged his indebtedness to Hoadly in 'Discourses on Several Subjects' (1753). In two early addresses reprinted in that volume, 'Charity the end of the commandment' (1731) and 'The certain and unchangeable difference betwixt moral good and evil' (1732), Wishart emphasized the social affections and commended Hutcheson's philosophy. While our natural disposition is easily corrupted, he argued, and good character must be instilled through persuasion and example, religious instruction commonly jeopardizes this, indoctrinating the young with sectarian prejudice rather than rational understanding. Civil constraint must likewise not infringe the liberty of informed conscience without which virtue is impossible. Ignorance and inadequate education are the main causes of crime, and punishment should be restricted to circumstances where identifiable hurt has been inflicted or the peace disturbed. In the same period Wishart corresponded with Thomas Amory, whose 'Dialogue on Devotion' (1733) revived the old debate on the petitionary function of prayer. For Wishart prayer is a means to wisdom and virtue, achieved by reconciling petitioners to their dependence on the constant laws by which the author of nature brings about the best total result for humanity. Wishart gave rougher handling to George Berkeley's 'Alciphron' (1732) a few months later. A former admirer of Berkeley's philosophy and probably one of those who declined a place in his missionary venture to America, Wishart was affronted at Berkeley's attack on Shaftesbury and his followers. He defended Shaftesbury's philosophy and personal character in an anonymous attempt at Shaftesburian banter, 'A vindication of the Reverend D -- B -- y, from the scandalous imputation of being author of a late book, intitled, Alciphron' (1734). 
In late 1736, with Lord Ilay's express backing, Wishart was nominated principal of Edinburgh University. The presbytery considered him theologically and politically subversive. For more than a year, initially under the moderatorship of John Gowdie, professor of divinity, they barred him from their pulpits, refused him the subscription to the confession of faith required by his appointment, and tried to block his nomination as university delegate to the general assembly. They drew documentary support, out of context, from what he had said and not said in his first publications, but their reading was coloured by his early reputation and his alleged association with every suspect strain in the Shaftesbury tradition. The documents in the case occupy 127 double-sided leaves in the general assembly's papers for 1738, and a flurry of pamphlets appeared on both sides. Wishart proved himself as orthodox as he judged necessary, while still defending the humane ethic and principles of conscience advocated in his previous preaching. He was exonerated. A year later he became minister of New Greyfriars, alongside the principalship, moving in 1744 to be co-pastor with his brother George Wishart ['see under 'Wishart, William (1660-1729)] at the prestigious Tron church. He was moderator of the general assembly in 1745. His wife died, probably in childbirth, on 27 February 1746. On 17 March 1747 he married Frances (died after 1754), daughter of James Deans of Woodhouselee; there is no record of further children. 
In 1743 Wishart became a manager of the Poor's Hospital. He was a member of the Musical Society and the Revolution Club. In two contentious church settlements, Bowden (1742) and Torphichen (1751), he made a stand against the policy of enforcing a patron's nomination against the wishes of the local congregation. His 'Reasons of Dissent from the Sentence of the General Assembly' (1751) shows Wishart's continuing allegiance to Hoadly's principles on discipline and conscience. Other dissentients who joined him (twenty-five in 1742, twenty-two in 1751) were from the orthodox wing of the church with which he was otherwise at loggerheads. He decried the Cambuslang revival of 1742, and was stung when Philip Doddridge in 1745 appeared to impugn the sincerity of clergy like him in subscribing the confession. Perceived threats to Wishart's benign philosophy tended to be answered with vehemence: he defended those who 'have most strenuously set themselves to promote real Virtue, and practical Christianity' (p. 12), in an anonymous 'Letter to the Revd Dr Doddridge, Occasioned by his 'Life of Col. Gairdner'' (1747). When the English dissenter George Benson applied for help in obtaining subscribers for theological works, Wishart expressed his isolation. Older ministers were not interested in scholarship: 'they know of a shorter & easier way of coming at their purpose'. The only hope lay with the next generation, whom Wishart 'put upon a thorough study of the Principles of Natural Religion & Morality, with other things preparatory to a critical search of the Scriptures' and encouraged to read new learning from the south (Wishart to Benson, 29 Dec 1748). He used his wealth to subsidize inexpensive editions for students and others. These included Ernesti's recent polemical defence of Ciceronian studies, and classic works by Scougal, Whichcote, and Volusene, all of which could be adapted to serve Wishart's own Christian stoic philosophy and his concern for practical piety without sectarian posturing. He concluded his introduction to Whichcote by citing Robert Fleming's 'Confirming Work of Religion' (1685) for its attack on the ignorance that both underlies and is transmitted by sectarian education. 
As principal Wishart improved the college library, attended colleagues' classes, and established a proper routine for student presentations. He was obsessive in his regard for what he considered the rights of the institution, whether threatened by politicians or by colleagues. When John Pringle obtained leave from the moral philosophy chair in 1742 Wishart lobbied unsuccessfully for the expected vacancy. When it finally occurred in 1745 David Hume and William Cleghorn were the principal contenders. Wishart campaigned for Cleghorn, leading the ministerial opposition which saw Hume disqualified. The accusations he levelled against Hume's philosophy and beliefs were as weakly and tendentiously documented as those Wishart himself had faced in 1737, and showed a radical misunderstanding of the nature of philosophical scepticism; but they fairly reflected the conception of a moral philosophy syllabus, circumscribed by natural theology, that still prevailed among liberal intellectuals of the day. 
A man of consistent principle, with a distaste for expediency, Wishart was one of the most significant and progressive figures at Edinburgh University and in the Scottish church in the generation between William Carstairs and William Robertson. He died in Edinburgh on 12 April 1753, to be succeeded, ineffectively, as principal by his erstwhile inquisitor, Gowdie. His edition of Scougal and his 'Essay on the Indispensable Necessity of a Holy and Good Life to the Happiness of Heaven' (1753) continued to be republished posthumously. His condemnation of deathbed repentances in the latter work was several times reprinted or included in devotional anthologies. Samuel Johnson, while doubting the argument, considered Wishart one of Scotland's few serious theologians on the evidence of this performance (Boswell, 23 Sept 1773). 


@@@@@


doc= 40218


Adamson, William (1863-1936), politician and trade unionist, was born at Halbeath, near Dunfermline in Fife, on 2 April 1863, the son of James Armstrong Adamson, a coalminer, and Flora Cunningham. He attended a dame-school run by the wife of a mining engineer, and left at the age of eleven to work in the mining industry, where he was employed for the next twenty-seven years. He married, on 25 February 1887, Christine Marshall (died 1935), a winder in a damask factory, with whom he had two sons and two daughters. 
The 1870s were a decade of vigorous trade-union activity in the Scottish coalfields, but, with the exception of Fife, union organization proved brittle. The Fife and Kinross Miners' Association survived some difficult periods, not least because the coal owners, sensitive to the pressures of the export trade, preferred negotiation to conflict. Adamson first became active in the union as a branch delegate; he became vice-president in 1894, assistant secretary in 1902, and general secretary, the senior post, in 1908. Through amalgamation his organization became in 1917 the Fife, Kinross, and Clackmannanshire Miners' Association. Moreover from the 1890s mining trade unionism became more effective in other Scottish coalfields. The various unions came together in 1894 to form the Scottish Miners' Federation -- the National Union of Scottish Mineworkers from 1914 -- and this body in turn affiliated to the Miners' Federation of Great Britain. 
Adamson was in many respects typical of the leaders who dominated British and Scottish miners' conferences before 1914. He was an active Baptist, a total abstainer, an admirer of Robert Burns, and, as a young man, involved in a mutual improvement society. His acquisition of the skills appropriate for a respectable miners' official went along with a conciliatory attitude to industrial relations. Politically Adamson was initially a Liberal, but the prominence of the Fife union had led by the late 1880s to demands that the West Fife constituency have a miners' representative. The reluctance of local Liberals and the emergence of independent Labour organization led in January 1910 to a three-cornered contest with Adamson, who had been a Labour member of Dunfermline council since 1905, standing as a Labour candidate. Unsuccessful in his first attempt, he defeated the Liberal in a straight fight in December 1910 to become the first Scottish miners' Labour MP. He was helped by the relative absence of ethnic and religious divisions among Fife miners, compared with the situation in Lanarkshire. 
Adamson's electoral success was founded on modest claims for the Labour Party. 'The Labour Party was the workers' own party' ('Dunfermline Press', 3 Dec 1910), but he also emphasized that the pre-war Labour Party was not a socialist party. He was a strong supporter of Britain's involvement in the First World War (his elder son was killed in the conflict) although he was at first unhappy about military conscription and voted against the second reading of the 'Military Service Bill' in January 1916. The involvement of key Labour figures in the Lloyd George coalition and the marginalization of critics of the government combined to elevate Adamson to the chairmanship of the Parliamentary Labour Party, in succession to Arthur Henderson, in October 1917. He retained the post until 1921 when he was replaced by J. R. Clynes. He was appointed a privy councillor in 1918. His experience as effectively party leader in the Commons was unhappy. Many felt that he lacked the necessary qualities. 'He has neither wit, fervour nor intellect; he is most decidedly not a leader, not even like Henderson, a manager of men' was Beatrice Webb's characteristically acerbic judgment ('Diaries', 330, 14 Jan 1919). Yet the weakness of the parliamentary party after 1918 was not simply the consequence of its leader's limitations. Comprising only a small contingent of MPs, mostly trade unionists, it seemed ill-equipped to cope with the challenges of post-war politics. Adamson's style reflected the pre-war party's status as a pressure group, but with an expanded electorate and a divided Liberal Party, Labour's ambitions had been transformed. 
Throughout the 1920s Adamson remained a senior figure within the Parliamentary Labour Party. He headed the Scottish Office in both the 1924 and the 1929 governments. On the second occasion, Ramsay MacDonald proposed that Adamson move to the Lords, leaving the junior minister, Tom Johnston, to answer for the Scottish Office in the Commons. The plan was abandoned when MacDonald discovered that Adamson had a son; the premier was opposed to appointing peers with heirs. Nevertheless Johnston often functioned as the effective secretary of state with Adamson as ceremonial head (Johnston, 100-102). This arrangement could give sustenance to the claim that Adamson's ministerial appointments simply reflected his place in the Labour Party hierarchy. 'There are so many considerations which have nothing to do with merit. The Labour Party has its 'Dukes' -- in its 18th century meaning of the term -- the great trade unions have to be represented -- viz Adamson!' (Beatrice Webb to Arthur Ponsonby, undated, Ponsonby papers, 671). Yet such representation in a Labour cabinet made an impact in the crisis of August 1931: Adamson voted with the minority who opposed any cut in unemployment benefit. Tom Johnston recalled Adamson's response to the proposed reduction. 'I've never voted against the poor yet, and I can't now' ('Political Diary of Hugh Dalton', 198-9, 15 March 1936). 
From this perspective Adamson's political career culminated in a principled stand. Whatever his caution and flexibility he revealed himself to be a stalwart defender of the labour interest in the face of orthodox financial pressures. Yet alongside his political seniority, Adamson's post-war trade union position became increasingly beleaguered, and this carried political consequences. During the First World War, a critical left-wing current had developed within the Fife miners' union. These radicals emphasized Adamson's responsiveness to coal owners' demands, the implications of mechanization for skilled colliers, and the lack of democracy within the union. Following the miners' defeat in the 1921 lock-out, criticism focused on the democracy issue. The culmination was a split at the end of 1922 with the formation of a separate Reform Union among the Fife miners under Philip Hodge of the Independent Labour Party. 
When a general election was called late in 1923, the Reform Union decided to run Hodge as a parliamentary candidate against Adamson in the West Fife constituency. Hodge had tried to secure the official Labour nomination, but having failed ran as a Reform candidate. In a straight fight he polled 6459 votes (over 34 per cent), an indication of many miners' disillusion with Adamson. The enmities meant that reunification of the two unions was achieved only in 1927. Several influential members of the Fife left were now in the Communist Party and that body favoured reunion. The lengthy dispute of 1926 placed a premium on solidarity, but the reunited union had to deal with the consequences of a thorough defeat. Reunification meant new elections both for posts in Fife and for the coalfield's representatives on the Scottish executive. The left made a significant advance and Adamson and his allies endeavoured by creative use of the rule book to evade the consequences. Mining unionism in Fife, and Lanarkshire, descended into chaos. The Fife county board suspended Adamson as secretary on the ground that he had broken his mandate, whereupon he resigned and set up a new union, the Fife, Clackmannan, and Kinross Miners' Union. Significantly this new body became the official Fife union within the National Union of Scottish Mineworkers and therefore within the Miners' Federation of Great Britain. The lack of constitutional procedure involved in creating the new union counted for little against a broad agreement among miners' union officials that communist growth must be blocked at all costs. The shambles was intensified as communists moved towards their sectarian 'class against class' policy, which produced yet another union, the United Mineworkers of Scotland. Yet to radicals in Fife, a separate 'red' miners' union could seem the only credible response to Adamson's contempt for union decisions. 
The imbroglio damaged the veteran leader's position in West Fife. In the 1929 election the Communist candidate, Willie Gallacher, polled over 6000 votes, and two years later he increased this to nearly 7000. Gallacher's intervention effectively cost Adamson his seat in 1931: the Conservative margin of victory was under 2000. Much worse faced him when he contested the seat again in November 1935. Several villages were now communist strongholds. A twelve-week dispute at the Valleyfield colliery saw members of Adamson's union ignoring his pleas to return to work; instead his members co-operated with the 'red' United Mineworkers of Scotland. The issue intensified long-standing criticism about his industrial policy. Recently widowed and ageing, he was no match for Gallacher and the Fife communists. He was defeated by 593 votes and died soon afterwards in a nursing home near Dunfermline on 23 February 1936. 
Adamson's reputation was damaged by the divisions within Fife mining unionism in the 1920s. Most accounts of him have been provided by left critics and have emphasized his autocracy and caution. In several respects he was characteristic of a generation of miners' leaders, but his world in Fife disintegrated and he faced talented opponents. A more nuanced portrait was offered by Tom Johnston: 'he was the soul of loyalty and good comradeship... caution personified with a capital P; he carried on for years a relentless warfare with the communists in his county, and his motto in that warfare as I once told him was the Covenanters' banner at Tippermuir 'Jesus and No Quarter'. ('Memories', 101)' 



@@@@@


doc= 40219


Arnold, Sydney, Baron Arnold (1878-1945), politician, was born at Hazel Bank, Hazel Road, Altrincham, on 13 January 1878, the son of William Ashness Arnold, stockbroker, and his wife, Sarah Anne, daughter of Charles Linney. Baptized at Bowden Downs Congregational Church, he was educated at Manchester grammar school and trained as a chartered accountant before joining his father's firm, W. A. Arnold & Sons, in 1900; he was a member of the Manchester stock exchange from 1904 to 1922. While working as a broker he devoted his leisure time to liberal politics and held office in the Manchester Liberal Federation, the Manchester Reform Club, and the Free Trade Union. He first stood for parliament at Holderness, in the East Riding of Yorkshire, in the general election of December 1910 and was narrowly beaten. In June 1912, at a by-election, he was successful at Holmfirth (later Penistone) in the West Riding, and represented the constituency as a Liberal until 1921, when he resigned his seat owing to ill health. 
Arnold established himself in the House of Commons as an expert on national finance, and in 1914, after serving as parliamentary private secretary to the president of the Board of Education, he became parliamentary private secretary to the financial secretary at the Treasury. During the war he was involved in several government missions to France, but although he was commended for this work he grew increasingly out of step with his party. He opposed conscription, favoured a negotiated peace, and in April 1918 urged a levy on capital to clear the national debt. The 'capital levy' did not then have the overtones of class war that it later assumed, and Arnold advocated the scheme on purely fiscal grounds. But it is indicative of his outlook that he placed the burden of the tax exclusively upon the wealthy, among whom he was to be numbered, and his politics now tended increasingly to the left. 
In 1922 Arnold broke with the Liberals and joined the Labour Party, where his political experience proved a valuable asset. He had a significant influence on policy, although not in his advocacy of the capital levy, which Labour leaders came to see as an electoral liability. In the Labour government of 1924 he served as parliamentary under-secretary of state for the colonies. Since for health reasons Arnold could not stand for parliamentary election, his appointment entailed the creation of a Labour peerage, then a novel step. He was created Baron Arnold on 12 February 1924. The scarcity of Labour peers meant that he had a heavy workload in the House of Lords, where he spoke often on financial matters. As befitted his political origins he remained vigorous in defence of free trade. 
By 1929 Arnold had been taken into the inner circle of Labour politics, and he accompanied Ramsay MacDonald on the nationwide speaking tour which laid the basis for Labour success at the general election in May. Later in the year he was with MacDonald on his historic visit to the United States, the first by a British premier. Though Arnold described himself as only the 'organ-blower' on this mission, he was recognized as a valued member of the prime minister's team and a close confidant of MacDonald himself. In the second Labour government he was appointed paymaster-general and he also sat on the Ullswater committee into electoral reform. In March 1931, though, he resigned his office to concentrate his energies on advocating free trade and temperance. Failing health was the ostensible reason for this decision, but in reality Arnold felt neglected by MacDonald, with whom his influence had inexplicably declined. After the formation of the National Government in August, Arnold sought a socialist riposte from Labour and was included in the finance and trade committee that oversaw the radicalization of party policy. But during the 1930s he became alienated over Labour foreign policy, which he thought made war more likely; in March 1938, after Attlee attacked the Anglo-Italian agreement negotiated by Chamberlain and Mussolini, he resigned his party membership. 
Arnold continued, though, to sit in the Lords and to comment freely on the political scene from which he had, at least in party terms, detached himself. He was a dissenting voice after the outbreak of war in 1939, and in mid-December urged the government to pursue a Dutch-Belgian offer of mediation with Hitler. Arnold believed that Hitler was 'genuinely anxious for peace and was prepared to go a long way to get it', and that more favourable terms might then be gained than could ever be won later ('Hansard 5L', 242). In the same debate he condemned what he saw as the wrecking tactics of Churchill, whose uncompromising views on peace Arnold believed encountered 'astonishment and repugnance' among great numbers in the country (ibid., 241). These remarks led the Labour MP Ernest Thurtle, in a letter to 'The Times' (15 Dec 1939), to question Arnold's position in the Lords, given his renunciation of the party that had placed him there. But Arnold was unrepentant, observing that 'it is not I who have changed. At the time when I was made a peer the Labour Party was generally regarded as a peace party. Can that fairly be said of it in the last few years?' ('The Times', 18 Dec 1939). 
Arnold's opposition to the war was motivated by the fear that there would be a repetition of the 'fight to the finish' mentality of 1914-18, but also by a belief that in focusing its energies on Nazism the British government was in danger of losing sight of the 'black shadow of Communism, which may spread right over the whole of Europe' ('Hansard 5L', 246). In February 1941 he attacked the anti-German, as opposed to anti-Nazi, content of government propaganda broadcasts. His last major contribution to Lords debate was, fittingly enough, on the 'Finance Bill' in June 1942, when he showed a characteristic concern for the interests of wage earners. Arnold died, unmarried, at Stoneycrest Nursing Home, Hindhead, Surrey, on 3 August 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 40222


Gretton, John, first Baron Gretton (1867-1947), brewer and politician, was born on 1 September 1867 at Bladen House, Winshill, Burton upon Trent, Staffordshire, the eldest of the three sons and five daughters of John Gretton (1833-1899), of Bladen House, Winshill, Staffordshire, and Grantham Lodge, Cowes, Isle of Wight, and his wife, Marianne Louisa (1847-1891), the daughter of Major John Richard Molineux (1817-1902). His father, who left an estate worth $2,883,640, was a director of England's leading brewery, Bass, Ratcliff and Gretton, of Burton upon Trent. Having leased Sudbury Hall, Derbyshire, from Lord Vernon in the late 1890s, Gretton inherited Stapleford Park, near Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire, the ancestral home of Lord Harborough bought by his father in 1894, and a great house in Knightsbridge, London. 
After education at Harrow School, Gretton went to work in the brewery at the age of about twenty. In 1893 he joined the board, and was soon crucial in political resistance to the temperance movement. He was diligent rather than keenly entrepreneurial, and in 1909 he succeeded Michael Arthur Bass, first Baron Burton, as chairman of Bass, Ratcliff and Gretton. The brewery paid dividends of 30 per cent in 1896-7 and remained superbly profitable throughout Gretton's chairmanship: average annual dividends on ordinary shares typically exceeded 20 per cent throughout the period 1934-45. Gretton was too conservative and complacent about the excellence of his products to develop forward strategies, however, and competition from Worthington's bottled beers troubled the firm from about 1900. Antagonism existed at all levels between the two companies; nevertheless, in 1926 Gretton agreed a merger with Arthur Manners, his counterpart at Worthington. But the two companies were left unintegrated, so that the anticipated benefits of this huge merger were never achieved. Manners always proved more astute and ruthless in boardroom politics than Gretton, whose resignation as chairman he provoked in 1945. 
Despite his Quaker descent, Gretton joined the Staffordshire volunteer regiment when young and maintained a lifelong devotion to soldiering. Known as 'Colonel' Gretton, he commanded the 6th battalion of the North Staffordshires (1900-07), and was their honorary colonel (1912-32). Military recruitment, training, and inspection consumed his energies in 1914-18. 
Gretton was an archetype of the reactionary tory brewer. For forty-eight years he was a Conservative MP, representing successively South Derbyshire (1895-1906), Rutland (1907-18), and Burton upon Trent (1918-43). As a protectionist he testified to the tariff commission (1903); he was an implacable opponent of the 'Licensing Bill' (1908) and of government restrictions on the wartime drinks trade. Lord Balniel characterized him in 1910: 'One of the best-hearted fellows one has ever met, kind, generous, self-effacing: ugly as possible, blinking at one through gold-rimmed spectacles: inarticulate, for it is almost impossible to hear a word he says, and his handwriting is simply deplorable. He has all the noble qualities of the mole. (Vincent, 169)' He hated the Lloyd George coalition, and resigned the tory whip (1921-2) in protest at its Irish settlement, foreign policy, and budget 'squandermania'. His inability to co-operate with Lord Salisbury, however, resulted in the leadership of the die-hard Unionists passing to Salisbury by the summer of 1922. Gretton, who sought the party chairmanship later in 1922, chaired the Unionist reconstruction committee (1920-21) and the National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations (1920-29). He was a gloomy, stubborn, and suspicious politician but a sharp-eared gossip who often exasperated his party leaders by demanding 'reactionary policy that the country would not stand' ('Austen Chamberlain Diary', 358). 
After the Conservative defeat in 1929, Gretton mustered the die-hards against Baldwin, and as a leader of the India defence committee stood beside Churchill in a last-ditch fight against the 'Government of India Bill' in 1931-5. Cuthbert Headlam wrote of him in 1934: 'He is a terrible cripple nowadays and getting very old -- in the House he collapses into a heap snoring so loud that he almost disturbs a debate. It is odd that he has had so much influence in politics for he has no parliamentary ability -- and is not even an average speaker: presumably he is a clever intriguer. I like him. (Ball, 297)' Gretton was a Derbyshire magistrate (1899), deputy lieutenant of Leicestershire (1929), a freeman of Burton upon Trent (1943), lord of the manor of Wymondham, and patron of five livings in Leicestershire, Rutland, and Staffordshire. He was created CBE in 1919, sworn of the privy council in 1926, and received a barony in 1944. In 1900 he married Maud Helen de Moleyns (1870-1934), the fourth daughter of the fourth Baron Ventry; they had a son and two daughters. He died of hemiplegia and a cerebral thrombosis on 2 June 1947 at Stapleford Park, and was buried at Stapleford on 6 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 40223


Harvey, Sir Ernest Musgrave, first baronet (1867-1955), banker, was born on 27 July 1867 at 1 Oak Hill, Hampstead, London, the third son of the Revd Charles Musgrave Harvey, curate of St John's Church, Hampstead, and later rector of Acton and vicar of Hillingdon, Middlesex, and his wife, Frances Harriet, 'nee' Brewster. He was educated at Marlborough College, and in 1885 obtained a clerkship in the Bank of England. In 1896 he married Sophia Paget (1871-1952); they had a son and three daughters. 
During fifty years at the Bank of England Harvey -- among the first of a new breed of central banker -- became only the second of its officials to be elected a director and the first to enter the ranks of 'governors'. Appointed deputy chief cashier in 1902 at the early age of thirty-five, from 1914 he played a large part in the bank's tasks of arranging massive war loans and then post-war monetary reconstruction for Britain and its European allies. For these services he was decorated by the French and Belgian governments, made a CBE in 1917, and knighted in 1920. He succeeded Sir Gordon Nairne as chief cashier in 1918 and again as comptroller in 1925, before joining him as a director in 1928. 
These promotions of senior officials to a court of directors traditionally composed of merchant bankers introduced a new professionalism to the Bank of England's highest levels as part of wider organizational reforms arising from its recognition that, amid post-war financial dislocations, central banking had become a much more active and complex function. The customary two-year rotation of governors was also abandoned. Just as Montagu Norman was the first modern, long-term governor, so Harvey in 1929 became the first modern deputy governor. 
Harvey's great strength was his thorough knowledge of the Bank of England's organization and practices, making him 'the perfect permanent secretary' for Norman by relieving him of responsibilities for administration and co-ordination (Sayers, 2.622-3, 635, 650-52). He was also unusually articulate in expounding his understanding. On trips to European capitals, and in a visit to Australia in 1927, he was an apostle of the bank's conception of central banking principles under the restored gold standard. With Norman absent through illness in late 1929, Harvey gave the bank's long opening evidence to the Macmillan committee of finance and industry, impressing even Keynes with what remains the most comprehensive and lucid source for the inter-war Bank of England. 
Another of Norman's illnesses left Harvey as the bank's acting head during the sterling crises of August and September 1931. He not only orchestrated defensive actions by the City, the Treasury, and American and French banks, but with his fellow director Sir Edward Peacock became a principal adviser to successive governments, even attending cabinet committees. Calling for urgent balancing of the budget as the best means to restore international confidence, they contributed to the pressures which fatally divided the second Labour cabinet. Consequently they figured prominently in accusations of forming a 'bankers' ramp' against a socialist government, although Harvey had scrupulously left discussion of specific taxes and expenditure cuts to the politicians. Under the emergency all-party National Government they criticized Conservative efforts to force a general election, and believed these helped to precipitate the final collapse of confidence. After two months of strenuous struggle, Harvey had to preside over the Bank of England's decision to advise abandonment of the gold standard, announced on 21 September 1931. 
What then seemed a catastrophe was soon accepted as an economic relief. One result was the implementation in June 1932 of the long-prepared plans of Harvey and Sir Richard Hopkins of the Treasury for a great war loan conversion, which inaugurated the 'cheap money' that assisted Britain's economic recovery in the 1930s. Harvey also participated in Bank of England rescues of commercial banks and in its novel industrial reorganization schemes, notably of the Lancashire Cotton Corporation. From 1934 he chaired the R. M. and E. D. Realisation Companies, the Bank of England-led arrangements for liquidating the failed Royal Mail-Elder Dempster shipping combine. Harvey was created a baronet in 1933. He retired from the Bank of England in 1936, but during the Second World War was a member of the General Claims Tribunal. He died at his home, Pennings, Mildenhall, Marlborough, on 17 December 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 40225


Phillipps, (Henry) Vivian (1870-1955), politician, was born on 13 April 1870 at Lancaster House, Beckenham, Kent, the eldest son of Henry Mitchell Phillipps (1836-1900), a merchant on the London corn exchange, and his second wife, Louise Vivian (1847-1921). He was educated at the Abbey School, Beckenham (1879-83), and Charterhouse School (1883-6), before preparing for the Indian Civil Service examination with crammers in Brighton (1887) and at Heidelberg (1887-9), where he became fluent in German. On failing the examination, he studied for the modern languages tripos at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge (1890-93), where he also played violin in the university string quartet. On graduating BA with first-class honours in 1893, he held the post of modern languages master at Fettes College, Edinburgh (1893-1905), also becoming choirmaster. In 1895 he published 'A Short Sketch of German Literature for Schools'. On 8 August 1899 he married Agnes Cassels, daughter of James Ford, an Edinburgh businessman. They had a son and two daughters, one of whom inspired Phillipps's children's story, 'A Trip to Santa Claus Land, or, Ruth's Christmas Eve' (1905). In his mid-thirties his prosperous father-in-law enabled him to fulfil an ambition to become a barrister. He entered Lincoln's Inn, but undertook much of the studies by correspondence course. After qualifying in 1908, he practised on the northern circuit. 
Phillipps also took up Liberal politics, but was defeated as the parliamentary candidate at Blackpool in the general election of 1906 and at Maidstone in both the general elections of 1910. His political advancement took a different route, after lack of success at the bar persuaded him to serve as private secretary to successive secretaries for Scotland, McKinnon Wood (1912-16) and H. J. Tennant (July to December 1916). When the formation of Lloyd George's coalition government split the Liberal Party leadership, he declined to work for the new minister, serving instead as private secretary to the former prime minister, Asquith, from 1917 to 1922. Phillipps became a loyal member of the Asquithian inner circle, along with Sir Robert Hudson, Geoffrey Howard, Viscount Gladstone, and Sir Donald Maclean. His principal contribution to Liberal politics was as this group's most implacable opponent of Lloyd George. At the general election of 1918 he was defeated at Rochdale by a Conservative bearing Lloyd George's 'coupon', but after the fall of the coalition government he finally became an MP by winning West Edinburgh at the general election of 1922. 
Despite being new to the House of Commons, Phillipps was appointed in January 1923 chief whip of the independent Liberal Party, because Asquith desired a close friend in the post who could be relied upon to resist pressures for reunion with Lloyd George's National Liberal Party. When the Conservative government's adoption of protection nevertheless forced the Asquithians into reluctant reconciliation with Lloyd George in autumn 1923, Phillipps negotiated the allocation of parliamentary candidatures and an agreed election manifesto. He retained his seat at the general election of 1923, but as the results produced a hung parliament with Liberal MPs holding the balance of power, his work as chief whip became unusually difficult. The Liberal leadership's efforts to influence the inexperienced first Labour government generated mutual resentment, while new differences developed among Liberal MPs as they were torn between the alternatives of voting with one or other of the two larger parties, or else abstaining. Amid a general Liberal Party collapse at the general election of 1924, Phillipps lost at West Edinburgh and thereby ceased to be chief whip. 
Appointed early in 1925 as chairman of the Liberal Party organization with the formidable task of restoring its credibility, Phillipps engaged in new disputes which made matters worse. The party was desperately short of money, yet Lloyd George possessed a large political fund. Lloyd George's refusals to seal political reunion by financial union created Asquithian anxieties that he would use his fund to capture control of the party, so in 1925 Phillipps chaired a 'million fund' appeal aimed at securing the party's financial independence. When the appeal failed miserably, Phillipps's sense of political proportion deserted him: he asserted not just that the Lloyd George fund deterred donors but that distrust of Lloyd George himself was the chief obstacle to the party's revival. For Phillipps, defence of Liberal principles and hatred of Lloyd George had become inseparable. If, he wrote, Lloyd George were 'to offer the Kingdom of the earth' and ask 'what more do you want', he would say 'we don't want you' (16 Nov 1926, Gladstone papers). 
Phillipps considered Asquith's break with Lloyd George in May 1926 over the general strike a 'deliverance', yet it precipitated what he most feared. Not only was Asquith forced into retirement, leaving Lloyd George as 'de facto' party leader, but the party's income withered. In September Phillipps had to report that bankruptcy loomed within six months. The National Liberal Federation executive felt obliged in January 1927 to accept an offer of large sums from Lloyd George, with an implicit condition of Phillipps's removal as party chairman. Already, however, he and other Asquithians had resolved to continue the fight, forming the Liberal council under Viscount Grey's leadership as 'the champion of clean politics, the financial independence of parties' and traditional Liberal values. As executive committee member and joint secretary Phillipps was the council's chief organizer, assisting Liberal parliamentary candidates critical of Lloyd George and seeking every opportunity to thwart him. When the Conservative newspaper the 'Morning Post' ran a campaign during 1927 against the Lloyd George fund, exposing its origins in the sale of honours, Phillipps supplied much of the information. 
Although at the general election of 1929 Phillipps, sharing the fate of most Liberal candidates, was again defeated at West Edinburgh, like other Asquithians he delighted in the failure of Lloyd George's efforts to achieve a substantial party revival. Phillipps publicly presented the Liberal election result as proof that Lloyd George's leadership was a liability to the party, and organized an abortive Liberal council assault on him in early 1930. During the rest of the parliament he combined a Liberal council campaign for retrenchment and free trade with encouragement to new groups of Liberal parliamentary rebels. But with Lloyd George's removal from the leadership as the Liberal Party finally disintegrated during the 1931 political crisis, the mainspring of Phillipps's political career was removed. He remained active in the Liberal council, and defended the historical reputation of Asquithian leaders by assisting their biographers, but he did not stand again for parliament. Instead he turned to legal and local affairs. A JP for Kent since 1915, he was elected vice-chairman of the county bench in 1931 and chairman in 1937. He was chairman of the West Kent quarter sessions (1933-45), the West Kent Unemployment Appeal Tribunal (1934-40), and the Kent Agricultural Wages Committee (1935-40). He also served on the lord chancellor's committee on appointments to the commission of the peace, and the board of visitors to Maidstone prison. His autobiography, 'My Days and Ways', was printed for private circulation in 1943. He died on 16 January 1955 at his home, Upper Kennards, Leigh, near Tonbridge, Kent, and was buried two days later in the parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 40226


Skelton, (Archibald) Noel (1880-1935), politician, was born on 1 July 1880 in Edinburgh, the son of Sir John Skelton (1831-1897), advocate, author, and civil servant, and his wife, Anne Adair Lawrie ('b'. 1846/7, died in or after 1897). He was educated at Trinity College, Glenalmond, the University of Edinburgh, and Christ Church, Oxford, where he took a second in history in 1903. From 1906 he was an advocate in the Scottish bar. He became a rising figure in Unionist Party politics, one friend recalling ('The Times', 25 Nov 1935) that he did much 'to make Toryism a live creed in Scotland and to shake the rooted Scottish political traditions'. He stood unsuccessfully as parliamentary candidate for East Perthshire at the December 1910 general election. During the First World War he served with the Scottish Horse, a yeomanry regiment, reaching the rank of captain. Elected as MP for Perth at the 1922 election, he was defeated in 1923 but re-elected at the 1924 and 1929 elections. In the 1931 general election he was returned unopposed for the Combined Scottish Universities. He never married. 
During the early 1920s Skelton's pre-war Unionist activism against Liberal predominance in Scotland turned into belief that a progressive Conservatism was needed to defeat the new 'socialist' challenge throughout Britain. Here, for a back-bench MP, he had an unusual and enduring influence. In four articles in 'The Spectator' in April and May 1923, republished during the first Labour government in 1924 as a pamphlet entitled 'Constructive Conservatism', he coined the pregnant phrase 'a property-owning democracy'. In truth, encouraging possession of private property among the working population was an obvious strategy against socialist collectivism and was already entering the rhetoric of Conservative leaders, although Baldwin used the precise phrase only in 1931. Nevertheless, in Skelton's presentation the concept was a fresh and radical restatement of Conservative 'philosophy' appropriate for a 'new era': it would stabilize democracy, give wage-earners an economic status commensurate with their political enfranchisement, 'bridge the economic gulf... between Labour and Capital', and be the 'vehicle for the moral and economic progress of the individual' ('Constructive Conservatism', 7, 24). His ideas appealed strongly to a loose group of younger, idealistic Conservatives in the 1924 parliament, known as the 'YMCA', who supported the progressive elements in Baldwin's Conservative government against what they regarded as the party's reactionary business members. Skelton took a leading part in the lobbying and journalistic activities of the group, his contributions including an article entitled 'Labour in the new era' ('QR', 244, 1925). Several of the group's members -- Oliver Stanley, Walter Elliott, Robert Boothby, and Harold Macmillan -- and another friend, Anthony Eden, later became important figures, and through them Skelton unwittingly helped inspire interventionist Conservative 'middle way' thinking from the 1930s. By a 'property-owning democracy' he himself had meant a reinforcement of individualism through industrial profit sharing, agricultural smallholdings, and co-operative schemes. But after Eden revived the phrase at the 1946 Conservative conference and made it a leading party slogan, it became chiefly associated, particularly by Macmillan during the early 1950s, with state promotion of house ownership. 
In their memoirs, Skelton's friends recalled him as 'thought-provoking', a 'great political teacher', and a 'superlative talker, with a tremendous vitality and zest for life' (Eden, 12; Macmillan, 177-8; Boothby, 138). But these qualities were imperfectly communicated to wider audiences. While younger associates received early and rapid ministerial promotion, only under the National Government in September 1931 did he become parliamentary under-secretary for Scotland. Here he supervised health, housing, and educational policies, but without striking departures. He served also on the Empire Marketing Board and on the government delegation to the League of Nations. He had one last, curious effect on public life. He stood again for the Combined Scottish Universities at the next general election, but died at 25 Belgrave Crescent, Edinburgh, on 22 November 1935, after the poll but before the declaration of the result -- creating the first modern case of a parliamentary candidate elected posthumously. The consequent by-election in January 1936 was notable for being used to secure a parliamentary seat for the former prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald, embarrassingly defeated in Seaham at the general election. 


@@@@@


doc= 40227


Fleming, Ann Geraldine Mary (1913-1981), society hostess, was born at 26 Catherine Street, Westminster, London, on 19 June 1913, the eldest daughter of Guy Lawrence Charteris (1886-1967), and his first wife, Frances Lucy Tennant (1887-1925). Her father was the second son of Hugo Charteris, ninth earl of Wemyss, and after her mother died, she spent long periods at Stanway, her grandparents' home in the Cotswolds. There she came under the benign influence of her grandmother Mary Constance Charteris, countess of Wemyss, one of the last of the Souls, the group of intellectual aristocrats which had flourished at the turn of the century. In an atmosphere where plays were specially written for her and her siblings, Laura, Mary Rose, and Hugo Francis Guy Charteris, by Sir James Barrie, Ann learned to prize conversation, conviviality, and literary prowess. 
Unsuited for conventional schooling (she lasted one term at Cheltenham Ladies' College), Ann was educated at home by governesses. She was well grounded in English literature, but a poor speller. In 1931 she 'came out' as a debutante at a party given by her aunt, Kathleen Manners, duchess of Rutland. Always competitive with her sister Laura (later duchess of Marlborough), on 6 October 1932 Ann married one of her first real suitors -- Shane Edward Robert O'Neill, third Baron O'Neill (1907-1944), a wealthy peer with a job in the City. 
Settling into a conventional social life in London and Northern Ireland (where the O'Neills had a hereditary seat), Ann gave birth to two children, Raymond and Fionn. However, tiring of her husband's friends, she fell in love in 1936 with Esmond Cecil Harmsworth (1898-1978), heir to Lord Rothermere, owner of the 'Daily Mail'. She was also attracted to Ian Lancaster Fleming (1908-1964), a young stockbroker. When Lord O'Neill went to war in 1939 Ann took a house in Gloucestershire. The following year Harmsworth succeeded his father, and Ann, attracted to his power, was regularly at his side at the Dorchester Hotel, London's wartime social centre. She continued to see Fleming, the influential assistant to the director of naval intelligence. 
Ann was devastated when O'Neill was killed in Italy in October 1944. At the end of the war, she would happily have married Fleming, but settled for the second Viscount Rothermere, with whom she lived in great luxury at Warwick House, off Green Park, London, after their marriage on 28 June 1945. She fought post-war austerity with sumptuous parties, which mixed her husband's associates, the more interesting aristocrats, and a new generation of writers and artists -- among them Lucian Freud, Frederick Ashton, Francis Bacon, and Peter Quennell. She enjoyed being the power behind the throne at the 'Daily Mail', where she found a job for her brother, Hugo, later a novelist. Hugo disapproved of her sybaritic lifestyle and was scornful of her continued attachment to Fleming who, while working at the 'Sunday Times', enjoyed three months' holiday every year in Jamaica. Pretending to visit her friend Noel Coward on this Caribbean island, she stayed with Fleming. In 1948 she gave birth to his daughter, Mary, who lived only a few hours. In late 1951 Rothermere tired of this set-up and divorced her. On 24 March 1952 she married Fleming; they had one son, Caspar. 
Spurred by impending marriage Fleming wrote a novel, 'Casino Royale', featuring the secret agent James Bond and published to critical acclaim in April 1953. The Flemings bought a Regency house in Victoria Square, London, where Ann reinvented her social life, giving smaller lunch and dinner parties attended by new literary friends, including Evelyn Waugh, Cyril Connolly, and Patrick Leigh Fermor. She maintained her links to newspapers via a flirtatious relationship with Lord Beaverbrook, owner of the 'Daily Express'. She also developed an interest in politics through the Conservative leader Sir Anthony Eden (who had married her friend Clarissa Churchill) and through his Labour opponent, Hugh Gaitskell, with whom she conducted a discreet romance. 
Since Ann's husband preferred golf and bridge to literary gossip he was seldom at home. He spent increasing time in Kent (where the Flemings had a succession of houses) and in Jamaica, while she lobbied to live in the 'real countryside' of her childhood. Having become wealthy through his Bond books, he bought a house at Sevenhampton, near Swindon, Wiltshire, where the Flemings moved in 1962. In August 1964 Fleming died of a heart attack. Unhappy at the exploitation of the Bond franchise, Ann nevertheless welcomed the ensuing wealth. Her social gatherings metamorphosed into relaxed weekend house parties, attended by Oxford friends such as Maurice Bowra and John Sparrow. Despite right-wing views, she extended her political circle to include Labour Party spokesmen such as Anthony Crosland, Roy Jenkins, and the lawyer Arnold Goodman, with whom she was particularly close. In 1975 she experienced further tragedy when her depressive son, Caspar, killed himself. 
Ann died of cancer at her home, Sevenhampton Place, on 12 July 1981, and was buried at Sevenhampton. Her intelligence is reflected in 'The Letters of Ann Fleming', posthumously edited by Mark Amory. Although seemingly hard she had a great capacity for friendship. At her memorial service Lord Annan noted that, unlike earlier hostesses, she was indifferent to celebrity and did not exist to please. He perhaps ignored her interest in power (one reason why she courted Labour politicians), but he was right that she brought out the best in an incongruous mix of people -- and that she could do this 'because she was totally self-confident and cared not a jot for the opinion of others'. 


@@@@@


doc= 40229


Rowntree, John Wilhelm (1868-1905), chocolate manufacturer and religious activist, was born on 4 September 1868 at Top House, St Mary's, York, the eldest of the six children of Joseph Rowntree (1836-1925) and his second wife, (Emma) Antoinette (1846-1924), daughter of Wilhelm Seebohm of Hamburg. (Benjamin) Seebohm Rowntree was his brother. He was educated at Bootham School, York, and Oliver's Mount School, Scarborough. In 1886 he entered his father's York cocoa works at Tanner's Moat, working in each department so as to become 'thoroughly acquainted with the 'practical' side of the work' (Vernon, 88). At nineteen he reorganized the cocoa and chocolate departments; at twenty-one he became a partner and, on the firm becoming a limited company in 1897, a director, serving until his death. While not warming to business life he took a full and effective share in it, including the planning of the move in the 1890s to the Haxby Road site. He saw the firm grow from 200 employees to over 2000. 
Rowntree was tall and erect in bearing, had a ready wit, and was an excellent mimic. He inherited from his mother an interest in the arts: he had some talent for painting and became passionately interested in the theatre, becoming himself a gifted amateur actor. He married on 28 July 1892 Constance Margaret Naish (1871-1928): they had five children. 
At the 1893 yearly meeting of British Quakers Rowntree spoke for younger friends not reached by the language of evangelical orthodoxy. With his creative driving force he became an acknowledged leader among those urging Friends to come to terms with scientific discoveries, biblical criticism, and the social implications of the gospel. To this end he took a notable part in the Manchester conference (1895) and in the promotion from 1897 of summer schools, leading to the foundation in 1903 of Woodbrooke, Birmingham, as a permanent centre for these studies. In 1897 he met in Switzerland the American Quaker Rufus M. Jones (1863-1948): together they planned a comprehensive history of Quakerism, written after Rowntree's death by Jones and William Charles Braithwaite (1862-1922). Rowntree also founded and edited (1899-1902) 'Present Day Papers' as a vehicle of Christocentric faith freed from doctrinal narrowness: some of the society's practices he dismissed as 'Quaker caution and love of detail run to seed' (Vernon, 106). 
Like his father, Rowntree was devoted to adult school work and his students found his teaching lucid and arresting but demanding. With Henry Bryan Binns (1873-1923) he wrote 'A History of the Adult School Movement' (1903; reprinted with new introduction and notes, 1985). He was impatient with the 'brief and bright' approach of the Pleasant Sunday Afternoon movement. He was equally impatient with mission-minded Quakers who wished to brighten meetings for worship with congregational singing and he stressed the need for an educated lay ministry: his own gift in the vocal ministry was acknowledged by York monthly meeting in 1900. 
Rowntree had been a delicate child and had early suffered from deafness (an ear trumpet had to be bought when he was only nine). In 1894 he had serious contraction of sight, diagnosed as retinitis pigmentosa, and was warned of coming and irreparable blindness. The ensuing decade of intense activity could have been, but was not, clouded by his health, despite almost daily bouts of depression. He was the only one of Joseph's children who could make his father laugh. In 1899 his doctors ordered a country life and Rowntree retired to Scalby, near Scarborough. In 1905 he sailed for his fourth visit to his American eye specialist, but contracted pneumonia on the voyage and died in a New York hospital on 9 March, his body being interred on 17 March in Friends' burial-ground, Haverford, Pennsylvania. 


@@@@@


doc= 40230


Addison, Henry Robert (1805-1876), playwright and army officer, was born of Irish parentage in 1805 at Calcutta, and spent his early life in India. He acquired on 12 July 1827 a commission in the cavalry as cornet in the 2nd dragoon guards, and progressed to lieutenant on 15 March 1831. Part of his army service was spent in western Ireland during the period of Daniel O'Connell's election in co. Clare in 1828. On 10 December 1828 he married at Limerick Mary, daughter of Thomas Phillips Vokes; they had at least one son and one daughter. 
In June 1833 Addison went on half pay. His first extant plays were melodramas with songs or operettas specially written for Mrs Waylett: 'Lo Zingaro', 'Jessie, the Flower of Dumblaine', and 'The Butterfly's Ball' (all performed at the Adelphi, 1833). Addison was adept at catching the public mood: all his early plays were successful and many were printed. During the 1835-6 season several were performed at Drury Lane and Covent Garden, and about this time he joined the Dramatic Authors' Society, of which most leading playwrights were members. In August 1836 he leased the Queen's Theatre, Fitzroy Square, with Mrs Waylett again as his star, but this excursion into management failed to last the season. 
As recommended in his guidebook for the English resident, 'Belgium as she is' (1838), Addison in 1837 settled temporarily in Bruges, where it was possible to live more cheaply than in Britain while retaining contact through a largish expatriate community. Here he attempted his first fictional writing with 'Diary of a Judge' (1838) -- six 'strictly original' tales of crime and justice in Napoleon's time -- and also met Charles Lever, whom he pestered for space in his 'Dublin University Magazine'. The lively series of 'Dramatic doings' (1840-41) which resulted drew partly on his experience as a raw recruit to play writing, and included surprisingly frank portraits of prominent contemporaries such as Bunn, Fitzball, Planche, and Moncrieff. Lever described Addison in 1841 as a portly, flamboyant bon viveur with well-waxed moustache, disposed to tall stories. He is fictionalized as the comic Captain Bubbleton in Lever's picaresque novel of the Napoleonic period, 'Tom Burke of 'Ours'' (1844), where his extravagant boasting is redeemed by his loyalty to the hero. Addison's discursive, casual style was well suited to his inventive anecdotal versions of his Indian experiences for 'Bentley's Miscellany' (1841-5) and 'Ainsworth's Magazine' (1848). At the same time he resumed his dramatic career in London, principally writing successful farces such as 'Sophie's Supper' (1849), 'No. 117 Arundel Street, Strand' (1860), and 'Locked in with a Lady' (1863). Three of his plays -- he is said to have written more than sixty -- were still in print, in 'Dicks's Standard Plays', at the end of the century. In 1849-50 he edited the first 'Who's Who', then an almanac and lists of public officials. 
In 1865 Addison published 'Behind the Curtain', a moderately successful three-volume sensational novel featuring sibling rivalry, baby substitution, abduction, madness, and attempted murder, and ending with the hero's restoration to his inheritance. His 'Recollections of an Irish Police Magistrate' (1862) drew on his own experiences, as well as chronicling the detective work of his father-in-law, Thomas Phillips Vokes, Limerick's magistrate during the troubles of the late 1820s and early 1830s. On a lower level was ''All at Sea': Recollections of a Half-Pay Officer' (1863), a loosely connected series of tales told by, or to, a would-be missionary 'en route' for Africa. Addison knew Paris well as a sometime resident -- he was a reporter for the London papers at the 1867 Paris Universal Exhibition -- and his last work was a brief, though graphic, account of a visit to Paris after the 1870 commune, when mutilated bodies still littered the streets. He died aged seventy-one at his home, 32 Albion Street, Hyde Park, London, on 24 June 1876. 


@@@@@


doc= 40231


Brookfield, Charles Hallam Elton (1857-1913), playwright, was born on 19 May 1857, the third child and second son of William Henry Brookfield (1809-1874), clergyman and inspector of schools, and his wife, Jane Octavia Elton ['see 'Brookfield, Jane Octavia (1821-1896)], novelist and close friend of Thackeray. From childhood he was accustomed to the company of his parents' literary friends and he inherited his father's gift for mimicry and love for the theatre, creating dramatic diversions with his brother Arthur. From 1871 until 1873 he attended Westminster School and then devoted two years to occasional attendance at lectures at King's College, London, and to dashes across the channel to revel in the techniques of comic actors in the theatres of Paris. He also rubbed shoulders with writers who included Rudyard Kipling and R. L. Stevenson, became a reviewer of novels for 'The Examiner', and began his attachment to London club life when he gained membership of the Savile Club at the age of seventeen. At Trinity College, Cambridge (1875-8), he was prominent in the productions of the Amateur Dramatic Club but went down without taking a degree, distinguished only by the award of the Winchester reading prize. Later photographs show a neat, sleek-haired man with alert eyes; he was described as 'sparkling, debonair and full of stories' (cutting in Brookfield MSS); his gift for repartee and caustic wit ensured great popularity in clubs and social gatherings. 
After a short and uncongenial period studying law, Brookfield decided in 1879 to try his luck on the stage in spite of strong opposition from his family, using his friend Henry Kemble (who had never seen him act) as a referee. He experienced an uneasy start in pantomime and in a touring company, where his health problems became overwhelming for a time, but in 1880 he was invited to join Squire Bancroft's highly successful company in the renovated Haymarket Theatre, London, where he gained many complimentary notices for his performances in supporting roles. He also began writing plays, many translations of, or derivations from, works in French. On 4 December 1884 he married Frances Mary Grogan (1857/8-1926), daughter of William Grogan. She was an actress who used the stage name Ruth Francis. Their only child, Peter (who took the religious name of Paul when he became a monk), was born on 28 June 1888. 
On Bancroft's retirement in 1884 Brookfield continued his successful acting career until in 1898 he became very ill and advanced tuberculosis was diagnosed. Periods of convalescence abroad were followed by a financially precarious existence, clouded by ill health, but he remained outwardly cheerful and applied himself to writing and marketing his plays. He converted to Roman Catholicism in 1900, and found peace and enjoyment during visits to Downside Abbey in Somerset, where his son became a pupil in 1901. He was the author of 'The Twilight of Love' (1893), 'Random Reminiscences' (1902), and, with his wife, of 'Mrs Brookfield and her Circle' (1905). He wrote, or co-wrote, many plays, concentrating on farce, revue, and burlesque. A typical product was 'Under the Clock', a spoof Sherlock Holmes story which provoked the wrath of Conan Doyle. 
Brookfield's appointment as examiner of plays in 1911 caused an outcry. He had set his face firmly against the New Drama as exemplified by Ibsen and Shaw, and felt an implacable and seemingly obsessive hatred for Oscar Wilde (he had mocked Wilde and 'Lady Windermere's Fan' in his play 'The Poet and the Puppets' and had helped gather evidence against Wilde in the trial of 1895). Brookfield had also himself been attacked for perceived amorality in his play of 1906, 'Dear Old Charlie'. However, he weathered the storm and carried out his duties with aplomb until his death from tuberculosis on 20 October 1913 at his home, 28 Clareville Street, Hereford Square, London. He was buried in the Catholic church at Stratton on the Fosse, Somerset, on 23 October, after a requiem mass on the same day at Brompton Oratory, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 40235


Meritt, Paul John (1843/4-1895), playwright and theatre manager, was born in Kiev, Russia. His father, originally from Prague, was a naturalized Briton and sometime private secretary to Sir Edward Earle Gascoyne Bulwer. Although formally his surname remained Maetzker, Paul Meritt always used the Anglicized version. On his father's death in 1854, his Yorkshire-born mother, whose maiden name was Elissens, sent him to school in Leeds, where he was known as Russian Jack. There his juvenile melodrama ('Roderick the Ruthless'), written in 1859-60, earned him a flogging for misuse of school paper. In 1861 he made his acting debut at the Theatre Royal in Hull, initially as Wilford in 'The Iron Chest' by George Colman the younger, but his main employment was as an office clerk in Leeds and, from 1868, in London. Meritt began writing professionally about 1870 and between 1871 and 1874 was a mainstay author at the Grecian Theatre, where his early sensational melodramas ('works strung together almost at haphazard to please an east-end audience'; Archer, 227) included 'Sid, or, The Family Legend' (first performed in Doncaster in 1870), 'Glin Gath', and the farce 'Chopsticks and Spikins'. 
Meritt could write forceful melodramatic dialogue; but none of his pieces had pretensions to literary quality, an aspiration which he tended to disparage. Probably his greatest success was 'The New Babylon' (Manchester, 1878; Duke's, 1879), which became the talk of London and ran for 361 performances. It astounded audiences by the verisimilitude, diversity, and brilliance of its settings and effects: a ship collision in mid-Atlantic; representations of Cremorne Gardens, Goodwood racecourse, and the Thames Embankment; and a night scene at the notorious slum of Seven Dials. Equally ingenious and almost as exhilarating was 'The World' (1880; with Augustus Harris), which drew on familiar plot-lines such as insurance fraud and thwarted family inheritance, set against an especially thrilling shipboard explosion, a nerve-tingling rescue from a raft (which 'The Theatre' suggested was worthy to 'be recorded in the famous annals of melodrama'; p. 176), and the fatal precipitation of the villain down a hotel lift-shaft. Another collaboration with Harris, 'Youth' (1881), was notable for the authenticity of its rendering of the convict-yard at Portsmouth gaol, which Meritt had previously visited to absorb the atmosphere. 
During the early 1880s Meritt partnered George Conquest at the Surrey Theatre, which led to several jointly written plays and equal sharing of the profits. Indeed, most of Meritt's forty-odd pieces were collaborations, if not with Conquest or Harris, then with Tom Taylor, Henry Spry, or Henry Pettitt. As there was also money to be made from novels based on popular plays, Meritt recruited a Surrey colleague, the actor W. Howell Poole, who dabbled a little in fiction, to produce a novelistic version of 'The New Babylon'. It was published jointly in 1882, but Meritt, having contributed little beyond the basic framework, received only a one-third royalty. He later quarrelled with Poole over 'Hidden Millions', a prose version of his earlier play 'Glin Gath', published under Meritt's sole name in 'Pictorial World' (Christmas 1882). As principal author, Poole claimed a $200 royalty rather than the $45 Meritt actually paid; but after a two-day court hearing in 1885, irreconcilable conflicts in evidence emerged, preventing the jury from agreeing on a verdict. Meritt's last exposure on the London stage was the revival of 'The World' (1894), which ran for fifty performances. According to 'The Times', it had aged well for a fourteen-year-old play and, as a spectacular, episodic melodrama, was still 'a striking work of its class' (26 Feb 1894). 
A large-framed man, well-built, and bespectacled, with a rather chubby appearance, Meritt possessed, in William Archer's opinion, powers of invention which could have fitted him 'for better things' (Archer, 231). But within his range he enjoyed real success and made enough money to indulge his passion of collecting theatrical portraiture. A member of the Savage Club and the Dramatic Authors' Society, he knew the theatre intimately and was a friend of leading figures such as Arthur Pinero and Henry Irving. Actively involved in the production of his plays, he attended the majority of first nights personally. About a quarter of his dramatic output was published, all in Lacy's 'Acting Edition'. Meritt died on 7 July 1895 at his home, The Hollies, Pembroke Square, Kensington, London, and was buried on the 11th in Brompton cemetery in London. He was survived by his wife, Annie. 


@@@@@


doc= 40240


Robinson, Emma (1814-1890), novelist and playwright, was born in London, the daughter of Joseph Robinson (died 1856), a bookseller at 309 Oxford Street. Nothing is known of her mother nor much of her own life. In 1844 at the age of thirty she published, anonymously, 'Whitefriars, or, The Days of Charles the Second: an Historical Romance', the first of twelve historical novels. She was apparently self-educated. According to contemporaries, all her fiction was published anonymously because her father forbade her using her own name, and one source suggested that Joseph Robinson led people to believe he was the author of her works (Tinsley, 1.92). 
In the same year that she published her first novel, Robinson sent a historical three-act play, 'Richelieu' (under the pseudonym a Young Oxonian), to J. R. Planche at Covent Garden. Although he recognized merit in the work, he felt that it was not strong enough to produce, and it is also possible that he foresaw the reaction of the lord chamberlain's office which quickly banned the play for 'bringing church and state into contempt' (Blain, Clements & Grundy, 'Feminist comp.', 914). Robinson subsequently published it as 'Richelieu in Love', and it was licensed and performed in 1852, albeit without success. 
After publishing seven historical novels from 1844 to 1849 (followed by five more from 1854 to 1865), Robinson shifted her interests to social critiques of contemporary society. Her first effort was 'The Gold-Worshippers, or, The Days we Live in: a Future Historical Novel' (1851), followed by four others. One of these, 'Which Wins, Love or Money?' (1862), provided the story, character, incidents, and dialogue for H. T. Craven's three-act 'Philomel', produced at the Globe Theatre in London in 1870. Her last publication was a critique of the marriage market, 'The Matrimonial Vanity Fair' (1867). None of her works has been republished. 
Robinson's historical fiction is characterized by fluency and naivety, and most of her social fiction is conventional and made up of stereotypical characters. But both types of fiction display a surprising lack of moral righteousness about sexual matters which leads to an uncharacteristic investigation of physical desire and a lack of sentimentality about marriage. In the case of 'Mauleverer's Divorce, or, The Story of a Woman's Wrongs' (1858), written in the wake of the debates over the 'Matrimonial Causes Bill' of 1857, her lack of moralism and her efforts to deal complexly with a complex issue led to an interesting novel that experiments with point of view, an open ending, and indeterminacy of character. 
Robinson was granted a civil-list pension of $75 in 1862 on the basis of her various works. Earlier she had applied to the Royal Literary Fund for relief. Some time after her last publication in 1867, she became mentally ill. She died in the London County Lunatic Asylum at Norwood on 18 December 1890, with the causes of death listed as bronchitis, heart disease, and cirrhosis of the liver. 


@@@@@


doc= 40241


Thackeray, Thomas James (1796-1877), playwright, army officer, and agriculturist, was born on 5 September 1796 in Madras, India, the elder son of Thomas Thackeray (1767-1852) of Bath, a surgeon on the Madras establishment of the East India Company, and his first wife, Frances (Fanny) Ward (died 1800), daughter of the Revd Henry Ward of Stevenage, Hertfordshire. He entered Eton College in January 1810, went up to St John's College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 15 October 1814, and was awarded the degree of MB in 1820. After an interval he was commissioned, on 26 March 1824, as ensign in the 2nd Somerset militia. Eventually he rose to the rank of captain, on 10 January 1842, which rank he retained until his retirement on 11 August 1855. He lived for a time at Clench Wharton, Norfolk, but he was a fluent speaker of French and spent much of his adult life resident in Paris. 
Thackeray began his writing career in the drama -- a not uncommon part-time occupation for army officers -- with 'The Barber Baron' (Haymarket, 8 September 1828), a farce about a Strasbourg barber who wins a chateau by lottery. William Farren and John Reeve won praise as baron and comic porter, though an otherwise hostile 'Times' was determined to consign to 'just oblivion... such a piece of unsuited and unmitigated dulness' (10 Sept 1828). It was published by Thomas Richardson in 1830, and was followed by an unpublished melodrama, 'The Castle of Wolfenstein' (Olympic, November 1828), and 'The Executioner' (Coburg, February 1829), published in 'Richardson's New Minor Drama' (vol. 3, 1830). For the summer season at the Haymarket in 1830 Thackeray wrote 'The Force of Nature' and (with Charles Shannon) the farce 'My Wife, my Place'. He instinctively turned to foreign models for inspiration, especially in the former play, which, set in Paris, was considered 'striking and effective' in situation ('The Times', 17 July 1830). A historical drama, 'Gustavus of Sweden, or, The Masked Ball' was licensed in 1833, but his best success was probably 'The Mountain Sylph' (1834), a largely versified 'romantic ballet opera', with music by John Barnett. This was almost Thackeray's last venture into drama in Britain, though 'L'abbaye de Penmarc'h', a three-act melodrama written jointly with Pierre Tournemine, was performed in Paris at the Theatre de la Porte St Antoine (2 February 1840) and published in that city. 
Thackeray's intimate knowledge of the contrasts between the theatre in London and Paris made his advice invaluable to the growing number of dramatists who sought radical theatrical reform in Britain in the 1830s. His pamphlet 'On Theatrical Emancipation, and the Rights of Dramatic Authors' (1832) showed the unequivocal superiority of conditions for French (and Belgian) authors compared to British, who, lacking copyright protection and fair remuneration, laboured under a state-sustained monopoly in London which restricted not only the number of theatres but also the class of drama that each was permitted to perform. Thackeray's evidence underpinned the case of the anti-monopoly agitators, whose ally in parliament, Edward Bulwer-Lytton, chaired the select committee (1832) inquiring into the state of the drama, the immediate result of which was reform of dramatic copyright in 1833. 
Thackeray was also an agriculturist and published extensively on the subject, exclusively in French, from 1846 to the late 1850s. A history of the Royal Agricultural Society, England, appeared in 1848, but his special interests included drainage, barn construction, the use of farmyard dung and artificial fertilizers, and the benefits of deep ploughing. His large-scale 'Registre du cultivateur, ou, Livre complet de tous ses comptes' (8 vols., Paris, 1850-57) detailed the work of a farmer on a month-to-month basis. 
Thackeray's other writings, on the army and firearms, were exclusively in English. This included a two-volume treatise on the military organization and administration of France (1856); but his best-known work was the manual for soldiers on the principles of rifle-firing over various distances (1854; 3rd edn, 1861), the foundation of which was a series of three lectures he delivered at the Guildhall, Bath, in 1853 (separately published, 1853). 
Thackeray was a man of means, his father having left him well off. As described by Mrs William Bayne, '[h]e was a most agreeable man of the world, and had a fair share of good looks' (Mrs R. Prynne and Mrs W. Bayne, xxx). He had a considerable circle of friends, including several authors, such as James Robinson Planche, Thomas J. Serle, and Edward Bulwer-Lytton. However, in 1840 his involvement, as an agent of Bulwer's, in attempted burglary at the Paris dwelling of Bulwer's estranged wife to recover certain papers and also to suborn witnesses against her, astonished all who knew him, including his second cousin the novelist William Makepeace Thackeray, who commented: 'What the juice have Tom Thackeray and Lawson [his accomplice] been about? -- they are both gentlemen and I can't conceive what could bring them to meddle with such dirty work' ('Letters and Private Papers', 1.434). Lady Bulwer's double civil action against them in Paris aroused much public interest in that city and in London. Both defendants were acquitted, none of the prosecution evidence having been heard, on the grounds that Lady Bulwer could not sue for civil redress without her husband's permission, which not surprisingly he refused to give. The judgment was confirmed on appeal. The scandal was conceivably the cause of the apparent delay in Thackeray's promotion to captain. 
Tom Thackeray was unmarried. He died in France at his home at 83 rue du Faubourg St Honore, Paris, on 21 February 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 40242


Walker, Henry (fl. 1638-1660), journalist and preacher, was born in Derbyshire of unknown parentage. On 28 October 1638 he was admitted a pensioner at Queens' College, Cambridge; though he appears not to have proceeded BA, he claimed to have been ordained a deacon by a representative of the bishop of Lincoln. He apparently worked as an ironmonger (apprenticed to a Mr Holland in Newgate market), served out his apprenticeship, but was unsuccessful at the trade. This would suggest that his Cambridge career followed his apprenticeship, though the account of his mechanic years may be exaggerated, if not fabricated. He subsequently became involved in the book trade as a bookseller (vending anti-episcopal books) and author. At the same time he operated as a preacher, a 'tub' or 'mechanic' preacher (meaning a preacher without a benefice, usually of Independent or nonconformist tendencies). In his 'Modest Vindication' (1642), Walker professes, 'I was never yet a member of any separated congregation' (p. 6). 
During 1641 Walker was repeatedly in trouble for writings and publications. In March he was briefly committed to the Fleet prison for two libellous pamphlets provocatively conflating episcopacy with popery, 'The Prelates Pride' and 'Verses on the Wren and Finch'. In December 1641 the Commons sent for him as a delinquent. Sudden notoriety came on 5 January 1642 when he threw into the king's carriage a pamphlet (now lost) entitled 'To Your Tents, O Israel'. He was arrested, escaped, and was recaptured before coming to trial. He denied authorship but was convicted on the testimony of the printer. After begging the king's pardon he was sentenced to the pillory. 
During 1642 Walker engaged in a pamphlet exchange with John Taylor, who repeatedly stigmatized him as an ignoramus ironmonger and a scandalous preacher. Except when engaged in polemical mud-slinging Walker's tone was conciliatory, godly, informed, and submissive to the king. During the 1640s he published about thirty pamphlets (his anonymity makes certain attribution difficult), including an eight-page history of the church, proposals for further reformation of the English church, proposals to reform parliament, and a short exposition of 'Genesis' based on lectures delivered at the academy of Balthasar Gerbier. Walker's learning was not extensive, and he did not wear it lightly, but like others he acquired during the 1640s rudimentary knowledge of Hebrew. 
Walker's career took a new turn in January 1644 when he began to edit a newsbook, initially entitled 'Occurrences of Certain Speciall and Remarkable Passages' and subsequently 'Perfect Occurrences'. For this and other items he used the anagrammatic pseudonym Luke Harruney. The newsbook spoke to his religious nonconformity, journalistic ambition, and political opinions, including close support for Cromwell. It also pioneered an innovative element in newsbooks, perhaps a precursor of the crossword puzzle: from 1648 each issue began with a Hebrew transliteration of the name of a figure prominent in the news, which was then translated back into English to obtain a hidden meaning. Walker's relationship with parliament was chequered. He was questioned in March and April 1647 for expressions in 'Perfect Occurrences', and asked to verify a report therein; in the same year he was given a privilege for printing army papers. In 1648 and 1649 he successfully struggled to retain possession of his title. Walker petitioned for the right to be his own licenser in January 1649; this was granted but suspended by the Lords, and events soon overtook Walker's ambition. 'Perfect Occurrences' disappeared in October 1649, killed off by the Commonwealth's act against unlicensed and scandalous books and pamphlets. One of the weekly newsbooks authorized following the act was 'Severall Proceedings in Parliament', apparently edited by Henry Scobell, clerk to the parliament; Walker later took control of this title and edited it until a second newsbook purge in 1655. 
It is likely that Walker was involved in other short-lived periodicals, less colourful than 'Perfect Occurrences', most probably 'A Perfect Summary of Chiefe Passages in Parliament' (1646); 'Packets of Letters' (1648); 'A Declaration, Collected out of the Journalls of Both Houses of Parliament' (1648); and 'Tuesdaies Journall of Perfect Passages in Parliament' (1649). His newsbooks profited from advertising, and in August 1649 he advertised an 'Office of Entries' at the Fountain in King's Street, Westminster. In 1647 an anonymous pamphleteer remonstrated of Walker: 'I do think that his, and many other scurillous Pamphlets, have done more mischief in this Kingdome then ever all my Lord of 'Essex's' or Sir 'Thomas Fairfaxes' whole train of Artillery ever did' ('A Fresh Whip', London, 1647, 6). Walker's contemporary notoriety was chiefly as a newsbook editor, perhaps second only to Marchamont Nedham in prominence, in which trade he was competent and engaging if not eloquent. 
Wood credits Walker with responsibility for editing selections from 'A Conference about the Next Succession' (1595) by the Jesuits William Allen and Robert Persons, which was published as 'Severall speeches at a conference concerning the power of parliament, to proceed against their king for misgovernment' (1648[1649]), and reports that Walker was rewarded with $30 for his pains. Walker preached in the king's chapel at Whitehall on 15 July 1649, which sermon was printed. Perhaps it was not only because of his red hair and beard, but on account of his former expressions of allegiance to the king, that royalist pamphleteers nicknamed Walker Judas; they also labelled him a Jew, presumably because of his interest in Hebrew, and described his sexual predilections and the promiscuous conduct of his wife. The only two known contemporary likenesses of Walker are unlikely to be accurate: both appear in woodcuts on title-pages of John Taylor's pamphlets 'A Reply as True as Steele' (1641), showing Walker being discharged from the anus of the devil, and 'A Seasonable Lecture' (1642), showing Walker preaching from a tub. 
Royalist journalists also report in August 1649 that Walker was given a benefice at Uxbridge, Middlesex, with a stipend of $100. A printed sermon delivered by him before Cromwell at Somerset House on 27 June 1650 describes him as 'minister of Gods word, at Knightsbridge in Middlesex' ('A Sermon Preached in the Chappell at Somerset-House', 1650). He was appointed to the living of St Martin Vintry, College Hill, London, in 1655. He may have been the author of a pamphlet describing Cromwell's last hours published in 1659, which described its author as a groom of the protector's bedchamber and an eyewitness to his death. His last extant publication is 'Serious Observations Lately Made, Touching his Majesty Charles the Second' (1660), a royalist work that began with one of his Hebrew word plays. He may have been appointed to the chapel at Hounslow, Middlesex, in 1664; otherwise nothing further is heard of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 40244


Sir Robert McAlpine, first baronet (1847-1934). He was born on 13 February 1847 in Newarthill, Lanarkshire, the second of four children and elder son of Robert McAlpine (1816-1853), a colliery manager, and Ann Paterson (1823- 'c'.1900), a weaver's daughter. Because of his father's early death Robert left the local parish school at the age of ten in order to contribute to the family income by working as a trapper in a local coalmine. In July 1858 his mother married Thomas Reid Malcolm; they had eight sons. By 1862 Robert was working at the coalface, but left two years later to become an apprentice bricklayer in Coltness. In 1868 he went into business as a jobbing brickbuilder, and on 12 June married Agnes Hepburn (died 1888), the daughter of a master shoemaker from the Lanarkshire village of Forth. They had six sons and four daughters. 
Robert McAlpine worked on small building and repair jobs in Lanarkshire until 1872, when he won his first major contract, to build 100 miners' cottages at Stonefield near Hamilton. The profits from the contract enabled him to expand the business; by 1877 he regularly employed over one hundred men (including, for a brief period, the blacklisted Lanarkshire miner and later Labour politician, James Keir Hardie), and his annual turnover exceeded $100,000. In 1875 he began to invest in property, building tenement houses and villas to let in Hamilton, Stonefield, and Motherwell. He leased three brickworks to provide him with the raw materials required for the business, but he also experimented with the use of concrete to make lintels and doorsteps, and by 1876 was building house walls of rubble concrete blocks. The use of concrete was rare in the Scottish building industry at this time, and Robert's activities earned him the nickname Concrete Bob. 
Like most rising businessmen in central Lanarkshire, Robert's political sympathies lay with the Liberal Party. In 1878 he was elected to Hamilton town council to represent the Burnbank ward, in which he built most of his houses. He did not seek re-election in 1881, owing to a dramatic change in his personal fortunes. Robert's house-building ventures collapsed in 1880, in the midst of a severe economic recession. It became increasingly difficult to let his properties, and he was therefore unable to gather sufficient sums in rent to meet interest payments on loans and mortgages raised to acquire land and build houses, and which were secured on the property. With debts of about $90,000, and assets which were almost all in the form of unwanted property, he was forced to petition for the sequestration of his estate. 
In January 1880, with financial ruin looming, Robert took his cashier, William Richmond, into partnership in his contracting business. By the terms of the agreement, Richmond became sole partner when Robert became bankrupt. This manoeuvre prevented the business from falling into the hands of Robert's creditors, and he was able to continue to win contracts, albeit nominally as an employee of the firm, until he was discharged from bankruptcy in August 1881. In the summer of the following year the firm won a contract worth over $300,000 to build what was believed to be the largest factory in Europe, for the Singer Manufacturing Company, at Kilbowie, Dunbartonshire. The successful progress of the contract enabled Robert, in January 1883, to dissolve the partnership with Richmond and regain sole ownership of his business. 
In 1884 Robert won the contract to build the Barrhead to Ardrossan section of the Lanarkshire and Ayrshire Railway -- his first major public works contract. As on previous contracts, he employed his two brothers-in-law, his brother William, and five of his half-brothers, the Malcolms, as site managers and foremen. He also brought his eldest sons, Robert junior and William, into the business, which became known as Robert McAlpine & Sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 40245


Stein, John (1922-1985), footballer and football manager, was born at 339 Glasgow Road, Burnbank, Hamilton, Lanarkshire, on 5 October 1922, the only son (he had three sisters, one of whom died early) of George Stein, coalminer, and his wife, Jane McKay Armstrong. After leaving Greenfield School, Burnbank, at the age of fourteen, he worked briefly in a carpet factory before becoming a miner in the Lanarkshire coalfield, an occupation which he continued until 1950. He first signed for Burnbank Athletic in 1938 but never played for them: his father did not like the way the club had secured his signature and so he joined Blantyre Victoria instead. As a coalminer, Stein was exempt from military service, and during the disrupted football of the war years, he played for Albion Rovers, in Coatbridge, from November 1942, and, except for a brief period on loan to Dundee United, he played for Albion until May 1950. By then he had a wife and family, having married, on 3 October 1946, Jeanie Tonner McAuley, a creamery worker, daughter of John McAuley, coal hewer. Dissatisfied with his position at Albion, he then went south to play for the non-league Welsh club Llanelli, his first full-time professional appointment. 
Unhappy away from his family in Scotland, Jock Stein, as he was now known, was attracted back north in December 1951 to coach the Celtic reserve team. An injury to two of the regular first-team players, however, gave him a place in the senior squad which he never relinquished until forced to do so by injury in January 1957. Although he lacked speed, and was very much left-sided, his height made him strong in the air, and his ability to read the game made him an accomplished centre-half, who was particularly effective at stifling opposing forwards. He also brought his long and hard professional experience to a Celtic team which was recovering from a poor spell on the field. Although it had several star players who helped to take it to mixed success in domestic competition and outstanding success in the two international competitions it entered in this period (1951 and 1953), the team Stein played for (and captained from 27 December 1952) never reached the heights of those he later managed. 
When Stein's playing career ended he coached the Celtic reserves from the summer of 1957 until he took up the position of manager of Dunfermline Athletic in March 1960. There he turned around the fortunes of the struggling club, saving it from relegation and then seeing it through to a cup final victory against Celtic in 1961. He took over as manager of Edinburgh's Hibernian on 1 April 1964, but after a successful spell with them he returned to Celtic on 9 March 1965 as manager. The Celtic chairman, Robert Kelly, whose interference in running the team had contributed to its decline in the early 1960s, later claimed that Celtic had allowed Stein to leave the club to gain experience in his trade. This is a myth, but Kelly did make up for his mistake when he brought back to the club the man many thought should never have left. Stein soon made it clear that, unlike his predecessor Jimmy McGrory, he was in complete control of the team and would brook no interference from the board. 
Within a couple of years Stein took Celtic on the first steps to domestic and European triumphs: in his twelve full seasons as manager, in addition to the European cup, Celtic won ten league championships, eight Scottish cups, and six league cups. Inevitably his name remains linked to the famous Lisbon Lions, a team whose most expensive player cost the club a mere $28,000, and all of whom were born within a 40 mile radius of Glasgow. This was the team that won the European cup of 1967 with a 2-1 victory over Inter Milan at the Estoril Stadium (Estadio Nacional) in Lisbon on 25 May 1967. 
Stein lived for football and the players under his care, skilfully managing such wayward geniuses as Jimmy Johnstone and constantly planning new strategies. He was also a consummate manipulator of the press. His Lisbon Lions, in addition to winning the European cup in 1967 and being losing finalists in 1970, won a record nine successive Scottish league championships from 1966 to 1974. Above all, the Celtic teams of the Stein years lorded it over arch-rivals Rangers, whose team of the early 1960s had been one of the best ever. Despite success in the latter half of the 1970s, Rangers had to wait until the Souness years after 1986 to regain the ascendancy that Stein had taken from them, and in 1997 they equalled Celtic's record of nine successive league championships. 
Stein was Celtic's first protestant manager, and only the fourth manager in the club's history since its foundation in 1887. Although the club had always fielded protestant players, its origins and ethos were Irish-Catholic and this was a tradition protected by the family directors, all of whom were Catholic until the appointment of David Dallas Smith in 1991. Stein was offered a position on the board after he retired, 'with a special responsibility for fund-raising', but it was seen by Stein and many others as beneath the former manager's dignity. Stein, who was married to a lapsed Catholic, nevertheless had several family and friends who came from Orange backgrounds, some of whom shunned him after he joined Celtic. Stein, himself totally free from bigotry, maintained an enigmatic attitude to Celtic's Catholic traditions. 
A strict teetotaller and non-smoker, Stein's obsession with football took its toll and he suffered his first heart attack in 1973. In 1975 he was almost killed when he was driving a car that had a head-on collision; Stein was totally absolved from responsibility. He was never quite the same powerhouse after this. After a brief spell with Leeds United from 21 August to 4 October 1978, he accepted the position of manager of the national team. In this position he took Scotland to the world cup finals in Spain in 1982 and to the brink of the world cup finals in Mexico in 1986. Stein died of a heart attack at Ninian Park, Cardiff, on 10 September 1985, just thirty minutes after his team had all but qualified for Mexico with a 1-1 draw against Wales. His funeral took place at Linn crematorium, Glasgow, on 13 September; his wife and their son and daughter survived him. 
Although only an average player, as a manager Stein was the equal of his legendary compatriots Matt Busby and Bill Shankly. He also shared with them the personal experience that playing football was a much cushier job than a life down the mines. To the fans, Stein remained a giant figure, the Big Man. At Celtic Park the Jock Stein lounge was named in his honour, as was the west stand which completed the renovations of Celtic Park in the summer of 1998. 


@@@@@


doc= 40246


Shankly, William (1913-1981), football manager, was born on 2 September 1913 at Manse Place, Glenbuck, Ayrshire, the last of five sons and penultimate of ten children of John Shankly, then a postman and later tailor, and his wife, Barbara Gray, 'nee' Blyth. Glenbuck was a pit village of about 800 people and, after elementary schooling, Shankly worked as a loader above and below ground. Glenbuck's principal male recreation was football. Over time it produced some fifty league professionals, including six Scottish internationals. Though their inter-war pay was generally inferior to that of stars of the entertainment world and their average length of career was seven years (Fishwick, 80), football appealed over most ordinary working-class occupations. At Glenbuck, where mines were failing, other options were few; and all five Shankly boys became footballers, as had their two maternal uncles: Robert Blyth who played for Glasgow Rangers, then Portsmouth, of which he became chairman, and William, who played for Preston North End, then Carlisle United, of which he became director. 
This Uncle Billy, who was also a publican in Carlisle, gave Shankly his opening as a professional, when Shankly signed for the club in July 1932. He was paid $4 10's'. a week when he made his first-team debut against Rochdale on 31 December. After another fifteen appearances in the third division north he was sold for $500 to second-division Preston and received $50, a signing-on fee of $10, and weekly wages of $5. Shankly remained on Preston's books for the rest of his playing career -- though he turned out for other teams during the war -- and accumulated 297 league appearances, mostly at right-half, the first of them against Hull City on 9 December 1933, the last against Sunderland on 19 March 1949. His weekly pay was raised to $8 ($6 in summer) after his first season, when Preston were promoted to the first division; after 1946, it became $10. 
Shankly was above all an energetic player, a tough tackler, fair reader of the game, and keen motivator. He scored rarely, altogether only thirteen times in the league for Preston, including eight penalties, and his first goal did not come until 2 February 1938, ironically in view of his eventual reputation, against Liverpool. He was a losing FA cup finalist in 1937 and a winner in 1938, the year he was first capped for Scotland. He played five internationals before the war, and seven during, when, as an airman who never flew, he was assigned routine jobs at various bases. At Glasgow he met a slater's clerk enlisted with the WRAF, Agnes Wren Stewart (Nessie) Fisher, daughter of James Fisher, a motor mechanic-cum-garage proprietor. They married according to Church of Scotland rites on 29 June 1944, when she was twenty-three and Shankly thirty. Two daughters, Barbara ('b'. 1945) and Jeanette ('b'. 1951), resulted. Nessie, a strong character, provided Shankly with a lifelong shield. He paid his own handsome tribute: 'I'd break my wife's legs if I played against her' (Kelly, 299). 
Shankly's tenacity, uncompromising style, and experience as player marked him out for management, though it was personal connection that provided the initial invitation to take charge of Carlisle in March 1949. He moved to Grimsby in July 1951, then to Workington in January 1954; all three clubs were in the third division north and remained there under Shankly's management. Nor did he achieve promotion from the second division with Huddersfield Town, which he joined in December 1955. This undistinguished record is in part explained by scarce resources; investment in players and facilities was either unavailable or withheld, though no amount of attention could turn a dead-end club such as Workington into world champions. Shankly's forcefulness and ambition were otherwise recognized, and in December 1959 he was appointed manager of Liverpool -- a post he had failed to get in 1951 -- at $2500 per annum. Here was a big club, then underachieving in the second division, where the team was placed below Huddersfield. Promotion was gained in 1962 and by 1974, when Shankly retired, Liverpool had won the league championship three times (1964, 1966, 1973) and were twice runners-up; the FA cup was also won twice (1965 and 1974), and Liverpool were beaten finalists in 1971. In Europe, Liverpool carried off the UEFA cup in 1973, having reached the finals of the European cup-winners' cup in 1966, and the semi-finals of the European cup in 1965 and of the UEFA cup in 1971. 
Shankly's outlook was shaped by his origins in a particular place and family. Teamwork, necessary as much as natural in a mining community, became the cornerstone of his philosophy as football manager. Labour's political processes held no attraction. All politicians, even Labour's, were 'two-faced, even three-faced' (Kelly, 290). Shankly's socialism derived from Robbie Burns, not Karl Marx. It was with a life of the poet that he chose to console himself on 'Desert Island Discs' in 1965; more important, in the category of luxury item -- which must, according to the rules of the programme, have no practical use -- he wanted to take with him the impractical football. As Shanks himself became a folk hero, he was courted by politicians who itched for his popularity to rub off on them. The OBE was conferred in 1974 and, at his death, delegates at the Labour Party conference in Brighton stood in silent respect. He always voted Labour but, at Glenbuck, he had seen trade-union officials manipulate the lives of miners just as company bosses did, and he cared for neither. The wider world, with its larger organizations and varied cultures, remained strange to Shankly, who regarded it with suspicion, even hostility. When Liverpool Football Club first entered European competitions, he blamed foreign skulduggery, corrupt officialdom, and bad luck for their defeat. This xenophobia was not reserved for foreign nationals. Abroad included everyone outside the club. His highest praise for any non-Liverpool player was 'fair... nae bad'. More commonly, they were 'rubbish... not fit to tie your bootlaces', as Ray Wilson, a member of England's world cup-winning side of 1966, discovered because, though he played for Shankly at Huddersfield, he had meanwhile joined Everton. 
Shankly recognized that there were two teams in Liverpool, but Everton was not one of them: they were Liverpool and Liverpool reserves. He never tired of lauding his own players. Don Revie, manager of some outstanding Leeds teams, received regular Sunday morning telephone calls from Shankly following a Liverpool win, when every Liverpool player would be hailed as the world's best in his position. Absolute to the point of absurdity -- 'Some people think football is a matter of life and death. I can assure them it's much more serious than that' ('Sunday Times', 4 Oct 1981) -- Shankly exuded will-power, and his charismatic conviction animated players and supporters alike. With the Kop end at Liverpool's Anfield Stadium, where 24,000 of the most fervent fans stood, swayed, and sang, Shankly had a special affinity. He saluted them, with raised arms and hypnotic intensity of eyes, just as they saluted him. 'The Kop', he always said, 'was worth a goal start' (Kelly, 286). Characteristically, when required to register in hotels, he gave Anfield as his home address. It became a football fortress or, as some would have it, a shrine at which Shankly's Red Devils were worshipped. This nickname referred to the all-red strip which his team first adopted for a European cup match against Belgian champions Anderlecht in 1965. Liverpool had played in red shirt with white shorts and socks since 1896: it was Shankly, together with his centre-forward Ian St John, who conceived of their transformation, as a warning that Liverpool intended to become the dominant European side as Real Madrid had been in their all-white strip. That achievement eluded Shankly's teams, and he betrayed jealousy when the teams managed by his successor, Bob Paisley, did so, while Paisley, the ever unassuming former assistant, acknowledged Shankly's inspirational force as the foundation. 
Deification by Liverpool fans, who kissed his feet at Wembley following the cup final victory in 1974, increasingly weighed on Shankly. Expected to heal the sick during hospital visits, he needed to explain: 'I'm no God. People seem to think I'm a miracle-maker' (Kelly, 290). The fortunes of his team -- and of Everton, who won the FA cup and were twice league champions during the Shankly era -- mattered the more in a city in catastrophic economic decline; yet Liverpool in the 1960s and 1970s was also a popular cultural capital, and the cult of Shankly's personality echoed the theatre of hysteria surrounding the Beatles and other pop musicians, and allied artists, poets, and comedians. Shankly's standing cannot be measured without reckoning the structure of Liverpool Football Club, however. The Littlewoods magnate John Moores was a crucial figure. This was less visible than at Everton, where he became chairman and virtual dictator in 1960; but Moores was also a principal shareholder at Liverpool and he installed Eric Sawyer -- the first non-family director of Littlewoods (Clegg, 166) -- as his nominee on the board. This released money and, while Shankly never enjoyed unlimited powers to buy or sell, Sawyer's backing secured the pivotal players of the Shankly era, St John as leader of the forward line and Ron Yeats as defensive colossus. The support of the directors, chaired by first Tom Williams -- another friend of Moores -- and then by John Smith, and of the club secretary Peter Robinson, was therefore vital, though Shankly was never comfortable in their presence, conscious of his class origins and want of education. Posh homes and cars, and the country-club circuit of golf and bridge, were alien to Shankly, whose family resided in an unpretentious three-bedroomed semi, and whose off-duty recreations were limited to weeding (unselectively: flowers were at risk) in the garden and scouring clean the cooker. He was no great reader, still less a penman; but as a wordsmith, spitting phrases out in machine-gun style, raw, abrasive, and aphoristic, he excelled. The model here was James Cagney in his cocky, tough-talking screen roles; gangster and cowboy films were Shankly's favourites and, on television, 'The Untouchables' series about Eliot Ness. Boxing thrilled him too; otherwise he was a football totalitarian: he talked about it tirelessly to journalists and anyone, and was always ready for a game, with his players on the training ground or with scratch boys and dads on car-park asphalt and urban wastes. Moreover, the match must continue until Shankly's side won. 
Leadership at football came naturally to Shankly. The objects were clear-cut, to score goals and not to concede them. These were secured by collective and individual effort and skill. Their right combination involved complex, even mysterious, chemistry but Shankly believed it could be manufactured from quite simple ingredients and processes. A prerequisite was physicality. Most manual labourers were muscular but suffered wear and tear, from occupational hazards and ageing and also from self-inflicted or socially acquired disabilities, such as excessive alcohol and tobacco consumption or unsuitable diet. Shankly never drank, gave up cigarettes early, and always kept in condition. Like his father, a competitive runner, he would be one of the fittest men to die. In his own playing career he was rarely unavailable through injury and, as manager, he was unsympathetic to those that were. After discovering that the champion boxer Joe Louis had been sustained by steak, Shankly insisted on this (with chips and salad) for his Liverpool teams. Their training emphasized stamina; he was proud that they pressurized opponents to the final whistle. Tom Finney, whom Shankly had known at Preston, he revered as supreme, but it was his fitness as much as ball-dribbling that impressed: 'He was grizzly strong; he could run for a week. I'd have played him in his overcoat' (Kelly, 53, 213). Shankly thought the less of America, which he visited in 1964, for never having heard of Finney. 
All this indicates that Shankly's greatest gift was as a motivator rather than tactician. In that sphere the fabled Anfield 'bootroom' -- the support staff of mostly former players, such as Reuben Bennett, Joe Fagan, Ronnie Moran, and, above all, Bob Paisley -- was influential: scouting, coaching, scheming. Shankly tried to guard against his own impulsiveness and, in his early days at Liverpool, would consult his friend Matt Busby, shrewd manager of the great rivals Manchester United. Yet Shankly had his methodical strengths, and the institution of five-a-side games, training players in quick control, simple passing, and intelligent use of space, was central to his system. He understood too the need to conduct change within a stable framework. Like most managers at the start of his regime, he showed some ruthlessness in clearing out players whom he had inherited, where he assessed them as wanting; but the trickiest decision, having constructed a winning team, is thereafter to preserve continuity while simultaneously rebuilding. Shankly, for all his aggressive image, was sometimes thought too soft and slow about dropping star players who were past their peak; but he valued loyalty both as an ethic and as a device, and his sustained success at Liverpool entitles him to be ranked with the best managers of his generation, next to Jock Stein (of Glasgow Celtic) and Matt Busby, fellow Scots from similar backgrounds. 
Retirement for Shankly was painful. He soon regretted his decision to resign, tried to retract it, and felt hurt about being sidelined by the club he had so well served, though this was essential for Paisley to establish his own authority. On 26 September 1981 Shankly was admitted to Broadgreen Hospital, Liverpool, following a heart attack; he died there on 29 September, with his wife at his bedside. He was cremated at Priory Road crematorium, Liverpool, on 2 October. In life stocky, Shankly's stature was enhanced after death when in 1997 Tom Murphy's 7 feet 6 inch bronze figure of him, weighing three-quarters of a ton, was planted near the entrance to the Anfield Kop. It captured the famous attitude: club scarf about the neck, arms aloft, intense, pugnacious, victorious. 


@@@@@


doc= 40247


Sir (Thomas) Malcolm McAlpine (1877-1967), who was born on 19 June 1877 at Hamilton, Lanarkshire, began work for the firm on the Mallaig contract, but in 1898 was struck by flying debris while supervising blasting operations. He was rushed to Glasgow and his injuries attended to by the famous surgeon, Sir William Macewen. His place on the contract was taken by his younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 40248


Strong, Rebecca (1843-1944), nurse, was born on 23 August 1843 at the Blue Boar inn, High Street, Aldgate, London, the daughter of John Thorogood (1785-1870), the innkeeper, and his wife, Mary Westell (1804-1854). On 19 July 1863 Rebecca Thorogood married Andrew Robert Strong (1841-1865), a mathematical instrument maker and son of Andrew Robert William Strong, a wholesale rag merchant. A daughter, Annie Ellen, was born in 1864 and a year later Rebecca was widowed. When her daughter was three Rebecca entered the Nightingale Training School, St Thomas's Hospital, London, and started her career as a nurse. As it was necessary for nurses to live in the nurses' home, both during training and when qualified, Strong's daughter was brought up by her family. 
The Nightingale school, which had opened in 1860, was still in an experimental stage and after one year's practical work in the wards of St Thomas's, with some lectures, Strong was sent to Winchester Hospital and then to the new British army hospital at Netley, Southampton. In 1874, when her contract with the Nightingale school was completed, Strong applied and was appointed as matron of the Dundee Royal Infirmary. With the support of the managers she raised the standard of nursing and improved the nurses' working conditions. Her reputation reached Glasgow and, in 1879, she was appointed matron of the Glasgow Royal Infirmary, the largest voluntary hospital in Scotland. Strong was shocked by the poor standard of nursing at Glasgow and insisted that all the ward sisters attend medical lectures and pass an examination. Strong had decided that nurses could no longer be properly trained on the wards alone; with recent developments in medicine they needed theoretical lectures if they were to carry out their duties intelligently. William Macewen (1848-1924), surgeon to the Royal Infirmary, had been one of the first to adopt Lister's antiseptic methods and was at the forefront of brain surgery. Although Macewen encouraged Strong to develop the nurses' education, he demanded a continuous supply of good nurses for his wards. Lack of sufficient accommodation limited the number of nurses available and when the infirmary managers repeatedly refused to provide more Strong resigned from her position in 1885. 
For five years Strong ran her own private nursing home in Glasgow. During this time she and Macewen developed their ideas on the education of nurses. Then in 1891, Strong was asked to return to the Glasgow Royal Infirmary as matron, and thus they were given the opportunity to put their ideas into practice. The new training scheme started in 1893 and included several features which became standard for nurse training schemes in the twentieth century. It pioneered the block system by dividing the nurses' training into blocks of lectures, followed by blocks of practical ward work. It introduced compulsory theoretical instruction and examination before probationary nurses entered the wards. It set an educational standard for entry to training and it elevated nurses' education to the medical college, placing nurses on a par with medical students. Strong and Macewen both paid tribute to the contribution that the other had made to their achievements. The collaboration between them was rare and it advanced the development of brain surgery and the development of nurses' education. 
Strong was a friend of Mrs Bedford Fenwick, the leader of the campaign for state registration, and they shared the view that nurses' education should be established at a university level, with postgraduate opportunities. They also shared ideas on the value of international contacts with professional women and Strong was an enthusiastic supporter of the International Council of Nurses, founded by Bedford Fenwick in 1899. She attended meetings of the council in Europe and North America until she was in her eighties. Strong was also a member of the various professional nursing organizations of the time, the Royal British Nurses' Association, and the Matrons Council, and was a vice-president of the National Council of Nurses of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1909 Strong and Macewen formed the Scottish Nurses Association and she later became president and represented the association on the committee of the Society for the State Registration of Nurses. The next ten years was a period of great professional development for nurses with the impact of the First World War, the establishment of the College of Nursing, and the passing of the 'Nurses' Registration Acts'. Strong, like Bedford Fenwick, did not support the College of Nursing, and they were disappointed with the educational standards set by the new statutory bodies, the general nursing councils for England and Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. 
Strong retired from the Glasgow Royal Infirmary in 1907 and moved to England to live with her sister. In 1912, following her sister's death, she returned to Scotland to live in St Fillans on the shores of Loch Earn, Perthshire. In 1886 her daughter had married the minister of the German protestant church in Glasgow, Adolf Geyer, and was settled there with five children. Strong did not approve of her son-in-law; she referred to him as 'that Austrian gypsy' and did not speak to him for over thirty years. However, she contributed financially to the upkeep and education of her grandchildren. 
In her retirement Strong supported initiatives which promoted nurses' educational and professional standards, among them the Scottish Nurses Club in Glasgow and the Glasgow Royal Infirmary Nurses' League. She was still very fit and enjoyed travelling and mountain climbing. She was appointed OBE in 1938, and at the Glasgow Royal Infirmary the work of Macewen and Strong was commemorated by the annual presentation of two medals to the best nurses. In Britain her reputation is less than in North America, where nurse education was developed in universities as early as the 1920s. In 1941 she moved to Chester to live with her great-nephew. Her hundredth birthday was celebrated in the nursing press, and the BBC broadcast a message from Strong to younger nurses. She died on 24 April 1944 at Heathfield, Vicars Cross, Christleton, Cheshire, and her funeral took place in Liverpool, where she was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 40253


John Pingo (1668-1733), the third son of John Pingo (died 1677) and his wife, Elizabeth Pingo ('fl'. 1640-1677), who was born on 11 January 1668 in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields. His elder brothers, Richard Pingo ('fl'. 1658-1690) and Zachariah Pingo ('fl'. 1659-1692), were both apprenticed in the Haberdashers' Company. Richard's name occurs on a late seventeenth-century bracket clock of fine quality bearing a Pall Mall, London, address. Zachariah is mentioned in a land tax assessment of 1692 as being in Plumbtree Court, the watchmaking area of the City of London, and was the grandfather and father of Thomas Pingo senior and junior ['see below'], who were among the most prominent family members. 
John Pingo entered an apprenticeship in the Clockmakers' Company in 1684. The register entry for his marriage in 1690 to Elizabeth Wells ('fl'. 1690-1709) refers to his trade as watchmaker, as do the baptism registers for some of his children, none of whom appears to have distinguished him- or herself. These records also cite his residence and business premises in Gunpowder Alley, New Street -- a stone's throw from his brother Zachariah -- which were visited in 1710 by the German traveller Zacharias von Uffenbach. Uffenbach's journal vividly recalls John Pingo's diverse areas of interest, such as cleanly cast 'articles made in steel', a gilded seal of Oliver Cromwell, and an engraved plaque depicting Alexander the Great, of 'uncommon elegance and charm'. Further references to 'marvelously elegant though very dear' watchcases, and 'an especially curious water clock', suggest the quality as well as the diversity of his goods and skills (Mare and Quarrell, 97, 113-14). 
Ester Marchant (died in or after 1733), who was John Pingo's second wife, may have been related to the gem-engraver Nathaniel Marchant, whose uncle was John Marchant, an apprentice watchmaker and whose father may have been Nathaniel Marchant ('b'. 1702), also an apprentice watchmaker. John Pingo died in 1733 aged sixty-five and was buried at St Bride's, Fleet Street, on 22 April 1733. 



@@@@@


doc= 40254


Thomas Pingo senior (fl. 1706-1743), the son of Zachariah Pingo, was bound apprentice in the Merchant Taylors' Company in 1706. Having been made free of that company, he was himself master to at least seven apprentices in the 1720s and 1730s. 
Thomas Pingo senior specialized in the engraving of heraldic devices on silver and copper plate. This work was rarely signed and it thus provides scant evidence of a specific engraver's hand. However, a single plate of armorials bearing Thomas senior's signature was published in 1715 in Ralph Thoresby's topography of Leeds, 'Ducatus Leodiensis'. Thomas Pingo senior's name also appears in the household accounts of Henry, ninth earl of Pembroke, which itemize the engraving of silver plate between 1734 and 1743. He was also engaged in the more routine engraving of snuff-boxes, gun locks, and seals, which were frequently advertised as the stock-in-trade of jewellers and goldsmiths. 
A rare mezzotint portrait of Thomas Pingo senior dated 1741 (BM) refers to him as an engraver, and points to the level of recognition that he had achieved in his profession. In 1711 he married Mary ('fl'. 1711-1732); they had at least fourteen children, the most prominent of whom was Thomas Pingo junior. Thomas Pingo senior's date of death is not known. 



@@@@@


doc= 40255


Henry Pingo (bap. 1740), the third son of Thomas Pingo junior and his wife, Mary, was baptized on 17 August 1740 at St Andrew's, Holborn. Henry was awarded premiums by the Society of Arts between 1756 and 1761 for fancy drawings and ornamental designs in oils and watercolours, exhibiting a group in 1773 at the Society of Artists in London. 
Henry subsequently became a surgeon working in Shoreditch. By a remarkable coincidence -- and only six years after its inception -- he was one of the first recipients of his brother Lewis's Royal Humane Society medal, having saved a woman's life in 1782. It is not known whether he married or had children, nor is it known when he died. 



@@@@@


doc= 40256


Mary Pingo (bap. 1741, d. 1819), the first daughter of Thomas Pingo junior and his wife, Mary, was baptized on 18 October 1741 at St Andrew's, Holborn. Mary was awarded several premiums by the Society of Arts between 1758 and 1762 for floral and ornamental designs and drawings. Mary died a spinster, aged seventy-eight, and was buried at St Peter ad Vincula, Tower of London, on 26 March 1819. 



@@@@@


doc= 40259


Thompson, Edward Palmer (1924-1993), historian, writer, and political activist, was born at Boars Hill, Oxford, on 3 February 1924, the second son of Edward John Thompson (1886-1946), teacher and writer, and his wife, Theodosia Jessup (1892-1970). 
At the time of E. P. Thompson's birth (he was often known by his initials), his father taught Bengali at Oxford University, having returned to England in the previous year from west Bengal, where he had been a Methodist missionary. Far removed from the stereotype of the proselytizing Christian missionary, Edward John Thompson's life was pervaded by unresolved contradictions and tensions. A Methodist by birth, upbringing, vocation, and education, he was in most respects an instinctive humanist and believer in the possibility of human betterment. Unable completely to shake off the legacy of paternalism in British India, E. J. Thompson nevertheless became -- as did his wife -- a strong critic of imperialism. Leading Indian intellectuals were among his friends. These included the Nobel prize-winning poet Rabindranath Tagore, of whom he was a translator, and the rising politician Jawaharlal Nehru, whom E. P. Thompson remembered as a visitor to the family home. To E. P. Thompson the ambiguities of his father's intellectual positions became of great interest, and at the end of his own life he published 'Alien Homage: Edward Thompson and Rabindranath Tagore' (1993). He especially remembered from his youth the general atmosphere and tone which stemmed from his parents' radical-Liberal rejection of imperialism and which passed to him the belief that governments were 'mendacious and imperialist' and that 'one's stance ought to be hostile to government' (Merrill, 11). He persisted in that belief and stance throughout his life. 
Edward and his elder brother, (William) Frank Thompson (1920-1944), attended the highly regarded Dragon preparatory school in Oxford. Frank went on to become a star pupil at Winchester College, but Edward was enrolled at his father's old school, the Methodist-founded Kingswood School, near Bath. He left little comment on experiences there, although the harsh attack on Methodists in his best-known book suggests that Kingswood did nothing to attract him to the church of his father and grandfather. In fact the Kingswood regime in Thompson's time there was remarkably open. Under the headship of A. B. Sackett, wide-ranging debate on political and cultural matters was characteristic. Thompson recalled that as a sixth former in 1940, reading the early work on the English civil war of the Marxist historian Christopher Hill and the seventeenth-century Leveller writings to which it led him, was a 'breakthrough' ('Essential E. P. Thompson', 491). At eighteen he followed the example of his brother and joined the Communist Party. 
At that age too Thompson began his military service with the army in north Africa and Italy, becoming a tank commander and taking part in the battle of Cassino in 1944. Although his own war experiences were significant, a greater impact on Thompson was made by his brother's death. Frank, a brilliant linguist, was recruited by the Special Operations Executive and dropped into Bulgaria to work with the partisans. Captured by the fascist government, he was shot along with the men he was leading. Frank's vision of a united socialist Europe stayed powerfully with Edward. After visiting Bulgaria with his mother, he wrote with her 'There is a Spirit in Europe: a Memoir of Major Frank Thompson' (1947). His brother's vision fed into Edward's own later persistent political imagining of European possibilities: in his despising, for example, of the narrowing concept of Europe represented by the European Common Market ('Sunday Times', 27 August 1975). His last vigorous political commitment was to European Nuclear Disarmament, of which he was a founder, with its aim of bridging the peace movements of eastern and western Europe. The official obstruction and evasion which he encountered when he tried after the war to find out the truth about his brother's mission reinforced his lifelong suspicion of the power of the 'secret state'. 
Late in 1945 Thompson returned to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, to complete the history degree he had started in 1942. Wartime regulations allowed him his BA on a two-year part one. His first-class result brought him a scholarship with which he was able to finance a third year of extensive individual study of literature, which was probably then his first love. When he entered on his first teaching post, he taught both literature and history. 
At Cambridge Thompson re-joined the Communist Party, his formal membership having lapsed during the war. In the party there he met Dorothy Katharine Gane Towers ['see 'Thompson, Dorothy (1923-2011)], who was completing her history degree after war service in industry. She and Edward began to live together in 1945 and married on 16 December 1948. Until ended by Edward's death, it was a remarkable partnership of almost fifty years. The Thompsons then had no inclination to pursue academic careers, and had already decided to move to the north of England, when Edward was offered a teaching post in the extra-mural department at Leeds University. Before taking up this post he and Dorothy had been involved with a volunteer international youth group in building a railway in Yugoslavia, another reinforcement of an internationalism that remained essential in his thinking, and which qualifies overdone attempts to portray him as a quintessentially English radical. The Thompsons moved to Halifax in 1948, shortly before their eldest son, Ben, was born. They lived there for seventeen years, and two more children, Mark and Kate, were born. 
Thompson was perhaps fortunate to secure a post when doors were being closed against known communists. He did not see eye to eye on many things with the head of the department, S. G. Raybould, a noted writer on adult education with strong ideas of his own, but from all accounts Thompson was a successful teacher. Departmental records show him to have been committed and thoughtful, expecting a significant input from his students, many of whom were from working-class backgrounds. In later interviews several remembered him as an inspirational teacher. Thompson, in turn, felt that he had much to learn from the life experiences of his working-class students. The whole tone of his most celebrated work, 'The Making of the English Working Class' (1963), which made his reputation, testifies to this. It was fittingly dedicated to one of these students, and for all its international success it is impossible not to sense that the audience he felt himself to be addressing was a wider one than that of the academy. 
The Thompsons' Halifax household was busy: Dorothy remembered it as a 'shambles'. With three children she restricted herself to part-time work. At the beginning of 'The Making of the English Working Class' Edward emphasized his debt to her: 'her collaboration is to be found, not in this or that particular, but in the way the whole problem is seen' (preface, 14-15). They never collaborated in co-writing historical works in the manner of the Hammonds or the Webbs. They wrote separately, but with the same initial interest in working-class history, and as they worked they tended to develop the same approach to writing history, achieving much the same balance between theory and evidence. Although neither had served a formal postgraduate apprenticeship, they later imparted to their research students a sense of the rigour required in the production of written history. Clearly Edward's work took precedence in the Halifax years. Later feminist assertions that this amounted to exploitation gained some credence from the very rapid rise to pre-eminence as a historian of Chartism made by Dorothy once she became a full-time academic from 1968, but she has strongly rejected these allegations (Thompson, 'Outsiders', 9-10). 
While teaching at Leeds University, Thompson wrote two books of formidable length. The first, a study of William Morris, 'William Morris: Romantic to Revolutionary', was published in 1955. The date is significant, for in the following year he broke with the Communist Party, later remarking that it was only in his thirty-third year that he had 'commenced to reason' ('The Poverty of Theory', 1978, i). The study of Morris displayed some signs that its author was still operating within the orthodoxies of official communism. Reviewers certainly read it in that way. Thompson's reclaiming of Morris from woolly-thinking artist to committed and original socialist seemed in places to be implying that the nineteenth-century artist and writer would have approved of Stalin's Soviet Union: 'Visitors return from the Soviet Union with stories of the poet's dream [factory] already fulfilled' (1955 edn, 844). When he revised the work in 1977 Thompson confessed that he had allowed 'a few Stalinist pieties... to intrude upon the text' and that he had then held to 'a somewhat reverent notion of Marxism as a received orthodoxy, and my pages included some passages of polemic'. A different reading is now suggested. Thompson, viewing the book from his post-1956 perspective, suggested that discerning readers might have been able to detect in his stress on Morris's genius as a moralist, 'a submerged argument within the orthodoxy to which I then belonged'. The truth is that Morris, as Thompson became immersed in his life and works, began to speak to him in the silent spaces of received Marxism. His biography, he suggested, was one of 'muffled revisionism' and when his disagreement with orthodoxy became explicit in 1956, he recalled that he had been much sustained by what he had learnt 'in those years of close company with Morris' (1977 edn, 769-70, 810). 
In 1956 Edward and Dorothy Thompson were among 7000 members, including many prominent activists, who left the British Communist Party. The tremors had begun following Khrushchov's secret speech to the twentieth Soviet congress in February. Its revelations of Stalinism's atrocities soon became known outside the Soviet Union. A crisis of belief and of adherence began, which became an outflow by October when Soviet tanks entered Budapest to suppress the Hungarian rising. Explanations of why Thompson and others had remained in the British Communist Party over years when doubts had already been developing are complex. His generation had fought the war against fascism to a victory in which the Red Army had been decisive. They saw no other organization than the party which could provide the support and comradeship for those in whom anti-fascism was combined with a socialist vision. That vision had seemed part of a re-awakening at which many thought they had been present as the war in Europe came towards its end. In the resistance to fascism Thompson's own brother had become a communist martyr. The spirit of that moment was however an interlude of hope which had been crushed with the deadening imposition of the cold war. 
Against such a background it is not surprising that Thompson through most of 1956 believed that something positive might still emerge which would allow British communism to develop the moral strength to survive as a legitimate political force, allowing more democratic processes and broader and freer discussion. To this end Thompson and fellow historian John Saville began to produce the critical, but internally directed, journal 'The Reasoner'. The party was unwilling to allow even this form of dissidence and ordered publication to cease. Refusal brought the suspension of Thompson and Saville and, with the invasion of Hungary, they resigned. 
The events of 1956 were decisive for Thompson and for many others on the left. But what he wrote against Stalinism in the third issue of 'The Reasoner' in November hardly reads simply as an immediate response to a present crisis: 'the subordination of the moral and imaginative faculties to political and administrative authority is wrong: the elimination of moral criteria from political judgement is wrong: the fear of independent thought, the deliberate encouragement of anti-intellectual trends among the people is wrong; the mechanical personification of unconscious class forces, the belittling of the conscious process of intellectual and spiritual conflict, all this is wrong. ('Through the smoke of Budapest', 'The Reasoner', 3, 1956, 3)' Here, although still in a journal addressing its argument to the morally moribund British Communist Party, is already indicated a challenge to old communist thinking from the mobilizing vision: of the 'socialist humanism', of which Thompson was to be, through his writings, the most prominent proselytizer. 
Socialist humanism would, Thompson hoped, provide the liberating approach around which a new left movement could emerge. In simple terms it would restore to the Marxist tradition (after 1956 Thompson tended to describe himself as a historian working in the Marxist tradition), the dimension which had been partly lost by Marx himself as he moved on from the writings of his youth to the economic certainties of 'Capital'. It had certainly been lost from the Soviet version of communism. Later Thompson recalled his sense of a 'real silence' in Marx, lying in the 'area that anthropologists would call value systems'. The 'degeneration of the theoretical vocabulary of mainstream Marxism' had led to a desensitization of human qualities such as imagination and passion. Marx may have replaced the classical economists' economic man with 'revolutionary economic man', but the injury lay in defining man as essentially economic in the first place (D. Thompson, viii-ix). 
From 1956 to the ending of its first phase in 1962, the Thompsons strove to further the dream of a new left. Its formative journal 'The New Reasoner' was edited and distributed from their Halifax home and in its pages were contained the defining texts of the 'socialist humanist' vision. The first new left, however, amounted to more than a journal: it was a campaign to mobilize manifold voices of protest into a movement. Notably it was strong in its support for the nascent Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament from 1957, something which of itself was a breakaway from the official communist line of the nuclear-armed Soviet Union. Running a national journal was inevitably burdensome, and in 1959 'The New Reasoner' merged with the 'Universities and Left Review' to become the 'New Left Review'. 
The two journals came from different backgrounds. That of the 'New Reasoner' was unashamedly provincial, committed to a belief in the revolutionary potential of a medley of protest mobilizations and retaining some hopes of the British labour movement with a belief in the value of the traditions of protest embedded in a long history from peasants in revolt, through Levellers and Luddites to the Chartists and beyond. Based in London and dominated by young Oxbridge socialists, the partner journal, however, was more self-consciously theoretical. It was this approach which came to characterize the 'New Left Review', when, following an editorial coup in 1962, Thompson and his associates were ousted from their various positions on the journal by a group of younger men led by Perry Anderson. This was more than a generational change. It was a fundamental shift in perspective and in the form of socialist vision. As Thompson saw things, it was a displacement of the first new left with a second, which attached no immediacy to mobilizing the diverse protest forces on the left, but rather saw the British working class as hopelessly compromised and supine in its relationship with capitalism. The function of left intellectuals, in its view, was to provide and refine the energizing socialist theory which history had thus far denied it. In short, the first and the second new lefts read British, and especially English, history in fundamentally different ways. That divergence prompted in the mid-1960s a rigorous and at times savage debate, with the lone voice of Thompson embattled against Anderson and his co-editor, Tom Nairn. Ironically in 1963, at the very moment when Thompson was at his most detached from formal association with a socialist organization, his greatest work was published, which brought his writing to a much wider audience. 
During the early 1960s Thompson had been engaged on what was quickly recognized as a book of monumental importance. The appearance of 'The Making of the English Working Class' was a transforming event in twentieth-century historiography. More than 800 pages long and priced accordingly, it did not at first suggest an impact on historical scholarship which has been described as 'truly alchemic' (Eastwood, 637). By 1968 when it appeared in its first British paperback edition, it had already become an established classic. In a work which has come to be seen as the single most influential work of English history of the post-war period, Thompson set out to demonstrate how between 1790 and 1832, under the joint pressures of political oppression and economic exploitation, English working men came to see themselves as a class: a class both made by the changing circumstances in which they laboured and lived, and self-making in terms of the responses they made to this experience. By the time of the crisis over parliamentary reform in 1830-32, a form of working-class consciousness had emerged, drawing on past traditions of resistance and rights as well as on present experiences. Further, Thompson argued, against generations of traditional conservative writing, that consciousness included the possibility of political revolution, which came very close at more than one moment. 
At the beginning of the twenty-first century the book remains in print with its main text hardly changed. Its narrative and conclusion are hardly now accepted in all their detail by historians of the period, but the influence of 'The Making' has not depended on that. In its preface, which has become a key historiographical text in its own right, Thompson made the defining statement of 'history from below'. He wrote of seeking to rescue groups of dissenting working people, like the Luddites, from 'the enormous condescension of posterity', putting them back into the history which they had made with their own life experiences. Also in that preface is his now classic definition of class and how it eventuates in history. Class, he argued, could not be understood in purely structural terms, be they those of twentieth-century sociology or those of later Marxist orthodoxy: 'class happens when some men, as a result of common experiences... feel and articulate the identity of their interests as between themselves, and as against other men, whose interests are different from (and usually opposed to) theirs'. The class experience may have been largely determined by the productive relations into which men were born or entered, but class consciousness, the way in which these experiences were handled in cultural terms, in traditions, value systems, and institutions, was not so determined: 'Consciousness of class arises in the same way in different times and places, but never in 'just' the same way'. The book is the most significant exposition of socialist humanism in actual historical writing with its insistence that class was defined by men 'as they live their own history' (preface, 9-13). Written with passion and commitment, 'The Making' freed the historical imagination, redefined the subject matter of social and labour history, and pushed open more than one door of historical closure. 
Thompson's rocketing reputation took him in 1965 to the directorship of the Centre for the Study of Social History at the newly opened University of Warwick and the family moved to Leamington Spa. Then at the beginning of his forties, he was an imposing figure. Tall and sparely built, his craggily handsome features were topped by an unusually thick head of hair, which flopped uncontrollably over his forehead. He had no particular affectation in dress, unless smoking small cigarettes alternately with hardly larger cheroots counts as such. The intensity of his gaze could be at first disconcerting, but it was his habit to listen properly to those who were speaking, for except in moments of anger he was not an interrupter. 
Thompson's Warwick experience was mixed. With his postgraduate students his relationship was excellent. They remember with affection a painstaking and inspiring mentor, and most became lifelong friends. With the university itself relations were more strained. Resources for the centre were short of his expectation; undergraduate teaching took up much time, as did boards and meetings, leading him to complain that little time was left for writing. His writing was itself undergoing a shift. 'The Making' carried marks of having been written by someone not fully bound by academic conventions. Its invective, for example in its infamously hostile depiction of Methodism as 'ritual psychic masturbation', could be immoderate. He had a blind spot when it came to quantification, and a glimpse of his feelings towards some academic tendencies is exemplified in a passage which summarizes the average worker's share in the benefits of the industrial revolution as: 'more potatoes, a few articles of cotton clothing for his family, soap and candles, some tea and sugar, and a great many articles in the 'Economic History Review'' ('The Making', 1968 edn, 351). 
From the mid-1960s Thompson's own historical essays began to appear in leading journals. Two appeared in 'Past and Present', whose editorial board he joined in 1969. 'Time, work-discipline and industrial capitalism' (1967) and 'The moral economy of the English crowd in the eighteenth century' (1971) became classics, and, especially the second, have been internationally influential on how the processes of resistance and adaptation to capitalism have become understood. These articles are part of a body of work centring on the eighteenth century, now most accessible through the collection 'Customs in Common' (1991). At Warwick too he developed an interest in the history of crime and the criminal law. 'Albion's Fatal Tree: Crime and Society in Eighteenth-Century England' (D. Hay and others, eds., 1975) was a pioneering joint production with several of his research students, while the single-authored 'Whigs and Hunters' (1975), a study of the power exercised through the law, is remarkable for a conclusion which recognizes the dichotomous significance of the law as a force which not only empowers but restricts the actions of the empowered. Increasingly Thompson's work showed enriching but cautiously employed inputs from disciplines like anthropology and folklore as he tackled subjects like wife-selling and 'rough music'. In the mid-1960s too he had continued the debate with Anderson and Nairn and 'The New Left Review'. Most notably he produced in 'The peculiarities of the English' ('Socialist Register', 1965, 311-62) a challenging over-arching interpretation of the course of English history rescuing it, as he saw things, from the distortions of the continental Marxisms of the 'lumpen intelligentsia'. 
Thompson's final quarrel with the university's authorities was a public one. In 1970 students occupying the registry discovered files revealing a close and secret involvement of the university with prominent industrialists in its region, which included spying upon and informing on the activities of students and academics viewed as political dissidents, unfriendly to industrial capitalism. Thompson became the most conspicuous of those who publicized these revelations. With astonishing speed he edited a volume which situated Warwick as symptomatic of a threatened higher educational system in which values and freedoms were being lost in an increasing subordination to the requirements of industrial capitalism ('Warwick University Limited', 1970). 
Thompson left Warwick in 1971 to become a full-time writer. Dorothy had begun a period as a full-time university teacher at the University of Birmingham in 1968. For almost a decade from the new family home, Wick Episcopi, a splendid Georgian house on the outskirts of Worcester, he furthered his eighteenth-century project and wrote a number of political essays, often concerned with the defence of liberties against the state. In an earlier part of his life most of his essays and reviews had tended to appear in journals little read outside the left, but from the later 1960s they were appearing in periodicals such as 'New Society', the 'New Statesman', the 'Times Literary Supplement', and in the quality newspapers. Many of these essays, alongside some earlier ones, were reprinted in 'Writing by Candlelight' (1980) and 'The Heavy Dancers' (1985). Much of Thompson's writing, especially within arguments on the left, is bitter and unforgiving, but several of the essays of this period reveal how capable he was of using humour to make his points. He could, as in the essay 'Writing by candlelight', produced at a time when strikes were resulting in power cuts, and parodying the uncomprehending attitude of the upper and middle classes to it, produce very effective satire. 
An early critic of the 'betrayal' of socialism by the Labour governments of Harold Wilson, Thompson was, with Raymond Williams and Stuart Hall, an editor of the 'Mayday Manifesto' in 1967, which explicitly sought to present a socialist alternative (R. Williams, ed., 'Mayday Manifesto, 1968', 1968, 9). Yet he retained a belief that the Labour Party, as the outcome of the history of British workers' struggles, still possessed a potential at least to contribute to a political transformation. As late as 1979 he was stating this view in a defence of the role of Marxists within the party ('The acceptable faces of Marxism', 'The Observer', 5 Feb 1979). The world of contingencies inhabited by party politics was alien to the stances adopted by a man who could not accommodate moral relativism. Something of a sense of isolation, a tendency to see himself as a lone battler on the left, had surfaced in him at various times from at least the collapse of the first new left. It was in such a mood and driven by a sense of its real potential to do harm that in 1978, in 'The Poverty of Theory', he took on the then fashionable French Marxist philosopher Louis Althusser, whose denial of individual agency and dismissal of morality he perceived as a form of neo-Stalinism. In this book Thompson made his most deliberate defence of history as a discipline with a distinguishing epistemology and methodologies. It lost him some friends on the left, who considered his stance arrogant and self-centred, and his language extreme. His apparent refusal to debate the issue of theory in moderate and open terms at an Oxford history workshop session in 1979 has entered the collective memory of the British left, although it has been suggested that he had assumed a sense of irony which his audience seemingly lacked (Ree, 19). 
The Thompson angered by the closed thinking of French structuralism was a man becoming increasingly concerned with the threat of nuclear war. At the beginning of the 1980s he put aside his 'trade' as a historian to devote himself to the campaign against nuclear weapons. He believed that in the Reagan-Thatcher era the cold war was entering a phase in which nuclear conflict was becoming probable. In 1980 with Dan Smith he wrote 'Protest and Survive', a pamphlet which did more than any other to revive interest in the peace movement, while his 'Notes on exterminism, the last stage of civilization' ('New Left Review', 1980) provided a significant analysis of the stage the arms race had by then reached. It had become a self-sustaining system propelled by an internal dynamic and a reciprocal logic. Against this process the Thompsons and their associates pitted their resisting energies for the next several years. Most importantly, in that year he drafted the European Nuclear Disarmament appeal, the mobilizing document which added a new dimension to the peace movement in insisting on the responsibility of both sides for the intensifying arms race and calling for a European movement of protest and resistance. It established the non-alignment of the peace movement as it opened contacts between east and west, associating the campaign for peace with the movement for democracy in Eastern Europe. Thompson was its most prominent public figure, becoming familiar to television audiences and newspaper readers and continuing to write articles and pamphlets, which showed 'how to attack not just a wrong but the official discourse which says that wrong is inevitable' (N. Ascherson, 'E. P. Thompson: defender of the faithful few', 'Independent on Sunday', 5 Sept 1993). 
The contribution made by the peace movement to the ending of the cold war is a matter of continuing debate. Thompson considered it significant. In 1990 he remarked that he had no regrets at having been turned aside from his writing, because he was 'convinced that the peace movement made a major contribution to dispersing the cold war, which had descended like a polluting cloud on every field of political and intellectual life' ('Customs in Common', ix). A co-founder of European Nuclear Disarmament, Mary Kaldor, predicted that in time Thompson would be viewed, along with Mikhail Gorbachov and Vaclav Havel, as 'one of the key individuals who influenced the course of events in the 1980s' ('The Independent', 30 Aug 1993). Many would agree, but there is no likelihood of a consensus: students of international relations are reluctant to acknowledge the efficacy of a moral crusade, while conservative historians continue to stress the firmness of the West's leaders in outfacing their cold-war enemy to the point of climb-down and ultimate collapse. 
With the ending of the arms race Thompson returned to his 'trade'. The long-delayed 'Customs in Common' appeared in 1991 bringing together the essays which had given a new shape to the history of eighteenth-century England. His study of his father's relationship with Tagore came two years later, while progress was made on other projects: notably the completion of his major work on William Blake ('Witness Against the Beast: William Blake and the Moral Law', 1993). Sadly that book, which meant so much to him, appeared shortly after his death. Thompson's last years were a five-year battle with a series of debilitating illnesses. He was very ill indeed, and what he accomplished in those years was remarkable, but finally on 28 August 1993 he died peacefully with Dorothy at his side in his garden at Wick Episcopi. 
E. P. Thompson was one of the most prominent of twentieth-century British intellectuals working within the Marxist tradition. While he was best known for his historical writing and peace campaigning, these did not represent the whole of his intellectual activity. His significance in both roles owed most to his power as a writer, and as a writer his output was prolific and varied. He published poetry from an early age and in 1988 in his mid-sixties he published a satirical novel: 'The Sykaos Papers'. His intellectual and writing skills were also displayed in the field of English literature, perhaps most noticeably in his study of William Blake. As a political essayist his was the most distinctive pen from the British left, writing with a passion, polemical verve, and remorseless reasoning which compares with the radical journalists and pamphleteers of the early nineteenth century, whom he much admired. 
Had he not been otherwise preoccupied, Thompson would have found himself in the 1980s increasingly responding to critiques of his work. These began even before the collapse of communism influenced all who worked in the Marxist tradition and made 'class' an unfashionable concept around which to organize a historical narrative. The rise of women's history brought comment on what was perceived as a silence about gender in 'The Making'; an increasing concern with ethnicity noted that, too, as a silence. The rise of post-modernism and the so-called 'linguistic turn' directed attack on to most existing forms of historical practice. It is a measure of Thompson's stature that his work attracted and continues to attract more critical attention than that of any other historian of his generation. The academic establishment was reluctant to accord him the recognition he merited, the British Academy electing him to a fellowship only in 1992. As the leading British historian Eric Hobsbawm has explained, he was a very special historian: 'He had the capacity to produce something qualitatively different from the rest of us, not to be measured on the same scale. Let us simply call it genius... None of his mature work could have been written by anyone else. ('The Independent', 30 April 1993)' 



@@@@@


doc= 40262


Gunter, Raymond Jones (1909-1977), trade unionist and politician, was born at High Street, Llanhilleth, Abertillery, Monmouthshire, on 30 August 1909, the son of Miles Gunter, a fruiterer and later a colliery pumpsman, and his wife, Clara Adeline Jones. After attending Abertillery and Newbridge secondary schools, he became, at the age of fourteen, a booking clerk with the Great Western Railway. When he was sixteen, he joined the Railway Clerks' Association (later the Transport Salaried Staffs' Association) and the Labour Party. He became active in both. On 4 August 1934, at the Methodist church at Newbridge, he married Elsie (died 1971), an elementary school teacher, daughter of James Elkins (a coalminer), with whom he had one son. During the Second World War Gunter enlisted in the Royal Engineers in 1941 and was promoted to staff captain in 1943, overseeing the transport of arms from Iraq to the USSR. 
Gunter returned to Britain in 1945 to contest Essex South-East in the general election and, to his surprise, won the seat. He was then narrowly elected for Doncaster in 1950 and equally narrowly defeated in 1951. He unsuccessfully contested Doncaster again in 1955 but eventually found a safe haven in Southwark, for which he sat from 1959 to 1972. 
While out of the House of Commons, Gunter became president of the Transport Salaried Staffs' Association in 1956, having previously been its treasurer, and he held the post until 1964. Emphatically anti-Bevanite, he was a member of the national executive committee of the Labour Party from 1955 to 1966 and, as head of the party's organization committee, took a tough line against left-wing critics during the early 1960s. He was a steadying and unifying influence during the clash over unilateral disarmament during and after the 1960 party conference, and for a brief moment he was seen as a future leader of the party. He became opposition spokesman on power in 1960 and then served as shadow minister of labour from 1961 until the 1964 general election. He was also chairman of the Labour Party from 1964 to 1965. 
On 17 October 1964 Harold Wilson included Gunter in his new cabinet as minister of labour. Gunter called his new post 'a bed of nails' (Wigham, 'Much more a unionist'). Under any administration of the period, mediating between employers and workers was an exacting and unenviable task, but in 1964 the Ministry of Labour was expected to construct the coherent and genuine labour market policy that seemed an essential prerequisite to union participation in a voluntary incomes policy. It thus formed a pivot around which the government hoped to turn its social and economic policies. 
Gunter's performance as minister of labour was mixed. He piloted through parliament the 'Redundancy Payments Act' and successfully set up the industrial training boards required by the 'Industrial Training Act' of January 1964. However, in both instances the spadework had already been done by the previous Conservative government. His 'Trade Disputes Act' (1965) overturned the 'Rookes v. Barnard' judicial decision of 1964 that threatened the unions' legal immunity in respect of strikes. The achievement which probably gave him greatest satisfaction was paving the way to ending casual dock working by setting up the Devlin committee. 
In other respects, Gunter's achievements were less satisfactory. His creation of the Donovan commission (the royal commission on trade unions and employers' associations) in April 1965 soured his relations with the unions. During the seamen's strike of May 1966 his ministerial status was undermined when the handling of the dispute was taken over by Wilson. The strike helped to precipitate an economic crisis in July 1966, but Gunter in cabinet was unable to resist either the imposition of the pay freeze or the subsequent prolongation of statutory control of collective bargaining. 
In April 1968 Wilson moved Gunter to the Ministry of Power. Gunter bitterly resented this, not least because he loathed his successor, Barbara Castle, and resented Wilson's expansion of the now renamed Department of Employment and Productivity. Two months later, on 28 June, he resigned from the cabinet. Had he chosen to go in April his motives would have been clear, but as it was they were obscure. For this reason, his resignation is remembered as an example of how not to resign (Kaufman, 168-9). But his comment that he would be forgotten within ten years (Wigham, 'Much more a unionist') proved correct. 
Ray Gunter was a rotund and smilingly self-confident figure, who employed an emotional, rumbustious, and sometimes demagogic oratory in the service of the Labour right. After meeting him in May 1968, Richard Crossman, who 'never trusted him a yard', described him as 'a huge, squat bullfrog of a man, with a great Welsh voice and the less attractive qualities of the Welsh as well' (Crossman, 'Diaries', 3.50). He was pro-European long before this became common in the Labour Party and was a firm believer in co-operation between management and workers. In a sense he was more a trade unionist than a politician, though his white-collar connections disadvantaged him within the TUC general council, where some referred to him dismissively as 'the ticket collector' (Jenkins, 7). Within the cabinet he was unpopular among some of his colleagues for leaking information to the press ('Castle Diaries, 1964-70', 304). His appointment and dismissal as minister of labour mirror the changing attitude of Wilson's government to the unions. Gunter campaigned relentlessly against traditions and practices that were dear to many Unionists but that he perceived to be hampering change; in a speech to the Scottish council of labour he remarked, 'I do wish so many of the comrades would stop equating profits with incest or lechery', adding that profitable industry meant further investment and more jobs ('Sunday Times', 20 Aug 1967). For this he was bitterly resented by the left, and when he returned to the back benches he had few political reserves on which to draw. His Europeanism was a major factor in his decision to resign the Labour whip in February 1972, when he insisted 'our country has a new role in Europe, not only on economic grounds' ('The Times', 17 Feb 1972). He also cited his resentment at the dominant role of intellectuals, whom he thought out of touch with the interests of ordinary people, among a Labour leadership lacking the working-class ballast which he, Frank Cousins, and George Brown had provided. He died at his cottage, Y Bwthyn Bach, Launceston Close, Old Town, St Mary's, on the Isles of Scilly on 11 April 1977. 


@@@@@


doc= 40263


Copley, John (1875-1950), printmaker and painter, was born on 25 June 1875 at his parents' home, Fallowfield, in Manchester, the only child of William Crawford Williamson (1816-1895), professor of botany at Manchester University and founder of palaeobotany, and his second wife, Annie Copley Heaton (1840?-1929?). Copley was always his working name but was formalized by deed poll only in 1927. He was educated at Manchester grammar school, Manchester School of Art (he saw Ford Madox Brown paint the town hall frescoes), and the Royal Academy Schools in London (1892-7). He then spent three years in Italy. His first lithographs were published in 1906. In 1910 he helped Joseph Pennell set up the Senefelder Club for the revival of lithography as a creative medium, and was its secretary from 1911 to 1915. Here he met his wife, Ethel Leontine Gabain (1883-1950), also a lithographer. They married on 28 June 1913 and had two sons: Peter ('b'. 1915) and Christopher (1918-1940). Copley produced 252 lithographs between 1909 and 1938 drawn on stone; almost all were in black and white and all were printed by him in editions of twenty to thirty. 
In perception, technical skill, and imaginative power Copley became perhaps the outstanding lithographer of the first half of the twentieth century in England. After his early complex colour works failed to sell, he found that black and white lithography was the ideal medium to record the activity of humankind, which he saw sometimes with sardonic humour, for example in 'A Lavatory' (1909), sometimes with social concern, as in 'Recruits' (1915). He loved the backstage life of the theatre, which he recorded in 'Footlights' (1911), and delighted in the odd moment glimpsed: 'Seen from an Omnibus' (1931). 'He had the photographer's ability to freeze an action and hold it in perpetual potentiality' (Taylor, 4). In 1930 he received the chief award and medal at the first International Exhibition of Lithography at the Art Institute of Chicago. 
Copley throughout his life was semi-invalid with a heart condition: for two years, 1925-7, he and his family lived in Italy for his health, at Alassio. Lithographic stones not being available, he turned there to copper plates, and from 1930, when working a lithographic press became too strenuous, he concentrated on etching and resumed painting. Between 1927 and 1950 he made 131 etchings, and the process affected his art profoundly. Instead of following the precise technique that had become characteristic of British etching he used bold expressive outlines and decorative hatching. As the painterliness of lithography was replaced by the precision of etching so his mental attitudes became both more introspective and also more daring; there was a blackish humour and an existential unease in his enquiries into the human condition. In 1939 war broke out and his wife became seriously ill, and in 1940 his younger son died tragically: subsequently his images seemed to grow in power and foreboding, as in 'Figures in the Wind' (1940) and 'London Snow' (1940). A series made in the Scottish highlands explored the fierce darkness and sudden light of mountain storms, of which 'Cairngorms' (1943) and 'Loch Morlich: after Rain' (1943) are memorable examples. One of his last etchings, 'In my Studio' (1949), is a self-portrait in which he looks at his aged self with penetrating curiosity. All his prints were signed in pencil 'John Copley', sometimes with the addition of 'imp.', meaning printed by him: he had his own press and did all his own printing. Between 1910 and 1918 he often placed by the signature a printed drawing of a yew tree, thus identifying that it was made at Yews, the house he lived in during those years and which had fine yew trees in the garden. In 1998 the lithographic prints mentioned above sold at between $2500 and $3500, while the etchings fetched between $1000 and $2000. Other prints sold at between $250 and $700. Copley earned his living solely as an artist, making paintings as well as prints. In 1938 his paintings were exhibited jointly with those of his wife at the Colnaghi Galleries. 
Though a Mancunian, Copley never seemed a very English artist. It has been said that a stranger shown his prints would have no clue to their origin. He is an unclassifiable, original European, part of no fashion, school, or aesthetic movement. With passion and integrity he sought his own path, and had his own technique for transferring the shape of things and of living people onto plain paper. His obituarist noted that: 'there was a feeling behind [his work] of a consistent judgement of life that might be called stoical if it were not so intense in feeling, with a sense of tragedy that never became sentimental. There was something of the mystic in his temperament and sometimes his work reminded one of Blake. ('The Times', 18 July 1950)' He held no rigid political or religious views. In 1935 he participated in the Artists' International Exhibition against War and Fascism. In the 1945 general election, in an uncharacteristic moment of dogmatic certainty, he voted Communist.In his last years Copley found a rare new energy: besides working and caring lovingly for his increasingly ill wife, he was, in 1948, elected president of the Royal Society of British Artists, a conservative body shaken into life by his wide-ranging exhibitions which he invited film stars -- notably Vivien Leigh -- to open. He organized exhibitions for foreign artists (a de Chirico show electrified London), concerts, and picture-hire schemes. More especially, he arranged open assemblies for young contemporaries and students, and many then young artists benefited from, and also acknowledged, Copley's influence on their work, particularly Carel Weight, Paul Hogarth, Michael Ayrton, and Patrick Heron. 
Copley and his wife, Ethel Gabain, worked closely but not imitatively together, sharing studio space all their lives. He often said, almost jokingly, to his son, 'If anything happens to your mother I shan't want to stay around'. She died early in 1950. He organized a memorial exhibition of her paintings, said one day, 'There is no more for me to do', and five months after her, on 17 July 1950, he died peacefully at his home, 10 Hampstead Square, London, where they had lived for thirty years. Examples of his work may be found in the print rooms of the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum; the municipal galleries of Manchester, Bradford, and Liverpool; the National Gallery of Canada; the Galleria Moderna, Rome; the Uffizi, Florence; and the library of the City of Boston. 


@@@@@


doc= 40269


Kinnear, John Boyd (1828-1920), politician and agriculturist, was born in Edinburgh on 15 March 1828, the eldest son of Charles Kinnear ('b'. 1795?), of Kinloch, Fife, and Christiana Boyd Greenshields. He was educated at home and then at the universities of St Andrews and Edinburgh, where he was a member of the Speculative Society. He was admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates in March 1850 and to the English bar at the Inner Temple, London, some six years later, but did not practise. On 12 August 1852 he married Sarah Harriet Frith (1824-1866), the only daughter of George Frith, of Worksop, Nottinghamshire. 
From 1852 to 1856 Kinnear acted as political secretary to the lord advocate, his most noticeable achievement in this office being his drafting of the 'Scottish Bankruptcy Bill'. In the 1860s he turned to journalism and acted as leader writer to several journals, including the 'Daily News', the 'Morning Star', the 'London Review', and the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. He was also active in this period in the volunteer movement and apparently attached himself at one point to a guards' battalion to improve his drill technique. What was described as 'his public spirit and enthusiasm in the cause of freedom, combined with an independent and virile temperament' ('The Scotsman', 11 Nov 1920), led him, furthermore, to volunteer to help in Italy in the struggle against Austria. Kinnear served as a private in the forces commanded by Giuseppe Garibaldi in the Trentino Mountains in the war of 1866. A similar commitment to national self-determination in Europe is evident from his involvement with, among others, John Stuart Mill and Giuseppe Mazzini, in efforts to set up the Balkan Liberation Society, the aim of which was to create a confederation of Christian Balkan states liberated from Turkish rule. 
On 19 March 1868, after the death of his first wife in 1866, Kinnear married Theresa Bassano (1828-1929), the fourth daughter of Clemente Bassano, a Venetian lawyer, active also in London. There appear to have been no children from either marriage. Later that same year Kinnear stood for Fife as an advanced Liberal against the sitting moderate Liberal MP, Sir Robert Anstruther of Balcaskie. He was defeated, in part because his opponent received the votes of Conservatives in the county. 
Kinnear's return thereafter to London, and to the editorial staff of the 'Pall Mall Gazette', was to be short-lived. In 1870, following a breakdown in his health caused by the strain of work, he moved to Guernsey on medical advice. The subsequent period, until his permanent return to the Kinloch estate in 1884, was marked by more journalistic activity, on reform issues in general and on Irish and land issues in particular. Kinnear wrote, for example, the article entitled 'Land' for the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. In 1881 he travelled to Ireland and returned convinced that the solution to the Irish question lay in a settlement of the land-reform issue, a position he publicized in his pamphlet 'Facts about Ireland' (1883). 
Kinnear was elected to parliament as a Liberal for the new East Fife constituency in 1885 and began a parliamentary career that was cut short by his refusal to support W. E. Gladstone's 'Irish Home Rule Bill'. Standing as a Liberal Unionist in 1886, he lost his seat to the Gladstonian Liberal H. H. Asquith. However, he had been involved in farming in Fife since 1882, and his election defeat, together with the prevailing agricultural depression, led him to become still more actively engaged on his estate, taking the management of several of his farms into his own hands. As an agricultural innovator he experimented with new scientific ideas in dairying, imported livestock from Guernsey, ran a profit-sharing scheme for his employees, and opened direct sales outlets for his estate's milk in Edinburgh and St Andrews, all with reported success. He ran the estate business until 1905, when he relinquished control due to advancing age. 
In retirement Kinnear remained true to a nineteenth-century concept of personal freedom and of social responsibility based on voluntaryism. He was well known in Fife for his charity, for addresses on religious subjects, and as the first chairman of the Cupar Educational Trust. In his pamphlet 'Reform Questions in 1884' he had put forward ideas advanced for the time, such as the enfranchisement of women and the abolition of the House of Lords -- in his view, the enfranchisement of peers. From 1911 he took his resistance to the reforms of the new Liberalism so far as to face prosecution for non-compliance with the 'National Insurance Act'. As a leader of the opposition in Scotland to this measure, Kinnear objected especially to its compulsory elements as an interference with individual liberty, a position which led him to refuse to pay the required premiums. 
Kinnear died at Kinloch on 10 November 1920 and was buried on 13 November in Collessie churchyard. His widow died in 1929, by then a centenarian. Kinnear's political fortunes reflected the developments of his time. He remained true to the nineteenth-century old Liberal tradition of individualism and voluntaryism and lived long enough to be clearly out of step with the more collectivist, state-oriented new Liberalism of the early twentieth century. His defeat in 1886 by Asquith, later leader of the new Liberal government whose policy he so much opposed, adds some poignancy to the contrast. 


@@@@@


doc= 40271


Hartley, Mary (c.1850-1916), novelist and short-story writer, was born in Dublin, the elder daughter of Michael Laffan, custom house officer of Blackrock, co. Dublin, and his wife, Ellen Fitzgibbon, who was related to Gerald Fitzgibbon (1793-1882). Not much of her earlier life is known. The family was Catholic and probably middle-class, and she was brought up in Blackrock and educated at a convent school. Throughout her life she seems to have been called May rather than Mary. 
May Laffan began publishing anonymously in June 1874 with an attack on her Catholic education in an essay in 'Fraser's'. Her first novel, 'Hogan, M.P.' (1876), the story of the rise and fall of a political opportunist, gave a detailed and satirical insight into Dublin society. It also strongly criticized Catholic education as detrimental to social climbing, leading to petty intrigues, social manoeuvres, gossip, and scandal. One reviewer commented that: 'if instead of refined, delicate and pungent satire, there is too much of rather broad and coarse caricature in the filling up, still we must admit that the descriptions generally have truth and point, more especially in the sketches of society... ('Dublin University Magazine')' Apparently the book caused a stir in Dublin, since it dealt with contemporary events, and it was assumed that it had been written by a man. 
Laffan's next novel, 'The Hon. Miss Ferrard' (1877), was an attack on a typical Irish middle-class household, exposing its vulgarity, pretension, and extravagance. In 'Christy Carew' (1878) she criticized the Catholic church's discouragement of mixed marriages. 'Flitters, Tatters and the Counsellor' (1879) contained four stories: the first two about Dublin slum children, the third about Glasgow slum life, and the last about conspiracy and murder in a county district. These stories are characterized by their social realism, and show the brutalizing effect of poverty and slum life. It is her most acclaimed work (John Ruskin admired it) and went through three Irish editions before being published in England. The Tauchnitz edition of 1881 had three extra stories. 'The Game Hen' and 'Baubie Clark' had been published separately in 1880. In 1880 Laffan produced 'No Relations', a translation of a French novel by Hector Malat. 
On 4 July 1882 May Laffan married a protestant, Walter Noel Hartley (1846-1913), the distinguished professor of chemistry at the Royal College of Science in Dublin who was knighted for his services to science in 1911. When he lectured at King's College, London, the couple lived in London. May Hartley published 'A Singer's Story' in 1885. Her last novel was 'Ismay's Children' (1887), a fictional account of the lives of a group of men who join the Fenian movement. 
Hartley was described as 'a most witty and delightful woman' ('Irish Book Lover'). But she suddenly stopped publishing, probably because of public anger about and strong clerical opposition to her criticism of the Catholic education system and her support for mixed marriages. There were also rumours of a nervous breakdown and a separation from her husband. The obituaries in 'The Times' and 'Irish Times' for Sir Walter, who died on 11 September 1913 at Braemar, did not mention his family at all, which does point to an estrangement. However, an unpublished memorandum on education from about 1895 shows that she continued writing. 
Mary Hartley died on 23 June 1916 at her home, 10 Elgin Road, Dublin, shortly after her only son was killed at Gallipoli. The death notice in the 'Irish Times' declared that the funeral was private. It did not mention her literary achievements, and there was no obituary. It seems that the life and work of this powerful social critic of Irish Catholic life had already been forgotten, and some ninety years later her works continued to be neglected by writers on Irish literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 40275


Allen, Roland (1868-1947), missionary and theologian, was born at 104 Friargate, Derby, on 29 December 1868, third son in the family of five sons and two daughters of Charles Fletcher Allen (1835-1873), curate and schoolmaster, and his wife, Priscilla, 'nee' Malpas (1839-1935). Of his brothers, Reginald (1863-1948) and Willoughby (1867-1953) attended the Clergy Orphan School (St Edmund's), Canterbury, and became Church of England clergymen. Willoughby, a Hebrew scholar, was twice archdeacon. 
After attending King's School, Canterbury (1879-82), and Bristol grammar school (1884-7), Roland won a scholarship to St John's College, Oxford (BA, 1889). He proceeded, with a second in classics and modern history, and the Lothian prize, to Leeds Clergy Training School. But he barely sampled a conventional career, discovering instead the sting of Christ's reference to the prophet without honour in his own country and his own house. His radical understanding of evangelization met with incomprehension in his time. It is acknowledged in diverse denominations today as a seminal response to the post-colonial dissolution of political and religious structures. 
In 1895 Allen joined the north China mission of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and in 1900, as chaplain to the British legation, was trapped in Peking (Beijing) by the Boxer uprising. His diary furnished an evocative narrative, 'The Siege of the Peking Legations' (1901), but three articles in the 'Cornhill Magazine' (November and December 1900 and February 1901) on the causes of the siege and of the 'providential' preservation of the legations clarify his reflections on the experience. He accepts the necessity for social change in China, and is blunt about the folly of the court and the superstitious popular ignorance it exploited in its encounter with the foreign pressure for 'concessions'. But he is appalled by the imperial brutality of that pressure, and laments the corrupting entanglement of competing missions; for instance the French legation's insistence on political status for the Catholic hierarchy, the abuse of landlord power by missions, and their provocative misuse of political influence with local officials to protect converts involved in private litigation. 
On furlough in 1901 Allen married Mary Beatrice Tarleton (1863-1960), daughter of Admiral Sir (John) Walter Tarleton, and returned briefly to China, but left on health grounds. He took his only living, Chalfont St Peter in Buckinghamshire, in 1904, but resigned in 1907 rather than continue extending the sacraments of the church to parishioners who gave no evidence of faith. Briefly a naval chaplain, he survived shipwreck off Whitby in October 1914 and was invalided, and subsequently worked for the Young Men's Christian Association, taught at King's College, Worcester, and thereafter collaborated in the Survey Application Trust, funded by an evangelical businessman whose insights into the contradictions of missionary organization he clarified (Allen, 'James Sidney Wells Clark'). 
Allen's first significant 'prophetic' text, 'Missionary Methods: St Paul's or ours?' (1912), established the position he reiterated in a long succession of publications, mostly from the World Dominion Press and in church periodicals: Christ commanded, St Luke focuses, and St Paul pursued an 'apostolic' mission, communicating the redeeming energy of the Holy Spirit and helping believers submit themselves to it; Christ said nothing about a trained, professional priesthood, about institutional structures, or about providing health and education; hospitals and schools, though good in themselves, are irrelevant to the Pentecostal message; missions, exhausted by competition for funds, doctors, and teachers, idolize a 'progress' to which the Holy Spirit is indifferent; above all, patronizing insistence on a salaried priesthood, however 'native', replicates a deadening past. Christian communities open to the Holy Spirit, however, will identify their own 'priests' and thrive in independence. Allen's books 'Spontaneous Expansion of the Church' (1927) and 'The Case for Voluntary Clergy' (1930) have been republished several times, especially in the USA. 
Allen visited India in the late 1920s. An exasperated George Hubback, bishop of Assam, writing in 1928, finally acknowledged the gulf dividing them. He had been more patient than most, but spoke for other churchmen tormented by Allen's monotonic attentions: ''You' may hear the voice of our Lord speaking direct to you; others like myself are less highly honoured and have to depend for guidance on those in authority over us' (D. M. Paton, 1968, 155). A decade after his death, however, Bishop Lesslie Newbigin was drawing attention to the slow but steady increase in the number of those who felt compelled to listen to his message for modern missiology (Yates, 63). 
Travels in east and southern Africa confirmed Allen's alienation from the church as an institution ('Le Zoute: a Critical Review of Christian Mission in Africa', 1927). In 1932, following his son and daughter, he settled in Kenya. There he performed locum duties, taught himself Swahili, and (with help from his son) translated three of its epic poems into English. He died at his home in Hurlingham Road, Nairobi, on 9 June 1947, and was survived by his wife and two children, Priscilla Mary Allen (1903-1987) and John Willoughby Tarleton Allen (1904-1979), a colonial educationist and Swahili scholar. 


@@@@@


doc= 40276


Allen, John Willoughby Tarleton (1904-1979), colonial administrator and Swahili scholar, was born at Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire, on 14 November 1904, the second child and only son of the vicar, the Revd Roland Allen (1868-1947), writer and theologian, and his wife, Mary Beatrice, 'nee' Tarleton (1863-1960). Allen was educated at Marlborough College (1918-20), where he was a foundation scholar, at Westminster School (1920-22), and at St John's College, Oxford (1923-7), where he gained second-class honours in 'literae humaniores'. 
After Oxford he spent two seminal years working for the Gezira cotton scheme in the Sudan (1927-9), learning Arabic, and developing a profound knowledge of Islam and an admiration for Muslim scholarship. He then joined the colonial service as a superintendent of education in Tanganyika (1929-37). On 29 September 1930, in Tanga, he married a fellow teacher, Winifred Ethel Emma (1902-1991), daughter of Hubert Brooke of Mexico City. They had four children, a son and three daughters, one of whom died in childhood. Also in Tanga, Allen made friends with members of the distinguished al-Buhry family, in particular Muhammad Hemedi al-Buhry, who taught Allen Swahili, introduced him to Swahili poetry, and furnished him with many texts. After Tanga School (1930-32) Allen moved to Dar-es-Salaam (1933-6), where he edited the government Swahili newspaper 'Mambo Leo'. He also became a founder member of the Tanganyika Society, and for its first three years was the editor of its journal, 'Tanganyika '(subsequently Tanzania)' Notes and Records' (modelled on 'Sudan Notes and Records'). 
From 1937 to 1947 and again from 1952 to 1958 Allen served as an administrative officer in Tanganyika. A publication during this time, never superseded, was his 'Arabic Script for Students of Swahili' (1945 and 1968), a companion to 'Maandiko ya Kizungu' (1938), which explained roman characters to those who read Swahili in Arabic or Swahili-Arabic script only. The years 1947 to 1952 were spent in the Western Aden Protectorate -- a delicate period (when much of the Jewish diaspora in Aden migrated to Israel, and when Russians and Americans courted the regime in the Yemen while clandestinely searching the area for oil fields). This was the most important part of Allen's colonial career. 
Retiring early from the Colonial Office, Allen moved to Makerere University College, Kampala, as warden of University Hall (1958-65). From 1959 he was also secretary of the East African Swahili Committee -- then located at Makerere but which moved to the new Dar-es-Salaam University College, where the committee was finally transformed into the Institute of Swahili Research. The glory of 'Swahili' Swahili consists in its dozen or so dialects, as is evinced in Charles Sacleux's monumental 'Dictionnaire' (1939). With others Allen realized that if Swahili was to be truly effective within east Africa and beyond, then the language had to be standardized, and so standardization (based on the speech of Zanzibar town) became a part of his duties. During these years, alongside his editorial and research work for the Swahili Committee, he prepared for publication the 'Diwani' (collected works; 14 volumes, 1967-72) of the Tanga poet Shaaban Robert, with whom he had become friends. Also, from 1960, he edited 'Johari za kiSwahili' ('Swahili Classics'), the purpose of the series being primarily to put the Swahili classics into the hands of Swahili readers. 
Thanks to the generosity of the Rockefeller Foundation from 1965 to 1968 Allen became an honorary research fellow of Dar-es-Salaam University College. This involved the collection of manuscripts of literary, linguistic, and historical interest of the Swahili-speaking world. Of all the many Bantu languages only Swahili has its own pre-European literature. In the 1850s Ludwig Krapf had discovered the existence of Swahili literature, but he was not interested in collecting it. A few collections already existed before Allen, for example that of Sheikh Sir Mbarak Ali Hinawy in Mombasa. Allen's work was facilitated by the efforts of his wife, 'Winkie', who persuaded learned and cultured women along the Swahili coast to entrust to her care for copying their most highly valued manuscripts, many of which were hitherto unknown to scholarship. Also crucial to Allen's work was his friendship with scholarly Swahili families, such as Ahmad Sheikh Nabhany, his wife, Mwana Khadija, and his grandmother Mwana Amina. The material collected was mainly in Swahili, in Arabic script (until the mid-nineteenth century all Swahili was written in Arabic script). The resulting catalogue, 'The Swahili and Arabic Manuscripts and Tapes in the Library of the University College Dar-es-Salaam' (1970) is, not unlike W. E. Taylor's 'African Aphorisms' (1891) and H. E. Lambert's 'Studies in Swahili Dialects' (1956-8), an outstanding contribution to Swahili scholarship. 
A genre which Allen pioneered was the translation of legal texts from and into Swahili, for example 'Nikahi' ('A handbook of the law of marriage in Islam', 1959) by Ali Hemedi al-Buhry. However, much of this work was done at the behest of official bodies in Dar-es-Salaam, and so appeared anonymously. 'Tendi' (1971) was Allen's greatest work, consisting of six examples of a Swahili classical verse form known as 'tendi' or 'tenzi'. Allen argued that the Swahili verse tradition is as rigid and sophisticated as any in Europe. Because of the high price of this volume Allen arranged for five separate volumes to be published inexpensively, without the English translations (1972). 
From 1970 the Allens taught Swahili at the Danish Volunteer Training Centre, Tengeru, near Arusha. In 1973 he returned to England where he died on 6 April 1979 of emphysema at his home at Halford, Old Marston, Oxford, and was buried at Marston. 


@@@@@


doc= 40278


Aldred, Guy Alfred (1886-1963), anarchist and political propagandist, was born on 5 November 1886 at 24 Corporation Buildings, Farringdon Road, Clerkenwell, London, the son of Arthur Alfred Aldred ('b'. 1864/5), a dramatist, and his wife, Ada Caroline Holdsworth ('b'. 1866/7). His father had deserted his family by 1892, and he was brought up by his mother, a parasol maker; his maternal grandfather, Charles William Holdsworth, a radical bookbinder, was a strong early influence. Aldred was educated in Clerkenwell at the Iron infants' school (1891-3) and the Hugh Myddleton School (1893-1901). After leaving school he soon became a penny-a-line journalist with the National Press Agency (1901-6) and briefly with the 'Daily Chronicle' (1907), before leaving to engage full-time in socialist propaganda. For the next fifty-six years, as a major figure in the British anarchist and anti-parliamentary communist movements, he wrote and published a stream of pamphlets, books, and journals, and set up a number of printing presses, from the Bakunin Press in London (1907) to the Strickland Press in Glasgow (1939-68). 
Aldred's early political career was spent in London among dissident left groups, including the Social Democratic Federation (1905-6), but he soon moved towards anarchism. He quickly fell out with the Freedom group of anarchists, and set up instead his own group to promote industrial unionism and direct action. In 1908 he left his mother's home at 133 Goswell Road, London, to set up a free union with Rose Lillian Witcop (1890-1932), a milliner. A son, Annesley, was born in 1909. Aldred's visit to Glasgow in 1912 at the invitation of the Glasgow Clarion Scouts was a great success, and he was invited back for several speaking tours of Scotland, although these were curtailed by war. In 1916 he spent his first spell of almost continuous imprisonment as a conscientious objector. On his release (March 1919) he returned to Glasgow, his base for the rest of his life. 
Aldred now played a central part in efforts to realign the communist left on an anti-parliamentary basis, notably through the formation of the Communist League in 1919, but these foundered with the establishment in 1920 of the centralized Communist Party of Great Britain, backed by Moscow. Aldred and some remaining comrades defiantly formed the Anti-Parliamentary Communist Federation in 1921, based at 13 Burnbank Gardens, Glasgow (Bakunin House). By now Aldred and Witcop had separated, and he formed another free union with Jane Hamilton (Jenny) Patrick (1884-1971). Despite a marriage of convenience with Witcop on 2 February 1926 at Glasgow register office to thwart her threatened deportation, the union with Jenny Patrick was lifelong and, after Witcop's death on 4 July 1932, constituted a valid marriage under Scottish common law. In 1933 Aldred's resignation from the Anti-Parliamentary Communist Federation over the divisive ballot-box tactic forced their move to 5 Baliol Street, which was their home for the rest of their lives. 
Aldred's new organization, the United Socialist Movement, founded in 1934, marked a change in philosophy and tactics from an exclusively anti-parliamentary focus to the need for socialist unity to defeat fascism, notably through support of the anarchists in the Spanish Civil War. Street-corner meetings were held almost nightly in 1936-7, accompanied, despite extreme poverty, by a stream of papers and pamphlets. Two of Aldred's closest comrades, Ethel MacDonald and Jenny Patrick, went to Spain to assist the propaganda effort of the anarchist federation, enabling Aldred to publish firsthand information on events such as the communist attack on the anarchists in Barcelona. In 1939 a $3000 legacy from Sir Walter Strickland enabled him to set up the Strickland Press at 104-6 George Street. Throughout the Second World War he was again active in the struggle against conscription. 
Aldred made major contributions to anti-parliamentary communist theory, combining the ideas of Marx and Bakunin and giving priority to self-organized working-class activity. Also, by keeping his press and journals in almost continuous existence for over fifty years, he maintained an open forum for the libertarian left. His most important journals, the 'Herald of Revolt' (1910-14) and 'The Spur' (1914-21), enabled different elements of the rebel movement to exchange ideas, while 'The Word' (1938/9-63) stubbornly proclaimed the anti-parliamentary and anti-militarist message in a hostile world. His many biographical studies rescued from neglect 'pioneers' of the movement. 
As an anti-militarist and anti-war activist in two world wars, furthermore, Aldred offered uncompromising resistance to conscription -- he even held meetings and published a newspaper while imprisoned for conscientious objection during the first, and used his experience and self-taught legal expertise to inspire and assist fellow resisters in the second. In addition he revived interest in an earlier generation of freethinkers, particularly Richard Carlile and Robert Taylor, situating them in a radical political tradition. Aldred was also significant for championing free speech. He received a prison sentence for publishing the banned 'Indian Sociologist' (1909) and incurred prosecution for publishing Margaret Sanger's 'obscene' 'Family Limitation' (1922). Between the wars he campaigned for the right to public speaking in Glasgow; he was also responsible for the controversial publication of the duke of Bedford's pacifist views in the Second World War. 
After the war Aldred campaigned on a number of issues, including world government, neo-colonialism, and American use of UK military bases. In their pursuit he stood as a parliamentary candidate in six post-war elections in Glasgow, the last of which was the Woodside by-election in November 1962. Shortly afterwards, in January 1963, he suffered a heart attack. He resumed speaking and writing, but grew weaker and died in the Western Infirmary, Glasgow, on 16 October 1963. As he had bequeathed his body for research, his funeral, at Maryhill crematorium, was delayed until 4 May 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 40280


Anderson, John (1893-1962), philosopher and social critic, was born in Stonehouse, Lanarkshire, 30 miles south-west of Glasgow, on 1 November 1893, the third of the five children of a radical schoolmaster, Alexander Anderson (1863-1947), and his wife, Elizabeth Brown (died 1942), teacher, pianist, and poet. 
John followed his brother William (1888-1950), later to be professor of philosophy in Auckland, New Zealand, by going with a bursary to Hamilton Academy (1907-10) and then (1911) on to Glasgow University. At first he concentrated on mathematics and physics until his brother induced him to turn to philosophy. In 1917 he graduated MA with first-class honours in mathematics, natural philosophy, and philosophy after winning prizes in Greek, economics, and political science. In open competition with graduates from all the Scottish universities he won in 1917 the Ferguson scholarship in philosophy and in 1919 the Shaw fellowship, which required four public lectures. His title was 'The nature of mind'. When on 11 September 1926 he applied for the Challis professorship of philosophy in the University of Sydney he could claim to have lectured for nine years, at first in Glasgow, then in Cardiff (1917-19), and finally in Edinburgh (1920-26). He left marks wherever he taught, especially in respect to his contribution to the then prevailing battle between defenders of the traditional classical education and those who sought to turn universities into training colleges. The vigour of his intervention led to his being compared with the non-religious covenanter Henry Morton in Walter Scott's 'Old Mortality' (1816). His educational writings were later brought together by a Welsh philosopher, D. Z. Phillips, as 'Education and Inquiry: John Anderson' (1980). 
Anderson's exceptionally long period as an undergraduate (1911-17) created a deep interest in student affairs which he retained for most of his life. In the period 1914-18 -- his health prevented him from being called up -- he published sixteen articles in the 'Glasgow University Magazine', some literary, some political. They are listed and described in Brian Kennedy's well-named biography, 'A Passion to Oppose' (1995). Anderson called himself Jude, characteristically referring to Hardy's widely condemned book 'Jude the Obscure' (1895). 
What kind of philosophy did Anderson learn in Glasgow? His principal teacher was Sir Henry Jones (1852-1922) who carried further the tradition of Scottish Hegelianism, which sought to reconcile Hegel with Christianity but also, unlike English Hegelians, emphasized the way in which Hegel moved from one area of human culture to another, always considering them in the light of his general principles. Anderson continued to admire this side of Hegel and substantially tried to imitate it, although he totally rejected Hegel's general principles as well as the Scottish attempt to make a Christian of him. 
Another major influence was the Australian-born philosopher Samuel Alexander (1859-1938), then a Manchester professor, who spent friendly months -- Anderson liked his personal style -- delivering the Gifford lectures (1918) published as 'Space, Time and Deity' (1920). Rejecting Alexander's metaphysical evolutionism, according to which in the beginning was space-time out of which mind, matter, and God were generated, he took over the view that to be was to have a place in space and time. There was a realism in Alexander, too, which Anderson more fully developed as a consequence of reading G. E. Moore ('Mind', 1903) and American realism as presented in the co-operative work 'New Realism' (1912). Thereafter he regularly described himself in all his work as a realist. From William James he learned that relations are perceived by us, not imposed upon isolated ideas. 
In Edinburgh Anderson felt himself sufficiently secure financially to bring to its end, by marriage on 30 June 1922, his lengthy courtship with a miner's daughter, Janet (Jennie) Baillie (1892-1987), whom he had originally met as a rival in Hamilton Academy. Their only child was another Alexander, shortened to Sandy (1923-1995), who was later to become the head of the philosophy department in Newcastle, an industrial city 90 miles north of Sydney. Edinburgh influenced Anderson in a number of ways. After Glasgow he found his colleagues conservative and 'kirky', and therefore chose to live in the miner's town of Eskbank, 12 miles south-east of Edinburgh. Nevertheless he learned a great deal from his scholarly colleagues. He was not himself a scholar but liked to centre his lectures, except for logic, around individual philosophers, presenting his own views by way of a criticism of them. He particularly admired Greek philosophy because it tried to give an account of the world rather than of perception, in the manner of British philosophers, whom he criticized as not having paid adequate attention to their continental critics. His Sydney students would soon be made aware of his scholarly hero John Burnet (1863-1928), an Edinburgh product although then at St Andrews, of the Edinburgh Plato scholar Alfred Edward Taylor (1869-1945), and, in the case of Kant, Descartes, and Hume, of Norman Kemp Smith (1872-1958). 
Anderson's application for the professorship in Sydney, probably incited by two things -- his impatience with kirky Edinburgh and his admiration for Samuel Alexander -- was supported by his conservative Edinburgh colleagues. Sydney was used to Scottish-educated professors. They were mostly conservative, sometimes extremely so. The first professor of philosophy, Francis Anderson (1858-1941), had been a product of Glasgow Christianized Hegelianism. He was in some quarters regarded as radical because he fought for the replacement of pupil-teaching by the setting up of a teachers' college, and in the course of the First World War had supported the setting up of the League of Nations. This degree of radicalism Sydney could endure. But what of a man who had signed up as a communist immediately on his arrival, who was unashamedly an atheist, a realist where philosophers were expected to be idealists, who freely mixed with students when he was expected to meet them only in classes or, very occasionally, in their studies? Trouble was bound to loom ahead. His students at first found him difficult to comprehend. His Scottish accent, the tweed suit he wore even in the heat of summer, even his general appearance at a time when what is now a multicultural city was little varied in appearance, were hard to take. He liked to think of himself as having a Gypsy background. Donald Horne ('b'. 1921), who was to be one of his ablest students, describes his first sight of him thus: 'He was in his late forties, very tall, gangling, striding loosely past in a brown suit and a green hat with an upturned brim, usually sombre, with his pipe jutting out from between his teeth. He seemed an embodiment of what was grave and constant in human suffering, but sometimes he would wave an arm at a student... and smile... His huge, sad, eyes seem to sag right down into his face, pulling the cheeks down with them, lost in wisdom... I was gripped by the need to know him. (D. Horne, 'The Education of Young Donald', 1967, 245)' There could be no doubt that his general appearance was melancholic. But it is also true that he could smile and wave at his students and could induce in them a need to know him. He could drink with them in pubs and the best of them he might invite to his home in Turramurra on Sundays. Professors were at that time well paid. Anderson joined most of them in having a garden house in the area north of Sydney, with a gardener and a maid. Jennie would play the piano to accompany his singing of Hebridean songs, Mussorgsky, Mozart, and Gounod. Or he might play records of Duke Ellington. Or tennis on the then commonplace court. 
When Anderson applied for his professorship he had very little to refer to in the way of publications, even by the standards of that time. Two articles, he said, and a textbook on logic, which was then being considered for publication. To his considerable distress the book was not accepted and he never wrote another standard-length work, although he wrote some 200 papers and just before his death brought forward a collection of 32 papers, 'Studies in Empirical Philosophy' (1962), which he regarded as being central to his philosophy, including two papers he wrote to clear up what he took to be misunderstandings. The book is prefaced by a lengthy introduction entitled 'John Anderson and twentieth century philosophy' by John Passmore. After 1962, the date of his death, former pupils brought forth collections of his other papers, accompanied by prefaces and annotations, and wrote accounts, often to some degree critical, of certain areas of his writings. Most of his pupils, however, learned from his lectures. These lectures have not been published; only in the Anderson archives in Sydney University can one find examples, or reports, of them. 
It is impossible to offer in a short space Anderson's complex arguments; one can offer nothing more than a bare outline of his positions. His realism is direct: what we are immediately aware of are states of affairs. There are no simples; complexes are the minimal forms of existence; what happens arises out of the meeting of complexes. He describes himself as an empiricist, since he maintains that all knowledge is based on experience, but he rejects the view, typical of British empiricism, that experience is of sensations, or of sense-data. Like Heraclitus, he argues that we have always to expect the unexpected; since there are no simples we can always overlook some of a thing's characteristics. There is no being outside space and time and hence no God or any other sort of absolute being. Relativism he sees as a common error -- defining a thing as that which stands in a certain relationship to something else, as when mind is defined as that which is conscious. In fact, minds are complexes of emotions; they are what is conscious but emotions have their own character as, for example, affection, and they can co-operate or conflict with other emotions. He was influenced by Freud but there is in Anderson's philosophy no ego, although of course there is egoism. In a similar way -- here Marx was an influence -- human societies are conflicts, and alliances, between social movements; there is no all-powerful state, although the institutions referred to as 'the state' have, of course, variable powers which social movements try to reduce, or increase, or seize. Again under Moore's influence, he takes ethics to be concerned with elucidating good forms of activity. For Anderson these include enquiry, love, art, and freedom. He does not, as Moore does, define 'right' as the production of goods; it is for him a political concept to be fought for or disputed. His aesthetics, too, defines beauty not in terms of the effects of works of art on human beings, which would be relativism, but as something perceptible in the structure of works of art. His writings on art are brought together as 'Art and Reality' (ed. Janet Anderson, 1982). 
The logic Anderson taught was the logic publishers had rejected. As often with him it is in some ways conservative, in other ways radical. He retained the four forms -- all, some, some not, no. But he rejected the view that there were also singular and hypothetical propositions. These, he argued, could be expressed in the four forms, as could all everyday statements. What is asserted or denied is always the existence of particular states of affairs. His pupils, particularly lawyers in the making, found that the exercise of putting statements into logical form helped them to argue more clearly, relating states of affairs to one another. There is a general, critical, account of his logic, which is also, for Anderson, his ontology, in A. J. Baker's 'Australian Realism' (1986). 
Aside from his lectures Anderson presided over two staff-student societies: the Literary Society and the Freethought Society. In the university at that time literature courses were wholly devoted to earlier centuries, and the approach was strongly biographical. The Literary Society, in contrast, was devoted almost entirely to twentieth-century writers except in the case of Russian writers, who were not at that time taught. Anderson was particularly enthusiastic about the banned Joyce's 'Ulysses'; it was circulated in a cover entitled 'The Book of Common Prayer'. But this created no public disturbance. Neither did his emphasis on an aesthetic rather than a biographical approach, although it aroused hostility in the English department. The society published as a pamphlet Anderson's 'Some Questions in Aesthetics' (1932). 
The Freethought Society had been set up by a group of left-wing students but was soon under the control of Anderson and his followers. Anderson's presidential address (9 July 1931) could scarcely have been more provocative. The Australian public had set up all over the continent war memorials as substitutes for the graves of soldiers killed in the First World War, all of them overseas. Anderson argued that they stood in the way of an intellectual examination of Australia's participation in that war. He was threatened with dismissal after a parliamentary debate demanded it. He was at that time lecturing to his first-year class on Plato's 'Apology'. His pupils saw him as a modern Socrates; but unlike Socrates he survived. 
There were to be other attacks on Anderson from a religious point of view. But in this case the university senate argued that Sydney University was a secular institution. The senate's earlier statement had been much more doubtful, upholding in general terms free speech but strongly attacking his views. Politically Anderson changed his allegiance. He switched from Soviet communism to being a Trotskyist, having political discussions in his room with trade union Trotskyists, after a communist Melbourne journal, 'Proletariat', refused to publish his article 'Leadership and spontaneity', published by the Freethought Society as 'Censorship in the working class' (1932). He was still very interested in Marx, claiming that the Soviet Marxists did not read him, but only writers who pretended to have read him. But he also turned to Georges Sorel, Benedetto Croce, and Giambattista Vico. To the horror of many of his followers he wrote in 1943 a favourable article on Hilaire Belloc's 'The Servile State' (1912). He also adopted political attitudes which greatly disturbed them. He was in fact a very disappointed man. He had hoped to see a free and productive society brought about by the working class. Now he found them content with welfare awards. He had once seen in science the supreme example of free enquiry but he found it selling out to industry and instruments of war, promising secrecy. He did not like, either, the way in which the Freethought Society had now become a city organization, based on hotels, calling themselves 'libertarians' or 'the Sydney Push', still organizing discussions, often referring to him, but taking as the society's central doctrine complete sexual freedom. He felt generally quite out of touch with the new generation. 'The Push' is analysed and related to Anderson in Anne Coombs's 'Sex and Agony: the Life and Death of the Sydney Push' (1996). Anderson's socio-political views, with their emphasis on such doctrines as that liberty always has to be fought for, can be found in A. J. Baker's 'Anderson's Social Philosophy' (1979). 
Anderson liked to chop wood but in July 1962 he went too far, collapsed, and died in hospital at Turramurra on 6 July. His funeral was at the relatively near Chatswood crematorium, the next day. The valedictory address was delivered by the psychologist W. M. (Bill) O'Neil. His legacy was a group of philosophers who, in very different ways, were to be internationally well known, but he also had a permanent effect on psychologists, lawyers, and critics. And beyond that he strengthened in Sydney the idea of political and intellectual liberty. 


@@@@@


doc= 40281


Arnot, Robert Page (1890-1986), political activist and historian, was born at 8 South Street, Greenock, Renfrewshire, on 15 December 1890, the son of John Arnot, a newspaper sub-editor who had begun work as a child in an iron foundry but became editor of the 'Greenock Telegraph', and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Marshall. His forebears were agricultural labourers and linen weavers, and he was the grandson of a Chartist. Learning and reading were encouraged at home and his father had many books. Aged twelve Robin (as he was always known) read William Morris's 'News from Nowhere' and so began a lifelong passion for Morris and socialism, further fuelled when at about sixteen he heard the Clydeside Marxist John MacLean speak. In 1908, having gained school examination passes in English, higher mathematics, higher Latin, Greek, and French, Arnot was admitted to Glasgow University, where he studied Greek and Latin, passing both at the higher level. In 1912 he withdrew from political economy and gained third-class honours in both English and history, graduating MA. 
Arnot's political activism began at university, where he joined the Glasgow University Fabian Society in 1908, and in 1912 became a founder and secretary of the University Socialist Federation (continuing as secretary until 1919). He moved to London and in 1914 became secretary of the Fabian research department (FRD). He wrote numerous pamphlets, trained researchers, and assisted the miners', engineers', and railwaymen's unions with political and economic information, especially at government inquiries. From 1915 editing the 'Labour Yearbook' brought him into contact with unions and future leaders of the Communist Party -- Rajani Palme Dutt, William Gallacher, and others. In this early period, Arnot was very close to G. D. H. Cole, with whom he wrote 'Trade Unionism on the Railways' (1917), and William Mellor. Beatrice Webb called them the 'kernel' of the FRD and 'professional rebels' ('Diary', 9 March 1916). On 1 January 1916 he married Leila Ogier Ward ('b'. 1889/90), the daughter of Allan Ogier Ward, a doctor of medicine; they had a daughter. 
Arnot avoided military service during the First World War and was imprisoned in 1917-18 for eighteen months for his anti-militarism. After his release he and Cole wrested control of the FRD from the Fabians and in 1918 it was renamed the Labour Research Department (LRD), Arnot remaining secretary until 1927. In 1919 he compiled much of the evidence presented by the Miners' Federation of Great Britain (MFGB) to the Sankey commission on the coal industry. In the early 1920s the LRD was fully taken over by the Communist Party and G. D. H. Cole resigned. Arnot was on its executive committee from about 1930. At the LRD he met Olive Elizabeth Budden ('b'. 1892/3), the daughter of Edwin Budden, a schoolmaster. His first wife having died some time previously, they married on 11 October 1935. Olive became a frequent lecturer for the Communist Party. 
In 1920 Arnot was a delegate from the Guild Communist Group to the conferences which formed the Communist Party of Great Britain, and was thus a foundation member of the party. In 1921, as a friend and close associate of Dutt, he helped found the 'Labour Monthly' and served on its editorial board, becoming associate editor from 1941 until 1950 when he resigned to continue his historical writing. In November 1925 he was among the twelve communist leaders imprisoned for conspiracy to publish seditious libels, Arnot being sentenced to six months. He was, however, released before the 1926 general strike and was an active organizer among miners in the north-east, an experience which intensified his radicalism. In 1926 he compiled a valuable book of documents on the general strike, and by 1927 he had completed a draft of his history of the MFGB, covering 1889 to 1910, which had been sanctioned by the union in 1925. Probably for political reasons (in the late 1920s the MFGB had moved to a stronger anti-communist line), its publication was delayed for twenty years. 
Arnot attended the Third World Congress of the Communist International (Comintern) in 1921 and became a trusted figure in Moscow. Dmitry Manuilsky of the Comintern asserted that Arnot and Dutt were the only correct theoreticians in the British party (Pelling, 51). Arnot also joined the Soviet party, and held various Moscow postings: in 1929 he was assistant director of the eastern department of the executive committee of the Comintern (ECCI), and he represented the British party at the ECCI (1928-1929, 1936-1938). His wife briefly worked at the International Lenin School in Moscow. 
As one of the leaders and top intellectual figures of the Communist Party of Great Britain between the wars, Arnot identified strongly with Bolshevik method and discipline and proved a loyal Stalinist. In 1926, from Moscow, he contributed to Comintern criticisms of the British party's leadership in the general strike. Similarly, in 1928 he assisted the Comintern when it decided to purge the British party's leadership and backed Moscow's promotion of the new leadership team of Harry Pollitt and Dutt, inaugurating the 'Class against Class' period, a sectarian anti-Labour Party line. He served on the party's executive committee from 1924 to 1938, after which he held no party leadership positions; Harry Pollitt did not want him to be re-elected as he was an inefficient organizer. He also served on the board of the party's 'Daily Worker' intermittently from 1930 and was to contribute over many years. He also worked with the League Against Imperialism and the party's colonial department. 
In 1933 Arnot became a founder, and the first principal, of the Marx Memorial Library and Workers' School, a post which he retained until 1947. He was a regular lecturer there, and at special party schools, especially on political topics. In 1934 he wrote a pamphlet, 'William Morris: a Vindication', stressing Morris's role as a revolutionary socialist, and communist antecedent. Morris continued to fascinate Arnot, who was a key founder of the William Morris Society in 1953 and an active member of its committee thereafter. For the Left Book Club he wrote two volumes on the Russian revolution in 1937. A founder of the Communist Party's historians' group between 1938 and 1940, he organized meetings which led to the publication in 1940 of Christopher Hill's essay on the English revolution as a 'bourgeois revolution', a controversial landmark in the interpretation of the 1640s. He was, however, inactive in the historians' group's post-war incarnation until about 1956. He was also a major figure in the formation and activities of the non-party Society for the Study of Labour History in 1960, and was its president at his death. 
Arnot's political dedication helped to shape the direction of his writing, much of which was ephemeral and polemical. Over the years he used some aliases, such as Jack Cade, when writing for the 'Labour Leader' in 1915. He also used R. Page, G. Vardy, and G. Scott when working for the Comintern. His writing on the British miners, which began in the 1920s, continued until the 1970s as he worked on his major multi-volume official historical works on the MFGB and the National Union of Mineworkers, as well as histories of the Scottish and south Wales miners. These works were the scholarly culmination of his association with the miners. The first, 'The Miners', covering the development of the MFGB from 1889 to 1910, appeared in 1949 and is a solid but fairly traditional presentation of labour history. Six other volumes followed at regular intervals to 1975. The earlier volumes are the more highly regarded, and will be the scholarship for which he is remembered, though Cole regarded his writing as tendentious and inclined to present complex issues in black and white tones (Wright, 147n). Overall they are powerful and traditional trade-union histories, with an epic style and heroic vision, celebrating solidarity and the achievement of a national union, and culminating in public ownership of the mines. 
Arnot died at Farnborough Hospital, Kent, on 18 May 1986 and was cremated at Beckenham crematorium on 28 May. At his funeral on that day the miners' leader Mick McGahey gave the oration. 


@@@@@


doc= 40282


Baillie, John (1886-1960), theologian and Church of Scotland minister, was born on 26 March 1886 in the Free Church manse at Gairloch, Scotland, the eldest of the three sons of John Baillie (1829-1891), Free Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Annie Macpherson (1853-1932). John and his brother Donald Baillie (1887-1954) were among the distinguished Scottish theologians of the modern era. Although Baillie later recalled 'a rigorously Calvinistic upbringing', mainly by his mother, who was soon widowed, there were also liberal strands in Free Church culture and a huge respect for learning, which drove the brothers through brilliant academic careers at Inverness Royal Academy (where John studied between 1898 and 1904) and at the University of Edinburgh, both graduating with firsts in philosophy and distinction in divinity. Baillie spent the summer terms of 1909 and 1911 at the universities of Jena and Marburg, respectively. For a short time assistants in the philosophy department, the brothers spent time in the YMCA in France during the First World War. 
In April 1919 Baillie married Florence Jewel Fowler and moved to Auburn Theological Seminary in New York state, and was ordained in the Presbyterian church there in 1920. Their only child, Ian Fowler Baillie, was born in 1921. 'The Roots of Religion in the Human Soul' appeared in 1926 and 'The Interpretation of Religion' in 1929. These books reflected wide cultural and theological experience from the manse in Gairloch to American society -- the latter's poetry and politics, the polarization of church politics in the fundamentalist debate, as well as participation in conferences on the social gospel in the early 1920s. Baillie moved in 1927 to Emmanuel College, Toronto, in the newly formed United Church of Canada. His wife was suffering from tuberculosis during much of the 1920s, and was in sanatoria between 1923 and 1930. In 1930 he moved back to the Union Theological Seminary in New York, then arguably the world's greatest theological seminary. It provided a forum for theology where, along with Henry Sloane Coffin, Reinhold Niebuhr, and Pitney Van Dusen, he was to have a major impact on Western theology for the next two decades. Though Baillie returned to Edinburgh in 1934, the four exerted huge influence on the new World Council of Churches. They agreed on a 'via media' between extreme liberalism on the one hand, and a narrow Barthianism on the other. Baillie was professor of divinity at Edinburgh University from 1934 to 1956. He also served as principal of New College, Edinburgh, and dean of the faculty of divinity (1950-56). A royal chaplain between 1947 and 1956, he was an extra chaplain to the queen in Scotland from 1956 to 1960. 
The theme of the presence of God to faith was central to the three books that followed Baillie's first publications, 'And the Life Everlasting' (1933), 'Our Knowledge of God' (1939), and 'Invitation to Pilgrimage' (1942). An emphasis on spirituality was manifested in 'A Diary of Private Prayer' (1936), which sold tens of thousands of copies, a devotional work combining honest self-examination with concentration on God's reconciling grace. A wider social and political concern was demonstrated, during his moderatorial year in the Church of Scotland in 1943, with the preparation for the general assembly of the report of the special commission for the interpretation of God's will in the present crisis. The report, published in 1946 as 'God's Will for Church and Nation', combined critique of the Nazis with a programme for social reconstruction after the war, a programme echoed in the Beveridge reports. The report recognized the difficulty in applying Christian principles in society, and took the route of 'middle axioms', which should 'exhibit the relevance of the ruling principles to the particular field of action in which guidance is needed' (p. 45). It argued that 'Economic power must be made objectively responsible to the community as a whole' (ibid., 156). The report reflected awareness of the German church struggle, numerous Church of England and ecumenical gatherings, and also the work of the Moot, an influential forum that met in Oxford and London. As well as J. H. Oldham, its founder, participants included such influential writers and theologians as Eric Fenn, H. A. Hodges, Karl Mannheim, Walter Moberly and Alec Vidler, T. S. Eliot, H. H. Farmer, Donald Mackinnon, and John Middleton Murry. In 1952 Baillie became one of the presidents of the World Council of Churches. 
Baillie's death precluded the delivery of his Gifford lectures, but they were published posthumously as 'The Sense of the Presence of God' (1962). They provided a masterly synthesis of his life's work. In them he displayed a characteristic combination of an appeal to experience with an exploration of rational grounds for belief in God. Knowledge seems to imply certitude, he argued, but often does not go beyond probabilities. Our knowledge of the realities is primary, and our knowledge of truths concerning them secondary. Moral convictions are central to human life, and 'Our total experience of reality presents itself to us as a single experience' (p. 50). Baillie also discussed procedures for verification and falsification, and argued that 'A faith that is consistent with everything possible is not a faith in anything actual' (ibid., 71), stressing that the ultimate refutation of doubts was theological and incarnational. Faith was 'an awareness of the divine presence itself, however hidden behind the veils of sense' (ibid., 89). Baillie argued that 'In the widest sense of the term all language may be said to be symbolic' (ibid., 113); but admitted that not all theological statements were analogical. Despite being known in, with, and under other realities, there is a certain directness in apprehension of God. Love of God is always related to love of neighbour, and beyond this to a new humanity. Baillie thought that it was important not to confuse dogmas with the primary perceptions of faith, and also raised the wider issue of 'Faith and the Faiths'. What does it mean to speak of salvation in a name? he asked. While there was an awareness of God in 'the pagan religions', the way of Christ was decisive. In Baillie's view, scientific and religious accounts of the world complemented one another. What others may see as coincidence, Christians will read as providential. Furthermore, gratitude was 'not only the dominant note of Christian piety, but equally the dominant motive of Christian action in the world' (ibid., 236). Propositions were necessary but not sufficient, as faith depended on trust. We have to do with 'a God whose living and active presence among us can be perceived by faith in a large variety of human contexts and situations' (ibid., 61). 
Baillie's theology, like that of his brother, remained resolutely liberal and evangelical. Sympathetic critics of each other's work and sensitive to theology in context, they could deploy arguments from various theological traditions when this seemed right. They deplored exclusivism and dogmatic narrowness. Baillie's 'strongly independent mind made him resistant to passing fashions, while his irenic spirit preferred to discover underlying unities rather than sharpen distinctions into conflicts' ('DSCHT', 50). He has been characterized as steering a middle course between American fundamentalists and modernists. A Companion of Honour from 1957, Baillie received numerous honorary doctorates, and at his death was widely regarded as the doyen of Scottish theologians. He died on 29 September 1960 at 9 Whitehouse Terrace, Edinburgh, and was buried in the city. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 40285


Bannerman, John Macdonald, Baron Bannerman of Kildonan (1901-1969), politician and rugby player, was born at 71 Seymour Street, Crossmyloof, Glasgow, on 1 September 1901, the son of John Roderick Bannerman (died 1938), who was originally from South Uist, and his wife, Mary Macdonald (died 1914/15), whose family came from the Isle of Skye. His paternal great-grandfather's family had been evicted from the Strath of Kildonan during the highland clearances. He grew up in the highland community of Glasgow, where Gaelic was the native tongue, and to all intents and purposes he regarded himself as a highlander. His father had begun his working life as a telegraph boy, but after studying at evening classes rose through the clerical ranks of the General Post Office to become its superintendent in Glasgow, in charge of several hundred men. After the mother's death when he was thirteen, Bannerman's father, who had a great knowledge of Gaelic songs and literature and organized Gaelic cultural activities in Glasgow, was a major influence on him. 
Bannerman was educated at Shawlands Academy until the age of thirteen and then at Glasgow high school, where he was captain of the rugby football fifteen (1919-20), before studying at Glasgow University; there he graduated MA and BSc in agriculture in 1926. He then spent three years on a scholarship as a postgraduate in agricultural economics, first at Balliol College, Oxford (1927-9), where he was a rugby blue, and then in the USA (1929-30), mainly at Cornell University. 
During the 1920s Bannerman was a celebrated international rugby player. A second-row forward weighing nearly 13 stone, with 'sturdy legs and well muscled shoulders' ('Memoirs', 57), he won thirty-seven consecutive caps between 1921 and 1929 and was on the winning side on twenty-five occasions. This included the golden period for Scottish rugby in the mid-1920s, when Scotland won the triple crown in 1925; in that season he played in the inaugural match at Murrayfield in which Scotland beat England for the first time since 1912. In all he made nine appearances in the Calcutta cup against England, captaining Scotland in 1929. Throughout his rugby career, in which he later became president of the Scottish Rugby Football Union, he was a strong proponent of the amateur ethos, believing strongly that the game should be primarily for players rather than spectators. 
In 1930 Bannerman became farm manager, and then factor, to James Graham, sixth duke of Montrose, the father of his Oxford friend the marquess of Graham, with the responsibility of managing the Graham estates around Loch Lomond. On 8 October 1931 he married Jenny Murray (Ray) Mundell ('b'. 1906/7), the daughter of Walter Mundell of Dalchork near Lairg in Sutherland; they had two sons and two daughters. Bannerman and Montrose were close, and their politics blended. They were Scottish patriots, though not of the republican and separatist kind found in the nationalist organizations of the late 1920s. Both had a liberal outlook, even though the duke took the tory whip in the House of Lords until 1936. It was the duke's involvement with the Scottish Party (formed in 1932 as a right-wing devolutionist counterweight to the more left-wing and separatist National Party of Scotland) that brought Bannerman into active politics. As Montrose's right-hand man, he took part in the public meetings and negotiations that eventually led to the creation of the Scottish National Party in 1934, and campaigned for John MacCormick, the party's leading figure, at Inverness-shire at the general election of 1935. 
Like the duke of Montrose, Bannerman grew disillusioned with nationalist politics in the 1930s as interminable arguments about policy and strategy, coupled with poor discipline and organization, blocked electoral progress. Both men ended up in the Liberal Party, Bannerman being adopted as prospective candidate for the Conservative-held seat of Argyll in 1938. When a by-election for the seat arose in 1940, Conservatives in Argyll held out the prospect that he might run as a National Liberal, but negotiations broke down and he decided not to contest the election. At the general election of 1945 he stood for Argyll as a Liberal but came a poor third behind the Conservatives and Labour, a result which was repeated when he stood for the combined Scottish universities at a by-election in 1946. He was unsuccessful in four contests for Inverness (1950, 1954, 1955, and 1959), though he pushed up the Liberal vote (in 1955 he cut the Conservative majority to below 1000) and established a credible Liberal presence in the constituency. He narrowly failed to win Paisley against Labour at a by-election in 1961, but was defeated by an increased margin when he stood for the same seat at the general election of 1964, his final electoral contest. 
Bannerman was chairman of the Scottish Liberal Party between 1956 and 1965, presiding over a period of improved fortunes for the organization. He did much to reinforce a distinctive identity for the party north of the border. Following his lead, the party reaffirmed its commitment to Scottish home rule at a time when both the tories and Labour opposed devolution. He was also keen to promote rural issues and highlight the concerns of small-town Scotland. Stress was laid on the need to have good candidates familiar with the locality where they were standing. The strategy paid dividends as, during his period as chairman, the Liberal Party in Scotland increased the number of parliamentary seats which it contested from five to twenty-six, while the number of its MPs rose from one to five, and its membership was boosted. In 1965 he became joint president of the party. 
Bannerman ceased to be the duke of Montrose's factor in 1952 in order to concentrate on his own farming interests. He was appointed OBE in 1952 for his services to the Festival of Britain. In 1957 he was elected rector of Aberdeen University. A member of the Forestry Commission from 1942 to 1957 and an active commentator on highland affairs (he was president of An Comunn Galdhealach, the highland association of Scotland), he helped to promote the Highlands and Islands Development Board, which was established in 1965. He broadcast Gaelic programmes on BBC Scotland, regularly appeared on the radio discussion programme 'Matter of Opinion', and took part in fireside ceilidhs on Scottish television. 
In December 1967 Bannerman was created a life peer. He used his position in the House of Lords to promote Scottish home rule and the welfare of the highlands and rural communities. One controversial issue was his refusal to vote with the Liberal Party for the renewal of sanctions against Rhodesia, as his old Oxford friend, now the seventh duke of Montrose, was a member of Ian Smith's cabinet. He died at Tidworth, Hampshire, on 10 May 1969. His daughter (Janet) Ray Michie (1934-2008) became a leading Scottish Liberal politician, and was herself made a life peer in 2001. 


@@@@@


doc= 40286


Barr, James (1862-1949), minister of the United Free Church of Scotland and politician, was born on 26 July 1862 at Beanscroft Farm in the parish of Fenwick, Ayrshire, the eldest of eight children born to Allan Barr, farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth Brown. James, or Jimmy, was educated at the local subscription school at Waterside in Fenwick, and then at Kilmarnock Academy, where he was dux in 1879. That same year he entered Glasgow University, where he enjoyed a glittering period as an undergraduate winning numerous prizes and medals, and graduating MA in 1884 with a joint first in moral philosophy and logic. 
After a year touring North America recuperating from a breakdown, Barr took up a scholarship at Trinity College, Glasgow, the college of the United Free Church, to study for the ministry. His first charge was at Johnstone and Wamphray Free Church in his native Ayrshire, which he took up in 1889 and where, a year later, he married Martha Wilson Stephen (1863-1959), a member of his old church in Kilmarnock and with whom he had five children. In 1896 he moved to Glasgow, first at Dennistoun Free Church and then, in 1907, he took charge of St Mary's in Govan, home of Clyde shipyards and other heavy industries, a position which he held until 1920, when he became secretary of the Home Mission Board of the United Free Church. 
Barr brought an evangelical fervour and social commitment to his ministries. He introduced a more informal style to church services and was determined to reach those who did not attend regular worship; at St Mary's he established a 'Men's Own' society which was successful in attracting working men. He was active in the Liberal cause as early as the 1892 general election, seeing in Liberalism the vehicle for realizing disestablishment, temperance, home rule for Scotland, and the taxation of land values. A member of local school boards in Ayrshire, he was first elected to the Glasgow school board in 1903 and was returned in subsequent elections, topping the poll in 1910. His work in education and his general outlook brought him closer to the labour movement and in 1913 he was honoured by the boilermakers on Clydeside for his efforts on their behalf in the lock-out of 1910. Official recognition was bestowed on him in 1914 when he was invited onto the royal commission on the housing of the industrial population of Scotland, the 'Report' of which (1917) was significant in promoting state involvement in the provision of housing. 
In 1919 Barr was appointed to lead a national campaign by all temperance groups in support of prohibition, though the local veto poll of 1920 was a major disappointment as a clear majority voted for 'no change' rather than 'no licence'. However the issue brought him closer to the Independent Labour Party, which he joined in 1920. In 1924 he was elected Labour MP for Motherwell. He was not unique among Presbyterian ministers in embracing socialism, but he was certainly in a small minority, as most were strongly antagonistic to Labour. Moreover, he also spoke out clearly against the anti-Irish prejudices so noticeable in the protestant churches at this time; his victory at Motherwell had been against a sitting 'Orange and protestant' MP. A founder and past president of the Scottish Home Rule Association, he introduced in 1927 a 'Home Rule Bill' for Scotland, the failure of which (and a similar bill in 1924) helped stimulate the formation of the nationalist movement in Scotland. As chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party he loyally supported MacDonald and Snowden throughout the crisis of 1931, though he had misgivings that the government had sold out to the bankers. The formation of the National Government, however, proved the breaking point for him. He was defeated in the general election of October 1931, though he was returned in November 1935 for Coatbridge, which he held until his retirement in June 1945. 
Barr controversially led the minority of the United Free Church against union with the Church of Scotland in 1929. He was in favour of unity but not at the price of the continuing establishment of church and state, and he became the first moderator of the United Free Church (Continuing), a position he held again in 1943. His writings on church questions included 'The Scottish Church Question' (1920), 'The United Free Church of Scotland' (1934), and 'The Scottish Covenanters' (1946). One of his sons became professor of 'New Testament' literature and exegesis, and his daughter Elizabeth Brown Barr (1905-1995) became the first woman to be ordained as a Presbyterian minister in Scotland. 
Barr remained committed to his principles throughout his life, a trait which sat uneasily with the compromises demanded of a parliamentary politician. But in his life and work he embodied much of Scottish history and society. His own family was steeped in the traditions of the covenanters, he was a great enthusiast for Burns, he was a pacifist actively opposed to the South African War and the First World War, even though his three sons joined up and one died in the latter. He was an ardent supporter of home rule and prohibition, and just as ardently opposed to capital punishment. He believed in free education for all and, while a member of the Glasgow school board, supported the efforts which led in 1913 to the establishment of a chair in Scottish history and literature at Glasgow University. He opposed fascism and communism (see his book 'Religious Liberty in Totalitarian States: the Challenge to the Church of Communism, Fascism, Nazism', 1938). He supported Chamberlain over Munich and even in November 1939 was calling for a negotiated peace. He did not oppose the war but was not an enthusiastic supporter, and found his role in serving as convener of the committee on the position of conscientious objectors. 
As befits the son of a 'bonnet laird', Barr has been described as looking like a farmer: a tall, brawny man and a powerful speaker. He died at 75 Clouston Street, Glasgow, on 24 February 1949 and was buried in his home parish of Fenwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 40287


Bilsland, (Alexander) Steven, Baron Bilsland (1892-1970), banker and Scottish business leader, was born on 13 September 1892, at 28 Park Circus, Glasgow, second but only surviving son of Sir William Bilsland, first baronet (1847-1921), and his wife, Agnes Ann Steven (died 1935). His father was a rich baker, who received a baronetcy (1907) during his lord provostship of Glasgow. 
Steven Bilsland was educated in Glasgow, and at St John's College, Cambridge, of which he became an honorary fellow (1956). During the First World War he was a captain in the Cameronians (8th battalion the Scottish Rifles), served on the staff, and was awarded the MC. In the immediate post-war period he was a director of Gray, Dunn & Co., biscuit manufacturers, and of the private banking firm of Bilsland Brothers. In 1921 he succeeded to the baronetcy, and afterwards became chairman of the family bank. 
During the early 1920s Bilsland joined the boards of the Union Bank, the Glasgow Stockholders Trust, and the Scottish Amicable Life Insurance Society. He was a caring capitalist, who felt responsible for promoting the good of others, and constantly supported projects to further Scottish economic progress. He served on the advisory board of Credit for Industry, formed in 1934 as a subsidiary of the Union Dominion Trust to provide finance of up to $50,000. In 1938 he advocated the establishment of a Scottish Development Finance Corporation to provide, in conjunction with Scottish banks, funding and constructive ideas for businesses, but this idea was resisted by other bankers. Bilsland was, however, involved in founding the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation set up to invest in smaller companies, and remedy the Macmillan gap (1945). As chairman of the Union Bank he negotiated its merger (1950-52) with the Bank of Scotland, of which he became deputy governor (1955) and governor (1957-66). He also rose to be chairman of the Glasgow Stockholders' Trust and president of Scottish Amicable. 
In 1922 Bilsland married Amy Janet (died 1979), only daughter of David Colville, iron and steel master; the marriage was childless, and Bilsland was ebullient, kind, and attentive with children. His sister Agnes (1890-1970) had previously married Amy's cousin David John Colville, afterwards first Baron Clydesmuir. As a result of these connections he was a director of Colvilles Ltd, steel makers (1937-65), with a special interest in finance. He joined the boards of John Brown & Co., Clydebank shipbuilders, and in 1947 of Burmah Oil, where the chairman relied on his common-sense assessment of new proposals and strategic policy. 
Intent on reducing Scottish unemployment Bilsland, together with Sir James Lithgow and Lord Elgin, promoted the Scottish Development Council in 1931. He was also an influential member of the Scottish Council on Industry. When these two bodies were combined as the Scottish Council (Development and Industry), Bilsland was first chairman of the executive committee (1946-55) and president from 1946. He often represented the council in the USA, where he received the medal of freedom and honorary foreign membership of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. His mantle at the Scottish Council was assumed by his nephew Ronald John Bilsland Colville, second Baron Clydesmuir, who admired him deeply. 
In the early 1920s Bilsland became a director of Workmen's Dwelling Company Ltd; later, as first chairman of Scottish Industrial Estates Ltd (1937-55), and of Lanarkshire Industrial Estates (1938-55), he pioneered industrial estates as a way of stimulating new industries in Scotland. Bilsland's association with this work led to his honorary associateship of the Royal Institute of British Architects. 
Bilsland was president of Glasgow chamber of commerce (1933-5), honorary colonel of 57th Searchlight regiment of the Royal Artillery, and district commissioner for civil defence in western Scotland, responsible for organizing 60 per cent of the Scottish population (1940-44). He was a Glasgow magistrate (1927), deputy lieutenant for Inverness-shire (1942), a member of the queen's bodyguard for Scotland, received honorary degrees from the universities of Glasgow (1948) and Aberdeen (1956), and the freedom of Aberdeen (1956). He was created Baron Bilsland, of Kinrara, Inverness-shire (31 January 1950) and became a knight of the Order of the Thistle in 1955. He died after a stroke, at his home, 69 Kelvin Court, Glasgow, on 10 December 1970. His hereditary titles became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 40288


Blake, George (1893-1961), novelist, was born on 28 October 1893 at 60 Forsyth Street, Greenock, Renfrewshire, the fourth child of Matthew Blake, manufacturer of sugar machinery, and his wife, Ursula Scott McCulloch. He was educated at Greenock Academy and studied law at Glasgow University until the outbreak of the First World War. He served in the forces and was wounded at Gallipoli. After the war he entered journalism and wrote for the Glasgow 'Evening News', then edited by the novelist Neil Munro. He married Eliza (Ellie) Malcolm Lawson in 1923, and they had two sons and a daughter. 
In 1924 Blake moved to London, where he edited two literary magazines and in 1930 became a director of the publisher Faber and Faber. He was involved in running the Porpoise Press, Edinburgh (which published Neil M. Gunn's 'Morning Tide' in 1931) as a subsidiary of Faber. He returned to Scotland in 1932 and lived successively in Helensburgh, Dunbartonshire, Dollar, Clackmannanshire, and Glasgow. 
Blake wrote more than twenty novels and many non-fiction works. The autobiographical 'Down to the Sea' (1937) demonstrated his lifelong interest in the Clyde and its shipping. His melodramatic first novel, 'Mince Collop Close' (1923), preceded more mature work in 'Young Malcolm' (1926) and 'The Path of Glory' (1929), which drew on his First World War experiences. 'The Shipbuilders' (1935), which contrasts the fates of a shipowner and a manual worker during the depression on Clydeside, attracted much attention and was filmed, although some later critics detect a patronizing attitude towards its working-class characters. Blake himself came to believe that he 'had failed with his proletarians... and found his right subject among the 'bourgeoisie'' (Blake, 32) when he went on to write a popular series of novels set in Garvel, a fictionalized Greenock. 'Late Harvest' (1938) is also set during the depression years, while 'The Constant Star' (1945) and 'The Westering Sun' (1946) depict the rise and fall of middle-class shipbuilding and shipowning dynasties. The Garvel novels are accurate in historical and social detail, but have not generally been highly regarded as works of literature. 
Blake, described as 'a thickset, battering-ram of a man, with a frowning brow and unruly hair' (Reid), was a frequent radio broadcaster and published much literary journalism. He assessed the Scottish kailyard school generously but honestly in 'Barrie and the Kailyard School' (1951). His death from a cerebral haemorrhage in the Southern General Hospital, Glasgow, on 29 August 1961 was followed by a private funeral. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 40290


Boyd, Edward (1916-1989), playwright and scriptwriter, was born on 11 May 1916 at 5 Townhead Street, Stevenston, Ayrshire, probably the eldest of four children known to have been born to Samuel Joseph Boyd, dynamite worker (whose father, Edward, was from co. Antrim, Ireland), and his wife, Mary Chapman Gardiner (died 'c'.1925). When Eddie was seven his younger twin brothers died at three months; two years on, first another brother and then his mother died of diphtheria within twelve hours of each other. 
After attending Ardrossan Academy, at fifteen Boyd went to London with 1's'. 2died in his pocket, and spent four nights sleeping on a bench on the Embankment and several months in a home for the destitute. While in London he wrote a short story entitled 'Home is the sailor', later accepted by the 'Manchester Guardian'. He received a cheque for 3 guineas, which he did not know how to cash. He served in the Royal Air Force from September 1939 to November 1945, as what he called their 'worst navigator' (Davidson). During the war years he married, but no details of the union are known; he called it 'a fleeting piece of war-time frivolity' (Davidson). After the war he worked as a part-time editor for Collins, and became involved with the left-wing Unity Theatre in Glasgow as stage manager, actor, and producer, beginning an enduring association with the actor Roddy McMillan. On 9 September 1948 he married Kathleen Maxwell or Donaldson ('b'. 1924/5), actress, daughter of Joseph Harrison Maxwell, school teacher, with whom he had a daughter, Susan. After fourteen years the marriage ended acrimoniously. He lived with his third wife, Catherine Cassidy Thomson ('b'. 1946), college lecturer, daughter of William Thomson, iron moulder, for twenty years, and had a second daughter, Rachel (the union was formalized on 24 September 1987). 
For most of his career Boyd was a freelance writer, who became associated with BBC radio in Scotland and worked for four years as a contract writer with Granada Television. His radio career began with the acclaimed play 'The Candle of Darkness' (1954). In the 1960s he wrote a crime drama, 'The Odd Man' (1962), which was much admired, and a surreal thriller, 'The Corridor People' (1966), which was likened to 'The Avengers' and 'The Prisoner'. Both were for Granada. His script of 'Robbery' (1967), a film starring Stanley Baker, was a co-winner of the Screen Writers' Guild award. In 1971 he was praised for his radio play 'The Wolf Far Hence'. A one-off television drama entitled 'Good Morning Yesterday' led to his most celebrated work, the BBC series 'The View from Daniel Pyke' (1971-3), in which Roddy McMillan excelled as a superficially tough Glaswegian private detective. In 1978 Boyd had further success with a television adaptation of John Buchan's 'Huntingtower'. 
Boyd was inspired by the blues and 'film noir'. Recalling Raymond Chandler, he said that he wanted to create art 'where it is least expected' (Davidson). A tall, stooped figure with the face of a Roman Stoic but with the learning of an erudite anarchist, he had a sense of humour at once dry and surreal, and a reputation for being both outspoken and enigmatic. The care and psychological depth he brought to the atmospheric thriller exercised a considerable influence on Scottish writing. He continued to write and to express independent views (including the view that Scottish theatre was dead) until the end of his life. Following several years of poor health he suffered a stroke in his home at 23 Hillhead Street, Glasgow, and died in Gartnavel General Hospital on 17 December 1989. 


@@@@@


doc= 40293


Cameron, Sir John, Lord Cameron (1900-1996), judge, was born on 8 February 1900 in Edinburgh, the son of John Cameron, solicitor at the Supreme Court, and his wife, Wilhelmina Louise Wilson. Known as Jock, he was educated at Edinburgh Academy from 1911 to 1917; in his final year he was dux (top classical scholar). Notably well read, Cameron won prizes, mainly in classics, and was active in the debating society. The First World War interrupted his passage to university and in 1917, after a brief period as a private in the Edinburgh University officer training corps, he served in the Royal Navy, taking part in a minor Baltic campaign as a probationary midshipman on destroyers. 
In 1919 Cameron entered Edinburgh University and obtained an MA degree in classics and history. Subsequently he gained an LLB degree with distinction, and was admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in 1924. Specializing in criminal work, he served as advocate-depute, the equivalent in Scotland of a crown prosecutor, from 1929 until 1936, the year in which he became a king's counsel. Cameron showed great skill with civil and criminal juries, and cross-examined witnesses with 'deceptive art', the phrase used by Lord John Wheatley, later lord justice clerk, who was devilling for Cameron at the time. On one occasion in the 1930s, when capital punishment was still common in Scotland, Cameron was defending in a murder trial and asked the key prosecution witness in a kindly tone what happened to people convicted of murder. The witness replied, with the smile of a simpleton, that he thought they would get the tawse -- the strap used in Scottish schools. The point was made. The court fell silent. Cameron's client was acquitted. 
In 1927 Cameron married Eileen Dorothea (died 1943), daughter of H. M. Burrell; they had two daughters and a son, Kenneth (later Lord Cameron of Lochbroom, lord advocate in Margaret Thatcher's government from 1984 to 1989, and a judge like his father). In the late 1930s Cameron came increasingly to detest Hitler and fascism. In 1938 he signed up for the Royal Naval Volunteer Supplementary Reserve, in which he served during the Second World War. In 1940 he was in charge of one of the last craft to escape from Dunkirk before the Germans arrived, and manoeuvred his coastal motor boat, which carried a full load of prominent generals, at full speed astern through a narrow channel. He was mentioned in dispatches for this exploit and in 1944, as a lieutenant-commander, was awarded the DSC for his 'gallantry, skill, and determination and undaunted devotion to duty' during the allied landings in Normandy. 
Cameron's wife died in 1943 while he was at sea, and on 4 November 1944 he married her friend Iris Eunice ('b'. 1913/14), daughter of Eric Alfred Henry of the India and Burma imperial police, and widow of Lambert C. Shepherd. They enjoyed an exceptionally happy marriage for the remainder of his life. 
On demobilization in 1945 Cameron was appointed sheriff of Inverness, Elgin, and Nairn, and from 1946 to 1948 he held the successor sheriffdom of Inverness, Elgin, Moray, Nairn, and Ross and Cromarty. Having been elected by his contemporaries dean of the Faculty of Advocates (leader of the Scottish bar) in 1948, he was knighted in 1954 and in 1955 appointed a senator of the college of justice and a lord of session. He presided over some of the most high-profile trials of the day, including that of Peter Manuel -- an armed robber convicted in 1958 of killing seven people -- whom he sentenced to death. 
Alongside his work on the bench, Cameron was extremely active in public service. On leaving the navy he became chairman of the legal aid committee in Scotland; he was involved in numerous industrial inquiries, including the feasibility of the dock labour scheme in 1948. He chaired a three-man commission into the rioting in Northern Ireland in 1969, which found many of the Catholic grievances justified. His service as chairman of the Highlands and Islands Development Consultative Council was part of a lifelong interest in the north-west of Scotland, where his ancestors originated. In 1978 he was appointed a knight of the Thistle, probably the first serving judge to receive that honour. 
The sea remained among Cameron's many interests -- he was honorary commodore of the Forth Yacht Club -- but he also supported the arts in Scotland, as a member of the Edinburgh festival council, chairman of the Edinburgh Concert Society, and a supporter of Edinburgh music and theatre. He was an amateur artist and a collector of pictures. A large, impressive figure, Cameron was a sociable man with 'swept-back hair and a face full of character' ('Daily Telegraph'). He had many friends and a reputation for hospitality and good humour: 'He sang songs, enjoyed mimicking his stuffier colleagues, and relished intelligent conversation and the exchange of ideas' (ibid.). While chairing the committee on the law of contempt, which had been set up in June 1971, Cameron recounted the story of how an egg had been thrown at Vice-Chancellor Mallins. 'He is said to have remarked that he presumed it was intended for his brother Bacon, who was sitting in an adjoining court' ('The Independent'). He died on 30 May 1996 at his home, 28 Moray Place, Edinburgh; he was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 40298


Cormack, John (1894-1978), protestant agitator and local politician, was born on 7 July 1894 in Edinburgh, the eldest child of the four sons and three daughters of Donald Cormack (1865-1937), a clerk and former soldier, and his wife, Mary McPhail ('c'.1870-1951). The family moved to Liverpool for a time but returned to Edinburgh, where Cormack had an elementary school education. He enlisted in 1909 as a boy soldier, serving in his father's regiment, the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders. 
Cormack remained for thirteen years in the army, survived First World War service in France, and was in the Rhineland army of occupation, and then in Ireland during the Anglo-Irish war (the 'troubles'). In October 1918 he married Mary Ross -- they had three daughters and a son, but the marriage broke up in the early 1930s -- and took his discharge as corporal in 1922. He probably held higher acting rank earlier and was also a drum major. He returned to Edinburgh, where he worked as a Post Office sorter and driver for ten years until suspended after allegations (which he said were malicious) of stealing postal orders. No charges followed and wrangling ensued, but he lost his job. 
Cormack's leisure activities made him a controversial figure. His father was a Baptist whose lay preaching included meetings on the Mound, then Edinburgh's speakers' corner. Although the emphasis was evangelical there were occasional confrontations with Roman Catholics, whose controversialists also pitched their pulpits there. John Cormack developed his own militancy, joining the fringe of a widespread Scottish protestant movement in which new anxieties were grafted on to the traditional doctrinally based hostility to the Roman church. One of these was demographic alarm at Irish immigration, another dislike of the 1918 'Education Act' by which the state assumed responsibility for Catholic education but allowed the hierarchy considerable influence. But closest to Cormack's experience was resentment at the perceived alliance of the Roman church and Sinn Fein which he had witnessed in the Irish troubles. The Argylls, whose turbulent beat included the Knock pilgrimage, resented the hostility they faced from priests and seminary students. 
Cormack developed a taste for historical and theological polemic, enlivened with denunciations of priestly delinquencies. He joined the Scottish Protestant League, a vehicle for protest driven by the unstable Alexander Ratcliffe, but seceded in 1930. In 1933 he was co-founder of the Protestant Action Society, and joined an Orange lodge, though he was intermittently at odds with that movement. Cormack combined leadership and 'loner' qualities. He deployed effective techniques of oratory and demagoguery, adaptable to indoor or outdoor use and displayed on the Mound for thirty years. During the 1930s his meetings provoked confrontation, especially among those who came to be provoked. In 1935 he led protests in Edinburgh against a Roman Catholic young men's conference and a eucharistic congress. These brought tens of thousands to the streets, as protesters and spectators, and involved turbulence, intimidation, and violent clashes. He also used his position on the city council, after his election for North Leith in 1934, to oppose the granting of the freedom of Edinburgh to the Australian prime minister, Joseph Lyons, and the American ambassador Joseph Kennedy, carrying protests from the council chamber to the ceremonies themselves. He campaigned on education and the replacement of Catholic municipal workers by unemployed protestants, though his causes also included slum clearance, nurses' pay, and a civic airport. 
It was remarkable that such protests should flourish not only on Clydeside, with its sectarian traditions, but in Edinburgh, where the Roman Catholic minority represented only 9 per cent of the population and the dominant middle-class protestantism was hostile to all demonstrative militancy. Cormack's success, most evident when Protestant Action took 31 per cent of votes in the Edinburgh local elections in 1936, perhaps reflected an Edinburgh working-class search for a cause of its own, at a time when it was less affected by socialism than most of urban Scotland. It also reflected the economic frustrations and political styles of the 1930s. 
But the tide of protestant militancy, also evident in Glasgow, soon ebbed. Ratcliffe's personal cult, which also moved towards antisemitism, decayed rapidly. Cormack lost his council seat in 1937, though he was returned for South Leith in 1938. He remained a councillor (and a phenomenon) until his retirement in 1962. The ill will he provoked in his prime surrounded him into the war years. The Roman Catholic archbishop unsuccessfully urged the Scottish Office to act against him for the alleged incitement by him of attacks on Italian businesses in 1940, a charge of which he was innocent, though he denounced Italian as well as Irish Catholicism and was hostile to Poles, even when they were allies. However, Cormack was insulated from Nazism and fascism, as well as communism and Scottish nationalism. He was not antisemitic, but he sympathized with Jews as victims of the Inquisition. His suspicion that 'once a Catholic, always a Catholic' (irritating protestant campaigners working with former monks and disillusioned priests) extended to Hitler and Mussolini. 
Cormack failed to become Leith's MP when he stood as an independent candidate at the general election of 1945, coming last with under 2500 votes out of a total poll of over 32,000. Thereafter he mellowed and concentrated on developing the substance and image of robust independence. On Edinburgh corporation he was a one-man party, co-operating with the ruling progressives (Conservatives, Liberals, and right-wing independents, Roman Catholics among them). He became health convener and a bailie, and was also a magistrate, achieving a kind of aldermanic status, though later than his seniority suggested. Militancy, isolation, and perhaps his plebeian origins excluded him in 1950s Edinburgh from the possibility of becoming lord provost. His personal credit was raised by his advocacy of Leith interests and his exemplary fairness on the magistrates' bench, together with a reputation (which his simple lifestyle, in a modest flat, bore out) for eschewing personal advantage. Now a dormant volcano, he became a local worthy. The Catholic historian of protestant protest described his transition 'from ogre to institution' (Gallagher, 159). Heart trouble in 1964 silenced his oratory. He died in Edinburgh on 17 June 1978 and was cremated at Warriston, Edinburgh, on 20 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 40301


Crawfurd, Helen (1877-1954), suffragette and communist, was born at 175 Cumberland Street, Glasgow, on 9 November 1877, the fourth of seven children of William Jack, a prosperous master baker, and his wife, Helen Kyle. Her parents had been married in Glasgow in 1872, but Helen spent most of her childhood in Ipswich, and returned with her family to Glasgow only at the age of seventeen when her schooling finished. 
Helen's political education was fostered by the involvement of her parents with the Conservative Party; both occupied platform seats at the large Conservative Party meetings in Ipswich and her father represented tory interests in his union, the Operative Bakers' Association. The family's political discussions were combined with religious fervour. William Jack was a strict Presbyterian, in the Church of Scotland, and his wife was a devout Methodist. Their Glasgow upbringing encouraged a strong antipathy towards Irish Catholics. Helen read the 'Bible' avidly and also attended evangelical Sunday school meetings in Glasgow. On 19 September 1898 Helen married a widower, the Revd Alexander Montgomery Crawfurd (1829/30-1914), a staunch campaigner for temperance reform in Scotland and an opponent of militarism. 
Against this background Helen developed an early interest in the women's movement. Inspired by Josephine Butler's works on the 'Contagious Disease Act' of 1867, she joined the suffrage movement about 1900 and lent her burgeoning debating skills to group discussions on sexual inequality and political and educational discrimination. In 1910 she joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), formed seven years earlier to secure the franchise for women, and she soon became a proponent of the militant tactics adopted by the Pankhursts. In 1912 she was sentenced to one month's imprisonment in Holloway gaol in London for smashing the windows of the residence of the Liberal minister of education in Piccadilly. She was given the same penalty in Glasgow in the following year, for a similar attack on the army recruiting office and for fighting with police at a meeting attended by Mrs Emmeline Pankhurst at St Andrew's Hall. This gave rise to her first hunger strike, which lasted for eight days before she was released under the so-called 'Cat and Mouse Act' -- the 'Prisoners (Temporary Discharge for Ill-Health) Act' of 1913. Hardened by these experiences, before the First World War Helen Crawfurd became one of the most popular speakers in the Scottish suffragette movement. She continued to campaign and to suffer imprisonment, most notoriously for her alleged responsibility for a bomb explosion at Glasgow Botanic Gardens in the summer of 1914. On each occasion she used the hunger-strike technique for propaganda purposes, buoyed up other female prisoners such as Sylvia Pankhurst. She left the WSPU soon after the outbreak of the war, however, owing to its pro-war position. 
As with many other women in this period Crawfurd's feminist efforts merged with socialist principles. Her political awareness was influenced partly by the radical plays of Henrik Ibsen, George Bernard Shaw, Maksim Gorky, and others performed by the Glasgow repertory theatre. She was also deeply affected by the disparity in living standards of people in the slums of Glasgow compared with those of Ipswich's inhabitants. 'These skilled creators of the city's wealth were living in squalor, in houses unfit for human beings', she wrote in her memoirs. 'I began to think there must be something wrong with a system that could allow this' (Memoirs, 29). Although she had in the course of her married life gradually rebelled against much of her religious upbringing, because of the perceived low status accorded women in the 'Bible', Crawfurd held on to the scripture's egalitarian pronouncements to produce a form of Christian socialism. In 1914 she joined the Independent Labour Party (ILP). 
During the First World War, Crawfurd established herself as a national political figure. This was based on her leading role in the anti-war movement and her activities to improve Glasgow's housing for the working classes. In November 1915 she and Agnes Dollan, a close friend and fellow suffragette, established the Glasgow branch of the Women's International League -- a predominantly middle-class pressure group opposed to the war, without party affiliations. In June 1917 they helped to form the Women's Peace Crusade, with Crawfurd as honorary secretary, in order to forge a more working-class and militant opposition to militarism. The two women also worked together in the Glasgow rent strikes of 1915. As secretary of the Glasgow Women's Housing Association, Crawfurd became a high-profile figure in urging housewives at mass rallies in Govan and Partick to resist rent increases. This resulted in the 'Rent Restriction Act' in December 1915 and, along the way, Crawfurd's forging of strong links with the shop stewards' movement. 
A measure of Crawfurd's increased standing was her appointment as vice-chairman of the Scottish divisional council of the ILP in 1918. In the immediate aftermath of the war, however, she grew increasingly disillusioned with what she saw as the ILP's lack of radicalism, and she was attracted instead by the movement to set up a British Communist Party, headed by Tom Bell and Arthur MacManus. Initially she worked to establish a communist faction within the ILP and travelled in her official capacity as a visitor to Moscow in July 1920 to attend the Second Congress of the Third Communist International. There she met a number of friends, including Sylvia Pankhurst and Willie Gallacher. During her stay she even managed to interview Lenin, who spoke of recruiting women into the Communist Party. 
When the vote for the affiliation of the ILP to the Communist International was rejected at the national conference of the ILP in 1920, Crawfurd left to join the recently established Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB). She was appointed to the executive committee within a year and concentrated from the outset on increasing female membership in the party. Her propaganda expertise led to her editing a separate women's page in the CPGB's official newspaper, the 'Communist', and a part in the creation of the 'Sunday Worker', which disseminated left-wing views in the labour movement. 
Throughout the 1920s Crawfurd's political activities ranged further afield. In 1922 she became secretary of the Workers' International Relief Organisation, formed to assist economically distressed areas such as the Volga province in Russia. Her international reputation as a political organizer grew as she visited countries such as Ireland, where she supported the quest for home rule, and Germany, where in 1924 she addressed an audience of 10,000 people on behalf of the German Communist Party. She also helped to set up a number of international trade union and socialist conferences, such as the League Against Imperialism in Brussels in 1927. Following several further visits to Russia, Crawfurd consistently expressed loyal admiration for Stalinism, dismissing the Trotskyists as 'disgruntled elements' (Memoirs, 341). At home she gave active support to the 1926 general strike in terms of food distribution and speeches. She also stood (unsuccessfully) as a Communist candidate in general elections: first in 1929, for the Bothwell division of Lanarkshire, where she polled 1677 votes; and second in 1931 for North Aberdeen, obtaining 3980 votes. 
During the 1930s Crawfurd was closely associated with the Communist Party's front organization, Friends of the Soviet Union. However, she switched the bulk of her attention to fighting the spread of fascism in Europe. In 1933 she became honorary secretary of two committees to combat fascism and antisemitism in Scotland, and in 1938 she organized the Peace and Empire Congress which sought to launch a co-ordinated peace movement throughout the British Commonwealth. When war broke out, like many members of the CPGB her stance was somewhat ambiguous. Answering critics who argued that the Communist Party only supported Britain's war effort when Germany attacked Russia in 1941, she retorted that her fellow communists had to be convinced that Britain was prepared to fight fascism and not to co-operate with it (Memoirs, 374). Her ambivalence was perhaps illustrated by her retirement during the war to a cottage in Dunoon. 
Helen Crawfurd was tall and robust and renowned for wearing stark, black dresses at public meetings. A personal assessment of her career as a feminist and leading radical was made by a fellow party member, who praised her high intelligence and sterling character as a militant and fighter. 'A fluent speaker and sympathetic personality', wrote Tom Bell, 'she is just as at home addressing a meeting of thousands as she is in conversation with the working class housewife... Had she been self seeking and opportunist I feel certain she could have been among the first women members of Parliament' (Bell, 258). 
Crawfurd's last years included a two-year stint as Dunoon's first woman councillor, immediately after the end of the war, and she continued her commitment to the communist cause through the establishment of a local discussion group on Marxist literature. Having lost her first husband in 1914, she married a steel-master and CPGB member from Coatbridge, George Anderson (died 1951). She died childless at her home, Mahson Cottage, Kilbride Avenue, Dunoon, on 18 April 1954. 


@@@@@


doc= 40302


Cruickshank, Helen Burness (1886-1975), poet, was born on 15 May 1886 in a staff house at Sunnyside Mental Hospital, Hillside, Forfarshire, the youngest of the three children of George Cruickshank (1845-1924), a hospital attendant at Sunnyside, and his wife, Sarah (1850-1940), a domestic servant, daughter of Colin Gibb Wood, master plumber, of Montrose. She had a happy country childhood and later attributed her facility for writing in Scots to her upbringing in Forfarshire, the home of a rich and natural dialect. Annual family holidays in Glenesk gave her a taste for walking and climbing that she later pursued on long trips in the highlands and islands. 
Cruickshank was educated at Hillside village school, which she entered at the early age of four, and at Montrose Academy, where she won prizes in every subject. Since her father was unable to afford university fees she left school at fifteen, and entered the civil service in 1903. Cruickshank remained a civil servant for over forty years -- until her retirement, on medical grounds, at the end of 1944 -- holding various clerical and administrative posts, first in London and later in Edinburgh, where she was for many years an executive officer for the Department of Health in Scotland. While in London she was active in promoting better pay for women and women's suffrage. She moved to Edinburgh in 1912 and began to write poetry about this time. In 1921 she acquired a studio flat, where for a few years she enjoyed a pleasantly bohemian life, beginning to publish her poetry and developing her interest in the arts. She never married but two love affairs (the partners are not named) are cited in her memoirs as the inspiration for two of her best-known poems, 'There was a Sang' and 'Shy Geordie'. 
On her father's death, in 1924, it was assumed that Cruickshank, the only daughter of the family, would provide a home for her mother. She bought a semi-detached villa, Dinnieduff, in the village of Corstorphine (later a suburb of Edinburgh), where she lived for the rest of her life. 'I had regained a mother but lost my freedom... On the whole my mother and I achieved a working synthesis of living together' (Cruickshank, 60, 62). 
Cruickshank wrote in both Scots and English (she considered her Scots poetry stronger -- probably an accurate assessment), often in lyrical or ballad mode but sometimes experimenting with metre and form in a thoughtful examination of experience and identity. Her first collection was published in 1934, and only two further volumes, together with 'Collected Poems', appeared during her lifetime. She regarded herself as a minor poet, and was certainly overshadowed by the male writers of her day, but twenty-five years after her death her work and influence had yet to be fully evaluated. 
Cruickshank's interests centred on Scotland, its problems and politics, and especially its culture. Though debarred from political activity during her civil service career, she became a committed Scottish nationalist. She was a founder member and secretary (taking over from the founder, the poet Hugh MacDiarmid) of the Scottish Centre of International PEN (1927), a founder member of the Saltire Society (1936), and an enthusiast for the Edinburgh International Festival from its beginning in 1947. A striking if not conventionally beautiful woman, with an 'astringent and sometimes bawdy' sense of humour (Lochhead), she maintained a busy social life in spite of the demands of work and home and, later, health problems. Invited to a cocktail party at a time when retirement had seriously reduced her income, she found a scarlet pram-cover in the village shop, converted it into a stole, and wore it over a slim, black dress. 'I was told it looked smashing' (Cruickshank, 125). 
Cruickshank is particularly remembered for her hospitality at Dinnieduff, where she kept open house for the writers of the Scottish literary renaissance movement of the 1920s and 1930s, including such major figures as Hugh MacDiarmid and the novelist Lewis Grassic Gibbon. She has been called 'a catalyst of the Scottish Renaissance' and a 'handmaid of the Scottish muse'. Yet she disliked such patronizing terms, including 'poetess', and they undervalue her contribution to Scottish literature. 
After her mother's death Cruickshank lived alone, and in spite of deteriorating health was able to remain in her own home until the age of eighty-eight. On medical advice she moved into an Edinburgh nursing home -- Queensberry Lodge, 105 Holyrood Road -- in November 1974, and died there on 2 March 1975. A cremation service, which she had herself planned in detail, was held at Warriston, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 40303


Dalrymple, James (1859-1934), tramway manager, was born on 15 September 1859 at 3 Gaskill Street, Charlton upon Medlock, Lancashire, the son of James Dalrymple, a draper, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Adams. His family was Scottish and in 1864 moved to Gatehouse of Fleet, Kirkcudbrightshire, where Dalrymple attended school until the age of fourteen and afterwards worked at the Union Bank. In 1880 he was transferred to its Glasgow office, where in 1881 he entered municipal service. Having qualified as a chartered accountant, he became accountant to the newly formed municipal tramways department in 1894, rising in 1902 to deputy general manager and in 1904 to manager. 
In his obituary in the 'Glasgow Herald' (2 July 1934) Dalrymple is described as an 'energetic and competent organiser' under whose leadership the tramways reached 'a high state of perfection' and 'spread farther and farther into the countryside'. He controlled the second largest tramway undertaking in the UK with well over 8000 employees and a book value of about $7 million; remarkably for a municipal concern, the entire capital debt was paid off by 1917 despite a policy of low fares. The undertaking was a progressive one, with well-built trams fitted with the latest features, such as windscreens and upholstered seats. In 1923 he persuaded the corporation of Glasgow to take over the neighbouring company-operated lines in Airdrie and Paisley, but Dalrymple's expansionist dictum of 'we've still a long way to go' was not accepted without controversy, and for his part he did not always approve of voter-driven pressure for ever lower fares, though in the event increased passenger numbers more than compensated for these. 
Dalrymple's organizing ability was shown to supreme effect in the First World War when he recruited a total of 10,000 men from the city within fourteen months, including a battalion raised from tramway men in September 1914 within a record twenty-four hours. Advertisements and military bands were carried on the trams and collections made for war schemes, though in the latter case Dalrymple had to be reprimanded for selling tickets involving lottery prizes. The tramway workshops were used for war work, including building aircraft bodies, and in 1920 Dalrymple was made a CBE for his contribution to the war effort. His own military experience was confined to a volunteer rifle brigade. Over 3000 tramway men joined up, so pre-war plans for employing women as conductors were put into effect in March 1915, followed in November by what were probably the first ever women drivers in the UK, a development which aroused much interest from other hard-pressed tramway managers. 
Dalrymple served on two committees of the Board of Trade (the department then responsible for tramways) and was a member of the council and president (1910-11) of the Municipal Tramways Association (MTA), in whose journal he published a number of professional papers. He was consultant to tramways in Bombay, Chicago, Johannesburg, and Sao Paulo; the last two of these were after his retirement in 1926, which resulted directly from his handling of labour relations, but was also the consequence of a long history of conflict between a strong-minded manager and the elected tramways committee. After the general strike he dismissed 316 men and refused to reinstate them, despite a decision by the committee to do so. Although supported on a close vote in the full council, he did not withdraw his resignation. Described variously by councillors as a sympathetic manager and as arbitrary and unreasonable, Dalrymple was clearly something of a martinet whose approach was becoming outdated as the political balance changed on the council. J. Beckett of the MTA nevertheless described him on 9 December 1926 as having had 'one of the greatest careers in the tramways service of this country. Among English-speaking peoples no man is better known in the tramway world' ('Tramway and Railway World', 60.338). As well as being a JP, his outside interests included charitable and Scottish societies. A stocky, bearded man who appears in numerous official photographs, Dalrymple was married to Elizabeth Gardner McGowan (who survived him), and they had a daughter and a son. In June 1934 he had a cerebral haemorrhage and died a few days later, on 1 July, in a nursing home at 3 Claremont Terrace, Glasgow. After a funeral service at Lansdowne church, Glasgow, on 4 July, he was buried at Gatehouse of Fleet. 


@@@@@


doc= 40305


Dollan, Sir Patrick Joseph (1885-1963), journalist and local politician, was born in Baillieston, Lanarkshire, on 3 April 1885. He was one of thirteen children of James Dollan, a miner, and his wife, Jane Rooney ('c'.1861- 'c'.1946), who were both of Irish descent. Baillieston was a mining village, incorporated into Glasgow in 1975. Dollan's memories were of 'an independent and tough community', and he stressed his parents' indomitability, despite considerable hardship. His mother at one time ran a grocery store. In later years he made much of his childhood, to demonstrate how far working-class Roman Catholics from an Irish immigrant background could succeed in public life. 
The family's fortunes improved when Dollan's father was promoted to a supervisory position at the Clydeside colliery. Nevertheless, Dollan was obliged to leave St Bridget's elementary school at the age of ten, and started part-time work in a rope-making factory. His first full-time employment was as an assistant in a Baillieston grocery store, an experience that he claimed taught him much about financial management. At the age of fifteen he joined his father as a miner in the Clydeside colliery, although with characteristic energy he also enrolled for three sessions of evening classes at Wellshot Academy, Shettleston. Here he developed a talent for writing, winning literature prizes, and finding publishers for his essays. Adopting the pseudonym of Myner Collier he made his first forays into professional journalism for the Glasgow 'Evening Times', writing on mining topics. 
Dollan became active in the labour movement during the early 1900s, serving as secretary to the newly inaugurated Baillieston branch of the Lanarkshire Miners' Union. Robert Smillie, a union official and Independent Labour Party (ILP) member, was an early and enduring influence. So too was John Wheatley, another prominent ILP figure, who like Dollan came from a Catholic Irish background. In 1910 Wheatley and Dollan set up a local ILP branch and, despite the strictures of the Catholic clergy against socialism, began to win recruits. Wheatley was impressed by Dollan's skills as a propagandist and was determined that his protege should become a full-time journalist for 'Forward', a left-wing weekly Glasgow newspaper with a lively and trenchant style. Following a brief apprenticeship with Wheatley's own publishing firm, Dollan joined 'Forward' in 1911 and became assistant editor. Although he long retained the 'Forward' connection, he was later appointed the Scottish editor of the 'Daily Herald'. 
On 20 September 1912 Dollan married Agnes Johnston Moir ['see 'Dollan, Agnes Johnston (1887-1966)], a fellow ILP member and activist in the women's suffrage movement. She was not a Catholic, and the relationship was indicative of Dollan's drift from religious orthodoxy, although significantly both were later to become devout church members. In 1913 Dollan entered municipal politics, and remained a Glasgow corporation councillor until he retired in 1946. He represented the Govan Central ward, and claimed that he was initially the last-minute replacement for a candidate who had withdrawn, and that he had to be persuaded to stand by his friend John S. Taylor, Glasgow ILP organizer. Yet his writing for 'Forward' revealed an enthusiastic interest in civic affairs. Effective government, he believed, originated at the community level, as citizens could relate more readily to their own home base. Dollan devoted himself to this ideal, and (apart from unsuccessfully contesting the Ayr burghs by-election in 1925) refused entreaties to embark on a parliamentary career. 
From 1913 Dollan's commitment to community politics was demonstrated by his high profile on the housing issue, especially the Glasgow ILP campaign against excessive rent charges by private landlords. The demand for accommodation in the booming munitions districts after the outbreak of war intensified local protests, which took the form of rent strikes. These were notable for the pugnacious contribution of women and the role played by both Dollans in directing strategy. The events in Glasgow were decisive for the introduction of national legislation during 1915 to peg rent increases. However, Dollan did not confine his militancy to housing. He was an outspoken critic of the war, appearing on peace platforms and agitating against military conscription. In 1917 he served a prison sentence of 112 days' hard labour in London's Wormwood Scrubs for failing to comply with a directive to leave Glasgow and seek 'work of national importance'. His resistance was given widespread press coverage, and added to the wartime rebel image of 'Red Clydeside'. 
The franchise reforms of 1918 opened out opportunities for the Labour Party in Glasgow and in the 1922 general election its candidates sensationally won ten out of the city's fifteen parliamentary seats. At the municipal level, despite a more restricted franchise, the Labour group also made substantial inroads, winning overall control of the corporation in 1933. Dollan was inextricably associated with these successes, his gift for organization making him a pivotal figure in the construction of Labour's expanding power base. The legend of Glasgow's electoral 'machine' emerged at this time, a Labour juggernaut supposedly created by him, as he welded his extensive network of community connections together. Yet whatever the reality of Dollan and machine politics, Labour's forces were far from united in Glasgow, and the disaffiliation of the ILP from the party in 1932 created a crisis of allegiance. He was already disenchanted with the flamboyant individualism of ILP colleagues like James Maxton, and chose to remain within the Labour mainstream. However, a vacuum had emerged in organization because of the previous strength of ILP support in Scotland. He sought to redress the balance by forming the Scottish Socialist Party (SSP) as a campaigning alternative to the ILP. The SSP could not establish a sufficiently distinctive identity and its status as a Labour affiliate ended in 1940, when it merged fully with the national party. 
Dollan held a number of key municipal positions during the inter-war period, including the city treasurership, and deflected criticism of expenditure policies by ardently espousing the common good of Glasgow during the difficult depression years. His ability to cultivate the press was evident in the blaze of publicity surrounding his election as lord provost in 1938. Not only was he the first incumbent from a Catholic Irish background but he declared that he would be a working ambassador for the city, sparing no efforts to raise its international status. For all that he was aged fifty-three, with a shock of silver-grey hair, he consciously projected a youthful, energetic image and ensured that his wife also had a prominent public profile. At the outbreak of war in 1939 he directly appealed to the community spirit of Glaswegians, in a conflict that he claimed was for the defence of 'civic and national freedom'. He went on to play a crucial co-ordinating role during the early phase of the war, when food and fuel shortages and the evacuation of children caused considerable social upheaval. For his war services he was knighted in 1941, towards the end of his three-year term as lord provost. 
After his departure from civic politics, Dollan did not abandon public life, serving as chairman of East Kilbride New Town Development Corporation between 1947 and 1958. Other positions followed, including a directorship of British European Airways at a time when air transport was being nationalized. For some critics, his career path seemed to negate his early socialist commitment, and they found difficulty in coming to terms with his acceptance of a knighthood. However, as wartime lord provost Dollan was dedicated to destroying fascism and boosting Glaswegian morale, while the knighthood was perhaps the inevitable refinement to the image of the Dollans as a successful, stylish, and cultured couple. That both became associated with the right-wing Moral Re-Armament movement during the 1950s did nevertheless tarnish their reputation for progressivism. Dollan died in the Victoria Infirmary, Glasgow, on 30 January 1963 and was buried in Dalbeth cemetery on 1 February, acknowledged to be one of Glasgow's most astute and influential municipal politicians. 


@@@@@


doc= 40308


Duncan, Joseph Forbes (1879-1964), trade unionist, was born at Boat of Bridge, Banffshire, on 3 June 1879, the son of William Duncan, gardener, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Munro. He was educated at the local school and Robert Gordon's College in Aberdeen, which he left at the age of fifteen to work on his father's small farm before taking up a position as a clerk in the General Post Office in London. He returned to Banffshire for health reasons in 1898 and worked as a clerk in Aberdeen where he became politically active, before becoming involved in the Scottish Workers' Parliamentary Election Committee and the Fabian Society. In 1904 he was appointed the general secretary of the Scottish Steam Vessels Enginemen's and Firemen's Union (SSVFU). Like many small Scottish unions, the SSVFU had little bargaining power with employers and the strikes under Duncan's leadership were not successful. 
From 1906 to 1908 Duncan was employed by the Independent Labour Party (ILP), then the principal motive force of the Scottish labour movement, as their organizer in the east of Scotland. His daily letters to his fiancee and later wife, Mabel Saunders (also active in the labour movement and the campaigns of the suffragettes), provide an insight into the life of an itinerant activist in the fissiparous world of Scottish left-wing politics. He often expressed idealism and optimism about the prospects for the advance of the labour movement, responding to Labour victories in the 1906 general election by telling Mabel that 'the revolution has started' (NL Scot., Acc. 5490(1)/30, 21 Jan 1906). He later complained, though, that the members of the rival Social Democratic Federation (SDF) had been trying to 'poison the wells' in advance of his work (NL Scot., Acc. 5490(1)/59, 2 July 1906) and on another occasion he reached the Fife mining district only to find that 'a teacher, John Maclean MA of Glasgow' had been there just before him in the interest of the SDF (NL Scot., Acc. 5490(1)/64, no date). The work was hard, the farming and mining districts of the east coast were not especially fertile territory for socialism, and the ILP was inefficient in payment of salary and expenses. As a result, Duncan resigned and returned to work in the north-east of Scotland in 1908 and was active in the attempt to rebuild the National Union of Dock Labourers. He married in Glasgow, on 22 May 1909, (Jessie) Mabel Saunders (1873-1968), daughter of George Saunders, a Congregationalist minister. They had no children. 
Duncan's next project took him into an area which remained one of the principal areas of interest for the rest of his life: agricultural trade unionism. In 1912 he began the Scottish Farm Servants' Union (SFSU). G. B. Clark, the former MP for Caithness, was also involved but Duncan was the moving force and in 1918 became the salaried general secretary of the union. The union's journal, the 'Scottish Farm Servant', provided a vehicle for Duncan's journalistic talents, and he also wrote extensively for the semi-official 'Scottish Journal of Agriculture'. The system of annual hiring fairs with their twelve-month contracts hindered union organization and the Farm Servants Union was never able to attract more than a small minority of farm labourers in Scotland. The SFSU took a distinctive position on the question of setting wages for farm workers. In England this matter had been increasingly regulated by state bodies but Duncan resisted the application of this system to Scotland, as he felt that it would only serve to depress the relatively high wages of the highly skilled Scottish farm labour force. As a result of the activity of Duncan and the SFSU, Scotland was excluded from the first Labour government's legislation to regulate agricultural wages. Duncan was resisted the appeal of protectionism in Scottish farming. Indeed, in the 1920s the industry as a whole stuck to a free-trade position despite depressed years in the early part of the decade. The more serious and long-lasting downturn of the late 1920s and early 1930s forced him to reconsider on both wage regulation and government support for agricultural production. Wage regulation was brought in to Scotland in 1937 and over the course of that decade most of the main areas of Scottish farm output came to be supported by government. The SFSU affiliated to the Transport and General Workers' Union in 1932 and was absorbed by it in 1942 after a period of falling membership. 
Duncan's concern for the social conditions of farm workers was recognized by his appointment a member of the royal commission on the housing of the industrial population of Scotland. This had been established in 1912 as a result of concern over miners' housing but it soon developed a wider agenda and Duncan was able to use the commission as a platform to criticize farmers for the appallingly low standard of farm cottages in Scotland. The royal commission exposed the shocking standard of housing and sanitation for farm labourers across lowland Scotland. He believed that pressure should be brought to bear on farmers to invest from their own resources in the improvement in housing so that they could meet statutory requirements under public health legislation. This view was defensible but impractical as farmers, especially in difficult years, failed to invest and local authorities were lax in their enforcement. The Scottish housing advisory committee, of which Duncan was also a member, returned to the problem in 1935 and instituted a system of state grants to improve rural housing. Duncan believed that this let the farmers off the hook. 
These activities gained recognition for Duncan as the foremost expert on Scottish agriculture. He served on the royal commission on agriculture of 1919 and was also a member of the agricultural research committee, with a particular interest in agricultural economics. He wrote widely on this subject, notably for the 'Journal of Agricultural Economics', which he had helped to found. In an article of 1932 in this journal he argued for greater prominence for agricultural economists in policy making. He served on numerous public bodies concerned with agriculture, co-operation, and education, notably on the board of governors of the Scottish Colleges of Agriculture, established after the foundation of the Board of Agriculture for Scotland in 1912. In 1938 he was a member of the Scottish economic committee's sub-committee that looked into the problems afflicting the highlands and islands of Scotland. Its sensible recommendations to encourage economic diversification in the crofting areas were not implemented owing to government indifference and the outbreak of war. He had strong views on the land question and was an advocate of land nationalization. In his presidential address to the Agricultural Economics Society in 1940 he argued that agricultural reconstruction was hampered by 'the system of personal ownership' (p. 27). This was another subject of his journalistic output, notably for the ILP's vibrant Glasgow newspaper 'Forward'. 
Duncan served as president of the Scottish Trades Union Congress in 1926. The tough experiences of the inter-war period dampened his earlier youthful optimism about the prospects for the labour movement. He was three times an unsuccessful Labour candidate for parliament: in a 1919 by-election in Aberdeenshire Central, in Moray and Nairn in the general election of 1929, and in a 1935 by-election in Aberdeen South. None of these seats was propitious for a Labour candidate. Duncan, however, might easily have secured a safe Labour seat had he shown any firm interest in a parliamentary career. He was on the right-wing of the Labour Party, and critical of the left of the ILP, whom he saw as hopelessly impractical in their outlook. He was also a strong opponent of Scottish home rule, which he argued was divisive of the interests of the working classes in Scotland and England and potentially disastrous for Scottish farming. In this outlook he was in the mainstream of Labour opinion in Scotland, which was strongly unionist from the 1930s. 
Duncan retired from the SFSU in 1945 but he remained prominent in Scottish public life until the early 1960s, when he was afflicted by poor health. He was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Glasgow in 1946. Duncan died in hospital in Aberdeen on 1 December 1964. His funeral took place at Aberdeen crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 40309


Eardley, Joan Kathleen Harding (1921-1963), painter, born on 18 May 1921 on her father's dairy farm near Horsham, Sussex, was the elder of the two daughters of Captain William Edwin Eardley (1887-1929) and Irene Helen Morrison (1891-1991), who had met when he was stationed in Glasgow's Maryhill barracks during the First World War. When Joan was seven her father, who had suffered from gas poisoning, committed suicide, forcing his widow to join her mother at Blackheath, London, where Joan and her sister spent their schooldays. Her talent for drawing was always evident, so that on leaving St Helen's School in Blackheath in 1938 she enrolled at Goldsmiths' College, London. But that course was very soon interrupted when the family moved to Blanefield, near Glasgow, in order to escape the threat of bombing in London. In January 1940 she was accepted for the four-year diploma course in drawing and painting at the Glasgow School of Art, where her good fortune was to be taught by the charismatic but singularly undidactic painter Hugh Adam Crawford. She was a prize-winning front runner at the school during each of her years there, but immediately after gaining her diploma, and throughout 1944, her studies were interrupted by her chosen brand of 'war work', which amounted to camouflaging the hulls of boats at a small local shipyard. It was at that point that her first important work, a painting of some of her workmates which she called 'The Mixer Men', was hung on the line at the Royal Glasgow Institute of the Fine Arts. In 1947, after having attempted to live and work in London for a year, she spent several months at Hospitalfield House, near Arbroath, Angus, then a summer art school for post-diploma students where another influential senior, James Cowie, was warden. After that summer in Arbroath she returned to Glasgow for a session of post-diploma study which, in its turn, led to a year of travel in Italy and France financed by scholarships from the Glasgow School of Art and the Royal Scottish Academy. 
Among the influences absorbed during Joan Eardley's Glasgow School of Art years were the monumental life drawings of Henry Moore, the intense colour clashes of Andre Derain and the Fauves, and, by no means least, the work of Vincent Van Gogh which Glasgow experienced at first hand in a major exhibition of his work shown at the Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum in 1948. It is surely not accidental that Van Gogh's influence, so evident in the drawings which she brought back from France and Italy, coincided with the onset of her creative maturity. In Italy, in particular -- where, as well as potent landscape studies, she made numerous drawings of peasants at work in their natural surroundings (Giotto and Masaccio were her declared favourites among the old masters) -- it began to be obvious that direct stimulus through the eye was for her a necessary starting point for emotional expression. As her later life was to prove, her affinity with Van Gogh went deeper than the deliberately simple existence of hardships and denials which they had in common. Hers, too, was a lifelong struggle to convey in line and coloured pigments the unusual power of her response to visual and sensual experience. Back at home in Scotland, where she eventually rented a glass-roofed studio in Glasgow's Townhead, this remained her aim, whether she was drawing and painting the surprisingly colourful street life -- the dark Victorian tenements, the derelict shop-fronts with their peeling paint, and the cheerful, demonstrative urchins who gathered around her studio -- or struggling to express an exceptionally acute response to the power of the North Sea at Catterline, the cliff-top fishing village south of Stonehaven in Kincardineshire. From the mid-1950s she spent the major part of each year at Catterline, and it was there that she sensed deep roots -- justifiably so, since her maternal grandfather was a native of Aberdeenshire. Sturdy, with short dark hair and black eyes, she remained essentially a country girl. 
All her life Joan Eardley drew incessantly, but more as visual 'feeding' than as the basis for future paintings. Around Catterline, in summer and winter, and even in the wildest storms, she painted on the spot: on the shore, on the cliff-top, and not least in the wonderfully fertile hinterland of summer fields. There, too, some of her best work was done in the chill of midwinter, on the stubblefields bleak with snow against fiery red skies. Increasing illness (a long-neglected breast cancer which eventually killed her) seemed merely to heighten her determination to continue working at full throttle. Her late canvases, not least the large seascapes in which she seems intent on conveying, above all, her sense of oneness with the elements, are among her finest and most moving works. It is interesting that a photograph of Eardley showing her working on a very large canvas on the rocky Catterline foreshore on a wild winter afternoon is eerily reminiscent of a late nineteenth-century camera image of her well-known Scottish predecessor William McTaggart, painting the Atlantic Ocean from the beach at Machrihanish on the Kintyre peninsula. 
Joan Eardley had discovered and fallen in love with Catterline at first sight in 1952. She first worked from borrowed lodgings, but after several visits she acquired a primitive studio cottage, 1 The Row, a tiny two-room shack without even running water, at the southernmost end of the village. Eventually, when her paintings began to find buyers in Edinburgh and London, she bought a slightly larger and at least more habitable home at 18 The Row while still retaining the other cottage as a store and a favourite place to set up her easel. However, Glasgow was by no means forsaken: she kept her roof-top studio to the end, returning again and again to re-create on paper or canvas the colourful, raucous, insouciant young life on her doorstep, drawing more and more obviously on abstract expressionist influences -- Willem De Kooning in particular. In the Glasgow subjects, as at Catterline even in the wildest seascapes, she never completely 'lost the image', however; with Eardley all influences -- Van Gogh, Derain, De Kooning, even at one stage Nicolas de Stael -- were swiftly subsumed in her own individual style. 
From the autumn of 1948, when her travelling scholarship exhibition was shown at the Glasgow School of Art, Joan Eardley's admirers began to grow in number. Her work became widely known in Scotland and her paintings were regularly hung in the major open Scottish exhibitions as well as in solo shows at Aitken Dott's Scottish Gallery in Edinburgh. Never interested or involved in the official business of the art societies, she had none the less been a professional member of the Society of Scottish Artists since 1948 and accepted associateship of the Royal Scottish Academy a few years later. (Full membership in the academy came in 1963, the year of her death.) By the early 1950s she was being invited to exhibit with some of her southern contemporaries in London galleries and before long her work was being seen regularly at Roland Browse and Delbanco. Joan Eardley died too soon for general acceptance as a major British artist; during her short working life her paintings attracted less serious assessment furth of Scotland than they deserved. But it was the art critic Eric Newton of the 'Manchester Guardian' who perceived her quality. After seeing her final London exhibition in 1961, he wrote: 'Only in an occasional Goya do I remember the translation of small children into paint mixed so inseparably with warmhearted self-identification with the inner life of the child. And only in Turner's seapaintings does one find oneself so involved with the skies and winds that hang over the uneasy tumult of the waves. ('The Guardian', 1 June 1961)' Joan Eardley died, unmarried, on 16 August 1963 in the hospital at Killearn, Stirlingshire; after her cremation the ashes were scattered on the shore at Catterline. Her works are in the Tate collection and the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh, as well as in several university collections and municipal galleries in a number of British cities, including Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Dundee, Birmingham, and Huddersfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 40311


Erskine, Stuart Richard (1869-1960), political activist and Gaelic entrepreneur, was born at 1 Portland Place, Brighton, on 15 January 1869, second of the three sons of William Macnaghten Erskine, fifth Baron Erskine (1841-1913), army officer, and his wife, Caroline Alice Martha, 'nee' Grimble (died 1922). He spent his early years in Edinburgh, and lived for prolonged periods in Scotland, England, and France. On 18 July 1891 he married Muriel Lilias Colquhoun, daughter of Major-General G. Irving Graham; she died in 1895, the year after the death of their only child, a daughter. On 6 August 1902 he married Maria Guadelupe Zaara Cecilia Heaven y Ramirez de Arellano (died 1956), only daughter of Joseph Robert Heaven of the Forest of Birse, and his wife, the marquesa de Braceras. 
Erskine learned Gaelic from a childhood nurse who came from the island of Harris, and this kindled the enthusiasm which was to be a main hallmark of his career. His imagination was fired early by the Irish nationalist movement and these combined influences, together with his family's historic Scottish roots, led to his development as a prominent Gaelic nationalist, whose compelling dream was of a self-governing Celtic Scotland. As essential steps towards the realization of this dream he was actively involved in the fostering of Gaelic consciousness and in the extension of Gaelic usage, especially in the written form. He hoped that a significant extension of Gaelic literary range would contribute to the raising of literary standards, in a reaction against what he saw as the down-grading influence of music-hall and 'pop' culture on Gaelic verse in the second half of the nineteenth century. He probably also viewed his activity as a response to the dominance of folk culture in the Gaelic literary world. 
Erskine's literary programme spanned the first three decades of the twentieth century, the first twenty years being especially prolific. His programme was based on the founding and financial support of a series of Gaelic newspapers and periodicals. The first of these was 'Am Bard' ('The poet'), a bilingual monthly issued in 1901-2. A short-lived weekly Gaelic newspaper, 'Alba' ('Scotland'), was published in 1908-9, and a publication devoted to fiction, 'An Sgeulaiche' ('The storyteller'), ran as a monthly from 1909 to 1910 and as a quarterly until 1911. A short series of quite bulky annual volumes, 'An Rosarnach' ('The rose garden'), appeared in 1917, 1918, 1921, and 1930. His most substantial and lasting periodical, however, was 'Guth na Bliadhna' ('The year's voice'), a quarterly which ran from 1904 to 1925, in bilingual format until 1919 and all-Gaelic thereafter. 'Guth na Bliadhna' marked a clear move towards journalistic and modern writing in Gaelic. One of the most prominent contributors was the journalist Angus Henderson, who often chose topics such as the 'Land Act', land and taxes, schools and education, and deer and deer-forests. The didactic drive behind these articles is clear, but Henderson usually produced a well-balanced discussion and verdict. Donald Sinclair, from Barra, contributed poetry and drama, and a new generation of writers appeared late in the series, with Hector MacDougall and John N. MacLeod, both of whom were to be prolific Gaelic writers for the next three or four decades. The political drive behind the publication was sustained throughout its life, with a movement towards the left (and a hint of communism) appearing in the late war and post-war years. Interviewed in 1956, Erskine at the age of eighty-seven was still a convinced nationalist and talked optimistically of returning to Scotland after his years in France and London. However, it was in England that he died, at St Augustine's Hospital, Chartham, Bridge, Kent, on 5 January 1960. 
Erskine himself published a number of books, including fiction, history, an edition of Bolingbroke's political writings (1897) and of 'The Earl of Mar's Legacies to Scotland' (1896), 'Bordology: the Science of Determining Character by what a Man Eats and Drinks' (1925), and a translation from the Gaelic 'The Old Tribute and other Pieces' (1929). Although Ruaraidh Erskine's Gaelic publishing work was not very successful in a commercial sense, it had a positive influence on Gaelic writers, and helped to lay the foundations for the resurgence in Gaelic writing (in fiction, poetry, and journalism) which was to come when he had retired from active work in this field. 


@@@@@


doc= 40312


Fairbairn, (William) Ronald Dodds (1889-1964), psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, was born on 11 August 1889 at the Red House, Cluny Gardens, Edinburgh, the only child of Thomas Fairbairn (1854-1925), chartered surveyor and secretary of the Edinburgh Architectural Association, and Cecilia Leefe (1854-1946). Ronald Fairbairn lived in Edinburgh all his life except for periods as a student and while on foreign service during the First World War. His whole school career was passed at Merchiston Castle School in Edinburgh. He wanted to go on to Oxford University but his father forbade this as offering too much opportunity for wickedness, and thus from 1907 he read mental philosophy at Edinburgh, obtaining his MA in 1911. From 1911 to 1914 he took courses in divinity and Hellenic studies in Manchester, London, Kiel, and Strasbourg and entered theological college in Edinburgh. Fairbairn joined the Royal Garrison Artillery as a territorial in 1915 and was posted abroad in 1916, serving in Egypt and Palestine. He had visited Craiglockhart, near Edinburgh, in 1915, where W. H. R. Rivers was pioneering psychotherapeutic work with shell-shock victims, and by the time that he was demobilized he had decided to become a psychotherapist. At that time most of the senior psychoanalysts were medically qualified, and so Fairbairn began his training by undertaking accelerated medical (1919-23; MB ChB) and then psychiatric (diploma in psychiatry) qualifications at Edinburgh University. An essential element in psychoanalytic training involved having a personal analysis, and Fairbairn went into treatment in 1921 with E. H. Connell. After qualification Fairbairn became assistant physician, Royal Edinburgh Hospital For Mental Diseases (1923-4). He had begun an MD on 'The relationship of dissociation and repression, considered from the point of view of medical psychology' immediately after qualification as a doctor but did not submit it until March 1929 when the examiners highly commended it. Between 1926 and 1931 Fairbairn was assistant physician at the Longmore Hospital, Edinburgh. 
Fairbairn married Mary Ann More Gordon (1901-1952), daughter of Harry More Gordon, in 1926 and in 1927 became a lecturer in psychology in the department of philosophy at the University of Edinburgh. The first of the Fairbairns' children, Ellinor, was born in 1927 and the following year twins were born who did not survive. Their loss of the twins may have been the trigger for the breakdown in the mental and physical health of Mary Fairbairn, which cast a shadow over the remainder of the Fairbairns' marriage. The birth of their fourth child occurred in 1929, the same year that Fairbairn's ideas on 'The cause of mental disease' appeared in the 'British Medical Journal'. Sir Nicholas Hardwick Fairbairn (1933-1995), barrister and MP, was their fifth child. In 1928 Fairbairn had given a paper to the Scottish branch of the British Psychological Society entitled 'Notes on the religious phantasies of a female patient', which described the madness, invalidism, and, ultimately, the death of one of his patients, and expressed a concern with unsatisfiable longing which was to be a cornerstone of his psychological theory subsequently. Between 1929 and 1934 Fairbairn was medical psychologist to the Jordanburn Nerve Hospital, Edinburgh, and Edinburgh University Psychological Clinic for Children. He was elected to associate membership of the British Psycho-Analytic Society in 1931 and to full membership a few years later. In 1931 and 1932 he was lecturer in psychology at Edinburgh University. Preparing lectures for psychology students, being an active member of interdisciplinary meetings, and his own critical reading of Freud prevented him from becoming too immersed in psychoanalysis. His election to fellow of the Royal Anthropological Institute in 1932 reflected these wider interests. 
Fairbairn enjoyed the company of children, and a significant part of his early clinical work was with them. He wrote a number of papers on education and on the effects of childhood sexual abuse. Despite this work becoming well known Fairbairn did not publish it, and these writings did not become widely available until the publication of two volumes of Fairbairn's work in an edition by D. Scharff and Fairbairn's daughter, Ellinor Fairbairn Birtles, in 1994. Fairbairn also had a considerable sympathy for people who cannot engage with others, or commit themselves emotionally. He applied to them the term that had become fashionable in Germany -- schizoid -- but unlike the German psychiatrists, who considered schizoidia an inborn temperament, Fairbairn thought that it was forced on a person by the conflict between desire for another person (prototypically the mother) and that person's constantly frustrating response to the desire. In 'The libido theory: the theory of the pleasure principle interpreted in terms of appetite', written in 1930 but first published in 1994, Fairbairn drew on the work of the social psychologist James Drever, and William McDougall, and proposed that Freud's assertion that behaviour is motivated by sexual and death instincts should be replaced by appetitive tendencies, which are triggered by needs such as hunger, and reactive tendencies, which are stirred by object-interest. The failure of these tendencies to remove what caused them leads to feelings which are characteristic of the tendency and which themselves function like appetites. A loving tendency, if it does not meet a loving response from its object, becomes an appetitive tendency of frustration or sorrow. Objects are usually important others, but may be animals, things, or institutions: indeed anything which a person might think can provide them with what they need or want. Fairbairn's emphasis on the importance of social relationships involving objects marked a turning point in psychoanalysis. It was, however, Melanie Klein, and not Fairbairn, who developed object-relations theory and Fairbairn's only acknowledged contribution is the inclusion by Klein of 'schizoid' in her characterization of the infant's early relationship to its carer, the 'paranoid-schizoid' position. 
Fairbairn's classic papers, 'A revised psychopathology of the psychoses and psychoneuroses' (1940) and 'Endopsychic structure considered in terms of object-relationships' (1941), were both published in the 'International Journal of Psychoanalysis'. Although they made his reputation, they also show imprints of Fairbairn's long incubation with Kleinian ideas. Earlier themes recur, but in a more formal, orthodox formulation, lacking the vigour of the earlier unpublished work. Fairbairn became disenchanted by psychoanalysis towards the end of his life. He felt able to reduce his own theory to a single page of principles for the 'British Journal of Medical Psychology' in 1963, and his correspondence with up-and-coming psychoanalysts at the end of his career indicates a pessimism about the approach and development of psychoanalysis. 
Mary Fairbairn died, after many years of ill health, on 28 September 1952, a year that also saw the publication of Fairbairn's collected papers, 'Psychoanalytic Studies of the Personality'. Fairbairn's personal life took on a new dimension when he began a relationship with Marion Frances Mackintosh (1907-1995), daughter of Captain H. E. M. Archer. Fairbairn married Marion, who had become his secretary, in April 1959, but was in failing health and from 1960 had a series of attacks, the first on the day of Melanie Klein's funeral, which were associated with a decline in his mental and physical health. Fairbairn died on 31 December 1964 at 19 Drumsheugh Gardens, Edinburgh. He was buried in Dean cemetery, Edinburgh, after a service in St Mary's Cathedral. He was survived by his second wife. 
Since his death Fairbairn's work has found a new relevance, and its influence has been particularly strong on the theory of highly disturbed or 'borderline' patients. Fairbairn would sometimes recall an occasion when, as a young child, he had begged a young girl to come to play but, when she finally acceded to his request, she had been knocked down and killed as she crossed the road to his house. Whether or not Fairbairn was personally preoccupied with the perils of needs and longings, his single most important theoretical contribution is his precise delineation of the allure, the struggles to reject, and the impossibility of giving up the object of desire whose recognition must be bought at a price of guilt, fear, jealousy, or shame. 


@@@@@


doc= 40314


Fraser, Marjory Kennedy- (1857-1930), folklorist, was born at 50 High Street, Perth, on 1 October 1857, the daughter of David Kennedy (1825-1886), a great singer of traditional Scots songs, and his second wife, Elizabeth Fraser ('b'. 1827); their family eventually numbered eleven children. The Kennedys were originally from Rannoch, settled in Perth, moved to Edinburgh and then lived in London, 1862-6. In 1866 they began a series of tours in Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the United States, and South Africa to take traditional Scots songs to emigrants and their descendants; they often travelled under fairly primitive conditions by coach or wagon, owing to the expense of taking such a large party by rail. Marjory trained as a piano accompanist in Edinburgh and made her first public appearances at Lanark in 1870, and the Music Hall, Edinburgh, in 1871. Visits for vocal training were made to Milan and Paris, where she was also taught the piano by Mathilde Marchesi. Disaster struck when three of the youngest members of the family died in a fire at the Theatre des Italiens at Nice on 23 March 1881, a blow from which their father never recovered -- he died at Stratford, Ontario, on tour in October 1886. Meanwhile Marjory, whose maternal grandfather had spoken Gaelic in his youth, developed an interest in Gaelic songs, and, encouraged by Professor J. S. Blackie, took lessons in Gaelic and Gaelic songs from the poetess Mary MacKellar, who was then living in Edinburgh. In the spring of 1887 she married a cousin of her mother's, Alexander (Alec) Fraser, soon to be appointed headmaster of Alan Glen's Technical School at Glasgow; his health gave way from overwork and he died on 9 November 1890, leaving her with two children, David and Patuffa. She earned her living by teaching music in Edinburgh and as music critic for the 'Edinburgh Evening News'. She had a special interest in Wagner and Richard Strauss and visited Bayreuth in 1899. With her close associate, Professor Frederic Niecks, she founded the Edinburgh Musical Education Society in 1900. 
In 1895 Marjory Kennedy-Fraser was asked to give a lecture recital on Celtic music, which involved presenting examples of the music of the various Celtic peoples. One work that impressed her was Ducoudray's collection of traditional Breton songs, which had been commissioned by the French government. In 1905, the last year of the life of the celebrated folklorist Father Allan McDonald, she paid what became a famous visit to the island of Eriskay, which lies in the sound between South Uist and Barra. She went at the urging of John Duncan the artist, and perhaps partly because an American folk-song collector, Evelyn Benedict, was already visiting the island, and another, Amy Murray, was expected to come in the autumn. She returned to Eriskay in 1907 and in that year gave her first recital based on her researches. She took with her to Eriskay 'a very small and easily portable graphophone' and recorded songs on wax cylinders. In 1907-8 and subsequently she recorded on Barra. The outcome of Mrs Kennedy-Fraser's visits to the Outer Hebrides were the three volumes of 'Songs of the Hebrides' (1909, 1917, 1921), 'Sea Tangle' (1913), 'From the Hebrides' (1925), and 'More Songs of the Hebrides' (1929). All except the last were compiled with the help of Kenneth MacLeod, a young theological student from the island of Eigg, who was found for her by Professor Donald MacKinnon as Gaelic amanuensis. MacLeod told the writer of this memoir that when he saw what she was doing to the songs he had wanted to withdraw from the collaboration, but that MacKinnon had persuaded him to continue. Her last visit to Barra was made in 1927. 

'Songs of the Hebrides' established Marjory Kennedy-Fraser's reputation; lecture tours and recitals in London and the United States followed. In 1911 she was given a civil-list pension to enable her to continue her work. She wrote the libretto for Granville Bantock's opera, 'The Seal Woman', and sang the part of Mary Macleod in it. Patronized by W. B. Yeats and Lady Gregory, the friend of Patrick Geddes and John Duncan, she became a central figure in the Celtic revival, and 'Songs of the Hebrides' is one of its enduring monuments. 'Songs of the Hebrides' took such a hold on the public mind that any criticism of it was considered almost an act of 'lese-majeste', and Mrs Kennedy-Fraser was wrongly given the credit of having saved the songs from oblivion. For a long time the only criticism of her method was made in a paper, 'Half a century of vocal Gaelic music', read by Malcolm MacFarlane to the Gaelic Society of Inverness on 27 March 1925: 'Mrs Kennedy Fraser's Collection is marred by the tunes being adapted to English words and by the liberties taken with their original forms; and they have, in cases, to be timed anew for the Gaelic singer. Also, the new words are often conceived in a false Gaelic spirit for which there is no valid excuse. Miss Frances Tolmie's excellent collection of Skye airs can be relied on as giving the tunes in accordance with the forms in which she found them. This collection is also too little used by singers. It was not, like some recent publications, conceived in a mercenary spirit for upper and middle class English consumpt, but was given for preservation to the English Folksong Society. It is Number 16 of that Society's Transactions. ('Transactions of the Gaelic Society of Inverness', 1927)' It must be said in Mrs Kennedy-Fraser's favour that her 'Songs of the Hebrides' did bring about an appreciation among English speakers of the beauty of the hitherto despised oral tradition of the highlands and islands. 
In 1929 Marjory Kennedy-Fraser published a lively autobiography, 'A Life of Song'. She was operated on for breast cancer in 1925 and died, from a recurrence of it, at 6 Castle Street, Edinburgh, on 22 November 1930. 


@@@@@


doc= 40315


Sutherland, Robert Garioch (1909-1981), poet and translator, was born on 9 May 1909 at 109 Bellevue Road, Edinburgh, the son of Robert Garioch Sutherland, a house painter, and his wife, Catherine ('nee' Mathewson), a music teacher. He attended Edinburgh high school and then Edinburgh University (1927-31). On 26 January 1942 he married Margaret Lillie (1914/15- 'c'.1979), a schoolteacher, in Edinburgh. They had at least one child, Ian. Conscripted in 1941, Sutherland served in the north African campaign with the Royal Signals, and was a prisoner of war in Italy and Germany from 1942 to 1945. Between 1946 and his retirement in 1964 he was a schoolteacher, first in London and Kent (until 1959) and thereafter in Edinburgh. With fellow poet Edwin Morgan he served as literary adviser to the cultural review 'Scottish International' (1968-74). From 1971 to 1973 he was writer in residence at the University of Edinburgh, and was also employed as a 'lexicographer's orraman [odd-job man]' (Royle, 305) -- his own description -- on the 'Dictionary of the Older Scottish Tongue'. He was a popular performer of his own poetry -- written mainly in Scots -- and participated in the readings circuit right up to his final months. 
Sutherland based his idiom on the speech of his native city, but augmented his working vocabulary from his constant study of Scots language and literature; a particular mentor was the major poet Robert Fergusson (1750-1774), tragic in his life, comic (even caustic) in his work. In such poems as 'In Princes Street Gairdens' and 'A Wee Local Scandal' Sutherland deployed the reductive possibilities of Scots to puncture the pretensions of city councillors, academics, political dogmatists, and their like. Together with an often deadpan satirical wit, his adoption of the faux-naif 'wee man' persona accounts for much of his popularity. 
Sutherland found a kindred spirit in the nineteenth-century Italian poet Giuseppe Belli, who wrote scurrilous sonnets in the working-class dialect of Rome. In his Scots versions of Belli, always preserving the strict sonnet form, Sutherland was able to transpose this mockery of church and state to the Edinburgh streets. Indeed, it is in his consummate craftsmanship as a poet ('makar' -- 'maker' in Scots) that it can be discovered where his sympathies lie -- with the skilled tradesman and his unassuming, necessary, but increasingly redundant labours. In 'Perfect' Sutherland adopted the persona of a french polisher, drily lamenting how his craftsmanly standards are giving way to mass production. 
Sutherland's most ambitious poetic projects were his 1959 translations from Latin into Scots of two tragedies, 'Jephthah' and 'The Baptist', by the great Scottish humanist George Buchanan (1506-1582). Although he valued these translations above everything else he had attempted, they remain neglected in spite of their organ-voiced sonorities: '
I come frae the Thunderer's throne in Hevin, 

his airborne herald, til Israel's hame 

promised to Jacob's seed as the centre o pouer... 
(''Jephthah' and 'The Baptist'', 1959)' 
'The Masque of Edinburgh' (1954) and 'The Laird o Dreepdaily' (1983) are worthy of note as his two other forays into verse drama in Scots. 
Buchanan also served as a sounding board for Sutherland's complaints against the realities of the teaching profession, and the disillusionment of the would-be writer and new university graduate who is forced to teach for a living: '
A kep and goun -- what dae they maitter? 

a kep and bells wad suit him better. 
('Complete Poetical Works', 1983)' In a letter to a fellow makar J. K. Annand, Garioch simultaneously offers a 'cri de coeur' and administers a gentle dig at the Scottish obsession with 'doubles', the Jekyll-and-Hyde co-existence of opposing qualities: 'But it is an awful strain, this Deacon Brodie sort of life, Sutherland by day and Garioch by night, school-mastering and making poetry being such different things, and yet both tiring you out in the same way, that's the damn thing about it.' (Deacon Brodie was an eighteenth-century figure who alternated between the roles of respectable citizen and elusive burglar.) 
Sutherland's friends and fellow poets Hamish Henderson and Sorley MacLean were also veterans of north Africa. Sutherland typically eschewed the elegiac sweep of their war poetry in favour of a hard-headed prose account of his experiences as a prisoner of war. 'Two Men and a Blanket' (1975), his only venture into sustained autobiography, records without self-pity or heroics the boring, basic level of existence in captivity. Prisoner-of-war camp was its own way of life: 'Where we had all started off equal, we began to have relatively rich and poor. The most successful businessman would run a gambling outfit of some kind and would combine this with their knowledge of the market to live pretty well. At the other end of the scale, somebody must have been going short, but nobody was going to worry about him. (Garioch, 'Two Men and a Blanket', 51)' Such mordant commentary does not mean that Sutherland was a confirmed misanthrope. During his writer's residency at Edinburgh University he gained a reputation for going out of his way to help aspiring poets, even advising them on where to place their work. He gave space to younger and little-known poets in his 1974 anthology, 'Made in Scotland'. Towards the end of his life he expressed warm sympathy with the aims of the fledgeling Scottish Poetry Library Association. Sadly he did not live to see the library as an up-and-running reality. 
Sutherland was much more than an 'Edinburgh' poet, but it is likely that his home-based work will continue to be his most read. In harking back to his childhood he does not allow his wit to give way to sentimentality. His 'Fi'baw in the Street' concerns any group of boys whose game is interrupted by the polis (police). The mellower 'Lesson' evokes the changes, both during and before Sutherland's lifetime, to the character of Edinburgh's port of Leith. Returning to the docks after many years, the poet is nostalgic but realistic; Leith is not better or worse, it is just different. 
Sutherland died on 26 April 1981 at the Western General Hospital in Edinburgh. He had been predeceased by his wife, and was survived by at least one son, Ian. 


@@@@@


doc= 40321


Hay, George Campbell (1915-1984), poet, was born on 8 December 1915 at the manse, Elderslie, Renfrewshire, where his father was a minister. His father, John MacDougall Hay (1879-1919), was born in Tarbert, Loch Fyne, and based his novel 'Gillespie' there. George Campbell Hay regarded Tarbert and Kintyre as his home territory, frequently staying there, learning Gaelic in his teens, and sharing the life of the local fishermen. His mother, Catherine, 'nee' Campbell ('b'. 1883), had Islay connections, and had some knowledge of Gaelic. His father died in 1919 and the family lived in Edinburgh from 1925. In 1934 Hay won a major scholarship in classics and took a degree at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, afterwards taking a teacher's training course at Edinburgh and teaching briefly at the Royal High School there. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 Hay refused conscription (apparently on Scottish nationalist grounds, like his contemporary Douglas Young), spent some time 'on the run' in the Argyll hills, and finally joined the Royal Army Ordnance Corps. During the war he served in north Africa, Italy, and Macedonia, where he learned modern Greek. He was suspected of acting as a communist agitator there, simply because of his friendship with Greek people, and suffered a violent attack. This led to his being invalided out of the army and to severe traumatization in later years, when he developed a drinking problem. He returned to Edinburgh, spending some time in hospitals, and working in the National Library of Scotland for some years. 
A versatile linguist, Hay published poetry in Scots, English, and Gaelic, with occasional pieces in French and Norwegian, and he translated from modern Greek, Croatian, Arabic, Italian, Finnish, Icelandic, Irish, and Welsh. In his metrics he was deeply influenced by medieval and early modern Irish verse. 
Hay's second book was 'Wind on Loch Fyne' (1948), and it is here that he includes his wide-ranging translations, and also a good number of poems in Scots, whether on Loch Fyne and Kintyre subjects or on Edinburgh: '
A windy toon o cloods an' sunny glints; 

pinnacled, turreted, stey an' steep grey toon; 

her soughin' gables sing their norlan' rants 

tae sant an' caller blufferts on her croon. 

' Hay had published a Gaelic collection in the previous year: 'Fuaran sleibh' ('Upland spring') (1947), and this has some evocative poems on Kintyre and the Argyll countryside, as well as a series of poems modelled on Irish courtly love poetry and deeply influenced by its metrics. There are humorous and philosophic poems here too, and the highly effective 'Tilleadh Uiliseis' ('The return of Ulysses'), a dramatic interpretation of the classical story. 
Hay's next volume, 'O na ceithir airdean' ('From the Four Airts') appeared in 1952, and here his war experiences, especially in north Africa, and his reflections on the devastation war has caused throughout Europe, are powerfully deployed, producing some of his most memorable poems such as 'Truaighe na h-Eorpa' ('Europe's wretchedness'), 'Atman', and 'Bisearta' ('Bizerta'). This collection also includes a large number of translations from Italian, Greek, Croatian, and Arabic verse. 
Hay's reputation, especially as a Gaelic poet, became firmly established, but there was to be a long wait for another collection. He published spasmodically in periodicals, for example, in the 'Akros' anthology of contemporary Gaelic verse (1976) and in 'Gairm' over many years, latterly developing very effectively a series of poems/songs in the folk style, founded on surviving fragments. He also published Scots and English verse of a strongly nationalistic sort in the 'Scots Independent'. 
In the early 1980s it transpired that Hay had written a long poem or sequence in the latter part of the war and early post-war period (writing in Italy, Macedonia, and Tarbert), but had never completed it. He gave permission for this to be published in its unfinished state, and it appeared in 1982 under the title 'Mochtar is Dughall' ('Mochtar and Dougall'). The original purpose may have been to compare and contrast these two civilizations that had attracted him so strongly: the Arabic and Gaelic ones. But it is only the Arabic section that was virtually completed, while only preliminary sections of the Gaelic one were composed. This Arabic section gives an extraordinarily vivid and colourful account of three generations of an Arab family in the African desert and elsewhere, and this can well be regarded as Hay's most powerful achievement. It is fortunate that it has survived the sad but buoyant chaos of this poet's life. Hay died alone in his house, 6 Maxwell Street, Edinburgh, a victim of alcoholism, on 25 March 1984. 


@@@@@


doc= 40322


Hay, John MacDougall (1879-1919), Church of Scotland minister and novelist, was born on 23 October 1879 in Tarbert, Loch Fyne, son of Mary MacDougall and George Hay, a steamship agent. He was educated at Tarbert high school and at the University of Glasgow, where he studied natural and moral philosophy and English literature. He graduated in 1900, and became the headmaster of the Lionel public school, Ness, Lewis, later moving to teach in Ullapool. There, during a bout of rheumatic fever, he decided to enter the Church of Scotland ministry, returning to Glasgow to study divinity in 1905. He gained a first in church history and biblical criticism. 
Hay was an intense individual, deeply exercised by the content of his studies. His relentless search for a solution to the problems of evil and suffering was conducted within a tortured Christian profession. Though subject to profound inner struggle, informed by a sharp intellect and a vibrant imagination, he was well liked by contemporaries, one of whom remembered him as 'quiet and reserved, almost shy,... a man gifted beyond the ordinary, and on the rare occasions when he did talk he never lacked eager listeners' ('Glasgow Herald'). 
From his undergraduate days, and particularly during his theological training, Hay helped support himself by writing for newspapers and journals such as 'Macmillan's Magazine', 'Chambers', 'The Spectator', the 'Glasgow Herald', and the 'Glasgow Evening News', whose influential editor, Neil Munro, he later met. As natives of Argyll both men studied the mingling of highland Gaelic and lowland Scottish cultures in that area. 
After finishing his divinity studies Hay became a student missionary at Morven and was licensed by the presbytery of Inveraray in 1908. He moved to an urban parish which had Argyll connections and became assistant minister at Govan old parish church. In 1909 he was ordained and moved to a charge in Elderslie, a similarly urban parish near Paisley, Renfrewshire, to which he did not feel wholly suited; he would have preferred a highland parish. On 28 October 1909 he married Catherine Campbell ('b'. 1882/3), daughter of Janet McMillan and Duncan Campbell, a minister. They had two children: Sheena ('b'. 1911) and George Campbell Hay (1915-1984), who later became a distinguished Gaelic poet. 
John MacDougall Hay's first novel, 'Gillespie', was published in 1914 and dedicated to Neil Munro. Though its impact was blunted by the onset of the First World War, 'Gillespie' never entirely disappeared from view. The novel is set in the small fishing community of Brieston, based on Tarbert, Loch Fyne. This poor, hard-working, and gossip-ridden community is dominated by Gillespie Strang, an unscrupulous capitalist. 'Gillespie''s characterization and setting demonstrate that the seminal influence on Hay's work was George Douglas Brown's 'The House with the Green Shutters'. Both works were regarded by contemporary literary critics as a welcome counterblast against the sentimental Scottish fiction of the kailyard school. Unlike Brown, however, Hay takes a religious stance. 'Gillespie' grapples with problems of severe religious doubt expressed in the terrifying nightmares of Gillespie's son, Eoghan, who seeks some creed which will enable him to condemn his father but remain just. The Christ of the gospels seems to offer him this, but Christ's ethic, though deeply attractive, seems powerless against the suffering which Brieston endures in the tragedy of the plague and at the hands of Gillespie. In 'Gillespie' a weak Christ cannot modify the overwhelming presence of fate, which is the strongest spiritual reality in the novel, deriving its potency from the superstitious highland background of Eoghan's grandmother. 
After the publication of 'Gillespie' Hay considered leaving the ministry to take up a career in writing, but did not carry the idea through. He published another novel, 'Barnacles' (1916), set around Elderslie and Paisley. In it the struggle between good and evil in its religious dimension is more obvious. Barnacles is a holy fool whose innocence and goodness help save the heroine from the horrific abuse of an evil husband. The violence in the novel is disproportionate to the motivations of the characters and, although derangement accounts for the power of the scenes, it is not one of the novel's ostensible themes. Hay's writing was not always under his literary control. 
Hay planned a third novel, 'The Martyr', and published a volume of free verse poetry entitled 'Their Dead Sons' (1918). In 1919 'The Agony and after', his sermon commemorating the fallen, was published at the request of his congregation. In it Hay flounders between anguished descriptions and fine writing about the fallen and the meaningfulness of their deaths, 'They won their victories with their knees in the mud, but the sacrifice of their lives was the purest victory of the spirit' ('The Agony and after', 22). These works show Hay's continuing struggle with the problem of evil, particularly in the aftermath of the carnage of the First World War. However, Hay's affirmation of the doctor in 'Gillespie' who cares for the poor and the plague victims demonstrates the move from a religious to a secular outlook which was to characterize the Scottish novel in the twentieth century. 
A victim of poor health, Hay remained a parish minister until his death at the manse, Elderslie, from tuberculosis on 10 December 1919, aged forty. He was buried at the abbey cemetery, Elderslie, on 13 December. His early death, though not unexpected, was felt to be a literary loss and, taken together with George Douglas Brown's similarly early death in 1902, denied Scotland the mature vision of two of its most promising writers of the period. 


@@@@@


doc= 40323


Haddow, Sir (Thomas) Douglas (1913-1986), civil servant, was born on 9 February 1913 at Summit Schoolhouse, Crawford, Lanarkshire, the son of George Haddow, the local schoolmaster, and his wife, Helen Jamieson Stewart. He was educated at George Watson's College, Edinburgh, Edinburgh University, where he graduated with a first-class MA (honours) degree in mathematics (1932), and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he held a scholarship and read for the mathematical tripos and graduated as a wrangler in 1934. He took first place in the competition of 1935 for entry into the administrative grade of the civil service, but surprised everyone by electing to serve in the Department of Health for Scotland in Edinburgh rather than one of the more prestigious London departments. He was the first direct entrant from the administrative grade to enter the department, which had previously been staffed with executive-grade officers. On 15 September 1942 he married Margaret Ross Steven Rowat (1913/14-1969), a clerical officer in the Department of Health and the daughter of David Rowat, an Edinburgh master tailor. They had two sons. 
In 1941 Haddow became private secretary to Tom Johnston, the secretary of state for Scotland, and learned much from Johnston's assertive approach to defending the Scottish interest in Whitehall and his deep-seated desire to be seen leading Scottish attitudes. In 1943 Haddow was promoted to assistant secretary in the department. He was closely associated with the preparatory work that led to the introduction of the National Health Service in Scotland, which in contrast to England aroused very little criticism from the medical profession. He forestalled potential unrest through his appreciation of the strong relationship between medical education in the four Scottish cities and the financial position of the consultant in teaching hospitals. In 1948 he spent a year in the USA studying the health services as a fellow of the Commonwealth Fund and returned to become the under-secretary responsible for the Scottish hospital services. 
During the early 1950s Haddow played a leading role in advising ministers on the methods required to control and reduce hospital costs, largely by the introduction of time and motion studies of labour and the strict control of supplies. He subsequently advised ministers to resist a Treasury attempt to impose a boarding charge for hospital care. Haddow argued that the low income of many families in Scotland would mean the extensive use of a means test, thus raising administrative costs and transferring a significant proportion of the supposed savings to the National Assistance Board. As in the rest of the UK, the charge was not introduced. 
In 1956 Haddow became the under-secretary responsible for town and country planning and was immediately involved in the overspill arrangements designed to move a third of Glasgow's overcrowded population into new towns and other settlements across Scotland. By 1958 he saw that the overspill programme could usefully link a public-health issue with the economic regeneration of Scotland in a planned and co-ordinated manner, and he became an advocate for reorganizing the Scottish departments around this task. He devised a plan to create a development department which combined the housing and physical planning functions of the Department of Health with that of the roads, electricity supply, and development area functions of the Scottish home department. However, he failed to convince a somewhat conservative Scottish Office, whose officials opposed it. 
In December 1961 the Scottish Council (Development and Industry), SC(DI), an independent body, published a report on the Scottish economy (the Toothill report) which recommended that a Scottish development department should be established and that government regional policy should be aimed at stimulating investment in areas, such as new towns, with the potential to grow. Haddow denied that his office had influenced the report (despite the presence of departmental assessors on the SC(DI) inquiry), but in June 1962, following a reorganization of offices, a development department was finally established, of which he became secretary. After a sustained campaign at official and ministerial level, the government's regional policy was altered in the following year and led to the creation of a fifth Scottish new town at Irvine, where a number of new light industries had been established. 
Haddow became permanent under-secretary at the Scottish Office in 1965 and immediately established a regional development division (RDD) of senior officials directly responsible to his office. The group's aim was to maintain close contact with UK economic ministries in London to ensure that the Scottish interest in investment discussion was maintained more directly at official level. The period after 1965 witnessed considerable structural change in the Scottish economy with the run-down and closure of many collieries and Clydeside shipyards. Inevitably this increased unemployment, and Haddow's later career was overshadowed by repeated Scottish Office attempts to prevent closures. Such efforts masked much of the substantial work that Haddow's RDD pursued in attracting overseas investment to the new towns, which by the early 1970s totalled nearly a quarter of Scottish factory space. On his retirement from the civil service in 1973, he was made chairman of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board, combining this with part-time membership of the South of Scotland Electricity Board, an innovative appointment designed to bring the work of the two boards into closer partnership. He was appointed KCB in 1966. 
To colleagues, Haddow's approach to administration was distinguished by its energy and directness of style. His forthright manner and speed in reaching a decision often conflicted with civil service traditions, but in the context of the issues besetting post-war Scotland he helped convert a rather cautious office into one prepared to accept challenge, operate at a more strategic level, and take risks. At times this led to bitter argument, but where it affected a younger colleague Haddow usually apologized. Outside the office Haddow's main interest was in golf; his tendency to play in khaki shorts and eat a bowl of rice pudding afterwards was confirmation to many of his single-minded sense of purpose. He died in the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, on 26 December 1986 after a short illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 40331


Leatham, James (1865-1945), political activist and publisher, was born on 19 December 1865, the youngest of five children of Stephen Leatham, an army sergeant from Yorkshire, and his Scottish wife, Margaret Cattanach, a hand-loom weaver. His father died shortly after his birth and he was raised in the Rosemount area of Aberdeen by his mother and her parents in a literate, self-improving home environment where education was valued. He attended Northfield public school, where he attained dux at age ten, followed by two and a half years at Dr Brown's school, Skene Square, where he was briefly a pupil monitor. Fascinated by the world of printing and publishing, at thirteen years and eleven months he became apprentice compositor with a local firm, with whom he progressed to journeyman and then foreman until 1888, when he was sacked for leading the printers' union campaign against dilution and cheap labour. He had recently (23 December 1887) married Isabella Sinclair Duncan (1862/3-1947), a linen manufacturer's machinist, the daughter of James Duncan, a flax mill overseer, and fathered the first of their four daughters. 
From his teenage years Leatham was a political activist; initially as an ardent secularist, developing and expanding his views in literary and debating societies, and, as a leading light in Aberdeen Junior Liberal Association, organizing public meetings and lecturing on radical and collectivist themes. From the mid-1880s, increasingly influenced by the socialist writings of Lawrence Gronlund, Edward Bellamy, Peter Kropotkin, and, especially, William Morris, he became a convinced socialist. An evolutionary socialist with fundamental but non-doctrinaire views, he was committed to building an open, informed, mass membership party, aiming at a maximum socialist programme of nationalization and municipal ownership, to be achieved through political representation and popular enlightenment. 
Already a militant trade unionist, from 1888 until 1893 Leatham was principal standard bearer of the emerging socialist left in Aberdeen, leading the local branch of the Scottish Land and Labour League and latterly the Aberdeen Socialist Society, which merged into the Social Democratic Federation. Between 1889 and 1892 he ran a small printing and publishing co-operative, selling progressive and socialist literature, including his own very popular propagandist pamphlets, such as 'The Eight Hour Day' and 'The Class War'. In the winter of 1891-2 he produced 'Workers Herald', the first, though short-lived, avowedly socialist weekly paper in Scotland. 
Leatham's growing reputation as a socialist propagandist and organizer created a wider demand for his political services throughout Scotland and beyond. Between 1893 and 1896 he worked in Manchester as a compositor in the large publishing firm of Heywoods, while otherwise immersing himself in lecturing, journalism, and building Lancashire branches of the Social Democratic Federation and Independent Labour Party (ILP). In Manchester he continued as a highly effective organizer of the printing trades and led the agitation that achieved shorter hours for 4000 workers. Again he was victimized, and he briefly worked full time for the Social Democratic Federation throughout the north of England. 
Leatham returned to north-east Scotland in 1896 to edit-manage the struggling weekly paper 'Peterhead Sentinel', which he transformed into a lively production with a popular literary, anti-imperialist, and socialist slant. Nearby, from his Clerkhill Press, he concentrated, between 1905 and 1908, on writing, printing, and publishing a prolific output of pamphlets and longer works on literary and historical themes, always from consciously rationalist and socialist viewpoints. His talents as a socialist journalist and writer were further recognized when, in 1908, he was appointed editor-manager of the Worker Press, a group of ILP weekly newspapers in the West Riding of Yorkshire. His main charges were the 'Huddersfield Worker' and the 'Halifax Labour News', and he was latterly also involved in producing the 'Leeds and District Weekly Citizen' and the 'Manchester Weekly Citizen'. He resigned after failing to win shareholder support to extend the specialist socialist publishing side of the firm. 
Thereafter between 1912 and 1916 Leatham became a resolutely independent socialist printer and publisher, operating from his Cottingham Press in the East Riding of Yorkshire and from the Deveron Press in Turriff, Aberdeenshire, where he finally settled in 1916. From 1912 until his death Leatham's own periodical, 'Gateway', was his principal propagandist weapon, discoursing on politics, current affairs, literature, and cultural issues. Throughout a long career Leatham always made a precarious living from printing and publishing ventures. A prodigious journalist and a clear, direct prose stylist he wrote several books, including the delightful tribute 'William Morris: Master of many Crafts' (1899; 4th edn, 1934), and a host of titles in pamphlet form, issued from his own presses. 
Although highly critical of the record of Labour governments in 1924 and 1929-31 Leatham was elected a Labour councillor for Turriff in 1923. He also served as a leading county councillor in Aberdeenshire and as a justice of the peace. In his twelve final years he was provost of Turriff. His greatest achievements in a distinguished late career in civic life were in municipal housing, public health, and welfare provision. Leatham was appointed MBE in 1942 for his services to local government. He died at his home, 7 Hillcrest, Turriff, Aberdeenshire, on 14 December 1945 after two heart attacks, and was buried in the graveyard of St Machar's Cathedral, Aberdeen. 


@@@@@


doc= 40332


Lindsay, David (1876-1945), writer, was born on 3 March 1876 at 5 Llanberis Terrace, Lewisham, London, the third of the three children of Alexander Lindsay ('b'. 1839), bookkeeper, and his wife, Elizabeth (1841-1925), 'nee' Bellamy, of a farming family from Leamington Spa, Warwickshire. Alexander Lindsay was a borders Scot, and David spent holidays in Scotland until he was forty; he placed his roots in Scotland and traced his ancestry back to the poet Sir David Lindsay and further to a Nordic prince, Ivar. Educated at Colfe's Grammar School, Lewisham (1885-December 1890), Lindsay excelled in English, winning the school prize; but the desertion of the family by his father about 1889 forced him to leave school at fourteen and start work as an office boy with the London firm of insurance brokers Price Forbes, probably in 1891. He remained there until 1918, advancing to accountant and then confidential clerk, absent only for war service in London with the Grenadier Guards (1916-18). 
On 21 December 1916 Lindsay married the young Jacqueline Silver (1898-1965), with whom he had two daughters, in 1919 and 1922. In 1918 he resigned from Price Forbes (although he had been offered the post of office manager), and committed himself, as he had long planned, to the untried life of a novelist, settling in 1919 at St Columb Minor, Cornwall. There he wrote the interplanetary romance 'A Voyage to Arcturus' (1920), the supernatural fictions 'The Haunted Woman' (1922), 'Sphinx' (1923), and what became 'Devil's Tor' (1932), and the historical novel 'The Adventures of Monsieur de Mailly' (1926). Two other fantastic works, 'The Violet Apple' (1924-6) and 'The Witch' (1932-45) remained unpublished, the latter being unfinished at Lindsay's death. 
Most of Lindsay's novels had difficulty finding publishers, were poorly reviewed, and sold badly, despite attempts by him to accommodate his vision to contemporary taste. Only the sturdy asceticism and other-worldliness of the author, which most of his novels expound, kept him at work through long years of self-isolation and poverty and the growing restiveness of his wife. In 1928 the Lindsays moved to a rural bungalow at Ferring, near Worthing, in Sussex; and in 1938 to a town house in Hove where Jacqueline Lindsay took in lodgers, and where Lindsay became increasingly reclusive and distant. 
Lindsay's novels seem more metaphysically inspired than personal: they are full of an intense vision of a sublime reality beyond all human desires, utterly alien, cold, and solitary, and yet apprehended, particularly through great music and through spiritual pain, as the soul's home. While this philosophy has a unique, if restricted, power which was buttressed by Lindsay's reading in Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, and mystics of the 'negative way', it was in part the expression of his own frustrated experience of the world. Lindsay is best known for 'A Voyage to Arcturus'. This long-gestated book is Lindsay's gnostic outlook at its fiercest, describing a journey to an imaginary planet of violently contrastive landscapes and creatures, where the hero Maskull is continually tempted by various forms of pleasure or self-denial, and by rejecting them all learns the sublimity of the god Muspel. Stylistically the book works superbly by constantly subverting the reader's expectations in parallel with those of the protagonist. 
Lindsay's other books are set in the 1920s English society he had contemptuously encountered; they reject superficiality, and feature a passionate love which mutates into spiritual awakening and sometimes death. 'The Haunted Woman' is a striking picture of a conventional relationship transformed intermittently by a vision of another world seen from an ancient house. In Lindsay's longest novel, the Jamesian 'Devil's Tor', the central characters realize that they are the last representatives of an ancient spiritual force which must renew itself through their marriage. Lindsay here subverts the reader's novelistic expectations by revealing all apparently human thoughts and conversations as actually the workings of a transcendent destinal agency. Lindsay's last book, the overwritten 'The Witch', returns us to the world-renouncing vision of 'A Voyage', a journey of the alone towards the Alone. 
In the scant photographs available of Lindsay, he looks the quintessential man of his times. Calm and good-humoured with his family, if shy and cold with others, he was always inwardly frustrated, tormented, and spiritually stricken. Lindsay died of vascular disease and cancer at 193 Upper Shoreham Road, Kingston by Sea, Shoreham, Sussex, on 16 July 1945. He was buried in an unmarked grave in nearby Lancing. Some fame then ironically came to him, through the enthusiasm of influential individuals and a public increasingly more receptive to visionary fantasy. 


@@@@@


doc= 40335


MacBrayne, David (bap. 1817, d. 1907), shipowner, was baptized on 25 December 1817 in the Barony parish of Glasgow, the son of David MacBrayne, registrar of births in the Barony parish, and Elizabeth Stevenson Burns, daughter of the Revd Dr John Burns of the Barony Church. After initial training as a typefounder, he joined a shipping firm to train as a clerk. This was probably in the office of his uncles, George and James Burns, who in 1830 had established the City of Glasgow Steam Packet Company, trading between Glasgow, Liverpool, Belfast, and Londonderry. The Burns's partners in this were two Liverpool Scots, David and Charles MacIver; it was George Burns and David MacIver who joined with Samuel Cunard as founding partners of what became the Cunard Line. 
In developing their Scottish business G. and J. Burns acquired the Castle Line in 1845, a west highland service. However, in 1848 they sold it to a partnership of their shipping clerk, David Hutcheson, his brother Alexander, and their young nephew David MacBrayne. The new company was operated as David and Alexander Hutcheson & Co., with MacBrayne as a junior partner. This company was early into the competition to open up access to the western highlands and islands, where the advent of the steamer offered the prospect of developing regular services for freight and passengers. Another potential market, in the tourist trade, was simultaneously emerging. Queen Victoria had travelled by track boat through the Crinan Canal in 1847, then onward by steamer via Loch Linnhe to Fort William, and through the Caledonian Canal to Inverness. The 'royal route' through the wild splendour of the Western Isles and highlands had been pioneered, and David MacBrayne and his partners were quick to develop it, initially with second-hand tonnage. New purpose-built vessels quickly followed, the first being the 'Iona' in 1855. This introduced Hutchesons' 'crack' steamers offering a new style of service combining speed, regularity, comfort, and economy, all under the watchful eye of David MacBrayne, who was responsible for the supervision of the ships and their accommodation. This formula brought them success during thirty years of partnership from 1848 to 1878, during which time the Hutchesons and MacBrayne developed a fleet of fifteen steamers, competing vigorously with the railway ones. The Hutchesons retired between 1876 and 1878 leaving MacBrayne as sole proprietor of his renamed David MacBrayne & Co. 
This was the prelude to ten years of vigorous expansion, even though MacBrayne was in his sixties. Ten new vessels were added to make MacBrayne's the pre-eminent service to the islands and highlands. He also skilfully captured a large part of the seasonal tourist trade by developing a variety of daily tours, and longer excursions for which he wrote and published a full-coloured guide in 1878. By the end of the 1880s he operated 28 ships employing 750 men afloat and 700 onshore. This earned the company the famous tag: '
The earth it is the Lord's and all that it contains, 

Except the Western Isles and they are all MacBraynes. 

' Loyalty was a strong feature of the company, most of his men having twenty-five years' or more service with him. His red-funnelled vessels developed a high reputation under his careful and detailed administration.David MacBrayne was totally absorbed by his shipping business, and did not marry until 1860. His wife, Robina Eckford Robertson, was the daughter of an Edinburgh banker, Lawrence Robertson. They had two sons and a daughter. The sons, David Hope MacBrayne and Lawrence MacBrayne, joined their widowed father as partners in 1902, when he was already in ill health. David MacBrayne finally withdrew from active business in 1905, the partnership converting to a limited company with the elder son, David, as chairman and managing director. Even then David MacBrayne kept in constant touch with the affairs of the business, which had been his life for nearly sixty years. He had had little time for, or interest in, other commitments, though he served dutifully on the Clyde Navigation Trust in the 1860s, and as a JP for Glasgow. He died at his home, 11 Park Circus Place, Glasgow, on 26 January 1907. At his death, his name was synonymous with shipping services to the highlands and the western and northern isles. His sons actively developed the business bearing his name, which was subsequently absorbed into a larger conglomerate. 


@@@@@


doc= 40336


MacDonald, Thomas Joseph Douglas (1906-1975), novelist, was born on 4 March 1906 at 9 White's Place, Montrose, the younger of the two children of Donald MacDonald, shoemaker, and his wife, Jessie Anderson Douglas. The family were Plymouth Brethren, and in accordance with their beliefs MacDonald was not baptized as an infant; he was later to react strongly against the Calvinist theological background which dominated his childhood experience. His father was a Gaelic speaker from Inverness, and in adult life MacDonald came to espouse passionately the cause of the Gaelic language; his mother was a native of north-east Scotland. 
MacDonald's early years were spent in Montrose with his parents and elder sister, Elizabeth; he was educated at Montrose Academy ('c'.1917-1923) and Aberdeen Teacher Training College (1923-5), coming out first in Scotland in his final examination. In his youth he became friendly with the great Scottish poet C. M. Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid), a near neighbour in Links Avenue, Montrose, whose Scottish nationalist convictions he shared, and who was to offer great encouragement to the literary aspirations of the precociously talented young man. 
At the early age of nineteen MacDonald took up his first appointment as headmaster of Laide public school in the district of Gairloch in Ross-shire. Here he was deeply affected by the legacy of the highland clearances and by what he saw as the life-denying assaults of highland Calvinism on the Gaelic language and culture. His anger was later to find a devastating satirical outlet in his first novel, 'The Albannach' (1932), the story of the frustrations (eventually in part overcome) of a young contemporary highlander. For this novel he adopted the pseudonym Fionn Mac Colla, which was retained for the remainder of his writing career. 
In 1926 MacDonald left Scotland to teach for three years at the United Free Church of Scotland's college at Safed in Palestine. One of the subjects he taught was history, and while teaching it he was by his own account powerfully struck by 'two marks of historical Catholicism -- its conception of man's Unity and its faculty of self-renewal' (Mac Colla, 'Too Long in this Condition', 77). On his return from Palestine he made contacts in the predominantly Roman Catholic parts of the Outer Hebrides, and it was a priest at Iochdar in South Uist who introduced him to the works of Jacques Maritain and to Thomist philosophy, an influence which (together with his passion for the classics of Russian literature) was to prove decisive in the formation of both his peculiar cast of mind and his means of expression. 
In 1929 MacDonald returned to Scotland to devote himself to the Scottish movement (the National Party of Scotland had been formed the previous year), and to writing. For a year he studied Gaelic at Glasgow University, but was forced to give up through lack of funds. In 1930 he moved to Edinburgh to work on the journal the 'Free Man', and later was for a time employed as a literary adviser by the New University Society; but the 1930s were years of sporadic employment and great economic hardship. Hugh MacDiarmid arranged for the publication of 'The Albannach' by the firm of John Heritage, of which he was a director, and praised the novel in print both uncompromisingly and acutely. During the years 1934-8 MacDonald was working on his second book, 'And the Cock Crew', perhaps his masterpiece, a classic novel of the highland clearances notable for its grandeur of language and conception and its acute psychological and socio-historical insights. Hopes of early publication were dashed by the outbreak of the Second World War, and the novel did not appear until 1945. Regarded by Hugh MacDiarmid as by far the most radical products of the Scottish Renaissance movement in the field of fiction, these two novels failed however to reach a wide public and remained the only two of MacDonald's works of fiction to be published in their entirety during his lifetime. 
MacDonald was received into the Roman Catholic church at Dundee on 31 December 1935, and shortly thereafter, on 24 January 1936, he married Mary Doyle (1911-1999) at St Peter's and St Paul's Roman Catholic Church, Dundee. They were to raise a family of ten children (three sons and seven daughters). Determined to bring up his family in a Catholic and Gaelic-speaking environment, MacDonald moved in January 1941 to the Western Isles as headmaster of Torlum School on Benbecula, transferring to a similar post on the island of Barra in 1946. In all he spent nearly twenty years in the Gaidhealtachd, years which he was later to describe as 'a never-ending horror of totally schizoid activity' (Mac Colla, 'Mein bumpf'), for he felt that the exigencies of his position had forced him against his will to participate in the de-Gaelicization of his pupils and to strangle his own creative and speculative talent. 
Nevertheless, MacDonald continued to write. His major effort during these years was a historical novel which attempted to penetrate to the root causes of the Reformation within the human soul, and to address once again the profound interrelatedness of the three developments with which he was preoccupied all his writing life: the loss of Scottish nationhood, the decline of the Gaelic language, and the ascendancy in Scotland of Reformation protestantism. Uncompromising in theme and approach, and making few concessions to the ordinary reader (much of the dialogue reflects sixteenth-century Scots usage), 'Move up, John' failed to find a publisher, and a pattern of rejection and frustration was established which was to dog MacDonald for the rest of his career. Fragments were issued separately as 'Scottish Noel' (1958) and 'Ane Tryall of Heretiks' (1962); the complete novel was published posthumously only in 1994. Another novel from these years, a little more optimistic in outlook, depicts with acerbic psychological observation what happens in a west highland parish when the minister starts having mystical experiences; it was published as 'The Ministers' in 1979, four years after the author's death. In the 1950s he wrote one more novel, 'Facing the Muzhik' (still unpublished; National Library of Scotland, deposit 265), which, using the framework of an adventure story in the manner of John Buchan, addresses questions about the political and social development of Russia in terms of its religious history; but it too failed to find an outlet. 
In 1960 MacDonald left the Western Isles to settle in Edinburgh, where he taught until his retirement in 1967, living first at 40A Morningside Park and latterly, when most of his children had left home, at 51 Warrender Park Road. By this time he had abandoned any real hope of the publication of his later fiction. He did, however, publish a brilliant exposition of his philosophical ideas in 'At the Sign of the Clenched Fist' (1967), and made a final attempt to propagate his religious and political convictions in the form of a lively, idiosyncratic, and opinionated autobiographical work, 'Too Long in this Condition', which appeared in 1975 about a month after his death. 
As a personality, Tom MacDonald was complex and arresting. With a tall and distinguished physical presence and impressive facial features, he had latterly much of the look of an 'Old Testament' prophet; and the prophet, too, was an essential ingredient of his temperament. Ebullient and witty when in good form, and a brilliant talker and anecdotalist, he could also be moody, depressed, touchy, and difficult to deal with. In his later years he was undoubtedly an embittered and frustrated man, and not without reason. As well as the three novels which remained unpublished at the time of his death, he left manuscripts of an account of the Russian prison system under the tsars, entitled 'The tsars' white hell' and dating from the early 1950s, and an untitled continuation of his autobiography. He was stung equally by the lack of any general recognition of his achievements as a writer (though his work was often highly praised by perceptive commentators), and by what he saw as his failure to communicate to a wide public the urgency of the ideas which he so vehemently advocated. He continued committed to the end, however, taking, for instance, an active part in the upsurge of Scottish nationalist politics of the late 1960s and early 1970s. 
MacDonald died of heart failure in Edinburgh Royal Infirmary on 20 July 1975. He was cremated at Mortonhall crematorium, and his ashes were buried at Mount Vernon cemetery, Edinburgh, on 24 July 1975. His wife survived him. After his death MacDonald's reputation grew steadily if unspectacularly, and with the publication of two of his later novels it became possible to attempt a more accurate assessment of his work as a whole. It is undoubtedly true that the achievement of his full potential as a novelist was frustrated by the conflict between what he distinguished as the 'creative' and 'speculative' sides of his talent: his great novelistic gifts never quite overcame his penchant for abstract philosophical analysis, so that, especially in his later fiction, the ideas were imperfectly integrated into the overall structure of the novels. Yet he was a born writer with a strong and subtle intellect, whose powers of precise and telling expression exactly matched his capacity for physical and psychological observation. In spite of structural imperfections his works have a linguistic power and a largeness of conception which succeed in imparting an acute and original vision of the forces which have shaped Scottish reality, both historical and contemporary. 


@@@@@


doc= 40341


McMillan, Roderick Macaulay (1923-1979), actor and playwright, was born on 23 March 1923 in the Anderston district of Glasgow, the second of the two children of Duncan McMillan (1880-1964), a foreman docker, and Rachel Macaulay (1879-1935). Roddy McMillan was born into a Gaelic-speaking family -- his father came from Ardnamurchan in Argyll and his mother from the Isle of Harris -- and the highland inheritance informed much of his work as an actor and playwright. Religion proved to be unimportant for him despite his strictly Presbyterian upbringing. He was educated at Finnieston public school, Glasgow, leaving at the age of fourteen. The only early sign of performance talent was in playing drums with the Boys' Brigade. 
Between 1938 and 1945 McMillan worked briefly as a delivery van boy for a biscuit factory but was soon apprenticed to a glass beveller and lens grinder. He subsequently attended night school as part of his training in the Rolls-Royce aero-engineering factory. By 1941 McMillan was taking an interest in amateur acting and, encouraged by the actor Duncan Macrae who had taught him at Finnieston, he joined Glasgow Unity Theatre. He married Jean Alexander Bell (1923-1996) in December 1943; their first daughter, Sine, was born in 1944 and their second, Norma, in 1947. 
Unity turned professional in 1946. McMillan decided to stay with them to follow a theatrical career, making his London debut in 'The Gorbals Story' in February 1948. When Unity broke up, James Bridie was instrumental in McMillan's joining the Glasgow Citizens' Theatre Company in 1950. 
McMillan soon established himself as a character actor of considerable stature, with a distinct gift for comedy. His style, described by David Hutchison as 'contemporary urban naturalism' (Hutchison, 5), was clearly the legacy of Unity's repertoire of Russian classics and social realism. McMillan was a regular member of the Citizens' until 1956, acting in a wide range of plays from Shakespeare to new Scottish writers, from J. Bridie and J. B. Priestley to Christmas pantomimes. 
However, it was as a playwright that McMillan saw his future. His first play 'All in Good Faith', initially rejected by the Citizens', was eventually produced by them in 1954. The reviews were harshly critical, claiming that it presented an unrealistic picture of contemporary life. McMillan was disillusioned and it was nineteen years before he wrote his second play. Nevertheless the play illustrates his particular gift in utilizing the Scots dialect to communicate with an audience. 
With the gradual decline of repertory theatre McMillan moved successfully into television, where he worked regularly from 1959. He was best known in the title role in 'The View from Daniel Pike' (1971), as Para Handy in 'The Vital Spark' series (1974), and as Choc Minty in 'Hazell' (1978). He also enjoyed credits as a supporting actor in films such as 'Morning Departure' (1950), 'The Battle of the Sexes' (1960), and 'Ring of Bright Water' (1969). 
It was not until the early 1970s, however, that McMillan really emerged as a leading figure on the Scottish stage when, in an attempt to revive interest in new Scottish drama, Bill Bryden formed a company of leading Scottish actors at Edinburgh's Lyceum Theatre. McMillan played Jake in Bryden's 'Willie Rough' (1971) and then, encouraged by Bryden, he wrote 'The Bevellers'. The Lyceum's production (1973) was instantly successful with McMillan playing Bob Darnley. This play became a significant influence on a generation of new Scottish playwrights. 
Throughout his life McMillan was keenly interested in Scottish ballads and folk music. He composed and published many songs, including 'Campbeltown Loch'. Theatre was not only his profession but also his private passion. He was on the board of the Duncan Macrae Memorial Trust and between 1953 and 1968 he was an active committee member of Scottish Actors Equity. His only recreation, apart from playwriting, was fly-fishing. 
McMillan was a small, stockily built man with sandy coloured hair and a strong and charismatic personality. On his recovery from a period of alcoholism he devoted a considerable time to helping others with similar problems. A man of generous spirit in public and in private, with a pawky sense of humour, he was highly regarded by his colleagues. In 1972 he won a television personality award and in 1979 he became an OBE. 
McMillan died suddenly, of a heart attack, at Glasgow Royal Infirmary on 9 July 1979. He was cremated on 12 July at Linn crematorium in Glasgow. In 1982 a new variety of rose, the 'Roddy McMillan', commissioned as a memorial by his friends and colleagues, was introduced at the Chelsea Flower Show. 


@@@@@


doc= 40342


Macmurray, John (1891-1976), moral philosopher, was born on 16 February 1891 in Maxwellton, near Dumfries, Kirkcudbrightshire, the son of James Macmurray (1854-1933), an excise agent in the civil service, and his wife, Mary Anna Grierson (1867-1973). Following a family move to the north-east of Scotland, Macmurray was educated at Aberdeen grammar school and Robert Gordon College -- also in Aberdeen -- before proceeding to Glasgow University (1909-13) to read classics. In 1913 he secured a Snell exhibition to study at Balliol College, Oxford, but his philosophical studies were interrupted by the outbreak of the First World War. 
After the outbreak of war Macmurray joined the medical corps in October 1914. Two years later, however, concluding that he was part of the British war machine, he enlisted as an officer in the Cameron Highlanders. In 1918 he was wounded in the defence of Arras and awarded the MC. He returned to Oxford as the John Locke scholar and completed his degree course in 1919. He had married, in 1916, Elizabeth Hyde Campbell (1891-1982), an artist from Banchory. As a result of an ectopic pregnancy their marriage was childless. 
Macmurray held teaching posts in philosophy at Manchester University (1919-21), Witwatersrand, Johannesburg (1921-2), and Balliol College, Oxford (1923-8) before his appointment in 1928 to the Grote chair of the philosophy of mind and logic at London University. He remained there until 1944, when he returned to Scotland to the chair of moral philosophy at Edinburgh University, the post from which he retired in 1958. 
Throughout the 1930s Macmurray established a reputation as a popular, if controversial, BBC radio broadcaster on cultural, political, and ethical topics. He was regarded as an inspirational teacher, particularly in Edinburgh, where philosophy remained a compulsory subject for all arts students. Although his thought was deeply religious he remained outside institutional Christianity, until in 1958 he and his wife took up residence in the Quaker community at Jordans, Buckinghamshire. They were subsequently received into membership of the Society of Friends, whose pacifism and lack of doctrinal definition attracted Macmurray. They lived and worked in the community at Jordans for ten years before returning to Edinburgh. Macmurray died at his Edinburgh home, 8 Mansionhouse Road, on 21 June 1976 and was survived by his wife. He was cremated at Mortonhall crematorium, Edinburgh, on 25 June, and his remains were interred at the Quaker burial-ground in Jordans. 
Several publications arose out of Macmurray's 1930s radio broadcasts, including 'Freedom in the Modern World' (1932); but his most significant philosophical work were his Gifford lectures, delivered in Glasgow in 1953-4. The two published volumes comprise 'The Self as Agent' (1957) and 'Persons in Relation' (1961). He was awarded an LLD degree by Glasgow University in 1954. 
Macmurray's sympathy for Marxism, particularly in his writings for the Christian left in the 1930s, derives from the view that material and organic processes must be used for the sake of personal freedom. A just socio-economic order and a classless society are necessary conditions of genuine human community. None the less, Macmurray's early affinity with Marxism did not extend to its radical criticism of religion. While hostile to other-worldly forms of Christianity he insisted that religion can enhance personal life. It exercises a vital social function in uniting persons across national and racial boundaries. It enables people to overcome fear of death and of one another. Fear, not hatred, is the antithesis of love. In this respect, ritual and fellowship are primary in religion; belief and doctrine are secondary. Macmurray was here strongly influenced by Hebraic thought forms over against Roman and Greek traditions. For the 'Old Testament', religion is not a compartment of life. It shapes all of personal, social, and national life. The significance of Jesus resides in his transforming Judaism from a national to a universal religion. His central vision is of the kingdom of God on earth. This regard for Hebrew religion led Macmurray into sharp public criticism of the antisemitism integral to national socialism in the 1930s. 
In his Gifford lectures Macmurray's philosophical vision is presented with greater precision. The egocentric and disembodied self of Cartesian thought is roundly attacked. Macmurray substitutes the 'I do' for the 'I think'. The self is more adequately described in terms of agency than thought. The agent is rooted in a material and social world in which identity is determined relationally. In his analysis of the mother-child relation, Macmurray argues that the child's identity is shaped by the intentions of its mother. Skills are acquired through linguistic communication rather than mere instinct. All experience is thus shared experience, and all existence irreducibly social. The child's well-being is dependent both on the mother's continual love and on her willingness to enable her child to become a free agent. A family is maintained by bonds of mutual affection and friendship between all possible pairs of its members. In this respect it is a model for every society. The task of politics is to apply this model under the conditions of economic and social life. 
Macmurray's influence continues to grow, as is evident in the recent reissue of his major publications. His philosophical work can now be seen as one of several twentieth-century protests against the distorting effects of Cartesianism. Although his work was largely ignored by the professional guild of philosophers, the relational and holistic description of the self he presents has attracted the attention of social scientists and theologians. A John Macmurray Society was formed in Canada in 1971 and later superseded by the International John Macmurray Association. In the UK, the John Macmurray Fellowship was formed in 1993. His influence upon a generation of students has been significant, if harder to quantify. Macmurray's relational vision of human society now resonates with late twentieth-century communitarian trends in political thought, while the acknowledged influence on Prime Minister Tony Blair's early political development has brought renewed public attention. 


@@@@@


doc= 40347


Milne, Sir David (1896-1972), civil servant, was born at 14 Comely Bank, Edinburgh, on 11 March 1896, the son of David Munro Milne, a Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Jane Mackay. He attended Daniel Stewart's College, Edinburgh, where he excelled as a pupil, becoming dux and gold medallist. He then entered Edinburgh University, but when the First World War intervened he took a commission in the 9th Royal Scots, being wounded while serving with the 51st Highland division in France. On demobilization in 1919 he returned to Edinburgh, where he gained a first-class MA degree in classics and the John Welsh and Vans Dunlop scholarships. In 1921 he entered the Scottish Office, then based in London, as an assistant principal. He married on 23 August 1928 at the High Pavement Chapel, Nottingham, Maud Winifrede Mary Greg Kilroy ('b'. 1901/2), the daughter of Lancelot Kilroy, a surgeon-captain in the Royal Navy. They had a son and a daughter. 
In 1928 Milne was appointed private secretary to the permanent under-secretary of state at the Scottish Office and in 1930 became private secretary to the Scottish secretary. It was in this office, during the minority Labour government, that he was first able to demonstrate his administrative talents, combining sympathy and tact with an ability to appreciate ministerial wishes and act as an interpreter between them and the civil servants' views on the nature of the Scottish interest. The hitherto devolutionary views of the ministerial team were rarely found in the memoranda submitted to the cabinet and in other correspondence. In 1935 he was promoted assistant secretary to head the newly established local government branch, based in Edinburgh. The branch was meant to signify an element of administrative devolution in Scottish affairs by ensuring that Scottish institutions could deal with a senior official in Scotland without travelling to London and paralleled the establishment of the Scottish special areas commissioner (who also reported to the Scottish secretary). His ability to deal with the commissioner with discretion (and prevent too ready an experimentation of state intervention in economic affairs) and generally ensure a better acquaintance between domestic institutions and the Scottish Office saw him promoted in September 1939 to deputy secretary of the Scottish home department. This department was newly created on the reorganization of the Scottish offices, and was based in Edinburgh. He became its secretary in 1942. 
In 1945 Milne was appointed permanent under-secretary of state to the Scottish Office on the retirement of Sir Horace Perkins Hamilton. It was not an automatic succession. The Scottish secretary, Tom Johnston, had wanted a previous Scottish health department secretary, William Scott Douglas; there were also doubts whether Milne had the character to operate with authority as head of the four rather disparate Edinburgh departments (dealing with agriculture, education, health, and home affairs) and the reputation to check the growing centrifugal force of Scottish domestic opinion. However, Douglas had been earmarked for the Ministry of Health and the other Scottish alternatives appeared to have even more cogent administrative weaknesses to operate at that level. Milne remained in the post until he retired in autumn 1959. 
During Milne's period as permanent under-secretary the Scottish Office was transformed from a rather minor Whitehall department that dealt mainly with re-drafting English bills and generally adapting English departmental deliberation to meet the exigencies of Scots law into a major department that often as not insisted that Scottish conditions demanded special consideration. Much of this was due to Milne's desire to deal effectively with the forces of Scottish centrifugalism, particularly the nationalists, who argued that unemployment and social deprivation could be more effectively reduced by home rule. In the late 1940s, using his contacts with Scottish institutions (then anti-nationalist, although somewhat reluctant to state their views in public) and the press, he carefully co-ordinated a ministerial campaign to deflate the Scottish covenant movement (which had gathered over 1 million signatures in favour of a Scottish parliament) with minor political concessions. The corollary of this was an official policy that sought to maximize government subvention of Scottish provision. During the 1950s, under Milne's guidance, Scottish officials were able to ensure government acceptance of the idea that Scottish provision should equal that in England, despite an increasingly lower rate (and tax) base. Milne even argued that to satisfy Scottish opinion of the benefits of the union, such provision ought, on occasion, to demonstrate that it exceeded that in England. 
In administrative affairs Milne was essentially a club man, preferring to meet, talk, and agree a matter with others rather than resort to lengthy minutes and correspondence. His unobtrusiveness and unassuming manner might have suggested lack of authority and unwillingness to deal with matters directly, but his brand of comfortable unionism had successfully managed Scottish affairs since the nineteenth century. In a period of increased government intervention in social and economic affairs and when Scottish institutions were more likely to be affected by that intervention, his administrative style and ability to select deputies of similar mind did much to ensure that Scottish opinion felt able to work and prosper with the United Kingdom government. 
In 1958 Milne published 'The Scottish Office', one of the series of books published on Whitehall departments by the Institute of Public Administration. He was knighted in 1947 and became a knight grand cross on retirement in 1959. In private life Milne liked to listen to music and generally appreciate the arts. He was chairman of the Scottish National Orchestra Society, 1961-70, as well as a governor of the BBC in Scotland, 1960-65. He died at the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, on 4 February 1972; his wife had predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 40348


Morrison, Sir (William) Murray (1873-1948), metallurgist and electrical engineer, was born on 7 October 1873 at Birchwood, Lower Drummond, Inverness, the younger child of William Morrison ('b'. 1841/1844), wood merchant and shipowner, and his wife, Marjory, daughter of Charles Innes, solicitor. Educated at Inverness College in 1889 he went to Edinburgh University to study natural philosophy; in 1892-3 he attended the West of Scotland Technical College, Glasgow. He trained at various engineering works in Glasgow, and then began a career in the aluminium industry. 
British Aluminium was established in May 1894 to extract the metal by using electricity generated at the Falls of Foyers, Inverness-shire, through the new Hall-Herrault process, and, at twenty, Morrison, whose maternal grandfather was associated with the company, joined it as its first engineer. Lord Kelvin, later joint technical adviser to British Aluminium with Morrison, who became a personal friend, designed some of the equipment. The process was imperfectly understood, but Morrison improved it by trial and error. On 15 June 1896 Foyers opened, and within a year it was producing one tenth of the world's aluminium. When it closed in 1967 much of the original equipment was still in use, a testimony to the conception and execution of the scheme. 
After 1904 Morrison worked on Kinlochleven, six times bigger than Foyers, which involved building a village, a huge reservoir, a power plant, and a smelter. The complex opened in 1908, in a remote Scottish glen, and in that year Morrison became general manager and sole technical adviser. On 13 June 1913 he married, in London (where the company had its headquarters), Marie Vera Markel ('b'. 1887/8), the daughter of Dr K. E. Markel, a chemist. The Morrisons, who had one daughter, lived in London, in Kent, and later in Norfolk, though Murray remained dedicated to things Scottish: he was a collector, a skating and curling enthusiast, and a member of the Clan Moriston Society. 
After 1924 Morrison worked on the great Lochaber scheme. This involved the then longest tunnel of its kind in the world, under the foot of Ben Nevis, which was inaugurated by his wife. The scheme was opened in December 1929, expanded by 1938, and completed in 1943, and involved Canadian troops. Morrison became managing director of British Aluminium in 1927 and deputy chairman in 1934. He was largely responsible for technically innovative, socially ambitious, and, at times, controversial projects, for solving scientific problems and negotiating with the powerful interests affected, and for drafting the acts of parliament which transformed the landscape and economy of the highlands. 
Morrison became associated with production in Norway in 1907 when British Aluminium established reduction facilities at Stangfjord and Kristiansand. In recognition of this he was created commander of the order of St Olav in 1933. He was acknowledged as a leading authority in other countries, and at home he gave valuable evidence to government committees investigating hydro-electric power. He was associated with the construction of factories for the production of alumina at Burntisland, Fife, in 1918, which was convenient for the company's operations in both Scotland and Norway, and at Newport, Monmouthshire, in 1938; he also helped to establish a state-of-the-art rolling mill, essential to the war effort, at Falkirk in 1944. He was knighted in 1943. 
Morrison had charm, foresight, judgement, and energy. He was essentially a practical man whose expertise spanned several disciplines: he was a founder member of the Institute of Metals, a council member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, a vice-president of the Faraday Society, a fellow of the Institute of Physics, and an early advocate of the National Physical Laboratory. When the Institute of Metals honoured him in 1942 with its platinum medal he first paid tribute to his collaborators. Morrison retired in 1947. He died of cancer at his home, 29 Bramham Gardens, Kensington, London, on 21 May 1948, and was cremated. His wife survived him. 
Through his outstanding scientific and managerial abilities Sir Murray Morrison established the industrial use of hydro-electric power in the highlands and significantly developed economical ways of extracting aluminium, previously a rare metal. According to an obituary, not only was he responsible for the creation of a new Scottish industry, but 'The ramifications of that enterprise spread through half the world' ('Chemical Age', 5 June 1948). 


@@@@@


doc= 40349


Morton, Alastair James Fagan (1910-1963), textile manufacturer and abstract painter, was born on 12 February 1910 at Home Acres, Brampton Road, Carlisle (now Cumbria College of Art and Design), the elder son and fifth of the six children of Sir James Morton (1867-1943) and Beatrice Emily Fagan (1871-1958). Both his father and grandfather Alexander Morton (1844-1923) were textile manufacturers. 
Morton was educated at St George's School, Harpenden, but his attendance was dogged by illness, which permanently impaired his heart. In 1929-30 he studied mathematics at Edinburgh University before going to Balliol College, Oxford, where he spent a year. On 17 September 1931 he married Flavia Birrell (1910-2001), whom he had met at school. They had three children: Alec ('b'. 1932); Joslyn ('b'. 1934), a sculptor who married the artist Joe Tilson in 1956; and Rachel ('b'. 1938). 
Morton joined Morton Sundour Fabrics Ltd, an offshoot of the family firm of Alexander Morton & Co., in 1931. In 1932 he moved to Edinburgh Weavers, a research unit established by his father in 1928 to pioneer fabric design in keeping with contemporary architecture and interior decoration. Morton emerged as a designer of considerable talent, and was appointed the unit's artistic director. Edinburgh Weavers became the most innovative textile producers in Britain, as Morton commissioned leading artists and designers to design fabrics of outstanding originality and quality. Perhaps the high point of its pre-war production was the range of 'constructivist fabrics' of 1937, featuring designs by, among others, Ben Nicholson, Barbara Hepworth, and Ashley Havinden. 
Morton began painting in 1936, and is best-known for his abstract work in the modernist style. He was one of a small group of artists in pre-war Britain who championed the new movement, and showed in exhibitions such as 'Living Art in England' at the London Gallery, London (1939), 'Abstract Paintings by Nine British Artists' at the Lefevre Gallery, London (1939), and 'England Today', a touring exhibition shown in Melbourne and Sydney in 1940. His work was shown alongside that of artists who included Piet Mondrian, Naum Gabo, Barbara Hepworth, and Henry Moore. After the war he began to create exquisitely rendered botanical drawings (examples of which are in the Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester). His commitment to modernist architecture was shown in 1936, when he commissioned Brackenfell, near Brampton, Carlisle, a house designed by Leslie Martin and Sadie Speight into which he moved with his family in 1937. 
Delicate health prevented Morton from fighting in the war, and he worked as a photographer for the National Buildings Record before studying handweaving and spinning with Ethel Mairet in Sussex during the winter of 1943-4. In 1945 he and Flavia divorced, and in July he married (Mary Isabella) Cherry Lawson (1907-1998). They moved to the Lake District, where they lived until Morton's death and where he set up a handweaving studio to produce striking ranges of fabrics and rugs. They had one child, Alison ('b'. 1946), a handweaver and designer. Between 1947 and 1954 Morton designed a popular and critically acclaimed series of dress prints for Horrockses Fashions Ltd, of Preston, while restrictions after the war led him to experiment with ramie fibre, as well as cowhair and wool. In 1946 he launched his 'unit prints', a system of screen prints that could be mixed and matched at will. 
Morton became increasingly concerned with teaching design, and during the 1940s regularly wrote articles and lectured on the subject to bodies such as the Design and Industries Association and the Cotton Board, who commissioned him to enquire into the state of textile design in 1944. He also became assessor for textiles for the four central Scottish art schools. He led a renaissance at Edinburgh Weavers between 1955 and 1963 as a new generation of artists including William Scott, Victor Vasarely, and Marino Marini designed fabrics for him and allowed their images to be used for production. At the same time his professional responsibilities grew, culminating in his appointment as chief executive director of Morton Sundour Fabrics Ltd in 1962. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Industrial Artists in 1947, was made an honorary designer of the Royal College of Art in 1954, and became a royal designer for industry and a member of the Council of Industrial Design in 1960. In 1961 Edinburgh Weavers received the royal warrant of appointment, with Morton as warrant-holder. His hobbies included hill farming (in particular the breeding of Belted Galloways), photography, natural history, and music. He died of heart failure at his home -- Hollows, Dockray, near Penrith -- on 30 June 1963, and was cremated at Carlisle crematorium on 3 July. 
Morton was a pioneer of modernism in Britain. His innovative textile designing and weaving, his enlightened commissioning of other artists, his practical knowledge of textile manufacture and willingness to experiment, and his work as a painter have secured him a permanent place in the history of twentieth-century design. Edinburgh Weavers changed the face of the European textile industry, while Morton's achievements as a painter have been recognized more recently in various exhibitions, including those at the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh, and Abbot Hall Art Gallery, Kendal. His work, both as a painter and as a textile designer and weaver, is represented in many public collections, most importantly those in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; the Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester; the Abbot Hall Art Gallery, Kendal; and the Craft Study Centre at the Surrey Institute of Art and Design. 


@@@@@


doc= 40350


Muirhead, Roland Eugene (1868-1964), Scottish nationalist and businessman, was born on 24 July 1868 at Lochwinnoch, Renfrewshire, Scotland, the second son of Andrew Muirhead (died 1885), the owner of the Gryffe tannery, and his wife, Isabella Reid. He was educated in Glasgow high school and at the age of fifteen he started a four-year apprenticeship at his father's tannery. When he was nineteen he emigrated to South America and worked as a cattlehand, and eventually moved north to the United States to live in an Owenite colony in Washington state. He subsequently claimed that this experience had shaped his belief in socialism. 
Muirhead returned to the United Kingdom in 1891 and after a short period of running a co-operative tannery in London moved north to take over the family business. He was drawn into radical politics both by his own personal experiences and by family influence. His elder sister, Alice Margaret, was an advocate of women's suffrage, and his elder brother, Robert Franklin, was a member of the Socialist Land and Labour League. Through Robert, Roland came into contact with a number of eminent socialists, such as Andreas Schau, R. B. Cunninghame Graham, and Keir Hardie. In 1897 he reorganized the family business to give the workers a share in ownership. His business practice paid dividends and the tannery was successful, which allowed him to channel funds into a wide variety of political and cultural causes. 
In 1901 Muirhead joined the Young Scots' Society (YSS), a radical Liberal organization which had been formed in response to the wave of jingoism which had swept the country following the South African War and the crushing defeat of the Liberal Party at the general election of 1900. Although the YSS had formal ties to the Liberal Party, Muirhead worked hard to turn it into a coalition of progressive political movements in Scotland and consistently argued that the society should back candidates at elections who were the most 'progressive', irrespective of party. In 1906 he provided funding for the socialist weekly, 'The Forward', edited by Thomas Johnston. He also initiated a number of debates between the Fabian Society, the Independent Labour Party, and progressive Liberals in an endeavour to achieve common ground for the progressive cause in Scotland. A wide range of radical campaigns such as railway nationalization, women's suffrage, the Peace Society, and land nationalization received his support. In spite of his endeavours the YSS remained firmly attached to the Liberal camp, and his dissatisfaction with it grew after 1910, when the society failed to back Labour candidates at by-elections. 
Muirhead's commitment to radical interventionist policies shaped his support for Scottish home rule. He believed that a Scottish parliament would implement more advanced policies of social reform than could be achieved by Westminster. From 1910 until the outbreak of the First World War he advocated the creation of a Scottish parliament as the top priority for Scottish radicals, as this would be the best way to deliver advanced social and economic policies. At this point in his political career he believed that his political objectives could best be achieved by putting pressure on the Liberal Party, and he questioned the need for a separate socialist party. He viewed nationalists, labourists, socialists, and radical Liberals as belonging to the 'progressive movement' and believed that they could win the Scottish Liberal Party over to their way of thinking. This 'common cause' approach to politics, in which issues and ideals were more important than party, would remain one of his key beliefs. 
The onset of war, however, initiated a break with the YSS as the society supported the government, which contradicted Muirhead's pacifist principles. In 1918 he joined the ILP, serving as secretary of the Lochwinnoch branch, and set about re-creating the Scottish Home Rule Association (SHRA), of which he became national secretary. He hoped that the SHRA would be able to emulate some of the qualities that he had tried to instil into the YSS. He wanted to make the organization cross-party in order to maximize support for home rule and retained the pre-war radical faith that ideas of principle could transcend party loyalties. However, such faith was misplaced. He failed to stop the Scottish Trades Union Congress and the Labour Party taking over the association through its use of affiliated membership. When the private member's bill on Scottish home rule, introduced by the Labour MP George Buchanan, failed in 1924 through a lack of parliamentary time, Muirhead and other nationalists within the SHRA wanted to pursue a more vigorous policy -- only to find their endeavours blocked by Labour loyalists within the association. 
From 1924 to 1928, when increasing calls were made for the formation of an independent nationalist party, Muirhead began to find common cause with other nationalist organizations. In early 1928 he announced that he would stand as an independent home rule candidate, hoping that Labour would turn a blind eye to this. When they did not he called on all like-minded individuals within the SHRA to follow his lead into the National Party of Scotland, which was formed in April 1928, and of which he was the first chairman. He believed that if the party could make a good showing at the polls it would sting the Labour Party into taking the issue of home rule seriously. The National Party, however, failed to make its breakthrough; Muirhead himself was unsuccessful on the three occasions (1929, 1931, and 1935) when he stood as a nationalist parliamentary candidate for Western Renfrewshire. Lack of electoral success led to serious infighting which saw the party take on a more moderate hue, which was not to Muirhead's liking. This dissatisfaction grew with the formation of the Scottish National Party (SNP) in 1934, which was an amalgam of the NPS and the right-wing Scottish Party. Muirhead was elected honorary president of the SNP in 1936, but played little part in policy formulation. He disliked the party's rightward shift, and its 'moderation of principles' led him to fund the publication of the 'Scots Independent', which provided a forum for radical and anti-leadership views. He also endorsed the anti-conscription campaign run by a number of activists following the start of the Second World War. Muirhead lent his support to the radical wing of the SNP, which eventually triumphed in 1942 and ousted the moderates led by John MacCormick, who went on to found the Scottish National Convention, a cross-party organization designed to promote Scottish home rule. 
Frustrated with the lack of direction in the nationalist movement during the post-war era, Muirhead founded his own Scottish National Congress in 1950. He continued to provide funding for nationalist pamphlets and literature through the Scottish Secretariat, which he formed in 1926. On 31 October 1945 he married his housekeeper, Flora Ferrier. A tall and austere figure with sharp features, Muirhead retained the common personality characteristics of the early Scottish socialist movement and was rather dour and serious. He died at Lochwinnoch, Renfrewshire, on 2 August 1964; he was buried there and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 40351


Munro, Neil (1863-1930), novelist and journalist, was born on 3 June 1863 (and not 1864 as often stated) in Crombie's Land, Inveraray, Argyll. His mother was Ann Munro, a kitchen maid, perhaps at Inveraray Castle. His death certificate names John Thompson Munro, farmer, as his father, but despite the lack of any concrete evidence, it has been rumoured that his father was of the house of Argyll. Soon after his birth Neil and his mother moved to his grandmother Ann McArthur Munro's home in McVicar's Land, and in this Gaelic-speaking household he lived for most of his childhood. In 1875 his mother married Malcolm Thomson, prison governor. 
Munro's formal education at Inveraray parish school under the scholarly Henry Dunn Smith was supplemented by his voracious appetite for reading. About 1877 he left school and became a clerk to William Douglas, a local lawyer, but found the work tedious and even then seems to have been preparing himself for a career in journalism. Like many young Gaels, however, he found no other satisfactory employment in the highlands and on 1 June 1881 he moved to Glasgow. There he soon became a reporter, working successively on the 'Greenock Advertiser', the 'Glasgow News', the 'Falkirk Herald', and, finally, the paper he was to remain with for the rest of his working life, the 'Glasgow Evening News', where he was made chief reporter under the editor James Murray Smith at the age of only twenty-three. In the meantime he had married Jessie Ewing Adam, daughter of Hugh and Euphemia Adam, on 23 July 1885. 
Although a gifted journalist Munro believed this to be the inferior side of the writer's craft and sought to become a novelist, making his first mark on the literary scene in 1896 with his innovative collection of short stories 'The Lost Pibroch and other Sheiling Stories'. In these powerful and somewhat bitter highland pieces he seeks to counteract -- perhaps too extremely -- the sentimentality of contemporary Scottish kailyard and 'Celtic twilight' writing, and to portray the highlander accurately in a language which captures Gaelic idiom. 
In 1897 Munro reduced his journalistic commitment to two anonymous weekly columns, 'The Looker on' and 'Views and reviews', to allow himself to concentrate on his literary work, and in 1898 his well-judged romantic historical novel 'John Splendid' appeared. Told from the Campbell point of view, it deals with the sack of Inveraray by Montrose and his subsequent victory over the Campbells at Inverlochy in 1645. Like most of Munro's novels it is set in a period of major social change, and analyses its effects on the highlands. 
In 1899 the partly autobiographical novel 'Gilian the Dreamer' was published. It deals with a young boy whose undisciplined poetic gifts manifest themselves in excessive sensibility and impede his maturity and his ability to act effectively. He has affinities with Tommy Sandys in J. M. Barrie's 'Sentimental Tommy' (1896) and his failure to grow up properly makes him a kind of highland Peter Pan. This was followed by three tales, 'Doom Castle' (1901), 'The Shoes of Fortune' (1901), and 'Children of Tempest' (1903), all loosely connected with the aftermath of the Jacobite rising of 1745. 
Munro published a vast number of highly amusing sketches in his column 'The Looker on'. For their publication in book form he used the pen name Hugh Foulis. These included stories about the waiter Erchie MacPherson and the commercial traveller Jimmy Swan, but most famous of all were his tales of the eccentric captain Para Handy and the crew of the puffer 'The Vital Spark'. The first of these appeared in 1905, and he continued to produce them for most of his working life. Ironically, it is for these he was best remembered. 
After 'Children of Tempest' Munro felt that he had carried the theme of highland historical romance far enough and turned with 'The Daft Days' (1907) and later 'Fancy Farm' (1910) to the contemporary scene, but with far less success. In 1908 he was honoured with an LLD from Glasgow University, and in 1909 with the freedom of Inveraray. Not surprisingly, then, he returned to historical romance and in 1914 produced his finest novel, 'The New Road'. Ostensibly this is the story of the hero's quest for information about his Jacobite father's mysterious death, but at a deeper level it examines the forces which shape individual destinies. Like Scott's 'Waverley' (1814) it shows the hero's gradual disillusionment with the superficial glamour of the highlands as he begins to recognize many of the chiefs for the scoundrels that they are. Eventually he comes to believe that only by trade will the highlands ultimately be civilized, and that the instrument to achieve this will be the new road that Wade is building between Stirling and Inverness. This road becomes a symbol of a more civilized and prosperous way of life for Gaeldom but, at the same time, it will destroy the old Gaelic way of life for ever. 
With the outbreak of the First World War Munro returned to full-time journalism. In 1915 his son Hugh was killed in France, near Albert. This trauma, coupled with the pressure of work on the 'Glasgow Evening News' -- he became editor in 1918 -- seemed to inhibit further large-scale literary production. From this time, apart from the short story collection 'Jaunty Jock and other Stories' (1918), only the typescript of the first ten chapters of a novel entitled 'The Search', a sequel to 'The New Road', survives. 
In 1927, in failing health, Munro reluctantly retired from the newspaper, where he was loved for his kindness and affability. In retirement he wrote a 'History of the Royal Bank of Scotland' (1928) and articles for the 'Daily Record and Mail'. In October 1930 he was honoured with a second LLD, this time from Edinburgh University. Munro died a few months later on 22 December, as the result of cerebral thrombosis at his home, Cromalt, in Craigendoran, Helensburgh, and was survived by his wife, one son, and four daughters. He was buried at Kilmalieu cemetery, Inveraray. In 1935, at the dedication of the monument erected to his memory in Glen Aray, R. B. Cunninghame Graham praised him as the 'apostolic successor of Sir Walter Scott'. 
Munro's high literary reputation declined after 1925 when he became the object of adverse criticism by C. M. Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid) who accused him of escapism and not dealing with the great national and highland issues of the day. Late twentieth-century scholarship, however, has shown that Munro's critique of highland life was much more penetrating than MacDiarmid had perceived. 


@@@@@


doc= 40352


Munro, Robert, Baron Alness (1868-1955), lawyer and politician, was born on 28 May 1868 at Alness, Ross-shire, the eldest son of Alexander Rose Munro (1835-1903), Free Church minister, and his wife, Margaret (died 1920), daughter of John Sinclair, minister of Bruan, Caithness. He was educated privately and then at Aberdeen grammar school. In 1889 he graduated MA from the University of Edinburgh and in 1892 took an LLB. Munro was president of the Students' Representative Council and of the University Liberal Association. 
On leaving university Munro became official receiver in bankruptcy under the Board of Trade in London, which gave him an awareness of commercial law. He was called to the Scottish bar on 3 November 1893. On 8 September 1898 he married Edith Gwladys Evans (1875-1920), only daughter of the Revd J. Llewellyn Evans of Peebles. 
As an advocate Munro's practice was successful without being extensive. He appeared for the United Free Church as junior counsel in the litigation over property arising from the church union of 1900 and undertook work for the Inland Revenue. In 1907 he was appointed counsel to the Inland Revenue, in 1908 advocate depute, and in 1910 king's counsel. 
Munro continued to be politically active after university, assisting the Liberals at by-elections. He was himself unexpectedly elected for Wick Burghs at the general election of January 1910, an event that he later said caused him considerable personal and professional embarrassment. In October 1913 he was appointed lord advocate, a position he held until December 1916 when, choosing to follow Lloyd George when the Liberal Party split, he became secretary for Scotland. In December 1913 he was appointed a privy councillor. 
Munro was one of the longer serving secretaries for Scotland, holding the post until his resignation in October 1922. His tenure has attracted adverse comment because of his involvement in combating wartime industrial unrest on Clydeside. As lord advocate, in December 1915 he supported in principle, but expressed doubts about the success of, bringing a prosecution against the authors of a Clyde Workers' Committee leaflet opposing the provisions of the 'Munitions Act'. He was involved in the temporary suppression of the socialist newspaper 'Forward'. This had reported on an unsuccessful rally at which Lloyd George tried to address munitions workers in Glasgow in December 1915, one of a series of reports which ministers again felt were detrimental to enforcing the 'Munitions Act'. As Scottish secretary, Munro was responsible in August 1917 for getting the war cabinet's agreement to banning a meeting of the Central Workers' and Soldiers' Committee for Glasgow. This was part of the response in the city to the Russian Revolution. Munro believed that the forty hours' strike of January-February 1919, aimed at achieving the reduction of the working week, was, though limited in scale, a Bolshevik uprising. He also initially held that special constables should be used to protect public utilities, as they were more reliable than soldiers, but was eventually involved in the government's decision to send troops and a few tanks to Glasgow. Finally, Munro was involved in the various terms of imprisonment of the socialist leader John MacLean. During MacLean's release from prison in 1917-18, for instance, Munro defended this step before the cabinet on the grounds of MacLean's unstable physical and mental health and the resultant calls for his release. 
It is easy to see the mixture of timidity and unimaginative overreaction in Munro's role as secretary for Scotland in these events. He has, as a result, been described as 'the dim representative of a failing political party' (Harvie, 28). In mitigation of this judgement can only be set the fact that much of what occurred took place in wartime and during fears of the spread of revolution. Munro's position outside the war cabinet, which was taking the decisions, did not assist him. 
At the general election of December 1918 Munro was returned as a Coalition Liberal for Roxburgh and Selkirk, as his Wick Burghs seat had ceased to exist as a result of redistribution. He entered Lloyd George's coalition cabinet in 1919. In September 1920 Edith, Munro's first wife, died. He married again, on 29 October 1921, Olga Marie Grumler (1897-1981), only daughter of J. G. Grumler, of Dinard, France, and Harrogate. 
Two important Scottish measures were passed during Munro's time as secretary for Scotland. First, the 'Scottish Education Act' of 1918 incorporated Munro's suggestion that denominational, mainly Roman Catholic, schools in Scotland should be transferred to the new local education authorities which the act set up. These authorities, however, only lasted until they were abolished and their functions absorbed by new, larger unitary authorities under the 'Local Government (Scotland) Act' of 1929. Also the act's aims of raising the school leaving age to fifteen, and of developing vocational and further education, were not realized in the years immediately following its passage. Second, the 'Church of Scotland Act' of 1921 allowed the church on its own, without parliamentary action, to adopt articles of a constitution. This helped to clear the way for union with the United Free Church in 1929. 
Munro saw the time during which he was secretary for Scotland as a dark and critical period. He criticized the low status of the position, which nevertheless meant that the incumbent had 'to think of Upper Silesia as well as, let us say, Auchtermuchty' (Munro, 282). He supported the improved status it received when the position of secretary of state for Scotland was created in 1926. 
Munro resigned political office in October 1922, when he accepted an appointment as lord justice clerk and president of the second division of the court of session. He took the judicial title of Lord Alness. Ill health forced his retirement from this position in October 1933, but his recovery allowed him to accept a barony in June 1934, again with the title of Lord Alness. He moved to London and was pleased to begin a new parliamentary career. Keeping away from party concerns, he assisted the House of Lords appeal committee, continued to sit on the judicial committee of the privy council, and also participated in legislative work. Alness introduced a reform of the divorce law in Scotland, which was enacted in 1938. This established new grounds for divorce and shortened the period necessary to establish legal desertion. During the 1930s Alness also accepted an increasing number of appointments to various committees. These included, in 1930, the chairmanship of the joint exchequer board under the 'Government of Ireland Act', the chairmanship of the Chinese bond-holders' committee, set up by the Bank of England in 1935, and the presidency of government committees on night baking and nursing in 1936 and 1937. He was also chairman of a House of Lords select committee into road accident prevention, of the University Grants Committee for Scotland, and of the executive committee of the Child Guidance Council and of the National Council for Mental Hygiene. 
The outbreak of war finally concluded Alness's judicial career. He was appointed a lord-in-waiting in May 1940 to enable him to take charge of government legislation in the House of Lords, a position he held until July 1945. Additionally, he was chairman of the Scottish War Savings Committee from 1941 until 1945 and, as a former secretary for Scotland, a member of secretary of state Tom Johnston's advisory wartime council of state. He was also chairman of an advisory committee appointed to look into the cases of people interned in Scotland. 
Alness also held posts in a number of voluntary organizations. These included the presidency of the Association of Scottish Societies, which involved him in all forms of social and benevolent activity in wartime London, as well as a trusteeship of the Carnegie Trust and the vice-presidency of the Building Societies Association. 
For his public services Alness was appointed GBE in 1946. He held LLDs from the universities of Edinburgh (1919), Aberdeen (1921), and St Andrews (1935), and was an honorary bencher of Lincoln's Inn. In addition to being made a deputy lieutenant of Edinburgh in 1929, he was a freeman of the city, and also of Dingwall and Peebles. Alness published in 1930 a collection of writings, 'Looking Back: Fugitive Writings and Sayings'. In later life he made his home in Bournemouth, where he died at the Durley Dean Hotel Nursing Home on 6 October 1955. He was cremated at the north cemetery, Bournemouth, on 10 October 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 40353


Nimmo, Sir Adam (1866-1939), coal owner, was born at Slamannan, Stirlingshire, on 7 November 1866, the second or subsequent son of James Nimmo (1840-1912), a coalmaster who was himself the son of a coalmaster, and his wife, Jessie, 'nee' Clarkson (1836/7-1916), of Airdrie, Lanarkshire, the daughter of an ironstone miner. His namesake, Adam Nimmo (1864-1927), chairman and managing director of the Edinburgh Collieries Co. from 1914, and chairman of the Lothians Coal Owners' Association from 1920, was a first cousin. 
Nimmo was educated at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, where he joined the classical side of the school, and at the University of Edinburgh (1884-7) from which he graduated MA after taking a broad range of courses from Latin and Greek to mathematics. This liberal education was becoming unusual for a coal owner's son intending to enter the industry; many of his contemporaries and even his seniors in the Scottish coal industry gained a technical education in mine engineering. In 1889, along with his father, mother, and his sisters, he was received by the Adelaide Place Baptist Church, Glasgow. In the same year he began working for his father's partnership, which owned and ran collieries near Slammanan, and became secretary when the firm became a private limited company in 1893. On 9 January 1901 he married Isabella Mackinnon (1876-1908), the daughter of Daniel Robertson Gardner, master cabinet maker, and his wife, Jane or Jeanie, 'nee' Maitland. They had two sons. Nimmo was left a widower at the age of forty-one and never remarried. 
In 1908 Nimmo succeeded his father as managing director of James Nimmo & Co. It was, however, to the public life of the industry, particularly to the affairs of the Lanarkshire Coal Masters' Association and later to the coal owners' Mining Association of Great Britain (MAGB) that he devoted himself. He first came to public notice on the conciliation board established in October 1899 to fix miners' wages for the whole of Scotland. By 1902 he had assumed his father's role as representative of the Slamannan district and put forward proposals for a sliding scale to link wages with coal prices, a proposal which was anathema to the miners and directly contrary to the policy of the unions, the Miners' Federation of Great Britain (MFGB) and its Scottish affiliate the Scottish Miners' Federation. In 1907, when the Lanarkshire Coal Masters' Association began recruiting in the counties adjacent to Lanarkshire, James Nimmo & Co. were eager to join. Adam Nimmo was elected to the executive committee. He was made president of the association in 1911, and in 1912 was able to report that the association represented 90 per cent of the coal output of the districts which it represented. In 1911 he became a director of the Fife Coal Company and was increasingly identified with the much bigger Fife company rather than his father's firm. 
The 1912 national coal mining strike brought a new note into the industrial relations of the Scottish coal masters. On 12 March 1912 they issued a pamphlet, 'The Coal Crisis', which professed to see behind the demands for a minimum wage the pursuit of 'a Socialistic policy' to nationalize the mines. From this point until at least the end of the 1926 lockout the Scottish owners saw themselves as 'fighting socialism', a perception which was shared by Nimmo and which hardened his stance in the industrial relations of the time. Sometime before 1917 Nimmo was invited to stand as a Unionist candidate for parliament, but he declined. Although he served on the general committee of the Glasgow Conservative Club in the 1920s he never held a seat in parliament or in local government. 
During the First World War the coal industry came under increasing government regulation. In April 1915 Nimmo was appointed an employers' representative on the Coal Mining Organisation Committee (CMOC), an advisory committee appointed by the home secretary to recommend ways in which the output of coal could be increased to meet wartime demand. Nimmo took a hawkish line, favouring longer working hours and increasing the number of working days from ten or eleven a fortnight to twelve, and imposing prohibitions on the sale of alcohol. In 1916 he was elected president of the MAGB and for the next decade his public life was centred on London. His position made him the leading spokesperson of the industry and he was one of the first people to be consulted by the government on questions affecting the industry or requiring its co-operation. Having requisitioned the south Wales coalfield at the end of 1916 to guarantee the supply of Admiralty grade steam coal, the government took over the rest of the British coal industry early in 1917. Day-to-day management of the collieries remained with the owners but the determination of coal prices, distribution, finance and, crucially, the conduct of national wage negotiations were assumed by the department of the controller of coal mines (the 'Coal Control') in the Board of Trade. In March, Nimmo was appointed to a newly established Coal Control Advisory Board (CCAB), 'the lineal descendant' of the CMOC. He served on this committee until September 1918, when he accepted an invitation to join the staff of the Coal Control; he resigned the latter post in April 1919. Although Nimmo and his coal owner colleagues on the CCAB had to bow to the great accretion of power enjoyed by the MFGB in the military and economic circumstances of the war, the very high levels of net profit enjoyed by the industry during the war years (Supple, 'History', 112-14), despite excess profits taxes and coal mines excess payments, nevertheless indicate a substantial success for the coal owner members of the board. 
In June 1916 Nimmo had been appointed a member of a Board of Trade committee on the coal trade after the war under the chairmanship of Lord Rhondda, and in January 1917 succeeded Rhondda as its chair. Despite its official status this was largely a coal owners' committee with no representation of the MFGB. Its focus was international competition and its report, published in 1918, insisted that with the return of peace international competition could only be met if British miners' wages were reduced. For this conclusion, or at least the bald and unqualified way in which it was stated, Nimmo was largely responsible. 
The end of the war saw Nimmo at the height of his success. He had led the industry in its relations with the state, co-operating on the regulation of exports to allies and neutrals, but ensuring that government control was always seen as a temporary measure, while enhancing the industry's profits. In 1918 he was knighted KBE and made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. He stepped down from the presidency of the MAGB in 1918, becoming one of the association's two vice-presidents, a position he retained until his death. In 1919 he became one of the representatives of the coal owners on the coal industry commission, chaired by Lord Sankey, and worked with his successor as MAGB president, Evan Williams, to present the owners' case against nationalization of the mines. Their success was confirmed in March 1921 when the mines were decontrolled and returned to the owners. 
Nimmo's personal involvement in the coal industry expanded after the war. In 1920 he became a director of the Shotts Iron Company, a large iron and coal firm in east Lanarkshire, and was chairman from 1934 until his death. He became chairman of the Fife Coal Company in 1923, a post he also retained until his death. In 1926 he was a director of the Earl of Rosslyn's Collieries Ltd and chairman of the Portland Colliery Co. Ltd. In 1928 he became a director of the newly established Ailsa Investment Trust and became its chairman in 1932. 
During the crisis in the industry which culminated in the general strike and seven-month lockout in 1926, Nimmo was an outspoken opponent of nationalization in what he saw as an apocalyptic fight against communism and socialism, and continued to insist that wages in the British coal industry had to be reduced once more or hours increased, or both, to meet foreign competition ('The Times', 22 Jan 1925). He became a bogey-man for the miners and their political allies. His intransigence also frustrated those in government who sought to preserve industrial peace. The previously close and harmonious relations between Nimmo and government ministers deteriorated, and by late March 1926 ministers were trying, unsuccessfully, to encourage a coup inside the MAGB against the Williams-Nimmo regime by more moderate coal owners such as the earl of Crawford, the chair of the giant Wigan Coal and Iron Company. In a speech in July 1926 the prime minister, Stanley Baldwin, criticized Nimmo by name for his belief that there are 'two raw alternatives - nationalization and private enterprise' rather than 'an indefinite series of intermediate positions between Socialism and 'laisser faire'' ('The Times', 19 July 1926). As the owners' position hardened during the lockout Winston Churchill commented to his cousin and friend Lord Londonderry, a coal owner prominent in the north-east, that 'there could be no worse way of combating Bolshevism than to identify the Conservative Party and His Majesty's Government with the employers, and particularly with a body of employers like those headed by Mr Evan Williams and Sir Adam Nimmo' (Churchill to Londonderry, 3 Nov 1926, in Gilbert, 865-66). 
Although the MAGB eventually won their fight against the MFGB, if not communism, the costs were enormous. Almost immediately some coal owners, Nimmo among them, began to consider ways of re-organizing the industry to avoid the necessity of periodic cuts in wages. Nimmo was involved in a voluntary scheme in 1928 offering coal owners financial compensation to reduce excess capacity in Scotland. It was as clear a statement as could be desired that the policy with which he had been so closely identified, of wage cuts and extensions in hours, had failed. But the costs of the scheme were high and it lapsed after a year's operation. By 1934 he had come to favour planning as a solution to the industry's problems but continued to reject nationalization, and in 1936 and 1938 he chaired meetings of coal owners to resist the compulsory amalgamation of colliery companies by government. 
Although a leader of the industry Nimmo was not an exceptional businessman. During his ownership James Nimmo & Co. was not unusually profitable, nor did it enjoy a reputation for good management, sound engineering, or rapid innovation. The high reputation of the Fife Coal Company for profitability and engineering excellence predated his directorship. Similarly the Shotts Iron Company's era of extraordinary profits finished with the First World War, and Nimmo's advent to the board did not restore it, nor did it prevent the emergence of a level of strike activity at the company's collieries extraordinary even by the standards of the industry (Church and Outram, 91). 
Outside the coal industry Nimmo undertook lifelong work for the Baptist church in Scotland. He was a 'Bible' class leader, a deacon, and a senior trustee, as well as treasurer of the Adelaide Place church, and was joint secretary of the Baptist Theological College of Scotland, founded in 1894. He advocated measures to secure the standards of efficiency and education among the church's ministers, and was convenor of a fund to pay salaries to ministers. 
Nimmo died suddenly of heart failure at his holiday residence at Auchmar, Drymen, Stirlingshire, on 10 August 1939, and was buried at the Western Necropolis, Glasgow, after a funeral at Adelaide Place. He was a more complex man than is usually recognized. Many saw in him simply a diehard, active only in his own interests. What was rarely appreciated was that his public life was pursued with a strong sense of the duty of public service. Although moderately wealthy, he showed little personal interest in accumulating money and rather saw the coal industry as one of the foundations of the national community. To his co-religionists in Adelaide Place his devotion to service was his primary quality; they also saw integrity, wisdom, and kindliness. If he often took a position of opposition and resistance he was more than an inflexible dogmatist; if he was stout in the defence of profit and private property he was also willing to shoulder religious responsibilities and public duties. 


@@@@@


doc= 40357


Robertson, Christina Jane (1908-1975), folk-singer, was born on 17 April 1908 at March Lane, Jack's Brae, Aberdeen, the daughter of Donald Stewart ('b'. 'c'.1870), a pedlar, and his wife, Maria Stewart ('c'.1880- 'c'.1950). She was the youngest child in a family of three sons and two daughters. On both sides of her family she was of Scots traveller stock. As in generations long past, she absorbed her -- largely oral -- cultural birthright around 'summer walker' campfires and meeting-grounds and at the family's winter quarters, which were in Aberdeen. Her father, 'Sodjer' (Soldier) Donald -- a byname distinguishing him from other Donalds in the interbred Cameron, Croll (or Croall), MacPhee, Robertson, and Stewart clans -- died during military service while she was still a baby. Her mother subsequently married James Higgins. 
At school in Blairgowrie, Perthshire, aged six, Jeannie, as she was known, first met Donald 'Donty' Higgins (1907-1971), the eldest son of Jim and Christina Higgins, whom she would later marry. Fourteen months older than Jeannie, he was Maria Stewart's great-nephew. As they were closely related, their paths crossed periodically. After the death of his first wife, moreover, Donty's father married Jeannie's elder sister, Lizzie Ann. In 1927 they decided to marry. Marriage to Jeannie would make Donty both son and brother-in-law of his father; but since there were several similar relationships in the immediate family alone, it raised few eyebrows at the time, even if the spectre of incest disquieted her biographers. For whatever reason, the couple eloped and were married at St Mary's Cathedral in Aberdeen on 3 September 1927. Donty's trade was recorded as 'pedlar' on the marriage certificate, but he would have described himself as a tinker. By then Jeannie had adopted another name -- following a common practice within traveller circles -- and she married as Christina Jane Robertson. She was a Roman Catholic by baptism and schooling, and remained one all her life, even though mass and sacrament figured little in her religiosity. 
According to Robertson's biographers, 'Traveller children were brought up in a culture in which songs and tales were not simply entertainment but rather were guides to everyday action' (Porter and Gower, 14); and she absorbed a sizeable repertory of songs, stories, legend, and lore at her mother's knee, supplementing this with knowledge acquired from an extended circle of family and friends. Marriage brought yet more music, whether singing, ceilidh flings, or Donty's piping, and two children, James 
(Jeemsie; 1928-1936)
and Elizabeth Ann 
(Lizzie; 1929-1993)
. As a boy Jeemsie showed a gift for ballad singing, whereas Lizzie warmed to her father's piping. (During her own distinguished singing career, despite knowing her mother's repertory inside out, Lizzie preferred to adapt her father's repertory and bagpipe decorations.) At the outbreak of war the family stayed in Aberdeen, but when the air-raids increased they hit the open road, like many traveller families, participants in the last great blossoming of Scots traveller culture in the twentieth century. With a rich vocal timbre and a delivery that sounded right whether heroic or humorous, Robertson was reportedly hailed as the foremost traveller singer up the Dee and down the Don. 
In 1953 the Scots folklorist and poet Hamish Henderson heard about Robertson from Bobby Hutchinson, and consequently he collected her songs for the School of Scottish Studies. He put the word out about his 'discovery' of a great Scottish folk-singer. In earlier decades Robertson would have been treated as a prodigious, though by no means unique, source cited in song collection footnotes; this had occurred with Miss Bell Robertson (1841-1922) of New Pitsligo in Aberdeenshire, whose feats of memory had irrigated Gavin Greig's 'Last Leaves of Traditional Ballads and Ballad Airs' (1925). The 1950s, however, were a new age, with Magnacord and Ferrograph tape recorders capable of capturing stylistic nuances and sheer lung capacity; collectors such as Peter Kennedy, Alan Lomax, and Jean Ritchie beat a path to Robertson's door to make recordings. 
Having spent most of her adult life as a mother and housewife, Robertson subsequently entered a new phase in her life as a public performer. For someone inured to society's antipathy towards 'tinkers', this represented a cultural wind-shift. For a so-called 'simple woman', Jeannie Robertson rose to the challenge beautifully, deploying all her skills with people, performance, and projection. Over the next ten years record releases on Riverside, Collector, EMI, Topic, Prestige International, and Caedmon labels, as well as radio broadcasts and concerts organized by Norman Buchan and Ewan MacColl, consolidated her reputation. 
Robertson had the unforced pace and presence of the natural storyteller, plus the versatility to tailor and vary her delivery as audience, material, or mood required. A performance might unfold briskly, leisurely, or with the sensitivity of an angler tickling in a supper trout. The folk-singer Andy Hunter, who became a kind of adopted son, related how she would pick one of two tunes for 'Little Matty Groves' depending on whether the rendition was to be long or short (Porter and Gower, 77). Her use of verbal consolidations, refrains, and plot reminders captured on record -- whether in the 'big' ballad 'Son David' on 'Jeannie Robertson: the World's Greatest Folksinger' (1960) or the story 'Silly Jack and the Factor' on 'Scottish Traditional Tales' (2000) -- attests to an artistry matured in a less hurried age. She became the most recorded Scots-language speaker in Scottish history (Porter, 1983); her speech was also peppered with traveller cant. 
Hamish Henderson had recognized her talent, but nobody could have guessed the extent of Jeannie Robertson's cultural bounty. She loved the folk revival, and the folk revival loved her. She touched a generation of folk-revivalists such as Martin Carthy, Archie Fisher, Ray Fisher, Andy Hunter, Clive Palmer, Jean Redpath, and Robin Williamson and academics such as Bertrand Bronson and Herschel Gower, and importantly carried the tradition to her kinfolk such as Carmen Higgins, Lizzie Higgins, Nichole Robertson, and Stanley Robertson. Even though she could be highly directive when teaching a song, Robertson was no folk purist. Henderson, when present, often dictated the style of what she sang in public; at home she let her hair down, singing cowboy and yodelling songs, or Harry Lauder's music-hall songs. 
Jeannie Robertson was appointed MBE for her services to traditional music in 1968. Long stricken with diabetes, she died of renal failure and renal tuberculosis at her home, 90 Hilton Road, Aberdeen, on 13 March 1975, and was buried in the Trinity cemetery at Pittodrie. 


@@@@@


doc= 40362


Schotz, Benno (1891-1984), sculptor, was born on 28 August 1891 at Arensberg (Kuressaare), on the island of Oesel (Saare), Estonia, the youngest of the four sons and two daughters of Jacob Schotz (died 1920), watchmaker, and his wife, Cherna Tischa Abramovitch (died 1917). His parents were Jewish. At the age of two he moved to Parnu on the mainland and attended the 'Gymnasium' there until 1911. He then studied at the Grossherzogliche Technische Hochschule in Darmstadt, Germany (1911-12), and from 1912 to 1914 at the Royal Technical College, Glasgow, where he gained a diploma in engineering. He settled in Glasgow and in 1930 became a naturalized British citizen. From 1914 to 1923 he worked in the drawing-office of Messrs John Brown, shipbuilders, Clydebank, while attending evening classes in sculpture at the Glasgow School of Art from 1914 to 1917. Although without a formal art qualification, he took a studio in the city centre and began his long association with the Royal Glasgow Institute of the Fine Arts in 1917, exhibiting more than 100 works altogether and being elected honorary president in 1973. At the same time he formed an association with the Royal Scottish Academy, showing more than 200 works and becoming an associate in 1933 and an academician in 1937. He also contributed to shows at the Leicester Galleries, London, from 1921 and the Royal Academy from 1925, exhibiting at the latter twenty-nine works. In 1919 he was a founder member of, and in 1921 president of, the short-lived Society of Painters and Sculptors in Glasgow. 
Encouraged by the architect John Keppie, Schotz became a full-time sculptor. His first solo Glasgow exhibition was at Reid's Gallery in 1926 and his first in London at Alex Reid and Lefevre Ltd (Lefevre Gallery) in 1930. He married Milly Stelmach (1902-1971), a dressmaker, on 4 January 1927; they had two children, Cherna Schotz ('b'. 1930) and Amiel Moshe Schotz ('b'. 1936). On the death of Archibald Dawson in 1938, Schotz took up the post of head of sculpture at the Glasgow School of Art, which he held until his retirement in 1961. An enthusiastic teacher, it surprised him years later to learn that students would tremble when he entered a class ('Bronze in my Blood', 219). A lively host to many artists, writers, actors, and politicians in his homes at 207 West Campbell Street (from 1932) and 2 Kirklee Road (from 1950), he also assisted refugees from eastern Europe, including the painters Jankel Adler and Josef Herman. An ardent Zionist, he began to see the new state of Israel as his true home. His connections led to a solo exhibition in 1955 at the Bezalel National Art Museum, Jerusalem, and the Municipal Museum of Modern Art, Haifa. 
Schotz's immense output runs to several hundred portraits and compositions. His bronzes were produced in editions of up to ten. The largest public collections of his work are in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh, which has fourteen works, including 'Lord Boyd Orr' (bronze, 1950), 'James Bridie' (terracotta, 1953), and 'Stanley Baxter' (plaster, 1983); and the Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum, which has twelve works, including 'John Keppie' (bronze, 1922), 'The Exile -- Ura Collins' (mahogany, 1926), 'Alexander Reid' (bronze, 1927), 'Milly' (terracotta, 1953), and 'Self-Portrait' (terracotta, 1953). A typically appealing portrait of a child is that of his daughter Cherna (bronze, 1932, formerly Dundee Art Galleries and Museums, now McManus Galleries, Dundee). He considered 'Hugh McDiarmid' (1958, bronzes in Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh, Aberdeen Art Gallery, and BBC Scotland) to be 'the high water mark of my portraiture' ('Bronze in my Blood', 173). His group of Israeli leaders includes 'David Ben-Gurion' (bronze, 1963, Israel Museum, Jerusalem) and 'Golda Meir' (bronze, 1970, Israeli embassy, London). Notable large compositions are 'Painting and Sculpture' (sandstone relief, 1928-9, Mercat building, Glasgow Cross, Glasgow; for John Keppie), 'Moses the Sculptor' (sandstone, 1949, priv. coll.), and the altar cross (iron, welded bronze, and plastic metal, 1958) in St Paul's Roman Catholic Church, Glenrothes, Fife. 
Schotz was one of the most important Scottish twentieth-century sculptors, spanning the period between Pittendrigh Macgillivray and Sir Eduardo Paolozzi. Principally a modeller renowned for his portraiture, he took his inspiration from Donatello and Rodin and was a spiritual brother of Jacob Epstein, though he resisted the title of 'the Scottish Epstein'. His vigorous, sometimes craggy heads betray the directness and speed with which they were modelled, a slight exaggeration of features and variation in expression adding movement and life. His carvings in wood and stone have a more stylized, even geometric character. He was generally a traditionalist but about 1960 moved towards abstraction, introducing modern techniques and materials such as welding, plastic metal, and cement. Tree trunks, stone, and shells became the inspiration for expressionistic figures or pure abstracts, developed through countless pen-and-ink drawings. 
With prominent cheekbones, alert eyes, a receding brow, and a thick mop of swept-back hair, Schotz would emphasize his bohemian air by sporting a bow-tie. He expressed his opinions in a forthright manner in an accent which recalled his eastern European roots. On 16 April 1963 he was created her majesty the queen's sculptor-in-ordinary for Scotland, as successor to Sir William Reid Dick. A corresponding member of the National Sculpture Society of New York in 1956, he received the honorary degree of LLD from Strathclyde University, Glasgow, in 1969 and the freedom of the city of Glasgow in 1981. He died of old age at his home, 2 Kirklee Road, Glasgow, on 11 October 1984 and was buried on 19 October in Jerusalem. 


@@@@@


doc= 40363


Scott, Francis George (1880-1958), composer, was born on 25 January 1880 at 6 Oliver Crescent, Hawick, Roxburghshire, the second son and youngest of three children of George Scott (died 1907), supplier of loom parts, and his second wife, Janet Greenwood (died 1897). The boy was proud to share a birthday with Robert Burns. Educated at Hawick Academy and Brand's Teviot Grove Academy, Hawick, he took piano lessons until he began composing at fifteen, when his parents halted them, lest music should distract him from schoolwork. 
In 1897 Scott went to read English at Edinburgh University and train as a teacher at Moray House college of education. He gave up his degree course in the second year, however, disliking the constraints of academic life. He taught English at schools in Hawick and Falkirk before Langholm Academy engaged him in 1903. Meanwhile he studied externally for a music degree from Durham University (1902-9). 
Scott transferred to Dunoon grammar school in 1912, and there fell in love with a colleague named Burges Gray (died 1967), who gave birth to their daughter, Francine, in Paris in 1914. They married at Fraserburgh on 4 September 1915 and rented a flat in the Langside area of Glasgow, where Scott worked at a succession of schools: Kelvinhaugh (1914-15), Kennedy Street (1915-19), and Townhead (1919-25). The couple had three more children, Lilias, George, and Malcolm, by 1927. 
Marriage and fatherhood coincided with the musical metamorphosis of F. G. Scott. He had been writing songs in late Romantic style; a few featured in a concert at Greenock in 1912. When a listener said that they were as good as Richard Strauss's lieder, Scott recognized his unoriginality and determined to evolve a fresh musical idiom -- not only for himself but for Scotland. Calvinism, poverty, and the absence of a royal court had historically stunted any native tradition of art music. He hoped to fill this gap in the national culture by deriving a distinctively Scottish style from folk-song, Scots poetry and speech rhythm, and pibroch (the ancient bagpipe music of the Gaels). His wife, a trained mezzo-soprano, made him aware of the subtleties of vocal writing. All his most important works are short solo songs with piano accompaniment, of which he composed over 200 and published 125 (largely at his own expense). 
The earlier of the five volumes of Scott's 'Scottish Lyrics Set to Music' (1922-39) provided new melodies for verses by Burns; they could not displace in public affection the genuine folk-tunes already associated with the words, though some literary figures praised their sensitivity. Scott mixed very little with other musicians but enjoyed discussing his work with the poet Edwin Muir and the French lecturer Denis Saurat. In public he came across as a formidable Edwardian schoolmaster, with watch-chain, bow tie, and a booming voice. Piercing blue eyes stared out from beneath a beetle-brow, whose height was enhanced by the brushing-back of his thick grey hair. The nose was sharp, the mouth tight-lipped, and he could be as fierce as he looked. But his private character had a mischievous streak, and friends could not tell whether his solemn exterior was the residue of a Presbyterian upbringing or something of a pose: a backdrop of 'respectability' to show off his iconoclastic opinions to more startling effect. Intellectual argument delighted 'FG', who sometimes defended outrageous views until he burst out laughing. The explosive vigour of the man was in contrast to the frequent delicacy of his music. 
Scott learned in 1923 that the poet known as Hugh MacDiarmid was actually Christopher Murray Grieve, once his star pupil at Langholm. Their reunion gave rise to a creative partnership which aimed at saving Scotland from torpid Anglicized provincialism. By re-establishing Scots as a literary language and starting a ferment of poetry and music, they sought to initiate a 'Scottish Renaissance'. With his twenty-two MacDiarmid settings, Scott confounded those who might have dismissed him as a mere purveyor of pastiche folk-song. Here was music both recognizably Scottish and thoroughly contemporary, capturing the mood and meaning of the poems in ways which seemed strikingly expressive and spontaneous. The songs ranged from the dramatic and eerie to the lyrical or comic. Chief among them are 'Country Life' (1923), 'Crowdieknowe' (1924), 'The Eemis Stane' (1924), 'Moonstruck' (1929), and 'Milkwort and Bog-Cotton' (1932). 
Echoes of Bela Bartok and Arnold Schoenberg in his harmonies testify to the fact that Scott was never a chauvinist. He scorned most British composers, admittedly, but saw Scottishness as his contribution to international music. In 1921 the French composer Jean Jules Roger-Ducasse had offered him free tuition in Paris; Scott felt unable to leave Glasgow. There was always tension between his absorption in art and his desire for a stable family life and steady income. In 1925 he became music lecturer at Jordanhill training college for teachers and moved to a terraced house in Munro Road, Glasgow. 
Scott and Grieve drifted apart in the 1930s, as the poet became more political. FG was also a left-wing Scottish nationalist, yet he saw separatist agitation as premature. He tried his hand at orchestral pieces (clumsily perhaps) and obtained lyrics for new songs from William Soutar and the poems of the fifteenth-century bard Dunbar. 
Scott's music was heard by only an infinitesimal public even in Scotland, as he made no concession to commercialism. Grieve and Kaikhosru Sorabji declared him the equal of Hugo Wolf or Gabriel Faure; others disparaged him as the house composer of a cranky clique. Arguably, the enthusiasm of Scottish nationalists for his work narrowed its appeal. After 1945 performances did multiply, thanks in part to the Scottish Arts Council and the Saltire Society, which aided the publication of 'Thirty-Five Scottish Lyrics and other Poems' (1949). Scott, who retired in 1946, was senile by 1957, when Glasgow University awarded him a doctorate. He died at his home, 44 Munro Road, Glasgow, on 6 November 1958 and was buried in Wellogate cemetery, Hawick. 
The songs of F. G. Scott subsequently found favour with Scottish recitalists, though the Scots language still scared off English singers. A musical miniaturist of exceptional individuality, he remained much admired by a few and all but unknown to the rest. 


@@@@@


doc= 40370


Spence, (James) Lewis Thomas Chalmers (1874-1955), poet and Scottish nationalist, was born at Darlington Cottage, Seafield, Broughty Ferry, Forfarshire, on 25 November 1874, the eldest of four children of James Edward Kendall Spence, insurance agent and house proprietor, and his wife, Barbara Charlotte Chalmers. His grandfather was James Spence, professor of surgery at the University of Edinburgh. Other relatives included Thomas Chalmers, leader of the Free Church of Scotland, and James Spence, inventor of the adhesive postal stamp. Spence was educated at the collegiate school, Broughty Ferry, and privately at Ongar School, Essex, before studying dentistry at the University of Edinburgh, where he took his MA. He chose journalism as a career, and from 1899 to 1904 was a sub-editor on 'The Scotsman'. On 25 November 1899 he married Helen (1876/7-1942), daughter of George Bruce, cabinet-maker, of Edinburgh. They had a son and three daughters. He edited a short-lived 'Edinburgh Magazine' before moving in 1906 to London to work for the 'British Weekly' which, under William Robertson Nicoll, was a vehicle for the kailyard school of Scottish writing. 
In 1909 Spence returned to Edinburgh to work as a freelance, as he would do for the rest of his life. He prospered best from feeding public taste for the occult and supernatural, with a special sideline on the lost continent of Atlantis. But he was also a genuine, scholarly expert on mythology and folklore, especially of Central and South America, and became a fellow of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland. He wrote many books on these matters, notably 'Myths and Legends of Mexico and Peru' (1913), 'An Encyclopaedia of Occultism' (1920), 'An Introduction to Mythology' (1923), and 'The Magic Arts in Celtic Britain' (1945). 
Poetry was less lucrative but more satisfying. After publishing two early, somewhat precious, volumes of verse Spence started composing in Scots. He was thus among the first to set about raising the modern language to the literary stature it had lost, by enriching it with archaic words and phrases. In doing so, he reacted against what he called the 'gutter Scots' of some vernacular verse, such as Charles Murray's, which sought to echo the voice of the people in sub-Burnsian fashion. His borrowings from the past also extended to poetic forms such as sonnets or roundels, though his range of themes was conventional and generally limited to nature or mythology. He aimed at a magical quality, such as he thought to find in the English romantics and in Scottish ballads. The praises he sang to various suburbs of Edinburgh, 'Ae dawin, frae Corstorphine lea', 'The Fute Fa's Kind at Craigentinnie', 'Now June has hid Craigmillar's wa', did not always hit the elevated note he sought. Near the end of his life he brought out his 'Collected Verse' (1953) and there -- though it by no means contained his whole output -- he let the English outnumber the Scots poems by two to one. His efforts had once been praised by Christopher Murray Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid) for their exquisite sensory and intellectual quality. But bitter argument on art and politics afterwards destroyed the early friendship of the pair. 
As a youth Spence had already become a member of the Scottish Home Rule Association and he wrote numerous articles or essays about its cause. Feeling, like other contemporary writers, the need for a deeper political commitment, he joined the Scots National League in the 1920s. It came together with three other bodies to form in 1926 the Scottish National Movement, of which he was elected president. In 1928 this in turn combined with remaining splinter groups into the National Party of Scotland, parent of the Scottish National Party. Spence became a vice-chairman. He was the first to try its strength at the hustings. As candidate in a four-cornered by-election in North Midlothian in January 1929, he polled 842 votes and lost his deposit. The party remained fissile. In 1932 Spence made a public avowal of his personal convictions, including unreserved loyalty to the crown. The consequence was a motion of censure on him in the party's national council, which he forestalled by resigning his post. He took the chance to denounce tendencies distasteful to him, the utopianism of the pan-Celticists round Compton Mackenzie and the socialist leanings, as he saw them, of adherents of the social credit propounded by Major C. H. Douglas. Before long he left the party altogether. He played no further role in politics, but devoted himself exclusively to writing. In later years he turned to short stories and plays, and also edited the 'Atlantean Journal'. 
Spence attached high importance to the revival of Scots poetry, but his own work seldom rose above an undemanding, often historical romanticism. He died on 3 March 1955 at his home, 34 Howard Place, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 40373


Stewart, Donald James (1920-1992), politician, was born on 17 October 1920 at 39 Newton Street, reputedly the last thatched house in Stornoway, Isle of Lewis, the son of Neil Murdo Stewart (1893-1944), carter, and his wife, Jessie Mary, 'nee' Smith (1894-1958), domestic servant. Educated at the Nicholson Institute, Stornoway, on leaving school in 1936 his first job was as a junior clerk in a local solicitor's office. Two years later he joined the tweed manufacturing and marketing firm of Kenneth MacKenzie Ltd. 
Stewart's first interest in politics was aroused by the Scottish National Party (SNP) campaign in the Western Isles during the general election of 1935, and he began to read political journals such as the left-inclined 'Forward' and 'New Leader', and the nationalist 'Scots Independent'. He joined the Labour Party in 1937 but ended his membership in 1939, being more in sympathy with the Independent Labour Party. On the outbreak of the Second World War he enlisted in the Royal Navy, serving as a signaller, mainly on vessels engaged on convoy duties in the western approaches sector of the Atlantic. While his ship was in harbour on the Clyde he frequented nationalist meetings in Glasgow, and in 1944 he became a member of the Scottish National Party. After returning to civilian life in 1945, he became a director with Kenneth MacKenzie and continued in that capacity until 1970. On 18 May 1955 in Stornoway he married Christina (Chrissie) Macaulay (1925-1995), daughter of John Macaulay, a crofter from the Lochs district of Lewis. 
Stewart's entry into political life came with his election to Stornoway town council in 1951. He was, at various times, bailie, dean of guild, honorary sheriff, and three times provost (1959-65; 1968-71) in a career of municipal service spanning twenty years. He was serving his third term as provost when he was selected as SNP candidate for the Western Isles in the general election of June 1970. He then became the first SNP candidate to win a seat in a general election; and his victory at that crucial moment preserved the threatened credibility of his party. He retained his seat until he retired at the June 1987 general election. 
Stewart's capture and subsequent retention of the Western Isles seat depended on the esteem in which he was held locally. He served for some time as provost and MP simultaneously, an unusual arrangement which enabled him to concentrate on issues on which his professional experience made him expert, such as tweed and fishing. He also acted to oppose the imposition of British summer time in winter, and introduced, unsuccessfully, a private member's bill in an attempt to enhance the status and prospects of Gaelic. He was in all aspects a vigorous defender of the economy, society, and culture of his community, always bearing in mind, as he himself was to recall, the maxim: 'Remember the people you came from.' At one with the convictions and principles of his people, he found himself sometimes at odds with the urban and industrialized majority. Baptized into the Free Church of Scotland, he held principles of moral austerity on such issues as abortion and the punishment of crime, but he always showed that these principles in him co-existed with a profound kindness. In keeping with the opinions of his people and, at that time, of his party, he resisted all moves towards involvement in the EEC, whose economic plans he described as 'taking in one another's washing machines'. 
The general election of February 1974 brought into parliament a seven-strong SNP group whose members elected Stewart their leader. In October 1974 eleven SNP MPs were elected. Stewart remained leader of the parliamentary party until his retirement, and was also president of the SNP from 1982. In 1977 he was sworn of the privy council, a recognition not only of his position but also of the respect which his work and personality had earned on all sides of the house. Assessments of his qualities always began with 'integrity', but in addition he was notably courteous and dignified, though relaxed and at ease in all social contexts, devoid of pomposity. His tall and strong physique and bearing were matched by a manifest strength of character sensed by all who met him. Speaking at party conferences he warmed and enthused his listeners, moved by the depth of his convictions and at times convulsed by his wit. He could persuade them to follow his lead even in directions which they might not have chosen, as for instance when he persuaded his colleagues to cease holding conference sessions on Sundays. He was no caricature Sabbatarian. As his old friend Robert McIntyre was to say, 'Donald was a rock that laughed' ('Scots Independent', October 1992). 
On his retirement in 1987 Stewart and his wife (who had been a steadfast supporter throughout his political career) were jointly honoured with the freedom of the Western Isles. He died on 23 August 1992 at the Lewis Hospital, Stornoway, following a heart attack, and was deeply mourned by his constituents and his colleagues. He was buried at Sandwick cemetery, Stornoway, on 26 August, following a funeral service at Stornoway Free Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 40374


Swan, Annie Shepherd (1859-1943), novelist, was born on 8 July 1859 in Edinburgh, the daughter of Edward Swan (died 1893), a farmer and potato merchant, and his first wife, Euphemia Brown (died 1881). After the failure of her father's business in Berwickshire, Swan's life was divided between Mountskip Farm, near Gorebridge, Midlothian, and Maryfield, Easter Road, Edinburgh, where she attended a dame-school and later Queen Street Ladies' College. Her father was a member of Duke Street Chapel, an Evangelical Union congregation, but in adulthood Swan became a member of the Church of Scotland. 
Swan's teenage persistence in writing fiction was rewarded when 'Wrongs Righted' (1881) was published serially in the 'People's Friend', establishing her profitable association with the publisher John Leng. The success of 'Aldersyde' (1883), the novel which made her reputation, was assured when William Gladstone wrote a letter in its praise to 'The Scotsman' (his letter was published in facsimile in the second edition of the novel). She was throughout her life a pronounced Liberal and campaigner for Liberal causes. 
On 27 December 1883 Swan married James Burnett Smith (1857-1927), a schoolteacher, and set up home in Star, Markinch, two years later moving to Morningside, Edinburgh, where Burnett Smith became a medical student at Edinburgh University, Swan paying his way through university. Swan confirmed her success with 'The Gates of Eden' (1887) and 'Maitland of Laurieston' (1891), novels modelled on the fiction of Margaret Oliphant but never rivalling Oliphant's literary complexity. It is estimated that during her career Swan 'wrote 162 novels under her own name and at least forty under the male pseudonym David Lyall' (Dickson, 329). Shortly after her husband's graduation, Swan achieved her ambition of moving to London, initially to 52 Camden Square, where her children were born: Effie on 10 January 1893 (died 15 October 1973) and Eddie in 1896. Later the family moved to 252 Finchley Road, Hampstead. 
Swan's prolific output was the result of rising at 6 a.m. and writing 3000 words which she never redrafted. She was much in demand for press interviews and because of her ability as a public speaker received invitations to speak for London city missions and, later in life, the Liberal Party, standing unsuccessfully as a candidate for Maryhill, Glasgow, in 1922. 
William Robertson Nicoll, founder of the 'British Weekly' made Swan chief contributor to 'Annie Swan's Magazine' and its agony aunt in the feature 'Over the teacups'. Swan also wrote for the 'British Weekly', becoming acquainted with S. R. Crockett and J. M. Barrie whose fiction along with Swan's earned the lasting opprobrium of the Scottish literary establishment who damned it as 'kailyard', summing up their disgust with its parochialism and sentimentality. 
In 1908, the Burnett Smiths moved to Hertford, where in September 1910 Eddie died after shooting himself accidentally. The family was devastated and Swan experimented briefly with spiritualism guided by W. T. Stead. During the First World War she went to France on a morale-boosting tour and also worked with Belgian refugees. Her home, the North House, was bombed in 1915. Invited by the Ministry of Information, Swan toured the United States in 1918 to explain the extent of British food shortages. 
When Burnett Smith retired, the family moved to Bandrum, Fife, where Swan wrote 'The Pendulum' (1926). Her success depended on her precise knowledge of the values of her mass readership, being regarded as an eminently 'safe' author who affirmed the values of the nonconformist conscience. 'The Pendulum's' critique of these values provoked hostility among her readership demonstrating the extent to which the relation between writer and reader was one of consent rather than control. Swan never wrote another novel like it. 
When James Burnett Smith died in 1927, Swan and her daughter moved to Gullane, East Lothian, where she was still in public demand: one journalist recorded that she was 'a charming woman, neat of foot, grey-haired, shingled, dressed in stylish mourning, with a quick smile'; another that she was 'plain, plump and motherly' (NL Scot. accession 6003, box 2, folder 3a). She was made a CBE in 1930. Swan died of heart disease at Aldersyde, Gullane, on 17 June 1943 and was buried in Kinghorn, Fife. 


@@@@@


doc= 40375


Tait, Thomas Smith (1882-1954), architect, was born in Paisley, Renfrewshire, on 18 June 1882, the son of John Tait, master stonemason, and his wife, Elizabeth Smith. Educated at John Neilson's Institution, Paisley, and apprenticed to a local architect, John Donald, in 1896, he acquired a reputation as a brilliant draughtsman at Paisley Technical School, which led to his engagement in 1903 by Sir John Burnet as his personal assistant. In the same year a scholarship took him to Glasgow School of Art, where he fell under the influence of the Beaux-Arts professor Eugene Bourdon. Tait won three king's prizes, and on Burnet's advice undertook a continental study tour before rejoining him at his newly formed London office in 1905. There Tait acquired a leading role, and had a considerable hand in the design of the Kodak Building, Kingsway, London (1901-11), which developed ideas pioneered in American urban office buildings, particularly the Owen Building, Detroit, by Albert Kahn. Its austere pilastered elevations of metal-framed windows and spandrel panels set the pattern for much inter-war commercial building. 
On 26 December 1910 Tait married Constance Winifred Blanche Hardy ('c'.1890-1961), the daughter of Albert Hardy, a station inspector. The financial pressures of setting up house induced him to assist the rival practice of Trehearne and Norman outside office hours, designing for them the elevations of a number of large commercial blocks connected with the Kingsway-Aldwych improvements of the London county council. These came to Burnet's notice, and caused serious differences with him late in 1913, compounding an earlier disagreement over a premiated but unauthorized entry (with James Mitchell Whitelaw) in an unofficial design competition for Regent Street. Tait sailed for New York early in 1914, leaving Constance and their son Gordon (1912-1999) at home, and secured a place with the Beaux-Arts modernist Donn Barber designing banks. There, briefly, he met Frank Lloyd Wright, whose work made a lasting impression on him. 
Burnet almost immediately regretted Tait's departure and offered him a partnership if he would return, but Tait declined and instead took up a salaried post as chief draughtsman to Trehearne and Norman. He designed for them Shell Corner (designed 1914-15; completed 1919-20) and Adastral House on Kingsway, London, but the remaining war years had to be spent as a draughtsman at Woolwich arsenal. After the armistice Burnet was appointed architect to the Imperial War Graves Commission for the Middle East. He invited Tait to rejoin him as a partner for the second time and on this occasion Tait accepted. Major London commissions flowed in, notably the completion of Selfridges in conjunction with the American firm of Graham, Anderson, Probst, and White (1919-24), Vigo House, Regent Street, and the giant Adelaide House, London Bridge (both 1920-25). Adelaide House was the largest office block then built in London and certainly the most American, with its mullioned facades and deep Egyptian cornice, a by-product of Tait's voyage to Egypt for the war memorial at Port Taufiq. The more conservative elevations with high-level Corinthian colonnades which Tait had also sketched for this project subsequently found expression at Lloyds Bank, Cornhill (1925-7; with Campbell-Jones and Smithers), and the Thames-side landmark of Unilever House, Blackfriars (1929-32; with J. Lomax-Simpson), the curved frontage of which forms a setting for heroic sculptures by William Reid Dick. 
Burnet's role gradually diminished throughout the 1920s. Tait was first acknowledged as an independent designer in 1923 at the second church of Christ Scientist, Notting Hill Gate, London, brick Early Christian and still very Burnetian; the earliest really large building unmistakably from Tait's hand was the Egyptianized classical 'Daily Telegraph' building on Fleet Street, London, with stepped-back upper elevations to comply with the light regulations then required for tall buildings in City streets. More significant for the future was a fine and very early series of flat-roofed modernist houses for adventurous clients built from 1927 onwards; at Silver End village, Essex, for the window manufacturer W. F. Crittall, and at West Leaze, Aldbourne, Wiltshire, for Hugh Dalton. Associated with their design was Frederick MacManus (1903-1985), a Dubliner who had joined the firm from New York in 1927. 
Major changes in the firm took place in 1930, the year Burnet retired. Tait took into partnership Francis Lorne (1889-1963), who had gained experience in the United States and Canada, in particular with the well-known New York architect Bertram Goodhue. He brought with him several other refugees from the Wall Street crash of 1929, most importantly his brother-in-law Gordon Farquhar, who had worked in New York for Raymond Hood. Lorne accelerated the changes Tait had already initiated, recruiting further staff with American (and in some cases Russian) experience, and reorganized the office on American lines. 'The Information Book of Burnet Tait & Lorne' (1933), the architect's bible for the rest of the decade, spread their influence far and wide. 
Tait had introduced something approaching the international style of the 1930s at Bechstein Hall, Brook Street, London (1929-30), but the transformation of the practice was nowhere more dramatically seen than at the Royal Masonic Hospital at Hammersmith (1930-33), where a neo-Georgian competition-winning scheme was dramatically redesigned in the brick style of the Dutch modernist architect W. M. Dudok. Lorne gained an entree to the prince of Wales's circle and applied American job-getting techniques to the practice, securing the agreement of several adjoining properties to sell (sometimes without the others' knowledge), and then finding clients for the large site thus assembled. The major London works of those years were the big apartment blocks of Mount Royal, Oxford Street (1932), and Chelsea House, Lowndes Street (1934-5), the Burlington School, Hammersmith (1932), the Curzon Cinema, Mayfair (1933), Steel House, Tothill Street (1936-7), and the German Hospital, Dalston (1935-8). In similar vein were St Dunstan's Convalescent Hospital, Brighton, Sussex, the Infectious Diseases Hospital, Paisley (also both 1935-8), and Benenden Sanatorium, Kent (1937-8). 
These buildings broke new ground in Britain but, as in America, a more monumental style was reserved for great public projects. These began with Limpopo Bridge, South Africa, designed in 1927-8. Further bridge commissions designed in consultation with civil engineers followed, notably at Bangkok, Kaar-el-Nil, Cairo, and Sydney Harbour (1932), the last being the finest of the series. At home Tait was selected to design the headquarters of the Scottish Office, St Andrew's House, Edinburgh (1934-9), which was skilfully composed to answer the profile of Calton Hill rising behind it. Its 'sculpturesque' style, with mullions rising into symbolic figures by William Reid Dick, had Dutch elements but was essentially American in composition. Equally monumental, but more austere, was the Anglo-American Corporation headquarters in Johannesburg (1935-40), which was overseen by Lorne. A fine scheme for the Colonial Office, Westminster, remained on paper because of the Second World War. 
Tait's most famous work was the Glasgow Empire Exhibition of 1938, for which he received the commission as late as October 1936. He developed a standardized system of construction, and recruited a team of like-minded architects, mostly from the Burnet-Tait circle, to carry it out. Architecturally, if not financially, it was a success, making brilliant use of the hilltop site for water features, and with the whole being crowned by the gleaming landmark of Tait's Tower. Although the tower itself drew on ideas from Walter Gropius, the general concept developed themes invented by Raymond Hood for the 'Century of progress' exhibition, Chicago (1929-33), and, in certain respects, others from the Paris Exhibition of 1925, the Brussels Exhibition of 1934, and the Johannesburg Empire Exhibition of 1936. 
Tait was offered a knighthood in 1938, but a breach of confidentiality that found its way from a bridge party to the gossip columns, and for which Tait was not responsible, resulted in its being withdrawn. Despite the importance of his wartime career as director of standardization at the Ministry of Works, 1940-42, no further honour came his way. Such things did not matter to him very much. Although robust in his opinions at times, he was rather shy of publicity, and took little interest in the affairs of the Royal Institute of British Architects beyond its golf club. Essentially he was a workaholic, happiest at the drawing-board in a haze of cigarette smoke. Although he lived in considerable style at Gate House, Wyldes Close, Hampstead, for which he designed spectacular art deco interiors and furniture in 1928, only late in life did he own a car, and then it was for Constance rather than himself. Tait went into semi-retirement in 1952 and died at his country house, Scotrea, Strathtay, on 18 July 1954. He was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex, on 23 July. Of his three sons, Gordon continued the practice and Kenneth became an architectural photographer and set designer. 


@@@@@


doc= 40376


Toothill, Sir John Norman (1908-1986), industrial manager and government adviser, was born at 13 Trafford Road, Leicester, on 11 November 1908, the only son of John Harold Toothill, an engineer's fitter, and his wife, Helena Gibbins. He was educated at Beaminster grammar school, Dorset, following which he undertook an engineering apprenticeship, initially at Tilling, Stevens Ltd and later at Harris Lebus Ltd, the furniture manufacturer. During this apprenticeship he also undertook a course in cost (or management) accounting, qualifying as a cost accountant at the same time as he became an engineer. This dual expertise proved useful in a career that involved managing highly innovative engineering projects. While resident at Perivale, Middlesex, he married, on 4 May 1935, Ethel Amelia, the daughter of George Arthur Stannard, an engineer. 
In 1935 Toothill was recruited to become chief cost accountant at Ferranti Ltd. Founded by Sebastian Ziani de Ferranti in 1882, this firm wanted to improve the efficiency of its radio factory at Moston, near Manchester. Given his engineering background, Jack Toothill proved to be highly suitable. He consequently moved to Moston to take up this challenging role. 
Although Toothill started at Ferranti Ltd as chief cost accountant, it was as general manager of the firm's Scottish division that he made his biggest contribution. Early in 1943 the decision to produce gyro-gunsights (GGS) in quantity for D-day was made, and as Ferranti had made several prototypes for the Royal Aircraft Establishment they secured a large contract. Moston, however, was already overloaded with contracts, but as Edinburgh had a good pool of female labour Toothill was sent to report on the suitability of available premises. He reported to Stafford Cripps at the Ministry of Aircraft Production that none was suitable, resulting in a campaign to build a new factory. Working twenty-four hours a day, the factory at Crewe Toll, Edinburgh, was built using funds supplied by the Ministry of Aircraft Production and first started production deliveries later in 1943. Crucially, the chairman chose Jack Toothill to run the new operation, giving him permission to recruit sufficient engineering and managerial staff from the instrument and fuze departments in Moston. 
By the time the war ended, the Crewe Toll team had become very proficient in this respect, manufacturing 9594 GGS units for the RAF. This also provided the basis of a business that over the following decades became a highly successful supplier of avionic equipment to air forces and civil airlines around the world. With the slump in defence orders after 1945, however, Vincent de Ferranti wanted to repatriate all outlying operations to the main factory, placing an enormous question mark over the Crewe Toll activity. Toothill, on the other hand, was so keen to stay in Scotland and make a great success of his burgeoning avionics business that he lobbied hard for a stay of execution. He also devised a strategy aimed at combining precision engineering with advanced electronics technologies, opening up four laboratories (radar, instruments, vacuum physics, and applications) to develop a viable product range. This was accompanied by the recruitment of a highly talented engineering team, using his contacts in government laboratories to ensure a steady supply of innovative thinkers. Some have claimed that his love of sporting activities like fishing and golf was the key reason why Toothill wanted to stay in Scotland; whatever the case, neither Ferranti Ltd nor Edinburgh regretted the decision to allow Crewe Toll to flourish. 
While the late 1940s proved to be highly challenging, given the limited demand for military avionics, once the Korean War had started in 1950 and Britain participated in the rearmament of that decade, driven by the cold war, Crewe Toll generated a substantial business. The most successful product was the AI23 monopulse radar that originated in the instrument and fire-control department, while inertial navigation equipment was also developed as another long-term business. Jack Toothill was often able to secure contracts for this advanced equipment because he committed a lot of effort to meeting with people in the defence world, frequently at cocktail parties and trade fairs. 
The shortage of skilled labour in Edinburgh also prompted the work on numerical control, another technology in which Crewe Toll developed a prominent position. Toothill always remained confident that his engineering team could take on any project in their chosen areas, a reflection of which was the rapid growth of Crewe Toll's order book. Indeed, by 1958 Crewe Toll had reported its first profit in excess of $1 million, on a turnover of $5.6 million. This growth also continued over the next thirty years, making the Scottish group the most important division within the expanding Ferranti empire. As a reward for this work Toothill was elevated to the main board of Ferranti Ltd in 1958. 
Apart from establishing and building a highly successful avionics business in Edinburgh, another major aspect of Toothill's work was his vision for Scottish industry's future development. In the first place, he established a training school at Crewe Toll that was renowned across Scotland, starting the first Scottish higher national certificate in electronics. He also wanted to encourage further diversification away from traditional industries like coal and heavy engineering. After he was invited in 1949 to join the executive committee of the Scottish Council (Development and Industry), an advisory body on economic development, Toothill proposed in 1951 the construction of a central laboratory at Crewe Toll that would act as a core facility for other Scottish electronics firms in need of development facilities. The Ministry of Supply accepted this plan and provided $513,000 for the new facility opened by the duke of Edinburgh in 1954. 
In addition to his work for the Scottish Council, for which he was appointed CBE in 1955, Toothill also sat on the National Economic Development Council, after its formation in 1962, as a representative of Scottish interests. This appointment was prompted by the impact of the Toothill report on the Scottish economy (1961), in which he argued for greater government support for diversification and regeneration. This led to a knighthood in 1964, as well as a host of directorships at Scottish firms like AI Welders Ltd, Fochabers, Moray, the Edinburgh Investment Trust, and Brand-Rex Ltd. By the 1960s Sir John had become a leading Scottish figure in the industrial world, reflecting both the enormous growth of his Crewe Toll operation and his work on behalf of the Scottish economy. Other honorary awards were an LLD from Aberdeen University (1966) and a DSc from Heriot-Watt University (1968). 
In 1968 Toothill's health deteriorated to such an extent that he was obliged to retire as general manager of the Crewe Toll division and pass on the reins to his highly successful successor, Sir Donald McCallum. He remained a director of Ferranti Ltd for another seven years, eventually retiring from business in 1975, spending his retirement in his beloved bungalow at Ordiequish overlooking the River Spey at Fochabers, Moray. He died in Spynie Hospital, Elgin, on 5 July 1986. By that time, the Scottish electronics industry had become a major player on the European scene, building dynamically on the foundations Sir John had laid at Crewe Toll. 


@@@@@


doc= 40377


Watkins, Dudley Dexter (1907-1969), comic artist, was born on 27 February 1907 at 40 Cedar Street, Cheetham, Manchester, and brought up in Nottingham. He was the eldest of the three children of James Willie Watkins, a lithographic artist, and his wife, Eva Charlotte, 'nee' Dexter. Watkins displayed his inherited skill at an early age: when he was six he received a commendation from the mayor of Nottingham for his drawing of a parade and, later, had his work included within an exhibition at Nottingham Castle. In 1919 he attended evening classes at Nottingham School of Art and in the early 1920s took a job with Boots the chemist. His first published work appeared in March 1923 in Boots's staff magazine, 'The Beacon'. Not long afterwards he was offered a position as a staff artist with D. C. Thomson, a publisher based in Dundee, and, after returning to art school for a year, moved to Dundee in 1925. The Scottish publisher had recently started a line of boys' story papers which were published weekly. The first was 'Adventure' (1921), followed by 'The Rover' and 'The Wizard' (both 1922). Eventually there would be two more: 'The Skipper' (1930) and 'The Hotspur' (1933); collectively they became known as 'The Big Five'. From his early employment with the firm and throughout the 1930s he contributed hundreds of drawings and paintings to these weeklies. Watkins's black and white illustrations to text stories also appeared in the Scottish publisher's 'Topical Times', an adult Thomson paper. On 8 March 1936 D. C. Thomson broke new ground in the UK with the inclusion of an American-style comic supplement entitled 'The fun section' with its newspaper the 'Sunday Post'. Dudley Watkins drew two features: 'Oor Wullie' ('Our Willie') and 'The Broons' ('The Browns'). Both are still running. Until the 1970s the artwork remained that of Watkins, his drawings being reprinted after his death. The success of 'The fun section' suggested to D. C. Thomson that a national comic was viable and the firm soon launched not just one but two weeklies: the 'Dandy Comic' (4 December 1937) and the 'Beano Comic' (30 July 1938). For the 'Dandy' Watkins drew 'Desperate Dan'; for the 'Beano,' 'Lord Snooty'. The former was a cowboy with a ten-gallon hat and permanent heavy stubble on his chin; he shaved with a blow-torch, swung bulls around his head by their tails, and carried his horse when it got too tired to carry him. Lord Snooty was a young aristocrat in a top hat and Eton suit who would rather fraternize with urchins than toffs. Both Dan and Snooty have become internationally well known and are national institutions in the UK. These classic comic characters and other lesser-known features Watkins continued to draw weekly until the 1960s. 
Following the successful launch of the 'Beano' and 'Dandy' Dudley Watkins's status as the Dundee firm's principal artist was confirmed. He was not only one of the most prolific artists but also extremely versatile. Watkins also was able to turn out adventure stories in comic form. These included: 'The Shipwrecked Circus' ('Beano', 1943); 'Jimmy and his Magic Patch' ('Beano', 1944); 'Danny Longlegs' ('Dandy', 1945); and 'Our Teacher's a Walrus' ('Dandy', 1947). In the late 1940s he also drew classic adventure serials for Thomson's magazine the 'People's Journal'. These included 'Treasure Island', 'Kidnapped', and 'Oliver Twist' and were later reprinted in book form. In the 1950s Dudley Watkins became a principal contributor to D. C. Thomson's first post-war comic, 'The Topper' (7 February 1953); he drew 'Mickey the Monkey' on the front page and had several of his serials from 'People's Friend' reprinted on the back in full colour. Similarly his work was to be found on the front page of 'The Beezer' (21 January 1956) with 'Ginger', a slightly older version of 'Oor Wullie' which he was still drawing for the 'Sunday Post'. From 1946 he started to sign his work. His clear, distinct signature, 'Dudley D. Watkins' (or 'D. D. W.'), was noted by millions and led to him being the best-known of all British comic artists. Watkins was a member of the Church of Christ of Dundee and used his art to help the religious movement. From 1956 he produced a series called 'William the Warrior' for the Worldwide Evangelization Crusade. These were comic strips published in small, paperback booklets. He lived at Broughty Ferry, near Dundee, and died of a heart attack there on 20 August 1969. Dudley Watkins was survived by his wife and son. If one man could be said to epitomize post-war British comics it would be Watkins; his influence is still apparent more than thirty years after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 40378


Watson, John Steven (1916-1986), historian and academic administrator, was born on 20 March 1916 at 20 Newton Terrace, Hebburn-on-Tyne, co. Durham, the only son of George Watson, naval architect, and his wife, Elizabeth Laybourn Gall. At the age of seven after his parents had moved to Finchley, Middlesex, he lost his right leg in a street accident, a handicap which even as a schoolboy he learned to overcome and exploit. Exhorted by a strong, ambitious mother, he proved a lively and talented pupil at Merchant Taylors' School, London (1929-35), from where he went as Andrews scholar to St John's College, Oxford. Despite missing a year through illness he took a first class in modern history at the age of twenty-three and in 1939 was elected Harmsworth senior scholar at Merton College. On 9 January 1942 he married Heba Sylvia de Cordoba ('b'. 1918), the daughter of Ernest Arthur Newberry, with whom he had two sons. In the same year he became temporary civil servant in the Ministry of Fuel and Power, acting as private secretary to successive ministers, including Emanuel Shinwell. 
Watson returned to Oxford in 1945 as student and tutor at Christ Church. He was popular both with his colleagues, who valued his shrewd judgement (he was censor from 1955 to 1961), and with his pupils, who appreciated his stimulating teaching and personal interest. An ambitious man of tireless energy and mildly socialist views, he was active in Oxford Labour Party politics, even becoming an (unsuccessful) candidate for the city council. He was one of the first Oxford academics to enter broadcasting, writing scripts and speaking on radio and television. His growing reputation led to his inclusion by Lord Franks on the commission of inquiry (1964-6) into the university. 
Though his postgraduate research on the speakership of the House of Commons never came to fruition, the two-volume work Watson edited in collaboration with his former St John's tutor, W. C. Costin, 'The Law and Working of the Constitution, 1660-1914' (1952), was a fresh and imaginative collection of constitutional documents, lacking only the benefit of an editorial commentary. His main piece of historical writing was 'The Reign of George III' (1960), an outstanding volume in the 'Oxford History of England', the product of wide reading and independent judgement. His 1968 Wiles lectures at the Queen's University, Belfast, 'The rise of party politics in England and America', did not prove satisfactory, however, and he always hoped to revise them before publication. 
Watson's elevation as principal of St Andrews University in 1966 surprised his Christ Church colleagues, who assumed it owed much to his friendship with Harold Wilson and other members of the Labour government. There was a certain resentment at St Andrews, which had not been consulted or even forewarned; it was a tribute to his geniality and tact that he soon overcame that initial disadvantage. A politician by temperament rather than an administrator and unencumbered by previous St Andrews connections, he was admirably qualified to preside over the separation from Dundee, which was the first test of the new regime. Unsympathetic to the Scottish professorial tradition, he promoted a more egalitarian system which effectively detached the holders of established chairs from the leadership and administration of their departments. His other concerns were for the rapid expansion of the truncated university and a widening of its international links. An elaborate appeals campaign to strengthen the university's finances did not fulfil all his expectations but gave him the opportunity to travel extensively as a St Andrews ambassador, especially in the United States. Though slow to shed his ingrained Oxford and London predilections, he nevertheless became a loyal advocate of his adopted university. At St Andrews he was a well-liked and accessible figure, despite his difficulties in fixing on a congenial residence. His habitual unpunctuality and cavalier attitude to paperwork sometimes disconcerted colleagues and officials but he was always adroit in seizing the main points of an agenda and guiding committees to a conclusion. He was not without personal partialities and could be resentful of opposition; but his animosity seldom lasted. His wit was often mischievous, rarely malicious. To those who went to him for assistance he was invariably responsive and sometimes greatly helpful. 
A large, untidy man of impressive appearance and much charm, Watson enjoyed being the centre of attention and relished the prestige and perquisites of his position. In his cheerful, worldly acceptance of what life offered him, he resembled the eighteenth-century aristocratic politicians about whom he wrote so perceptively. Essentially he was a frustrated man of action whom early circumstances had diverted into an academic life, and he was always ready to take on a wide range of public activities beyond the conventional duties of his office. Only in his later years, when his physical energy was sapped by disease and his absences from St Andrews became more frequent, did his popularity and effectiveness decline. Following a serious operation for cancer of the oesophagus in the spring of 1986 he died in the Royal Free Hospital, Hampstead, London, on 12 June 1986, a few months before he was due to retire. 


@@@@@


doc= 40379


Wheatley, John Thomas, Baron Wheatley (1908-1988), politician and judge, was born on 17 January 1908 at 231 Main Street, Shettleston, Glasgow, the third and youngest child of Patrick Wheatley (1875-1937), sometime miner and later publisher, who was born in co. Waterford, and his wife, Janet (1877-1951), a pupil teacher and daughter of Peter Murphy, a labourer who was born in Belfast. The families of both his parents had come to Scotland from Ireland seeking employment. His father was eventually in business as a newspaper proprietor. Wheatley was educated at St Mark's School, Carntyne, St Aloysius College, Glasgow, and the Jesuit boarding-school Mount St Mary's College, Sheffield. He attended Glasgow University, where he graduated MA (1928) and LLB (1930). He served a legal apprenticeship in Glasgow, and in 1932 passed advocate after devilling to John Cameron. 
In Glasgow on 5 August 1935 Wheatley married Agnes Nancy (1906-1995), daughter of Samuel Nichol, a joiner from Selkirk then living in Glasgow. Both families were supporters of the labour movement, and from his earliest days Wheatley was active in politics. In his autobiography he states that, when aged eight, he was given honorary membership of the Shettleston Independent Labour Party (ILP), to which he had been introduced by his uncle, also John Wheatley, later a member of parliament and minister of health in the first Labour administration in 1924. From his schooldays Wheatley was drawn to the law, and it was his ambition to become an advocate. He had been born into a Catholic family, and so it was that throughout his life, he felt strongly about three things: religion, politics, and the law. 
Between 1932 and 1939 Wheatley practised as an advocate at the Scottish bar. His was a general practice covering reparation, divorce, and crime. His reparation work was mainly for pursuers. When war broke out in 1939 Wheatley supported the war, and resigned from the ILP, which was a pacifist organization, to join the Labour Party. In those days appointments of prosecuting counsel (advocates-depute) were made on a political basis by the lord advocate of the day, and when the Churchill government was formed in 1940, Wheatley became sheriff court advocate-depute, so beginning a long connection with the crown office. In 1941 he was called up for army service in the Royal Artillery. It was a tradition during wartime that members of the Faculty of Advocates on leave could appear in court in uniform without wig and gown. Before he was commissioned, and while still a lance-bombardier, Wheatley made history as the first non-commissioned officer to appear in court in uniform without wig and gown. He was very proud of having this distinction. During the latter part of his war service he served in the judge advocate-general's department. 
While still in uniform Wheatley was adopted as Labour candidate for North Ayrshire and Bute. He fought in the general election of 1945 but was defeated, and under the Labour government became an advocate-depute. This was a part-time salaried appointment, and he continued his practice in the civil courts. In 1946 he lost the Bridgeton by-election for Labour, but in March 1947 he was appointed solicitor-general for Scotland, and later that year he became lord advocate at the early age of thirty-nine. At the by-election caused by the resignation of George Thomson, the previous lord advocate, who had become lord justice clerk, Wheatley became member of parliament for East Edinburgh, a seat he held until his own elevation to the bench seven years later. 
As a member of the government from 1947 to 1951 Wheatley was involved in much of the legislation concerning nationalization and the welfare state. As regards Scotland, he was closely involved in legislation which introduced legal aid and advice, and established the Law Society of Scotland. In 1954, with a Conservative government in power, he was appointed to the bench as a senator of the college of justice at the relatively early age of forty-six. In 1972, with another Conservative government in office, he became lord justice clerk. He continued to hold this office until 1985, by which time he was seventy-seven, having been appointed before the introduction of a compulsory retiring age for judges of seventy. 
Although not one of the great judges of the twentieth century, Wheatley was a distinguished judge who served Scotland well. He had a sound knowledge of the law, and a strong desire to do justice. Sitting on his own in the outer house or presiding at a trial, he was not an easy judge to appear before because he tended to have preconceived ideas about any case he was hearing; being a strong character, he consciously or subconsciously tried to impose his own views on counsel in the case. However, he was prepared to change these views when addressed by a counsel who was persistent and persuasive. The judgments he delivered were always clear, if at times somewhat wordy. 
It was during his thirteen years as lord justice clerk that Wheatley had his greatest influence on the law of Scotland. Again it must be said that the second division of the Court of Session over which he presided was not always a pleasant court in which to appear as counsel. He and his colleagues were not good listeners and interrupted constantly. In the criminal appeal court Wheatley was not comfortable in delivering extempore judgments on the bench; this had the unfortunate consequence that no reason was given for some decisions on appeals which, through pressure of work, had to be disposed of instantaneously. But the court led by Wheatley issued many important decisions, the fairness and soundness of which were never in doubt. As lord justice clerk he had a special part to play in the criminal field, and his guidelines on granting bail are still followed nearly twenty years after being promulgated. He also set the tone in sentencing. Other judgments by him are often cited in the courts. 
Outside the law Wheatley gave notable service to his community. He was chairman both of an inquiry into teaching in Scotland from 1961 to 1963, and of the royal commission of local government in Scotland from 1966 to 1969. In 1970 he was given a life peerage and became Baron Wheatley of Shettleston. In 1971 he conducted an inquiry into crowd safety at sports grounds. He served on many voluntary organizations, including the NSPCC and Age Concern. He was the first chairman of court of Stirling University. He received honorary degrees from Glasgow and Stirling universities. 
Wheatley died from cancer on 28 July 1988 at his home, 3 Greenhill Gardens, Edinburgh. In his latter days he was one of the best-known public figures in Scotland, recognized for his religious faith, for his past service in politics, and as a leading judge who was never slow to speak his mind. He published his autobiography in 1987. He was proud of his four sons, his daughter, and his grandchildren. Off the bench he was unpretentious, and despite being a total abstainer, very convivial. He was also a big-hearted man, and he, more than anyone, would have regretted the fact that by attending the Roman Catholic service at Wheatley's funeral in 1988, Lord Mackay of Clashfern, the lord chancellor, was excommunicated by the Free Presbyterian church. 


@@@@@


doc= 40380


Meacham, Gwendoline Emily (1892-1981), Scottish nationalist, was born on 29 October 1892 at 62 Earl Street, Maidstone, Kent, one of three daughters of Charles Stephen Meacham, a scientist, and his wife, Florence Wood. Her Scottish ancestry was on her mother's side, and her mother was herself a Scottish patriot whose father had been involved in Garibaldi's uprising and who told Meacham tales of Wallace as a child. Her father, however, was always an 'empire man' (Wood, 'Yours Sincerely', 9). In 1899 her father was offered a senior position in a brewing firm, as a result of which the family emigrated to South Africa. Later he inaugurated the South African Society of Artists, and his daughter first exhibited her own art in the colony under the society's auspices. Later in life she exhibited regularly at the Royal Scottish Academy and Society of Scottish Artists. Her mother was a still-life painter, her grandfather Samuel Wood was a sculptor, and her great-uncle Thomas Peploe Wood was a painter, so an affection for art clearly ran deep in the family. 
Meacham's childhood experience of Boer attitudes to the British seems to have helped to form her later political opinions, and indeed Scottish nationalists of the 1890s, such as Theodore Napier, drew a strong analogy between the Scots and the Boers. In 1902 Meacham was sent to Hamilton House School, Tunbridge Wells, and later she went to London to study art under Walter Sickert in Chelsea, dividing her time between her older sister in the capital and the family home, Scaur Topp, near Dumfries, which had been designed by her father; later she went to the Westminster School of Art, and gained the certificate of the Royal Drawing Society in 1909. Sympathetic to the suffragettes, she joined the Women's Volunteers. In 1913 she married Walter Robertson Cuthbert, a shoe manufacturer. She and her husband went on honeymoon to Basutoland, where their guide was Roger Casement's brother Tom. Subsequently they went to Scotland to live in Ayr, where her husband built her a studio, as he did later in Dundee. Their first daughter, Cora, was born in 1915. Her husband was unsympathetic to her artistic ambitions, and by this time she was beginning to be politically active. A home-rule Liberal in 1912, in 1916 she joined the Scottish League and in 1918 the Scottish Home Rule Association. In her autobiography, 'Yours Sincerely for Scotland', she claims that she experienced some kind of nationalist epiphany at the Wallace monument in 1913. 
In 1914 Meacham's husband worked at a munitions factory then went into the artillery. After suffering a miscarriage, she gave birth to a second daughter, Irralee, in 1918, and she went to London to explore an acting career before returning to Ayr. Owing to financial difficulties the family moved to Dundee in the early 1920s where she gave art lessons. In 1923 she obtained a job with BBC radio in Glasgow, and from 1924 was 'lady organizer' in Dundee responsible for 'Children's Hour' and 'Woman's Hour'. From 1926 she featured on 'Children's Hour' as Auntie Gwen. Reading aloud to children was one of her fortes: in later life she gave public readings in Edinburgh city libraries, and as late as the 1970s she was the storyteller in 'Jackanory'. During the 1920s she also worked as a talented if somewhat sentimental illustrator for the children's comic 'Little Dots'. In 1927 she joined Lewis Spence's Scottish national movement. She made her own friends, and she and her husband separated, and eventually divorced. At this stage Wendy Cuthbert joined the National Party of Scotland, which had recently been founded (1928), and took her mother's maiden name for her writing, becoming henceforth Wendy Wood. Rather like a Scottish version of Maud Gonne, Wood, 'the queen of demagogues' (Wood, 'Yours Sincerely', 198), raised nationalist consciousness through repeated addresses at public meetings: she averaged thirty-two of these a year, and in 1957 spoke at no fewer than seventy-three. 
In 1931 Wood started Scottish Watch, a youth movement which at one time claimed more members in Scotland than the Scouts. Leading Scottish intellectuals such as Sir James Frazer were asked to act as patrons to the movement, which gained the support of the 'Daily Record'. In 1932, at the Bannockburn rally, Wood led a group of nationalists into Stirling Castle to pull down the union flag and put up a lion rampant in its stead. This direct action offended many in the National Party of Scotland, with whom Wood's relations became steadily more strained. The following year she started an anti-conscription league. In 1939 she met a fellow patriot called Mac, who had connections with Irish nationalism. She spent the war with him in a croft on Glen Uig in Moidart and when the relationship broke up, she moved to another croft. In 'Mac's Croft' (1946) he is described as her 'husband' (p. 13), but this appears to have been a euphemism. In 1947 she made a fund-raising and publicity trip to the United States, and was appointed to an official position in the Scottish National Party (founded in 1934 from the merger of the National Party of Scotland and the Scottish Party). However, like her contemporary the writer Hugh MacDiarmid, she could not endure the demands of party discipline, and drifted away to form the Scottish Patriots, an organization dedicated to the cultural nationalism Wood saw the Scottish National Party as neglecting. 
Wood stood twice for election for Edinburgh town council in 1935 and at the Glasgow Bridgeton by-election in 1946, where she gained 14 per cent of the vote. She was arrested and detained in the 1930s for disrupting a blackshirt rally, and was twice in prison: in 1951, when she was found guilty of inciting the crowd in Trafalgar Square on the day of a Scotland v. England football match, and for non-payment of national insurance as a protest against the state of women's prisons. That same year she showed a side of her policy of direct action not likely to appeal to either the British government or the Scottish National Party by speaking at an old IRA rally in co. Kildare, where 'her speech... was given with such sincerity and earnestness that it evoked a storm of applause from... hundreds of IRA veterans' (Wood, 'Yours Sincerely', 184). 
After moving to 31 Howard Place, Edinburgh, at the end of the 1950s, Wood's nationalist activities entered a new phase. Following her address to its general assembly in 1961, the Church of Scotland accepted the policy of home rule. In 1966 her pressure was instrumental in persuading the Post Office to issue Robert Burns stamps and in 1972 the Post Office in Scotland also advised against the use of E2R on the silver wedding stamps (NL Scot., Wood folder 26). In December 1972 she commenced a hunger strike for Scottish home rule. Jim Sillars (then a Labour MP) made a television plea to her to end the strike, and she conceded after the secretary of state, Gordon Campbell (who lost his seat to the Scottish National Party in 1974), 'repeated undertakings' to publish a green paper 'after the Royal Commission had reported' (Kemp, 118). She placed a union flag under the staircarpet of her Georgian villa in Howard Place so that she could tread on it every day: towards the end of her life she gave fragments of the flag away as trophies to her younger supporters. She also grew a cutting in the garden from the rose at Fassifern in Lochaber said to be the very one from which Prince Charles had taken his white rose badge in 1745. In her later years she appeared increasingly interested in Jacobitism, and along with her supporters entertained the claims of 'Prince' Michael, a Belgian citizen, to be the 'direct and lawful heir' of the Stuarts. Wood herself always supported direct action and civil disobedience, and stated that 'Patriots finding themselves in trouble with the law would be supported completely... providing their offence was not of a serious criminal nature and directly against Patriots' policies' (minutes of the group meeting, 8 July 1979, priv. coll.). She died on 30 June 1981 in the Western General Hospital, Edinburgh. 
Wood had a striking appearance, with piercing blue eyes and a rugged, purposeful look. She was a poet and illustrator of some talent, and published a number of books on her own life, and on folklore, lifestyle, and travel; these included 'The Baby in the Glass' (1918), 'The Chickabiddies Book' (1927), 'The Secret of Spey' (1930), 'I Like Life' (1938, her first autobiography), 'Mac's Croft' (1946), 'From a Highland Croft' (1952), 'Legends of the Borders' (1973), and 'The Silver Chanter' (1980). Her liking for folklore no doubt had some connection to her reputed gift of second sight. Her final autobiography, 'Yours Sincerely for Scotland', was published in 1970; in 1985 Joy Hendry edited a posthumous collection of her poems and illustrations under the title 'Astronauts and Tinklers' (1985). 
Whatever Wood's limitations and excesses, her determined impossibilism helped to put Scottish nationalism on the map. The Patriots' policy of recalling the Scottish estates had something in common with the constitutional convention of the late 1980s and early 1990s: indeed, the Patriots were in essence an oddball 'cross-party campaigning organisation' (Mitchell, 99). Though given to inflammatory posturing, they were never dangerous, and through the indefatigable activity of their leader played a significant role in defining a distinctive Scottish politics, though in their day their extremism rendered them marginal. 


@@@@@


doc= 40382


Young, Douglas Cuthbert Colquhoun (1913-1973), translator and Scottish nationalist, was born on 5 June 1913 at Abertay, William Street, Ferryport-on-Craig, Fife, the son of Stephen Young, a mercantile clerk, and his wife, Margaret Smart, 'nee' Black. He spent part of his childhood in Bengal, speaking Urdu as a second language there. He attended Merchiston Castle School in Edinburgh and graduated in classics from the University of St Andrews and New College, Oxford. His professional academic career began as an assistant in Greek at King's College, Aberdeen (1938-41), where his fellow assistant was David Murison, who was to become Scotland's leading lexicographer. Later Young lectured in Latin at University College, Dundee (1947-53), in Greek at St Andrews University (1953-68), and then moved across the Atlantic to a post as professor of classics at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario (1968-70), and finally to a professorship of Greek at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (1970-73). Two of his many publications were on Greek subjects, 'Chasing an Ancient Greek' (1950) and 'Theognis' (1961). He also published verse translations from Aristophanes into Scots: 'The Puddocks' (1957) and 'The Burdies' (1959). 
A very tall, striking figure, adorned with a luxuriant black beard and bright questing eyes, and an engaging personality, Young had strong political views, and was a member of both the Labour and the Scottish National (SNP) parties, serving as chair of the SNP in Aberdeen in the early 1940s. The SNP was pledged to oppose conscription, except by a Scottish government, and Young refused to register either for military service or as a conscientious objector. He served two terms in prison, reading Greek as much as possible in his cell. He contested Kirkcaldy for the SNP in 1944, winning 40 per cent of the vote, and again in 1945, when his share of the vote fell to below 20 per cent. He left the party in 1948 when the SNP banned dual membership. In 1967 he was a founder member of the 1320 Club, which sought to provide a nationalist alternative to the SNP. 
Young was to be best remembered, however, for his promotional work in Scottish poetry, helping to build on the foundations laid by C. M. Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid) and others in the years after the First World War. He contributed to periodicals such as 'Poetry Scotland' in the 1940s and demonstrated that Scottish literature, especially poetry, should be seen as having strong multicultural links. He was instrumental in finding a publisher, William MacLellan, for Sorley MacLean's 'Dain do eimhir' (1943), and had a hand in translating some of these Gaelic poems, later contributing Scots versions of a good many Gaelic poems by various authors. These translations, and poems translated from Greek, French, German, Lithuanian, Russian, and Chinese, as well as poems in Greek (translations of Robert Burns's poems) and Latin and French, appeared in his two collections, 'Auntran Blads' (1943) and 'A Braird o Thristles' (1947). In 1952 he published an anthology of Scottish poetry, 'Scottish Verse, 1851-1951'. Probably his work as a translator is the most enduring of his poetry, with highlights such as his translation of Paul Valery's 'La cimetiere marin' ('The Kirkyaird by the Sea'). His original verse has been described as 'an effort of the will and the intellect rather than as an unforced creative response to his experience' (A. A. H. Inglis, 'The Penguin Companion to Literature', 1971, 571), and somewhat caustically by Hugh MacDiarmid as 'wit-writing rather than poetry' (Kinsley, 266). For all that, there are striking lines in his original poems, for instance, his wry war-time comment: '
Instans tyrannus -- But och, why fash 

for the waesome war, that doesna inspire us, 

nae me oniewey, wi onie rowth o pleasure, 

as weel warssle wi the Antinoe papyrus. 
('Auntran Blads', 24)' Douglas Young died suddenly in North Carolina, while perusing Homer, on 24 October 1973. He was survived by a wife, about whom no details are known. 


@@@@@


doc= 40383


Evans, (David) Caradoc (1878-1945), novelist and short-story writer, was born on 31 December 1878 at Pant-y-croi, Llanfihangel-ar-arth, Carmarthenshire, the fourth of the five children of William Evans (1849-1882), auctioneer, and his wife, Mary (1848-1934), daughter of William Powell and his wife, Mary. His childhood was spent at Rhydlewis, Cardiganshire, where his widowed mother worked a 9 acre smallholding. Forced to leave the Rhydlewis board school at fourteen, Evans became an apprentice draper, suffering the tyranny of 'living in' at various south Wales and London stores. He read Robert Blatchford's socialist 'Clarion' and the French and Russian short-story writers, and, following evening classes at the Working Men's College, took his chance in Fleet Street. 
By 1915 Evans had become editor of 'Ideas' (a Hulton's popular weekly) and had begun to publish the stories that would make his literary reputation. 'My People' (1915) debunked the myth of rural Wales: Evans's Manteg (a fictionalized Rhydlewis) is a place of greed and violence, of patriarchal repression and chapel terrorism, all beneath the veneer of religion. Visceral Welsh antagonism countered London critical praise. Sermons were preached against him, his East Sheen windows stoned, and efforts made to suppress his book. 'Capel Sion' (1916) and 'My Neighbours' (1920) followed, the latter exploiting comic fantasy in its satire on the London Welsh -- who in turn responded by wrecking a 1925 performance of 'Taffy', Evans's only play. 
Evans published little in the 1920s outside assaults on Liberal nonconformity, judged a politically repressive force, stifling the intellect and imagination. As a journalist he prospered, first with the 'Daily Mirror' (1917-23), then as acting editor of 'T.P.'s Weekly' (1923-9), a middlebrow literary journal. An acquaintance described him at this time, his: 'hollow strong face, the mouth large, the eyes small and piercing, beneath a black felt hat, of which the turned-down brim keeps even the high cheek-bones of the creature in shadow. The speech is swift, hissing; the views it conveys invariably violent and violently phrased. (Blake, 61)' It was the violence of protest; his kindness and courtesy were manifest.'Nothing to Pay' (1930), Evans's fine first novel, is a Swiftian fable of money worship in the underworld of drapery. His pleasure at its reception -- H. G. Wells thought it 'true in all substantial particulars' (Wells, 147) -- hid an inner turmoil. He had lost his job when 'T.P.'s Weekly' folded and was involved with Marguerite Barczinsky ['see 'Evans, Marguerite Florence Laura (1886/-1964)], a best-selling novelist under the pseudonyms Countess Barcynska and Oliver Sandys, who urged that he abandon Fleet Street to become a full-time writer. With her he left London and his wife, Rose Jessie, 'nee' Sewell ('b'. 1876), the Lambeth jobmaster's daughter he had married on 25 December 1907. 
At first the move seemed justified. Remarried on 22 March 1933 and settled at Aberystwyth, Evans published two more novels: the moderately successful 'Wasps' (1933) and 'This Way to Heaven' (1934), a critical disaster. Again his writing dried up, though controversy still clung around 'the best-hated man in Wales' (Stokes, 135): his portrait, by Evan Walters, was refused a Welsh showing (and knife-slashed across the throat while on display in London), and his draft for a broadcast talk rejected by the BBC in Wales. Yet the excellence of Evans's writing and his courage as dissident won the admiration of Dylan Thomas and other English-language writers in Wales, for whom he became the founding father of a new 'Anglo-Welsh' literature. 
'I like stories that are gloomy, morose and bitter', said Evans, explaining his lifelong obsessions; 'an angry man is nearer himself than a happy man' (Evans, 'Fury Never Leaves Us', 131). None the less his later stories show a broadening of vision: 'Pilgrims in a Foreign Land' (1942) and 'The Earth Gives All and Takes All' (1946) move into fantasy and folk tale through a more consciously poetic idiom. Caradoc Evans died of heart failure at Aberystwyth and Cardiganshire General Hospital on 11 January 1945, and was buried on 16 January at Horeb Chapel, next to Brynawelon ('hill of breezes'), the Evans' home at New Cross. During the second half of the twentieth century his critical reputation in Wales improved, and few serious critics would now react to his depiction of Welsh life with the ferocity of his original commentators. 


@@@@@


doc= 40384


Hamer, Robert James (1911-1963), film director, was born on 31 March 1911 (along with his twin sister, Barbara) at 24 Chester Road, Kidderminster, Worcestershire, the son of Owen Dylmer Hamer, a bank clerk, and his wife, Annie Grace Brickell. Both his parents survived him. He was educated at Rossall School in Lancashire, where he showed himself to be intellectually outstanding and won a scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. He had intended to join the Treasury as an economist or mathematician but achieved only a third-class degree. Hamer later light-heartedly blamed 'the proximity of Newmarket Heath to Cambridge and the existence in Cambridge of five cinemas changing programmes twice weekly' ('Biography of Robert Hamer') for his disappointing performance. He also spent much of his time writing poetry and contributing to revues, but he suffered a more serious disruption to his studies when he was sent down for having a homosexual affair with another student (Drazin, 'Finest Years', 72). 
Hamer began his career in films in 1934 as a 'number boy' and cutting-room assistant at the Gaumont-British Studios in Shepherd's Bush. A year later he joined London Films, which was expanding rapidly after the success of Alexander Korda's 'The Private Life of Henry VIII' (1933). Korda attracted a number of European film-makers to Britain, including Erich Pommer, the producer of German films such as 'The Cabinet of Dr Caligari' and 'Metropolis'. When Pommer formed a production company with Charles Laughton -- Mayflower Pictures -- to make prestigious films designed for the international market, he asked Hamer to edit 'Vessel of Wrath' (1938) and 'Jamaica Inn' (1939). 
Soon after 'Jamaica Inn' was completed Pommer and Laughton left for Hollywood and Mayflower's operations were suspended. As war approached, Hamer joined the General Post Office film unit alongside Alberto Cavalcanti, whose earlier work with the French avant-garde Hamer much admired. In 1940 Cavalcanti was recruited by Ealing Studios and he was soon joined by Hamer. After editing 'Turned out Nice Again' (1941), 'Ships with Wings' (1941), and 'The Foreman Went to France' (1942) Hamer worked as associate producer on 'My Learned Friend' (1943), 'San Demetrio London' (1943), and 'Fiddlers Three' (1944). He also gained some experience in directing by taking over from Charles Frend when he fell ill on 'San Demetrio London' and re-shooting sequences for 'Fiddlers Three' when Harry Watt, an outdoor realist director, failed to adjust to the demands of a musical comedy set in ancient Rome and starring Tommy Trinder. 
In 1945 Hamer directed one of the episodes of the omnibus horror film 'Dead of Night'. His contribution, 'The Haunted Mirror', though less praised at the time than Cavalcanti's 'The Ventriloquist's Dummy', has come to be seen as a clever allegory of sexual repression, and the disturbing presence of mirrors became a recurring motif in Hamer's films. A similar fascination with the dark side of life is apparent in 'Pink String and Sealing Wax' (1946), Hamer's first feature film, where a Victorian chemist's son, in rebellion against his father's heavy-handed patriarchal domination, strays into the rougher areas of Brighton and is lured into a murder plot by a glamorous barmaid. Hamer was happy to admit that 'he enjoyed the melodrama but never felt happy with the domestic charm' ('Biography of Robert Hamer'). And it is the sequences in the film set in the world of the sensuous and alluring barmaid (Googie Withers, who had played a major role in 'The Haunted Mirror'), which are the most impressive. 
Hamer's next film, 'It always Rains on Sunday' (1947), was an adaptation of a topical low-life novel by Arthur La Bern. Again it starred Googie Withers as a woman trapped in an unsatisfying marriage, though here the melodrama and the domestic detail are more carefully integrated. Much of the film was shot at Ealing Studios, but it manages to capture a real feeling of East End London and the film is memorable both for its authenticity in depicting life in a cramped working-class household and for the long, atmospheric sequence where the escaped convict is hunted down at night, trapped among shunting freight trains in a railway marshalling yard. Though the critic of 'The Observer' dismissed it as 'a dreary round of squalor', other critics praised the film for its realism, and it was a popular success. 
Hamer shifted back in time for 'Kind Hearts and Coronets' (1949), a black comedy about the poor relation of a noble family who is so stung by the snobbish insensitivity of his rich cousins that he determines to eliminate all who stand between himself and the dukedom. Daringly, Hamer cast Alec Guinness to play all eight of the aristocratic victims, and Dennis Price gave a masterly performance as the suavely vengeful murderer. On its initial release the film was only modestly successful and received respectful rather than ecstatic reviews, but it was one of few British films of the period to be warmly received in France and the USA. By 1959 Hamer was complaining that: 'It's flattering to make a picture which becomes a classic within ten years; it's not so flattering, however, when people get the impression it's the 'only' picture you've ever made.... That picture has become a sort of yardstick for everything else I've done. Friends, especially friends, look at my other films and say 'good, brilliant, superb' but not, of course, so 'good, brilliant, superb' as 'Kind Hearts and Coronets'. (Vincent, 27)' The comedy of 'Kind Hearts and Coronets' is of a much blacker shade than any other Ealing comedy and pessimism haunts Hamer's best films. The darkness of his vision made it difficult for him to find projects which fitted in with the cosy ethos of Ealing Studios. 'Soho Melodrama', a script he developed with Mark Benney, an ex-burglar who had become a successful reporter and novelist, was rejected because of censorship problems. Hamer's idea of casting Margaret Lockwood as Edith Thompson, who had been hanged in 1923 when her lover was found guilty of murdering her husband, was abandoned when the censors proved hostile. Another Hamer project, a dramatization of Richard Mason's novel 'The Shadow and the Peak' (1949), which would have had Vivien Leigh in the starring role, was held back by Balcon as too expensive and too erotic (it was eventually filmed as 'Passionate Summer', with Virginia McKenna). In 1949 Hamer took leave from Ealing to make 'The Spider and the Fly' for his old company Mayflower, now run by Aubrey Baring and Maxwell Setton. With a solid script by Robert Westerby and good performances from Eric Portman, Guy Rolfe, and Nadia Gray, it is an intelligent and interesting film, but, in contrast to the films emerging from Ealing, it shares the mood and the visual style of the bleakest of American 'films noir'. 
Hamer was still under contract to Ealing and returned to make 'His Excellency' (1951), with Eric Portman as a working-class trade union leader appointed governor of a British colony with a large naval base (very like Malta or Gibraltar). Freda Bruce Lockhart, who interviewed Hamer late in 1951, when the film was being completed, discerned that it was a task 'for which he had little heart', and the film is unconvincing and carelessly plotted. Hamer told his interviewer that he regarded Ealing 'rather as if it were a family co-operative than an employer' and praised 'Sir Michael Balcon's wisdom in giving the members of his team a free hand, subject to rational safeguards' (Bruce Lockhart, 74-5). But he found it impossible to agree with Balcon on a mutually acceptable project and left Ealing for good. 
Hamer's first film on leaving Ealing -- 'The Long Memory' (1952), produced by Hugh Stewart, who had co-edited 'St Martin's Lane' (1938) with Hamer -- harks back to the French poetic realism of the 1930s. John Mills plays a convict released after serving twelve years in prison for a murder he did not commit and determined on vengeance against those responsible. Visually it is an extraordinary film, shot extensively on location around the Thames estuary and ending with the wounded hero chased from Tower Bridge to the mudflats beyond Gravesend by the man he is supposed to have murdered. He is saved (physically) by a canny old tramp and (emotionally) by a European refugee who has lost everything in the war. Happiness -- or rather the chance to live without hurting or being hurt -- is possible here but only among a community of outcasts. 
Hamer was still a highly respected film director and his next film, 'Father Brown' (1954), starring Alec Guinness as G. K. Chesterton's detective-priest, was well received by critics and public alike. He followed it with 'To Paris with Love' (1955), a light comedy. But frivolity and Technicolor did not suit Hamer and the film springs to life only in the moment of pathos when the middle-aged widower (Guinness again) realizes that his plan to marry a vivacious young French woman is an impossible pipe dream. Much better tuned to Hamer's sensibilities was his adaptation of Turgenev's 'A Month in the Country' (1955) for the television company Rediffusion, an intimate drama where bored, unhappy people yearn for, but are never able to achieve, happiness in love. Even within the confines of television production of a stage play, Hamer maintains visual interest and the performances he evokes from his cast -- Margaret Leighton, Michael Gough, Laurence Harvey, and Geoffrey Keen -- are superb. 
Twice in 'A Month in the Country' the despairing suitor Ratikin quotes Swinburne's lines 'I can't think how things can be as dreadful as they are. I suppose if I live through this I shall live to see them become worse.' They had a prophetic relevance to Hamer's own life. About 1935 he had married Joan Holt, an aspiring actress, whose brother Seth Holt worked as an editor and director at Ealing. The marriage broke up in the 1950s and Hamer began a relationship with Pamela Wilcox, daughter of the producer-director Herbert Wilcox, with whom he lived until six weeks before his death. She charts their joint decline into alcoholism in her autobiography, 'Between Hell and Charing Cross'. Hamer's close friend the Ealing scriptwriter Diana Morgan thought that 'probably he would have been happier to live as a homosexual' (Drazin, 'Finest Years', 73). Apart from the fact that before homosexuality was legalized in 1967 this would have courted legal prosecution, Hamer appeared not to attach much weight to happiness. A script for an unmade film, 'For Each the Other', contained the lines by Hamer that: 'People think they have some right to be happy, and are doubly unhappy because they are not. It is only when they come to accept that the natural human salary is one of unhappiness, and that interims of happiness come as a bonus and must be hungrily seized and savoured, that they have a chance of coming out anywhere near even in the unequal contest with fate. (Kemp, 78)' 

It was not until 1958 that Hamer returned to the cinema. At Michael Balcon's suggestion he was taken on to direct an adaptation of Daphne du Maurier's 'The Scapegoat' (1957). This was a big-budget production backed by MGM and its story of a bored Englishman tricked into assuming the life of his aristocratic French 'doppelganger' (with Guinness in both parts), seemed ideal for Hamer. The first half of the film is intriguing and atmospheric, but it then becomes increasingly haphazard and disjointed and makes poor use of the talents of its three leading actresses: Bette Davis, Irene Worth, and Pamela Brown. This seems to have been more the fault of MGM, who would have preferred George Cukor or Vincente Minnelli as director and insisted on drastically recutting the film, than of Hamer, who stuck to his promise not to drink while he was directing the film. 
Hamer's disappointment at the mangling of a film which would have restored his reputation seems to have destroyed any desire to reform his life. On his next and last film, 'School for Scoundrels' (1960), drink got the better of him and he was replaced by Cyril Frankel after collapsing on the set. It would be unfair to attribute only the good sequences to Hamer, but it is appropriate that the first half of the film, where the hero played by Ian Carmichael is an incompetent failure at life, is much more satisfying and convincing than the second half, where, with the help of a course in 'lifemanship', he learns how to manipulate the world to his advantage. This was something Hamer himself conspicuously failed to do. He was declared bankrupt in November 1961 and although he completed and sold a script ('Down among the Dead Men') and worked for a few weeks rewriting David Niven's dialogue for '55 Days in Peking' (1963), he was unable to overcome his addiction to alcohol and died of pneumonia on 4 December 1963 at St Thomas's Hospital, Lambeth, London. He was buried at Llandegley church, Radnorshire. Hamer's contribution to British cinema is a significant one, most obviously for the wit and charm of 'Kind Hearts and Coronets' and 'Father Brown', but equally for the impressive poetic realism of 'It always Rains on Sunday' and 'The Long Memory', which showed he had the emotional range, the humanity, and the visual imagination to have been one of the world's great film-makers. 


@@@@@


doc= 40385


Kettle, Arnold Charles (1916-1986), literary critic, was born in 74 Mayfield Avenue, Ealing, Middlesex, on 17 March 1916, the first of the two sons of Charles Mansfield Kettle (1877-1960), manager of a baker's shop in Finchley Road, South Hampstead, where the family lived, and his wife, Ethel Beatrice, 'nee' Barry. Both Charles Kettle's sons had remarkably successful academic careers, Arnold in particular. Between 1928 and 1934 he was a pupil at Merchant Taylors' School before becoming an undergraduate at Pembroke College, Cambridge. He took a first in the historical tripos in his second year and a first in the English tripos the following year and then moved on to become a research student. During Kettle's time at Cambridge, F. R. Leavis was one of the strongest influences on undergraduates reading English and Leavis's ideas confirmed and reinforced the direction Kettle had begun to follow. Kettle did not share Leavis's firm anti-Marxist opinions, however: by 1936 he had joined the Communist Party and remained a member for the rest of his life. 
Kettle was elected a Commonwealth fellow in 1939 and spent the next two years studying at Yale University. He returned to England and was awarded his PhD in January 1942 for his thesis, 'The relation of political and social ideas in the novel of the English Romantic revival'. Once again the direction of Kettle's interests was set and the effect of social policy and development, together with their expression in the novel, was to occupy him for the rest of his life. 
When Kettle returned from America the Second World War was still raging and he joined the Royal Corps of Signals, rising to the rank of captain and seeing service in Yugoslavia, Italy, and India. He was demobilized in 1946 and, on 30 January 1946, married Marguerite Rosabelle Carritt, 'nee' Gale (1915/16-1995) (who from childhood was always known as Margot). They had two sons. Although he was happily married Kettle was bisexual and throughout his life he never fully came to terms with his situation. Doris Lessing in her autobiography 'Walking in the Shade' (1997) claims that one reason for his constant loyalty to the Communist Party was that they stood by him and were not prejudiced by his bisexuality. 
In 1946 Kettle was appointed as a supervisor at Cambridge where extra staff were needed to teach the undergraduates arriving in large numbers after service in the forces whose studies had been held back for up to six years by the war. He did not stay long in the post of supervisor and in 1947 he was appointed senior lecturer in the English department at Leeds University where Bonamy Dobree was head. The school of English at Leeds began to expand and continued to grow during Kettle's time there, especially under Professor A. N. Jeffares, with courses in linguistics, folk life studies, and Commonwealth literature. It began to attract applications from overseas, particularly from Africa and India. Kettle played an important role in teaching these overseas students. He had a profound influence on many, notably Dipak Nandy from India, and Wole Soyinka and Ngugi wa Thiong'o (James Ngugi) from Africa. 
At this stage in his career Kettle was not a prolific author of scholarly publications but his most significant book, 'An Introduction to the English Novel', appeared in two volumes in 1951 and 1953, with a paperback issue in 1962 and a second edition in 1967; there were translations into Serbo-Croat (1959), Russian (1966), and Japanese (1974). Angus Calder wrote of the book, '[it] has persuaded generations of readers that what it says is simple common sense' ('The Independent', 27 Dec 1986). Among his other publications from his time at Leeds were two chapters in the 'Pelican History of English Literature' (6, 1958; 7, 1961) and a collection of essays which he edited, 'Shakespeare in a Changing World' (1964). Scholarly work and university teaching, though, represented only some of his interests and he taught several courses for the Workers' Educational Association in Yorkshire where he was active in the local Communist Party. His commitment to Marxism was constant but it never obtruded into his teaching. On meeting a new group of students he would simply say, 'I am sure you all know what my politics are', and after that he would leave it to them to deduce why certain interpretations of a work were being stressed, or more likely, why others were not being mentioned at all. 
What some have seen as a paradox is that a man so sensitive to the subtleties of literature, who could bring new insights to books which nobody had noticed before, could also accept, or at least remain silent about, Stalinism, the suppression of the Hungarian uprising, and the most unsubtle brutalities taking place in the name of communism. In fact, only Kettle and John Gollan, the general secretary, at a Communist Party executive meeting in 1956 voted against a motion to support the Russians in their invasion of Hungary. Because democratic centralism was the rule, neither of them afterwards ever revealed his true opinion. 
It was probably Kettle's view that Marxism was fundamentally correct and even if those in control of communist regimes were corrupt, the truth of communism was not affected. He certainly had absolute loyalty to causes he espoused, commitments which went back to early manhood and remained with him all his life. Such commitment may also in retrospect make him seem cold and heartless, but nothing could be further from the truth and all who knew him spoke of his generosity. He was generous with his time and with praise for students' work, with his hospitality to friends and students, and he was unstinting in helping anyone he saw as disadvantaged. 
One example of this occurred in the spring of 1956 when Kettle was visiting Czechoslovakia as a member of a delegation. He had one day free and was asked what he would like to do. He said he would like to visit his old friend Marion Slingova. After a show trial in 1948 Marion Slingova's husband had been executed and by 1956 she had been released from prison but to prolong the humiliation she had been given work in a village factory making bicycle wheels. An official car was provided to take Kettle to the village, Marion Slingova was called out of the factory, and they embraced in the centre of the village. The communist officials and the villagers, some of whom thought Kettle was the British ambassador, were amazed, but Kettle's spontaneous action subsequently brought about some improvement in her conditions. 
A member of the national executive committee of the Communist Party, Kettle was never a politician in the public eye but preferred to work quietly in the background. He was on the editorial board of 'Marxism Today', as well as being a regular contributor, from its foundation in October 1957 and he wrote many articles for the Communist Party national newspaper the 'Daily Worker', which later became the 'Morning Star'. He also published reviews and articles in other left-wing periodicals such as the 'Marxist Quarterly' and 'Labour Monthly'. In 1963 probably his most important political publication appeared, 'Karl Marx, Founder of Modern Communism'; it generated a second edition in 1968 and translations into Norwegian (1966), Italian (1972), and Swedish (1976). 
In 1967 Kettle was seconded by Leeds University to the University of Dar es Salaam as professor of literature to run the new department and to help with the division of the University of East Africa into three separate institutions for Kenya, Uganda, and Tanzania. Three years later he was appointed to the Open University as its first professor of literature. Arnold Kettle's experience and approach to teaching were exactly what was needed to launch the Open University. The Open University in turn undoubtedly satisfied him because it had a clear, practical aim -- to educate anybody who enrolled. There were no entry requirements and thus the academics were forced to explain their subjects in everyday terms. Kettle had always adopted this approach and, although he had read the abstruse philosophical and literary theoretical Marxist treatises, he never brought any high-flown theories into his own work. He never saw himself as a literary critic but always as a teacher trying to explain how a novel, play, or poem was moulded by the historical circumstances in which it was written, and at the same time, if it was a great work, how it could still be relevant to modern life. And if he could explain this to a bus driver or a housewife, if he could bring out the full relevance of the work to them in person and let it change their lives, so much the better. 
Because of the multi-disciplinary approach, at least in the undergraduate foundation course, Kettle's contribution to Open University teaching covers a much wider range than his previous concentration on the English novel. For example, there is a unit on Stendhal's 'Scarlet and Black', and one, highly regarded, on Mozart's 'Marriage of Figaro'. Nevertheless, Open University courses did not take all his time and other academic publications continued to appear, such as 'The Nineteenth Century Novel: Critical Essays and Documents' (1972) and 'W. H. Auden: poetry and politics in the thirties' in 'Culture and Crisis in Britain in the Thirties' (1979). Recognition of his abilities and achievements at the Open University came in 1973 when he was appointed academic pro-vice-chancellor. 
As his unit on 'The Marriage of Figaro' shows Kettle had interests outside literature, especially in music and film. Opera and vocal music were his great loves, with Mozart and Schubert 'Lieder' taking pride of place. 
At some point in 1980 Kettle contracted Parkinson's disease, and he was forced to retire from the Open University in 1981. He finished working on his last publication, the Open University study unit on 'Antony and Cleopatra' published in 1983, but he was already very ill and after many months of gradual decline he died in Milton Keynes on Christmas eve 1986. He was cremated there and his ashes were scattered in the Thames. 


@@@@@


doc= 40388


Yworth, William (d. 1715), distiller and chemical physician, claimed to have been born in 'Shipham', in the Netherlands (this location has not been traced). His early life and education are obscure, but by 1690 he was practising as a chemical physician from his house at the sign of the Collegium Chymicum in Rotterdam. He later suggested that he had begun his studies in chemistry and philosophy about 1680. By June 1691 he had moved to England, residing at the Academia Spagyrica Nova, at the Blue Ball and Star, in the London suburb of Shadwell, from where he sold medicines, wrote works on distillation, and offered lessons in chemical philosophy and practice. He was married, his wife's name being Elizabeth. 
The changed political circumstances in England following the revolution of 1688 offered fresh opportunities to Yworth, who had a fluent command of English. In particular, he was attracted by the relatively low levels of duty payable on liquor distilled from malted corn, cider, or perry, established by statute in 1690 to encourage native alternatives to French wines, whose importation had been prohibited in 1689. His earliest publications, several of which derived from his 'A New Treatise of Artificial Wines', composed while he was still resident in the Netherlands and published in 1690, discussed distillation at length, as well as exhorting English manufacturers to exploit native resources, especially metallic ores. Yworth dedicated his 'Chymicus rationalis', registered in November 1691, to Robert Boyle. Boyle's success in 1689 in bringing about the repeal of the statute, dating from the reign of Henry IV, which prohibited the multiplication of gold and silver, may also have encouraged Yworth to pursue his career in London. However, Boyle's death in December 1691 left him without the patron he had hoped for, and there is little evidence that his business prospered in its new location. Nevertheless, he was able to employ an operator, Thomas Newton, in the laboratory of his grandly titled academy. 
At first most of Yworth's contacts in London came from among the members of the Society of Friends; although there is no record that he himself was a Quaker, it is tempting to suppose that his earliest English associates may have been from the Quaker community in Rotterdam. His first publisher, Andrew Sowle, as well as his initial collaborator, Charles Marshall, and his agent, John Spire, were all members of the society. Despite the similarity of the ingredients and titles of many of Yworth's pills and tonics to those which Marshall had published several years earlier, the two men soon fell out over their application. Yworth also quarrelled with Sowle, whom he accused of stealing his recipes. Yworth began to market his medicines through a network of small salesmen across London, sealing them with his own device to protect against imitations. Shortage of money, however, prevented him from pursuing the most elaborate of his schemes, which involved publishing a succession of his alchemical and medical treatises, guiding a reader through the arts of Paracelsus, van Helmont, and their followers, to a new understanding of the causes and treatment of disease, and a new wisdom about the nature of creation. It also sought to encourage the more complete exploitation of the mineral treasures of Great Britain, leading to new wealth as well as prolonged life. 
Although still living from hand to mouth, Yworth was able to move his premises to King Street, Moorfields, by 1702, and publish the first of his alchemical treatises, 'Mercury's Caducean Rod', under the pseudonym Cleidophorus Mystagogus. Together with his manuscript, 'Processus mysterii magni philosophicus', composed between 1701 and 1702, this work revealed him to be a well-trained and wide-ranging alchemist. Heavily influenced by the writings of Joan Baptista van Helmont and George Starkey, he was familiar with a remarkable variety of alchemical authors, including Michael Sendivogius, Basil Valentine, and Timothy Willis. He introduced extended considerations of the processes of creation, the origins of matter, and the beliefs of the ancient philosophers, into his accounts of the preparation and purification of metals and compounds, in particular sal ammoniac and mercury. By 1702 his skills had come to the attention of Isaac Newton, who shared Yworth's belief that Boyle had succeeded in transmuting base metal into gold. Newton, then master of the Royal Mint, received copies of Yworth's books and manuscripts, read and annotated them, and used them as the basis for some of his own alchemical work. In return, he paid Yworth an allowance for a time, which aided Yworth in supporting his wife and their children. It is unclear how long this relationship with Newton lasted; in 1705 Yworth published a second part of his alchemical work, 'Trifertes sagani', but by then he was already living away from London, and had handed his business there over to his son, Theophrastus. In 1709 Yworth applied for a licence to practise as a physician from Woodbridge, Suffolk, where it appears he and his family had been living for some while. He kept a shop there, achieving moderate prosperity, and continued to operate as both a distiller and a chemical physician. He died in 1715, and was survived by his wife. Thereafter Theophrastus Yworth made an attempt for a time to trade in London on his father's reputation. 


@@@@@


doc= 40400


Simpson, Edward (c.1815-c.1880), archaeological forger and craftsman, was possibly born in the Whitby region of Yorkshire, but nothing is known for certain about his parentage or early life. He went by a variety of aliases, the best known of which was 'Flint Jack'. He also used the name John Wilson. Other nicknames included 'Bones', 'the Old Antiquarian', 'Fossil Willy', 'Cockney Bill', and 'Shirtless'. 
Simpson's activities began to be noticed in 1853, when Charles Roach Smith wrote to warn Thomas Bateman of forgers at Whitby. In 1855 and 1857 Bateman received further letters complaining about forgers in the town called John Wilson, alias 'Bones', and Jerry Taylor. These two, particularly 'Bones', sold forgeries of prehistoric flint tools, pottery vessels, and jet seals. During this period Edward Tindall, an antiquary and collector of Bridlington, Yorkshire, formed an archaeological collection which attracted some interest. But when Tindall exhibited this in York at the Yorkshire Museum in 1857 many items were condemned as the product of the forger known as 'Bones', 'Flint Jack', or 'Shirtless'. 
Awareness of his activities caused Simpson to leave Yorkshire and roam Britain selling forgeries (his identification with John Wilson, alias 'Bones', is confirmed by works which mention his early association with Jerry Taylor). In 1857 a collector at Blackheath, Surrey, purchased forged archaeological items; twelve years later he saw a photograph of Simpson, whom he identified as the vendor. 
Simpson became well known to archaeologists, who called him 'Flint Jack', seldom using any proper name. In 1862 he demonstrated flint-knapping techniques for the Geologists' Association. The following year he visited Salisbury, where he manufactured flint tools for the museum and was photographed at work. He returned to Yorkshire in August 1863 and received a month's imprisonment for petty theft at Bridlington. 
In 1866 Simpson was the subject of a long article in the 'Malton Messenger', the newspaper of Malton in Yorkshire, which claimed to use information supplied by the forger himself. Afterwards published in pamphlet form, this has served as the basis of later biographies, but there are difficulties with its chronology. The article claimed that Simpson began making flint tools in 1843 and first left Yorkshire in 1846. This is at variance with his documented activities by ten years. His visit to Salisbury Museum is dated to 1854, but the museum was not founded until 1860. 
James Wyatt, a Bedford journalist, described a visit from 'Flint Jack' in his diary in 1867. Shortly afterwards Simpson was arrested for theft and sentenced to a year's imprisonment in Bedford gaol. While he was in prison a financial appeal on his behalf appeared in 'The Reliquary'. In 1872 Simpson formed a surprising partnership with Alfred Elliot, a retired policeman, at Stamford. Elliot took Simpson's photograph, which allegedly sold many copies. 
Simpson's fame rests on his career as a manufacturer of flint tools. Sometimes he passed these illicitly, at other times he openly made them as replicas. His itinerant life presumably prevented marriage or acquisition of wealth. Those who met Simpson, alias 'Flint Jack', commented on his untidy appearance, and photographs show him badly shaven and wearing torn clothes. Sometimes appearing unintelligent, and clearly lacking formal education, he displayed knowledge of and enthusiasm for prehistoric archaeology. During his wanderings he looked for genuine flint tools, which he sold or even gave to those who appreciated them. 
There is no record of his activities after 1878. It is believed that he died in poverty in a Yorkshire workhouse at about this time. Items made by 'Flint Jack' remain in the museums at Whitby, Hull, Salisbury, and Bedford. The Royal Scottish Museum in Edinburgh possesses tools used by him. 


@@@@@


doc= 40402


Hastie, William (1754/5-1832), architect and town planner, arrived in Russia in 1784, aged twenty-nine, as one of a group of seventy-three Scottish workmen recruited by the architect Charles Cameron (1745-1812) to work for the empress Catherine the Great at Tsarskoe Selo near St Petersburg. Many of them returned to Scotland in 1790 after the expiry of a second three-year contract, when work on the cold baths complex and the colonnade that became known as the Cameron Gallery was at an end. Hastie, a stonemason by trade, was apparently among those who were offered an extension and an opportunity in his case to develop a talent for architectural drawing and design that may well have been encouraged by Cameron, who had advertised, initially and unsuccessfully, for 'two clerks... who can draw well' ('Edinburgh Evening Courant', 21 Jan 1784, cited in Cross, 'Cameron's Scottish workmen', 53). 
It is as apprentice architect or 'architectural candidate' that he entered state service in 1792, and as such, two years later, in August 1794, he submitted for the empress's approval an album of fifty-seven designs of country houses and garden pavilions, generally drawn in Indian ink and sometimes water-coloured and inspired in part by existing English essays in the neo-classical and neo-Gothic. Catherine was impressed: 'c'est un sujet tres recommandable: il a fait des choses charmantes' (Cross, 'Cameron's Scottish workmen', 68). Recommend she did, and within months, on 5 July 1795, Hastie, or Vasily Geste, as he was known in Russia, was invited by Prince Platon Zubov, the last of the empress's favourites and recently made governor-general of the Yekaterinoslav and Taurida regions, to become his principal architect. Hastie, probably with his new wife Margaret, 'nee' Bryce, daughter of one of his fellow stonemasons, whom he had married in St Petersburg on 23 January 1795, travelled to the Crimea, where he remained until his dismissal on 3 July 1799. The only evidence of his work there was yet again an album, preserved today in the St Petersburg public library. It comprises thirty-four sheets of views of all the principal towns, and historically important measured drawings of monuments, among which, most notably, was the former palace of the khans at Bakhchisaray. 
Hastie's first employment on his return to St Petersburg presents yet another unexpected twist in his career, for he is next encountered in 1801, already into the reign of Alexander I, drawing up plans for the reconstruction of the admiralty's Izhora ironworks at Kolpino, south of the capital. He was reunited with James Wilson (1749-1821), a master smith from the 1784 group of Scottish craftsmen, and the latter's eldest son, Alexander Wilson (1776-1866), who later achieved extraordinary eminence in Russia as an engineer. All were subordinate to yet another Scot, Charles Gascoigne (1738-1806), former director of the Carron ironworks at Falkirk, who had arrived in 1786. It was during this period that Hastie was introduced to the new techniques of cast-iron construction that he was soon to put to practical use in his next appointment to the Office of Waterways, where from 1804 he designed the series of bridges in St Petersburg that brought him wide recognition. On 14 November 1806 the Police Bridge, spanning the River Moika at the junction with Nevsky Prospect, was officially opened. Eighty-eight feet long and consisting of fourteen bolted cast-iron arches, it set the standard design for bridges over the capital's waterways, constructed by Hastie and others. He himself was responsible for building five of the ten bridges he designed between 1806 and 1810. In 1817 he was awarded a state pension specifically for his work as a bridge designer, although his career had by then taken another decisive turn, bringing him an even greater reputation as a town planner. 
Continuing to work in the capital, Hastie was appointed chief architect at Tsarskoe Selo in 1808, when the tsar raised it to the status of a regional town and ordered nearby Sofia, which Cameron had designed and where Hastie and his fellow workmen had lived, to be dismantled. Hastie produced a plan, but did not oversee the town's construction, which was delayed by the war of 1812-14. The present-day town nevertheless preserves some of the essential features of Hastie's original layout; and one of the few houses he built there -- a two-storeyed wooden house built in 1820 -- still stands and was the home of the poet Anna Akhmatova in her early years. 
Hastie's appointment at Tsarskoe Selo had been a consequence of his contribution to the building committee of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which he had joined in 1806, along with the architect Adam Menelaws (1749-1831), yet another eminent graduate of the 1784 group. In 1809 he produced in collaboration with the Italian architect Luigi Rusca an album of standardized facades for private two- and three-storeyed houses in towns throughout Russia that became part of a grand overall strategy to impose classical conformity and regularity. House design was but part of Hastie's overall responsibilities and involvement. In 1811-12 he produced and published in 450 sets a series of twenty-six plans for standardized town districts and squares in all manner of variations. By this time he had been assigned to the Ministry of Police, which had assumed responsibility for the planning and regulating of towns. He was to be given enormous authority and power and for nearly twenty years he was the empire's master town planner. 
After the Moscow fire in 1812 Hastie produced a plan for the city's reconstruction that won the tsar's approval but was ultimately rejected as impossibly expensive and impractical. It proposed vast open squares, raking prospects, and wide boulevards on a scale only achieved in the Soviet period. His imprint was to be more lasting, for better or worse, on many other Russian towns, from Belorussia and the Baltic to Siberia (Omsk and Tomsk), from Onega in the north to Kiev and Yekaterinoslav in the south. He visited far from all of the towns on which his standard designs were imposed and far from always was he alive to the problems of local topography. He was the standard-bearer of uniformity and its common companion, monotony, and throughout his career he remained true to his concept of the town planned on classical principles, such as he had encountered in Cameron's Sofia. None the less his influence on Russian town planning, extending beyond his death, was enormous and far-reaching. He died on 4 June 1832 and was buried in the protestant cemetery at Tsarskoe Selo. 


@@@@@


doc= 40406


Robertson, Christina (1796-1854), miniature and portrait painter, was born at Kinghorn, Fife, on 17 December 1796, the daughter of a Scottish coach painter. She seems to have been taught to paint by her uncle, the miniaturist George Sanders (1774-1846). It was probably Sanders who steered her towards her first patrons, about 1819, and oversaw her swift rise to success in London, primarily as a miniaturist but also as a portrait painter in oil and watercolour. Over the next ten years she established a large aristocratic clientele, who were prepared to pay considerable prices for her work. Many of her earliest sitters came from distinguished Scottish families, and as well as exhibiting at the Royal Academy from 1823 to 1844 she was made an honorary member of the Royal Scottish Academy, at which she exhibited from 1829 to 1845. A selection of engravings after her portraits of society figures at this period were included in 'The portrait gallery of distinguished females including beauties of the courts of George IV and William IV with memoirs by J. Burke' (ed. E. Bull, 1833). 
Christina married James Robertson, an artist, on 23 May 1823 and together they had eight children, of whom four survived into adulthood. Leaving her husband and children in England, Christina Robertson travelled extensively in the 1830s, working in Paris between 1836 and 1838 and extending her range of clients to include a cosmopolitan elite of European society. In 1839 she was drawn to work in St Petersburg, possibly because of the successful sale of her work there by an agent or because she intended fulfilling a commission to paint several large-scale oil portraits to replace the many paintings damaged in a fire at the Winter Palace in 1837. She stayed in St Petersburg until 1841, when she was awarded the title of honorary member of the Imperial Academy of Arts for her full-length oil portraits of the Empress Alexandra and three of her daughters, which were shown there that year. Christina Robertson had also been appointed to paint Tsar Nicholas I in 1840; other commissions at the imperial court soon followed. Late in 1841 she broke off her visit to St Petersburg, at the height of her success, to return to London, where she continued to maintain a studio and to exhibit at the Royal Academy until 1844. She exhibited a historical subject, 'The Meeting of Amy Robsart and the Lord Leicester' (exh. Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg) at the British Institution in 1847, showing that she was not unaware of changing tastes in British pictures at the time. When she returned to St Petersburg in 1849, however, it was once again as an oil portraitist that she achieved success, painting portraits of the tsar's daughters-in-law and copies of the earlier portraits of his daughters for the Romanov gallery in the Winter Palace. Although only one of these portraits was paid for she painted a steady stream of watercolours in her final years, which staved off financial hardship and also marked the apogee of her stylistic achievement, being more complex in composition and freer in handling than the work she produced during her first visit to Russia. 
Christina Robertson died in St Petersburg on 30 April 1854, her husband having predeceased her, and was buried at the Volkhov Lutheran cemetery. Her rapid descent into obscurity has been explained in part by the strained relationship between Britain and Russia during the Crimean War, at the time of her death. Recent critics have reassessed her achievements and, while acknowledging that her work is not of the first order, have recognized that her miniatures, watercolours, and paintings are 'above all of interest as historical and artistic documents' (Farr, 15). This reappraisal culminated in an important exhibition of Christina Robertson's work at Edinburgh City Art Centre in 1996. A significant group of her paintings is in the State Hermitage Museum in St Petersburg, and her account book and a self-portrait in miniature, dating from about 1822, are preserved in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 40410


Wilson, Alexander (1776-1866), engineer in Russia, was born on 27 February 1776 in Edinburgh, the eldest son of James Wilson, a smith. He attended grammar school and the high school in Canongate. The family emigrated to St Petersburg in 1784 when his father answered an advertisement for artisans placed by Charles Cameron, architect to Catherine II, in the Edinburgh newspapers. Wilson's education continued at a Russian public school and as a pupil of Sir Robert Graham, ceasing at the age of fourteen when he and his father were employed at the government small-arms manufactory at Sisterbeck (Wilson as a draughtsman). In 1795 both father and son became officers in the mining corps. In 1800 Wilson became interpreter and secretary to General Charles Gascoigne, former director of the Carron Works and by then head of many imperial mechanical works. In 1803 the family moved to Kolpino, James Wilson as assistant to Gascoigne; in 1806, on Gascoigne's death, Alexander Wilson succeeded him as director of the works there and at Aleksandrovsk, but without his large salary. 
At Kolpino in the 1760s new workshops for the production of naval ironwork had been established. There Wilson rebuilt the old, and built new, sluices and water-wheels, adding steam to water power. He built steamers fitted with novel marine engines, schools, and houses. At Aleksandrovsk the works were built up to a great manufactory which turned out men who took their skills across Russia. Mills built there, such as a large flax mill and cotton mills, included the latest technology. Assisting Wilson was his brother Lewis, until his death in 1847. In addition Wilson was involved in casting guns, minting coinage, improving anchors and chain cables, building churches and hospitals, and reporting on Russian ports and engineering and mechanical works. In 1816 he was transferred from the corps of mines to the engineering and building department of the admiralty, in 1818 being promoted to major-general. In 1829 he became lieutenant-general, and engineer-general in 1853. He received four stars of different Russian orders between 1820 and 1856; in that year Alexander II ordered a gold medal to be struck to mark Wilson's fifty years as director at Kolpino and Aleksandrovsk. 
Between 1814, when he attended Alexander I during his inspection of public establishments, and 1862, when the tsar visited the international exhibition, Wilson returned to England ten times. He took back to Russia each time the latest technological innovations and methods. During these visits he also met notable engineers of the day with whom he maintained a busy correspondence from Russia. He would also visit the Institution of Civil Engineers, of which he had been a corresponding member since 1824. 
Wilson served Russia under five tsars, all of whom he knew personally. He retired in 1860 after nearly sixty-seven years of service. He received a full pension from the crown and the use of the official residence at Aleksandrovsk which he had used since 1821 and where he died on 25 February 1866. After a service in the chapel of the British factory at St Petersburg he was buried in the family grave at Kolpino. At an early age he had begun collecting rare and useful works on architecture, engineering, and other subjects. His life was marked by honesty, integrity, public-spiritedness, and consideration for his workers. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 40411


Gascoigne, Charles (1738?-1806), ironmaster, was the son of Captain Woodroffe Gascoigne, a member of the Gascoigne family of Parlington, Yorkshire, and his wife, the Hon. Grizel Elphinstone, eldest daughter of Lord Elphinstone. His father was involved in the highland settlement of 1746, but nothing is known about Gascoigne's early life or education. On 22 July 1759, at St Martin's, Birmingham, he married Mary, daughter of Samuel Garbett, ironmaster. They had three daughters. The eldest, Anne (1760-1840), married, first, Thomas Hamilton, seventh earl of Haddington, and, second, Captain James Dalrymple. Mary (1771-1795) married Aleksandr Markovich Poltoratsky in St Petersburg; and Elizabeth (1775-1858) married -- also in St Petersburg -- George Augustus Polten, the former MP for Leominster. 
Gascoigne joined the Carron ironworks, near Falkirk, Stirlingshire, where his father-in-law was a partner, quickly established a reputation as an iron-founder, and became managing director. The Carron Company first produced iron cannon in 1761 and from it the Russian admiralty college ordered, in February 1772, 1000 tons of iron cannon. The first consignment of forty-five guns reached Kronstadt in June 1772 and further orders were sent later in 1772 and in 1773. Difficulties under proof were found with many of the guns and no further orders were dispatched until 1785, by which time the famous carronades, first introduced in 1779, were being manufactured. In addition the Carron Company supplied Russia with a Newcomen steam engine, improved by John Smeaton, for pumping duty at Kronstadt. Both these enterprises led to the emigration of skilled British workers to Russia and established a long tradition of technological transfer. A major problem was that the workers had neither the managerial skills nor the social standing to carry out any major breakthrough. Unsuccessful attempts were made to recruit the engineer James Watt, and also William Small, the latter being a friend of the manufacturer Matthew Boulton and Thomas Jefferson's teacher. The solution to this dilemma proved to be the 'seduction' of Charles Gascoigne. 
The recruitment of Scots to the Russian navy, both as officers and as educationists, together with a growing colony of instrument makers and other skilled artisans in St Petersburg, created a suitable environment for the diffusion of technology to Russia. The negotiations for Gascoigne's recruitment were carried out, in great secrecy, through the agency of Admiral Sir Samuel Greig, at the instigation of Count A. A. Bezborodko. At the British end the agents were the Russian ambassador, Count S. R. Vorontsov, and the shipbuilder Mikhail Stepanov. Suspicion already existed in the minds of Garbett, Boulton, and others about Russian intentions because of the export of cannon, a copy of Smeaton's model for testing water-power, and other machines from the Carron Company. Nevertheless, the British government, anxious to establish good relations with Russia, allowed these exports to go forward. A few workers were taken off Russian ships and returned to Scotland, but it was with the British government's tacit approval that, in May 1786, Gascoigne and twelve skilled men, including his chief assistant, Adam Armstrong, embarked for Russia. 
The move to Russia was also fortuitous for Gascoigne, who had personally become bankrupt and whose shares in the Carron Company were held by creditors. In England he was strongly criticized by Garbett, Boulton, and others, though Boulton's position was always suspect, since he himself was angling for Russian business, first in the ormolu trade and later in the provision of a steam-powered mint for St Petersburg. From the Russian point of view, preparing for a war against Turkey, the provision of cannon that would not explode in the faces of their Russian operators was essential. Greig celebrated Gascoigne's arrival in St Petersburg by writing to Vorontsov to say that he was the man they needed more than anyone else. 
Gascoigne was placed in charge of the Olonets factories, near Lake Onega, north-east of St Petersburg. He was to direct the Aleksandrovsk textile manufacture and to establish the Koncherzersky iron foundry. His salary was to be $2500 (25,000 gold roubles) p.a., plus a percentage of the profits from the Olonets complex; he was also to be given complete control of the enterprises. His position at that time, as a private contractor to the Russian government, afforded him excellent opportunities for amassing a fortune. 
Within three years Gascoigne was awarded the order of St Vladimir, followed by the order of St Anna (second and then first class). In 1789 a Russian barony was bestowed on him. Not surprisingly, he met with a good deal of envy and suspicion. His second wife was Anastasia-Jessye, daughter of Dr Matthew Guthrie, physician to Tsar Paul; Count F. Golovkin claimed that she became the mistress of Procurator-General P. V. Lopuklim, father of the tsar's favourite (Bartlett, 'Charles Gascoigne', 355). 
The establishment of Henry Cort's process of ironfounding in Britain made it possible to use increased amounts of scrap iron. In 1789 Gascoigne introduced at Kronstadt a foundry using scrap metal, and it was later transferred to St Petersburg to become the basis of the Peterburgsky Liteiny Zavod. Several years later the increased danger of war with Turkey and the need to strengthen Russian defences led to Gascoigne establishing the Lugansk foundry, which began smelting in 1797. As Russia was also interested in the British invention of copper sheathing for the hulls of wooden ships, Gascoigne wanted to learn about the rolling mills that Boulton was bringing over in the 1790s for the steam-powered mint at St Petersburg, as well as the Boulton and Watt steam engines. Every move that 'the Baron' made was regarded with suspicion by Boulton's agents, despite the fact that Boulton had promised the disclosure of every part of the mint machinery to the Russian government. 
In 1796 Gascoigne established a factory at Petrozavodsk to make buttons for military uniforms, a typical Birmingham manufacture. In 1803 he reorganized the admiralty's Izhora works at Kolpino, south-east of St Petersburg. William Hastie, the architect, was involved in drawing up the plans, as he was for the first metal bridge erected in St Petersburg, also by Gascoigne. In 1805 Gascoigne was made technical director of the Aleksandrovsk manufacture and installed its first steam engine. When John Quincy Adams visited the textile factory in 1810 he found three steam engines there, but it may have been Alexander Wilson, Gascoigne's assistant and successor, who was responsible for them. Much of the ornamental ironwork on buildings in St Petersburg was created in factories directed by Gascoigne. He was a consultant to N. Mordvinov in the 1790s in the reconstruction of the docks at Nikolayev. He also played a large part in the introduction of a new Russian statute on weights and measures, setting the English inch as the basis of the Russian 'arshin'. 
Despite later problems with the collapse of the dam at Kolpino and a violent quarrel with A. N. Olenin over the St Petersburg mint, Gascoigne retained government support. The steam engine at the mint, built by George Sheriff under his direction, had to be replaced by Boulton and Watt engines, but such failures were outweighed by Gascoigne's many successes in bringing Russia into the era of industrialization through the introduction of new machines and processes and the attraction of skilled British labour, including Adam Armstrong, George Sheriff, and Charles Baird. 
Gascoigne was ambitious, unscrupulous, and self-seeking but he was also energetic, entrepreneurial, and effective. He died at St Petersburg on 1 August 1806 leaving a large fortune. 


@@@@@


doc= 40412


Baird, Charles (1766-1843), engineer and manufacturer of steam-driven machinery, was born on 20 December 1766 at Westertown, near Carron, Stirlingshire, one of the ten children of Nicol Baird, superintendent of the Firth and Clyde Canal, and his wife, Christian. In 1782 he was apprenticed to the Carron Company, which was then the foremost ironworks in Scotland, and within three years he had been entrusted with the firm's production of cast-iron guns. 
In the 1780s the quantity of the Carron Company's export of guns to Russia resulted in an invitation to the manager, Charles Gascoigne, to develop a gun factory there. Baird accompanied Gascoigne in 1786 and helped establish the Aleksandrovsk gun factory at Petrozavodsk, north-east of St Petersburg, and the Koncherzersky foundry. He remained for three years as Gascoigne's assistant. In 1792 he entered into partnership with a St Petersburg mill owner, Francis Morgan, to establish an ironworks company which came to be known as the Baird Works. Its success was typical of the dominant role played by foreign entrepreneurs in early nineteenth-century Russian ironworks and machine industries. In June 1794 Baird married Sophia Morgan, the daughter of his business partner. They had three sons, of whom only one, Francis Baird (1802-1864), outlived his father. 
The Baird Works specialized mainly in the manufacture of steam-driven machinery. It was responsible for the machinery for the imperial arsenal and the imperial glassworks, and by 1825 it was producing 130 steam engines of all kinds. In 1815 the factory built Russia's first steamship, the 'Elizaveta', which operated on the route from Kronstadt to St Petersburg. Baird's ten-year monopoly on that route enabled his steamships to dominate the waters around St Petersburg. Likewise, his development of a new method for purifying sugar, using non-animal substances, earned him a large share of the city's sugar supply. 
The most lasting legacy of the Baird Works were structures in and around St Petersburg, for which the firm supplied the ironwork. One of the first of these was within the works: the Tallow Wharf Bridge (1805-6; demolished 1914), with a 63 foot span, built up from cast-iron segments. Twenty years later there followed a group of notable suspension bridges, designed by Georges Traitteur, including the Post Office Bridge over the Moika and two bridges over the Griboyedov Canal. In connection with these, Baird designed a hydraulic chain-testing machine. The firm was also associated with two of the St Petersburg projects of the French architect, Auguste Ricard de Montferrand: for his Alexander column (1832-4) it cast the reliefs on the base and the colossal angel on top of the column, and for St Isaac's Cathedral (1836-41) it supplied the ironwork of the dome of 130 foot diameter, Baird having contributed to the dome's structural design. 
Baird was known for his business abilities as much as his technical expertise, in particular his assiduous cultivation of Russian officialdom. He was assisted by a number of talented engineers, including his nephew, William Handyside (1793-1850), and his son, Francis, who succeeded him as manager of the firm. His workforce included up to a hundred Russian serfs, for whom he paid a small fee to their masters. He received a number of Russian honours, including the order of St Anna (second class) and the order of St Vladimir (third class), and his achievements were recognized in Britain through his election to the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1841. He died on 10/22 December 1843 in St Petersburg and was buried in the Smolensk Lutheran cemetery there. 


@@@@@


doc= 40413


Carrick, William (1827-1878), photographer, was born on 31 December 1827 in Edinburgh, the eldest of the three children who survived into adulthood of Andrew Carrick (1802-1860), a timber and rope merchant, and his wife, Jessie, 'nee' Lauder (1810-1876). A few weeks after his birth the family moved to Kronstadt, the naval base on the Gulf of Finland of St Petersburg, where the Carricks had been trading since the late eighteenth century. They stayed there for sixteen years, during which time Carrick's brother, George Lyon (1840-1908), and sister, Jessie-Mary (1842-1924), were born. 
In 1844 the Carrick family moved into the heart of the Russian capital. Their relocation coincided with Carrick's enrolment at the St Petersburg Academy of Arts as a student of architecture under the tutelage of Alexander Bryullov, a leading Russian architect and watercolourist. This entrance into the art world was made possible through the agency of a close family friend, the Polish painter Xavier Jan Kaniewski. In 1853 Carrick was awarded the title of 'unclassified artist with the right to undertake building', upon receipt of which he departed for three years of further study in Rome. There he concentrated on creating watercolour portraits and studies of architectural monuments. 
Following the end of the Crimean War and the collapse of the family business, in 1856 Carrick returned to St Petersburg and determined to become a photographer. Initially he was engaged with Ivan Hoch, a long-standing acquaintance who had studied art with him at the Academy and in Rome. By the summer of 1857 he and his siblings had departed for Edinburgh to further their education. Carrick briefly studied photography under James Good Tunny, met the photographic technician John MacGregor, and in October 1857 went back to St Petersburg to establish himself as a professional photographer. In 1859 he opened his atelier at 19 Malaya Morskaya Street and was joined by MacGregor as his assistant. 
Carrick, himself a striking man of six feet four inches with bushy beard and wavy hair, achieved some success as the commercial portrait photographer he set out to be. However, he really found his niche as a photographer of Russian folk scenes, both urban and rural, and of painting. These two fields were brought together through his association with many artists connected to the progressive Itinerant Art Exhibition Society (the Peredvizhniki) whose aim was to popularize painting, not least by taking it to the provinces and elevating humble genres. Anticipating the Itinerants' interests, by the early 1860s he had begun to print card sets of photographs of Russian 'types' for sale as souvenirs. He was to continue making and adding to these for the next decade and a half. They included St Petersburg hawkers ('raznoschiki') as well as other workers and peasants from both town and country. For a set of eighty such images which he had given to the liberal but sickly heir apparent, Grand Duke Nicholas, in 1862, he was presented with a diamond ring. Among those he photographed in the atelier were a boy abacus seller, a milkmaid, a cooper, a glazier, buskers, a knife-grinder, a nurseryman, a glove seller, a chimney sweep, soldiers, and various armed Caucasians in national costume. Often classically posing his models, he gained renown for his evocation of dignity in labour. In addition he also took street scenes and travelled through the Russian provinces, notably to regions around the cities of Simbirsk (subsequently Ulyanovsk), Novgorod, Kostroma, Kazan, Nizhniy Novgorod, Yaroslavl, Tver, and, of course, St Petersburg, where he took numerous images of country life. Carrick thus pioneered Russian ethnographic photography, and left a great legacy of hundreds of photographs. Yet, in keeping with the Itinerants' principles for painting, these photographs were defined by an acute sensitivity to location and character, an unsentimentalized empathy with the people and the intrinsic qualities of their lives, and the ability to capture and subtly to convey the beauty of the mundane. His best-known set was a collection of albumen prints, 'Peasant Characters from Simbirsk Province', which he created in the early 1870s while staying on the estate of his friend Vice-Admiral Nikolay Sokovnin, a designer of unrealized airships. These and others were to be utilized by the Itinerants for their painterly depictions of peasant life. 
As early as 1863 Carrick had begun a collaboration with Count Mihaly Zichy, a court painter in St Petersburg. Zichy, who had previously worked as a retoucher in Russia's first daguerreotype studio, commissioned Carrick to take photographs of his watercolours which were then to be sold as prints. This marked the start of Carrick's pioneering role in the development of the photographic reproduction of Russian art. His 'Album of Russian Artists', published posthumously in 1879, featured the work of such foremost Itinerant painters as Nikolay Ge, Ivan Kramskoy, and Viktor Vasnetsov. 
In 1868, in a civil ceremony in St Petersburg, Carrick married Aleksandra Grigorievna Markelova (1832-1916), a leading member of the populist movement and radical writer. The couple had two sons, Dmitry ('b'. 1867) and Valery (1869-1943), the latter becoming a renowned caricaturist. Carrick also adopted Markelova's son from an earlier relationship, Grigory (1862-1887?), and trained him in the photography of art. 
Following MacGregor's death in 1872 Carrick moved to the Fifth Line of St Basil's Island, close to the Academy of Arts. He was appointed photographer of the academy in 1876 and given a studio in the academy building. His works were shown, to considerable acclaim, at the academy's exhibition of 1869, and the international exhibitions in London (1876) and Paris (1878). He died suddenly in St Petersburg, after an attack of pneumonia, on 11 November 1878. 


@@@@@


doc= 40415


Burbury, Edwina Jane (1818/19-1870), writer, was the daughter of Edward Raymond Hicks and his wife, Frances Pickering. Nothing is known of her early life, but she married Thomas Potter Burbury ('bap'. 1815, died 1868), solicitor, on 9 August 1841; they had at least two children, Thomas Raymond in 1842 and Florence Elizabeth in 1843. Her husband appears to have fallen into financial difficulties early in their marriage. In 1848 she published her first work, 'How to Spend a Week Happily', a religious tale for young people, the success of which led her to write a sequel, 'Mabel Trevor', in 1853. She became a contributor to 'Sharpe's London Magazine' at the beginning of 1849 'for the support of herself and her young family'. In 1849 the editor, Frank Smedley, aware of her friendship with G. P. R. James, published 'Seven Tales by Seven Authors' -- a collection of short stories including one by James -- with the aim of donating all the proceeds to Edwina Burbury. Her pecuniary difficulties do not seem to have been immediately alleviated, however; Charles Dickens's accounts show him 'contributing a subscription of $5 in favour of Mrs Burbury' in 1855. Burbury's own tale in this collection was 'The Trust', described in the 'Preface' as 'not actually 'founded on fact'' but 'suggested by some of the bitter experiences of her own eventful career'; the story tells of the heroine's husband suffering severe financial losses and being imprisoned for bankruptcy, and of her children being taken into the care of her brother-in-law's family and one of them dying through neglect. How much of this is applicable to Burbury is, like so much of her life, a matter of conjecture. Of her contributions to periodicals and five works, she is most famous for her novel 'Florence Sackville' (1853), which charts a woman's struggle for independence and love, and success in becoming an author, and was enjoyed by Charlotte Bronte. All her fiction has a strongly Christian emphasis. Her husband died on 15 March 1868 in Bewdley, leaving his wife 'debts' and his children his 'best love'. The Royal Literary Fund archive reveals that since 1860 Burbury had supported herself and her children through her writing; her husband had previously eloped with Edwina's sister and was also dependent on her support. Edwina Burbury died in Wallingford on 17 February 1870 at the age of fifty-one, her occupation being listed merely as 'widow'. She is frequently confused in reference works with Selina Bunbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 40417


Shrewsbury, William James (1795-1866), missionary, was born in Deal, Kent. His father was a grocer and tailor, his mother a former servant. He began his Methodist missionary career in Tortola in 1815 and stayed in the Caribbean for a further nine years. While he was in Tortola, in 1816, planters and slaveholders across the region were thrown into panic by a revolt among the enslaved population of Barbados, which they blamed in large part on the British anti-slavery campaign. During Shrewsbury's second posting to Grenada, from 1818, and his third in Barbados, from 1820, he faced restrictions on when and where he could preach to enslaved people because of the fears of many white West Indians that missionary activity would provoke further unrest. It was of great comfort to him when he married a local Methodist convert, Hilaria King (1801-1835), on 1 January 1823. 
Shrewsbury was not an outspoken critic of slavery in Barbados, but he came to be viewed as such. In August 1823 news reached Barbados of another major slave revolt in Demerara. Shrewsbury's services were disrupted and two masked horsemen fired on his Bridgetown chapel. A handbill called for the destruction of the chapel. Shrewsbury received warning of the plot and fled to the neighbouring island of St Vincent. The authorities there required Shrewsbury to provide testimonials to prove that he was not a subversive figure before allowing him to preach. These were used to great effect by Shrewsbury's supporters in Britain, where he returned the following year. In June 1825 Thomas Fowell Buxton, leader of the Anti-Slavery Society, introduced a Commons motion calling for the condemnation of Shrewsbury's persecution, the reconstruction of his chapel, and the protection of religious freedom in Barbados. The motion was given extensive coverage in the anti-slavery and missionary press and, reluctantly, Shrewsbury became a humanitarian 'cause celebre'. 
After a brief posting to Brighton, Shrewsbury was sent to Cape Colony in response to an appeal by William Shaw, Albany district's Wesleyan superintendent. Shrewsbury sailed there in 1824 with the pregnant Hilaria and their two children. He founded a mission named after the treasurer of the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society, Joseph Butterworth, adjacent to the homestead of the paramount chief Hintsa, some 100 miles to the east of the colonial frontier. At first Shrewsbury contrasted the Xhosa's hospitality with the animosity of the West Indian planters. However, once he found that his proselytization was of little interest to the independent Xhosa, he began to complain of their supposed flaws. His disillusionment intensified after his relocation to the Mount Coke mission station, in the midst of the area of greatest frontier tension. 
During his time at Mount Coke Shrewsbury found some comfort in the society of the British settlers in Graham's Town. He was transferred there in 1833. The following year the Cape Frontier War of 1834-6 broke out between an alliance of Xhosa chiefdoms and the British colony. Shrewsbury sided firmly with the settlers, forsaking any sympathy that he might have had with the Xhosa for the series of land losses and punitive raids they had suffered. When the commander of the colonial forces, Lieutenant-Colonel Harry Smith, asked a number of the missionaries who had lived among the Xhosa for their advice, Shrewsbury obliged. His suggestions included further confiscations of Xhosa land and property, the execution of those Xhosa who had killed British subjects in the war, and the putting to work of other 'offenders' making roads through Xhosaland. In addition he recommended that all Xhosa wear identity tags, and that those without be considered hostile. The governor, Sir Benjamin D'Urban, enclosed Shrewsbury's recommendations in a dispatch to the sceptical humanitarian colonial secretary, Lord Glenelg. 
In 1835 Shrewsbury returned to England, having asked for a recall on the grounds of Hilaria's poor health and the need to secure his children's future. But Hilaria died, apparently as a result of a miscarriage, just a week before they were to set sail. Soon after their return to Deal, Shrewsbury's youngest daughter also died. It was at this time that the controversy prompted by D'Urban's dispatch and Shrewsbury's enclosure erupted, as Buxton agitated for a parliamentary inquiry into the causes of the war in the Cape. In December 1835 the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society recorded its 'most entire and unqualified disapprobation' of Shrewsbury's recommendations. Shrewsbury, who professed himself a broken man, was consigned to a British congregation in Boulogne for a year until the furore had died down. 
After his return to England Shrewsbury had six more children with his second wife, Mary Ann, whom he married on 20 October 1837. While ministering in Yeadon, near Leeds, in 1852 he managed once again to have his chapel and home attacked. This time the 'mob' comprised Methodist revivalists angered by Shrewsbury's attempt to bar them from the chapel that they had built. He died of chronic bronchitis on 25 February 1866 at 53 Higher Ardwick, Chorlton, Manchester, and was survived by his second wife. The obituary printed in the 'Minutes of the Methodist Conferences' dwelt on his experience of persecution by slave-owners in Barbados rather than the controversy caused by his recommendations in the Cape. None the less, he remained something of a hero among the British settlers in the Cape for having spoken out against humanitarian interference. 


@@@@@


doc= 40418


Harrison, Edmund (bap. 1591, d. 1667), embroiderer, was born in London, the son of Christopher Harrison (died 1611), merchant taylor, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Cook of Wakefield. He was baptized at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 23 May 1591. From 1599 to 1604 he was a pupil at Merchant Taylors' School. Nothing is known of his apprenticeship as an embroiderer, but the intimate association of his name with those of William Broderick (died 1620), king's embroiderer to James I, and his son-in-law, John Shepley or Shipley (died 1631), embroiderer to Charles I as prince of Wales, suggests he was trained by one of them. He must have been working for James I in 1618, when he is referred to as king's embroiderer in the diary of his friend, Thomas Godfrey (1586-1664) of Sellinge, Kent, but he only bore the title officially from 1621, sharing it with Shepley until about 1626, when it became his alone. From 1623 he often served as churchwarden at St Benet Paul's Wharf, the church closely associated with the Broderers' Company, and in 1628 he became warden of the company for the first time, presenting a parcel gilt cup on that occasion. 
On 13 September 1630 Harrison married Jane (1615-1688), eldest daughter of Thomas Godfrey and his second wife, Sarah Iles of Hammersmith. In 1622 he had stood godfather to one of her younger brothers, later the magistrate Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey. By 1630 he had moved from Grub Street in the parish of St Giles Cripplegate, to Knightrider Street in that of St Benet Paul's Wharf, which was nearer to the great wardrobe. According to his own reckoning, twenty children were born to him and his wife, but only three sons and two daughters were living at his death. 
The civil war temporarily ended Harrison's career as king's embroiderer. By 1651 he had moved to Hartshorne Lane (now Northumberland Avenue), where he engaged in the coal trade from an adjacent wharf. That year he also acted for one of the syndicates of the king's creditors, buying numerous paintings and other items at the sales of the king's goods. These included royal portraits and important works such as Rubens's 'Peace and War' (now in the National Gallery, London) and pictures by Mantegna (in the Brera Gallery, Milan) and Titian (in the Prado, Madrid). He also acquired Henry VIII's richly embroidered table carpet from the paradise chamber at Hampton Court, and the cloth of state with the arms of James I, which he himself had embroidered for the banqueting hall at Whitehall in 1638. His production of these at the Restoration in 1660, and a certificate from the Broderers' Company testifying to his skill as 'the ablest worker living', helped to get him reinstated as king's embroiderer. He retained the position until his death. 
None of Harrison's official work remains, but the accounts of the great wardrobe and master of the robes detail numerous suits, masque costumes, horse trappings, cloths of state, heralds' tabards, liveries, 'Bible' and prayer book covers, banners and armorials embroidered by him. Elias Ashmole's book of 1672 on the Order of the Garter describes and illustrates two examples: the seal bag and the cover of the red book of the order. For Charles I he also executed rich figure embroidery on altar cloths and hangings. This is closest to his surviving work, a set of embroidered pictures of the life of the Virgin, of which five are now known (preserved in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, and Royal Museums of Scotland, Edinburgh). Unique of their kind in Britain, in being worked entirely in the technique of gold embroidery known as 'or nue', these were commissioned either by Lady Alethea Talbot (died 1654), wife of Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel (1586-1646), or their third son William Howard, Lord Stafford (1611-1680). Also attributed to Harrison are an embroidered altar frontal with the last supper in the same technique, and an associated pulpit hanging of 1633 with the arms of Sandys of the Vyne. 
Edmund Harrison died of a stroke on 9 January 1667. He was buried at St Giles Cripplegate, where a monument (now lost) was erected to him at the behest of his eldest son Godfrey (1635-1677). 


