@@@@@


doc= 40419


Wright, Phoebe (1710s?-1778), embroiderer and designer, may have been, according to evidence from her will, the sister of Benjamin Holmes, hosier and glover of Bishopsgate Street Without in Spitalfields, London, and of Joseph Holmes, silk and gauze weaver of Milk Street, off Cheapside, who was married at Christ Church, Spitalfields, in 1742. The will, made after Phoebe separated from her husband, about whom nothing is known apart from his surname, Wright, is undated but it must have been made before the birth of her niece Nancy Wilton in 1752 as she is not mentioned in it. That Phoebe Wright was already a woman of substance at the time is evident from her reference to her mahogany chairs and dining table and a steel grate, all of which, plus the bed she used herself, she left to her brother Benjamin. That her maiden name was Holmes is further suggested by the bequest of 'my best drawing table' to her niece, and presumably namesake, Phoebe Holmes. 
In the 'Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce' by Malachy Postlethwayt, first published in London in 1751, Phoebe Wright is mentioned, among a number of English designers of woven silks who came to the fore about 1744, as having 'eminently distinguished herself by the correctness and elegancy of her drawing and her colouring' (Postlethwayt, 1.736). No designs on paper by her are known, but at Wardour Castle, Wiltshire, is preserved a set of church vestments embroidered in Rome in 1777 for the eighth Baron Arundell of Wardour after designs by her. That on the chasuble incorporates trailing stems with flower sprigs very close to those on contemporary silks. Phoebe Wright was also a professional embroiderer. The earliest reference to her, in a letter of 29 November 1742 from Mary Pendarves, later Delany, to her sister, states that the finest clothes at court on the birthday of the prince of Wales were 'Lady Caroline Lenox's, gold and colours on white, embroidered by Mrs Wright' ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 3.250). It was most unusual for the two skills to be combined in a single person, professional embroiderers generally having to rely on professional artists or pattern drawers for their designs. 
Phoebe Wright lived on Great Newport Street in Soho, still quite a fashionable district in her day as well as being the home of various artists and engravers, including Sir Joshua Reynolds (1725-1793), a neighbour on Great Newport Street from 1753 to 1760. While Phoebe Wright would doubtless have trained apprentices in the usual way of an embroiderer she was singled out for royal patronage by Queen Charlotte, who, probably from the late 1760s onwards, made her a yearly grant of $500 to enable her to run a school for training indigent girls of good family in embroidery. Six pupils aged fifteen were admitted at any one time and their training appears to have lasted for two to three years. 
In 1770 Phoebe Wright exhibited 'A specimen of needlework now executing for her Majesty' at the Royal Incorporated Society of Artists of Great Britain. This was part of the largest project undertaken by the embroidery school in her day, namely the hangings for a state bed at Windsor Castle and matching covers for two armchairs and eight stools. This embroidery, which is still extant though now at Hampton Court and applied to a new ground, is described in 'The Windsor Guide' of 1783 as featuring 'a variety of the most curious flowers, the colours of which are beautiful, and disposed with the greatest accuracy and judgement' (p. 14). The design was by Phoebe Wright herself, while the embroidery was in coloured silks with a little chenille, in accordance with the fashion of the day. She lived to see the completion of the bed but not its installation at Windsor, as she died suddenly at Great Newport Street in November 1778; she was buried at St Anne's, Soho. Her school was taken over by her niece Nancy, whom she had also trained and who had married Joseph Pawsey in 1774, but from the time of her death onwards, while it continued to execute many royal commissions, it had to rely for its designs on the flower painter Mary Moser. It remained in existence, though no longer in London, until Queen Charlotte died, and eventually it came to be associated solely with Nancy Pawsey, Phoebe Wright's name having been forgotten. 
As a gifted and independent woman Phoebe Wright was on dining-out terms with such contemporaries as the bluestocking Elizabeth Montagu and Thomas Bentley, the business partner of Josiah Wedgwood. Her designs and embroideries, which seem to have included some of the embroidered pictures popular in her day, were treasured after her death by admirers such as Margaret Cavendish Bentinck, duchess of Portland, and Jemima, Marchioness Grey, who wrote on 23 November 1778: 'She is a great loss indeed to an Art which she has brought to an amazing degree of Perfection and with a sense of taste unknown before' (Phillips, 93). 


@@@@@


doc= 40423


Hill, Sir (Austin) Bradford (1897-1991), medical statistician, was born on 8 July 1897 in Hampstead, London, the third of four sons and third of six children of Sir Leonard Erskine Hill (1866-1952), professor of physiology at the London Hospital medical college, and his wife, Janet, 'nee' Alexander (1868-1956), daughter of Frederick Alexander, bank clerk. On his father's side he was great-great-nephew of Sir Rowland Hill. When he was five years old the family moved to Loughton, a village in Epping Forest, where he acquired a lifelong love of the countryside. He was educated at Chigwell School from 1908 to 1916 and was distinguished there more by sporting than academic ability. He nevertheless became head boy, staying on for an extra year as he was not allowed to enlist and did not want to start a long medical training during the war. On leaving school he obtained a commission in the Royal Naval Air Service and was soon posted to the Greek islands in support of the attack on the Dardanelles. While there he contracted pulmonary tuberculosis, which probably saved his life as it kept him 'hors de combat'. Confined to bed, he was unable to study medicine, which he had wanted to do since boyhood, so studied economics as an external student of London University, obtaining a second-class honours degree in 1922. After a long attachment dating back to before his naval service began, on 31 July 1923 he married Florence Maud Salmon (1892-1980), daughter of Edward George Salmon, editor and author. They had two sons and a daughter. 
An opportunity to work in the medical field occurred when the Medical Research Council (MRC) sought someone to investigate the reasons for the high mortality of young adults in rural areas and Hill obtained the appointment with the support of Major Greenwood, an old friend of his father's, who was in charge of statistical work at the Ministry of Health. This provided the opportunity to extend his knowledge of statistics (initiated in the study of economics) by attending part of the London BSc course. He was inspired by the teaching of Karl Pearson at University College, though more by his general ideas and philosophy than by his erudite mathematics, and he settled for a career in epidemiology, with a special interest in occupational medicine. A series of grants from the MRC led to a staff appointment until, in 1933, he obtained a readership in epidemiology and vital statistics under Greenwood, who had become the first professor of medical statistics at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. In this position Hill made his first great contribution to medicine, publishing in 'The Lancet' in 1937 his lectures on statistics to postgraduate medical students. The seventeen articles were subsequently brought together in a book, 'The Principles of Medical Statistics' (1937), which was translated into Spanish, Korean, Indonesian, Polish, and Russian, and was repeatedly reprinted and revised: fifty years later the text was still widely read (the eleventh edition appeared in 1985), but could be considered overly simple. It was, however, its very simplicity, combined with its clarity of expression and logical development, that made it so successful and was primarily responsible for making an innumerate profession understand the need for appropriate statistical analysis and allowance for the play of chance. 
With the onset of the Second World War, Hill was seconded to the research and experimental department of the Ministry of Home Security and later to the medical directorate of the Royal Air Force. With the latter he maintained a relationship as an honorary civil consultant in medical statistics until 1978. (He was also civil consultant in medical statistics to the Royal Navy, from 1958 to 1977.) Greenwood retired in 1945 and Hill was appointed to his chair and to the honorary directorship of the MRC's statistical research unit. A year later he persuaded two MRC committees to adopt a new technique for testing the value of new drugs or prophylactic regimes: namely, random allocation of subjects to treatment or control groups. He did so not for theoretical statistical reasons, but for the practical reason that it guaranteed the avoidance of bias in the allocation of treatment, something that was always possible, in one way or another, with other regimes. One of the trials (of streptomycin for the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis) had notably clear results; the benefits of the technique were quickly appreciated and within a few years random allocation became the essential characteristic of a reliable trial. 
In 1947 Hill was asked by the MRC to try to find a reason for the increased mortality attributed to lung cancer, which an MRC conference (in which Hill participated) had concluded was unlikely to be wholly an artefact of improved diagnosis. He consequently planned a study of patients with lung cancer, in which their histories would be compared with those of patients with other diseases, and he obtained the assistance of Richard Doll to undertake its day-to-day conduct. The results, published in 1950, led Doll and Hill to conclude that 'cigarette smoking is a cause, and an important cause, of bronchogenic carcinoma' ('BMJ', 2, 1950, 739). This unpopular conclusion (for 80 per cent of British middle-aged men were regular smokers) was not generally accepted and Hill (with Doll) designed a different type of study to test its validity, in which 40,000 doctors were asked to describe their smoking habits and were then followed to determine their causes of death. The results soon confirmed the earlier conclusion and, with further follow-up, showed that smoking also caused many other diseases. These case-control and cohort studies, as they came to be called, broke new ground and were frequently cited as models of their type. Consideration of the evidence that had led to the conclusion that cigarette smoking was a cause of disease led Hill to review the type of evidence required to deduce causality from observational studies. His findings came to be known as 'Hill's guidelines' and they were subsequently used widely for both scientific and legal purposes. 
Hill was a quiet, unassuming, private person, known to everyone as Tony, who sought to lead but not to drive. In committee he expressed his opinion firmly and cogently but never sought to impose, and was in consequence listened to with respect. He lectured brilliantly, reading texts in such a way that he was thought to be speaking spontaneously, often without the use of visual aids but always with humorous asides. His many public functions included membership of the committee on the safety of medicines (1964-75) and the MRC (1954-8), and he served as secretary (1940-50) and president (1950-52) of the Royal Statistical Society and, for two years, as dean of the School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (1955-7). In 1951 he was made CBE and in 1961 knighted. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1954 and received honorary degrees from Oxford and Edinburgh and many honorary fellowships and medals, including an honorary fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians of London and the gold medal of the Royal Statistical Society (1953). He retired early to devote himself to his wife, who had stayed by him when he had pulmonary tuberculosis, and he looked after her at home when she developed Alzheimer's disease, until shortly before she died in 1980. His last years were marred by frequent transient ischaemic attacks, one of which left him with a weak left leg. He died, mentally alert to the end, in Balla Wray Nursing Home, High Wray, Ambleside, Westmorland, of bronchopneumonia, on 18 April 1991. A service of thanksgiving for his life was held at St Clement Danes on 4 October 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 40427


Cleaver, Euseby Digby (1826-1894), Church of England clergyman and promoter of the Irish language, was born on 8 March 1826 at Delgany, co. Wicklow, the eldest son of William Cleaver, rector of the parish, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Sir Digby Mackworth, third baronet, of Glen Usk, Llanhenwg Fawr, Monmouthshire. He was grandson of Euseby Cleaver, archbishop of Dublin, and grandnephew of William Cleaver, bishop of St Asaph. The rector and his wife, to whose memory there is a marble tablet in Christ Church, Delgany, had three sons and two daughters. Of the second son we have no account. The youngest, William Henry Cleaver, was ordained in the Church of England. Catherine Cleaver is stated to have been married to the Revd William Pennefather, but this appears to be incorrect. Her sister, Frances Augusta, became the wife of James George Scott, vicar of Bray, co. Wicklow, until disestablishment, and later archdeacon of Dublin. 
Cleaver was privately tutored -- for a brief period ('c'.1840-41) by James Anthony Froude, who had just come down from Oxford. In 1845 he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, where his father had been educated, graduating BA with third-class honours in classics in 1849. He proceeded MA in 1857. Ordained in the Church of England in 1854, he served curacies at Ducklington in Oxfordshire and at Pimlico, London, before being presented in 1875 by the dean and chapter of St Paul's to the rectory of Landon Hills, Romford, Essex, which he retained until his retirement in 1886. He then settled in Dolgellau, Wales, having married Julian Helen, who was born in the East Indies about 1845. Her maiden name is not known. They had a son, who was five years old in 1891. 
Cleaver, though resident in England during all his working life, identified himself with and was a munificent benefactor of every organization which had for its object the preservation of the Irish language. A founder member of the Ossianic Society in 1853, he was immediately elected to its executive council and in the following year became a vice-president. He was still a generous patron of the language forty years later, when, shortly after the foundation in Dublin of the Gaelic League on 31 July 1893, he was elected its vice-president, filling the post until his death. 
The only thing certain about Cleaver's acquisition of the Irish language seems to be that he did not learn it in Delgany; east Wicklow had by then long ceased to be Irish-speaking. His father owned an estate in the parish of Fuerty, co. Roscommon, and Euseby by his own admission spent much of his youth in that area, which was largely Irish-speaking then. He doubtless learnt the language in the same way as did his co. Roscommon friend of later years, Douglas Hyde, also a rector's son -- by listening to and conversing with native Irish speakers, and by studying the grammar of William Neilson, or perhaps that of the attorney William Haliday or the lexicographer Edward O'Reilly. Hyde dedicated his own first book, 'Leabhar sgeulaigheachta' (1889), to Cleaver, who had borne the cost of publication. He referred to Cleaver (as Eusebh D. Mac Cliabhair) in his account of the early Gaelic League (1937). Cleaver's own book, 'Duanaire na Nuadh-Ghaedhilge', a collection of verse new and translated, was published under his Gaelic name, reaching its third and last edition in 1891. 
Cleaver, who in 1889 described himself as 'a poor man without any professional income', died at his residence, Tyn y Coed, Dolgellau, Merioneth, on 26 November 1894. He was buried in north Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 40428


Hickey, Emily Henrietta (1845-1924), writer and schoolteacher, was born on 12 April 1845 at Castle Macmine, co. Wexford, Ireland (home of her mother's Stewart ancestors), the second of two daughters of Canon John Stewart Hickey and his wife, a Newton-King related to the Stewarts of Stewart Lodge, co. Carlow. She was the granddaughter of the Revd William Hickey (1787-1875), a philanthropist and writer under the pseudonym of Martin Doyle; her ancestral heritage was Anglo-Irish and Scottish. The family home was in Goresbridge, co. Carlow. Educated at home in early childhood, Emily Hickey attended day school at ten and boarding-school at thirteen. At twenty she published a poem in the 'Cornhill Magazine' and shortly after, some narrative poems in 'Macmillan's Magazine', and it became her ambition to be a writer. 
Happily for that ambition, the Macmillans invited Emily Hickey to visit and introduced her to their literary circle. Determined to pursue her career in London, she took whatever employment was available to young women at that time: private teacher, secretary, governess, companion. She also took full advantage of the opportunities that London offered. She studied with Andrew Lang and, via correspondence, earned a first-class honours certificate from Cambridge. She attended the lectures of F. J. Furnivall, who was so impressed with her work that he helped her obtain an appointment as lecturer in the London Collegiate School for Girls, where she taught for eighteen years -- work for which she was put on the civil pension list. As a member of Furnivall's circle, she took part in Shakespearian readings, where it was remarked that 'her voice was singularly musical and her intonation faultless' (Dinnis, 26). Through Furnivall Hickey met Robert Browning, who admired her poetry and remained a friend until his death. She edited and annotated his 'Strafford' and with Furnivall founded the Browning Society; her role as honorary secretary was celebrated in a fine caricature by Max Beerbohm. 
Emily Hickey continued to write, publishing four volumes of poetry between 1881 and 1901. She translated Anglo-Saxon and French verse, and also wrote essays and criticism. Her interest in social problems brought her to know Conrad Roden Noel and to write on his work, and she also became interested in home rule; her blank-verse essay 'Michael Villiers' addressed Irish problems. Her work appeared in major periodicals in America, England, and Ireland. 
In the mid-1890s ill health sent Emily on a trip to France, Germany, and Switzerland, the only recorded journey that took her away from the British Isles. Switzerland inspired a series of nature verses, which with other works of this period were published in 1896. On her return to England she dedicated herself to social causes and became an active Anglo-Catholic. On 22 July 1901 she joined the Roman Catholic church, and for a time she wrote for the Catholic Truth Society. Her poetry became devotional and her prose dedicated to Catholic concerns; after her conversion she retracted her first three collections of verse ('A Sculptor', 1881, 'Verse-Translations', 1891, and 'Michael Villiers'), as they had expressed ideas at odds with her newly adopted beliefs. English critics largely ignored her post-conversion work; American and Irish continued to print and comment favourably upon it. In 1912 Pope Pius IX awarded her the gold cross 'pro ecclesia et pontifice'. It was hung in the church of St Thomas a Becket. 
In the last two years of Emily Hickey's life her health and sight failed, but she continued to write until she died on 9 September 1924 at the Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth in London. She left a poem, 'At Eventide', to be published after her death. 
In retrospect Emily Hickey's is the story of a talented woman who was able to be independent and successful in acquiring higher education and literary reputation. Her biography, together with a selection of her poetry, was published in 1927 by her literary executor, Enid Dinnis. It is as objective a record as a friend and co-religionist can be expected to give, but does not, however, have the last word on Emily's literary reputation. Dinnis wrote, 'Little by little the brilliant essayist, the erudite student of early English texts, the spoiled child of Victorian verse-makers and co-founder of the Browning Society, receded from the world of letters... she remained a Victorian to the end. (Dinnis, 47)' Interest in Emily Hickey's work has been more lasting than this; in 1982 the musical setting of her translation of the Irish 'His Home and his Own Country' was included in 'Seven Irish Songs', and the late twentieth century also saw something of a revival of critical attention to her work. 


@@@@@


doc= 40429


Morrison, James Horne (1872-1947), Church of Scotland minister and author, was born on 2 September 1872 in Aberdeen, the youngest of the four sons and one daughter of William Morrison (1835-1912), head gardener at the Aberdeen Mental Asylum, and his wife, Jane (1832-1925), a domestic servant, daughter of John Horne and his wife, Jane, both of Forgue, Aberdeenshire. When his father became head gardener to the dowager duchess of Gordon at Huntly Lodge, Aberdeenshire, James Morrison attended the local Gordon Schools ('c'.1878-1888) and was dux of his upper school. In 1888, at the age of sixteen, he entered the University of Aberdeen, from which in 1892 he received his MA degree with honours in classics and philosophy, in the process taking prizes in mathematics and physics. Later that year he entered New College, Edinburgh, to prepare for the ministry of the Free Church of Scotland, and in his first year won prizes in Hebrew and natural science. 
Following his second year at Edinburgh, Morrison offered himself as a student missionary in the Canadian North West Territories. He was sent to the district known as Assiniboia in April 1894, where for twelve months he laboured among mostly Scottish settlers in the area of Buffalo Lake, north of Moose Jaw. He arrived in North America at the height of agrarian unrest caused by a combination of commercial depression and crop failure during a devastating summer. Only his fine equipoise enabled Morrison to overcome the drought and heat of that summer and the bitter cold of the subsequent winter. All this he described in a compelling personal journal, a rare first-hand account of prairie life during the period, containing evocative accounts of settlers' lives. He also revealed high descriptive powers in portrayals of natural phenomena. 
Morrison returned to Scotland in April 1895 and that autumn commenced his third year of theological study. Elected president of the New College missionary society during his fourth year, he graduated in March 1897. He served as an assistant minister, first at the South Free Church, Aberdeen, until 1899, and then at St Leonard's United Free Church, Perth, to 1901. In July 1901 he was ordained and was inducted as minister of the United Free Church of Falkland, Fife. On 3 September he married Lizzie Jane Milne (1874-1962); the union produced three sons and two daughters. 
From March to September 1914 Morrison travelled in central Africa as one of the delegates to foreign missions of the United Free Church general assembly, having published in 1913 'On the Trail of the Pioneers: a Sketch of the Missions of the United Free Church of Scotland'. He published a booklet, 'Forty Years in Darkest Africa: the Life of Dr Laws of Livingstonia', in 1917 and two years later his second book, 'Streams in the Desert: a Picture of Life in Livingstonia'. In 1917 he was inducted as minister of Newhills United Free Church, Bucksburn, Aberdeenshire. For several months during 1918 and 1919 he served with the YMCA in France, lecturing to British troops. During the 1920s he published three further books on overseas missions: 'Missionary Heroes of Africa' (1922), 'William Carey: Cobbler and Pioneer' (1924), and 'The Scottish Churches' Work Abroad' (1927), and he contributed fifty-seven sermons and two general introductions to the 'Speaker's Bible'. 
The early 1930s saw the publication in the 'Expository Times' of several articles on Christianity and science. This led to Morrison's invitation to deliver the Cunningham lectures at New College, University of Edinburgh, in 1936, a penetrating analysis of the relationship of, and the boundaries between, science and Christian faith. These were published later that year as 'Christian Faith and the Science of To-Day'. In 1937 he produced a booklet for the Church of Scotland, 'God and the Atom', and in the same year received the degree of doctor of divinity from the University of Aberdeen. Morrison remained at Bucksburn until his retirement in 1942, when he moved to Edinburgh. He died there of heart failure on 2 January 1947, and was buried in the city's Morningside cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 40430


Alison, Francis (1705-1779), Presbyterian minister and college principal in America, was born in the parish of Leck in co. Donegal, the son of Robert Alison, a weaver descended from emigrants from Scotland. His mother's name and ancestry are unknown. He may have received his early education at Francis Hutchinson's Presbyterian academy in Dublin. Later he went to Scotland where he graduated MA at the University of Edinburgh in 1733. He completed his preparation for the ministry by studying for the next two years, possibly at the University of Glasgow. Thereafter, he returned to Ireland where he was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Letterkenny. In 1735 Alison joined the large-scale Scots-Irish emigration to British America where he earned prominence as a minister, teacher, and citizen. 
After serving for two years as a tutor in Talbot county, Maryland, Alison was ordained to the Presbyterian ministry and was installed as pastor of the New London congregation in Chester county, Pennsylvania, which he served from 1737 to 1752. Shortly after settling in New London in 1737, Alison married Hannah Armitage of New Castle, Delaware, who survived him. They had a daughter and three sons, two of whom predeceased him. The other, also Francis Alison, became a prominent physician. Alison's sermons demonstrated his reconciliation of Scottish Enlightenment philosophy with moderate Calvinistic theology. He preached clearly from notes that included numerous references to the scriptures. His parishioners appreciated his ministry. Most supported him against a revivalistic intruder into his parish and tried to prevent his departure in 1752. As the allegedly excessive emotionalism of the so-called 'great awakening of religion' divided Presbyterians in America during the late 1730s and 1740s, Alison became a leader of the anti-revivalistic Old Side. Nevertheless, he worked for the reunification of the Old and New Side synods, which occurred in 1758. 
Important as Alison's ministry was, he was even more significant in the field of education. Shortly after beginning his ministry he opened the New London Academy. The curriculum included Latin, logic, metaphysics, ethics, science, mathematics, and moral philosophy which Alison taught, basing his lectures on Hutchinson's teachings from the Scottish Enlightenment. The Old Side synod adopted the school as its seminary. It became so well known that it attracted and trained capable students who later became ministers, state governors, congressmen, teachers, and physicians. In 1752 Alison left New London to take charge of the Academy of Philadelphia. In 1755 he and the Scottish Anglican William Smith added a college, of which he became academic vice-provost. In 1779 the state's legislature changed the college's name to the University of Pennsylvania. The curriculum that he installed was similar to that of his New London Academy. Because of disagreements with Smith and other problems, in 1766 he obtained funds for and chartered an academy in Newark, Delaware, which became the basis for that state's university. 
During Alison's years in Philadelphia he served also as assistant minister of the city's Old Side First Presbyterian Church. His concern for his denomination's clergy and their dependants led him to establish in the mid-1750s the Presbyterian Ministers Fund, America's first life insurance company. With most other Presbyterians he worked against Benjamin Franklin's campaign of the mid-1760s to transform proprietary Pennsylvania into a royal colony, fearing that the change would lead to the legal establishment of the Church of England. As a Presbyterian, he also opposed the Church of England's attempt to secure the appointment of a bishop for the colonies, remembering that in his native Ireland bishops, who exercised not only ecclesiastical but also political powers, had discriminated against dissenters. In 1766 he formulated, with Connecticut Congregationalists, the 'convention for religious liberty'. As a staunch supporter of religious freedom, he opened his schools to students of all denominations and nationalities. When the leading German Lutheran pastor in Pennsylvania, Henry Melchior Muhlenberg, attempted to have inserted into Pennsylvania's 1776 constitution a clause to exclude Jews from voting, Alison successfully opposed him. 
During and after Alison's lifetime he received numerous honours and testimonies to his achievements and character. In 1756 the University of Glasgow awarded him the honorary degree of doctor of divinity. Ezra Stiles, president of Yale College, called him America's most learned scholar of the classics. According to William Smith, provost of the College of Philadelphia, he was capable of holding any academic post in the country. Bishop William White emphasized his impeccable integrity. Never strong physically, Alison died in Philadelphia on 28 November 1779. 


@@@@@


doc= 40431


Murray, John, second earl of Dunmore (1685-1752), army officer and politician, the son of Lord Charles Murray (1661-1710), who was created earl of Dunmore in the Scottish peerage by James VII in 1686, and his wife, Catherine (died 1710), daughter of Richard Watts of Great Munden, Hertfordshire, was born on 31 October 1685 at Whitehall, Westminster, London. He was styled Viscount Fincastle from his elder brother's death in 1704 until he succeeded his father in 1710 as earl of Dunmore. Pursuing a military career, he was commissioned an ensign in the 3rd foot guards in 1704 and fought at Blenheim the same year. Promotion was steady and at times rapid: Dunmore became colonel of his regiment in 1712 (a position he held until his death), brigadier-general in 1719, major-general in 1735, lieutenant-general in 1739, and general in 1745. In the same year he was made governor of Plymouth. His active service took place largely on the continent, where he served under a variety of commanders and gained the reputation of being a reliable subordinate. He was part of Lord Cobham's Vigo expedition in 1719, and in 1743 fought under George II at Dettingen, where he was one of sixteen British generals made knights-banneret on the field by the king. He later served under the earl of Stair and the duke of Cumberland in the Low Countries. His lone major command came in 1745 when Cumberland and almost all British troops in the Low Countries were withdrawn to meet the Jacobite threat in Britain, leaving Dunmore in command of remaining allied forces. Greatly outnumbered, he was unable to prevent the capture of Antwerp by the French or their overall dominance in the Austrian Netherlands. 
When Dunmore was not on active service his life focused on the court and parliament. A firm supporter of the Union of 1707, he served as a representative peer in 1713-14 and 1727-52. In 1720 he purchased the manor of Stanwell, Middlesex, and appears thereafter to have spent little time in Scotland. Despite the Jacobite leanings of some of his relatives, he remained staunchly Hanoverian in his sympathies and opposed the Jacobite risings of 1715 and 1745. He exerted himself to save his brother and heir, William Murray of Taymount, who had joined the Forty-Five. Having obtained statements from loyal peers that his brother had helped to save the lives and property of Hanoverian supporters, he successfully interceded with the ministry for a pardon. In politics Dunmore allied himself with Archibald Campbell, earl of Ilay and subsequently third duke of Argyll. He supported Sir Robert Walpole during the excise crisis of 1733 when the fourteen representative peers present divided equally, though in general he did not figure prominently in the upper house's proceedings. He was a lord of the bedchamber to George II from 1732 until his death; on one occasion, according to Lord Hervey, he provoked the king by being overly inquisitive about his health. Dunmore never married, though, according to Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, he lived for a number of years with Mary, Lady Lansdown (died 1735). He died on 18 April 1752 in London, and was buried at Stanwell on 24 April. He was succeeded by his brother William. 


@@@@@


doc= 40432


Liddell, Henry, first Baron Ravensworth (bap. 1708, d. 1784), politician and coal owner, was baptized on 1 August 1708 in Lamesley, co. Durham, the eldest son of Thomas Liddell ('c'.1680-1715) and his wife, Jane (1679-1774), the daughter of James Clavering of Greencroft, co. Durham. Both families were prominent north-eastern coal owners. Liddell succeeded his paternal grandfather, Sir Henry Liddell, as fourth baronet in 1723 and went to Peterhouse College, Cambridge, in 1725. Following a grand tour in the early 1730s, on 27 April 1735 he married Anne (1712-1794), the daughter of a former lord mayor of London, Sir Peter Delme, and his first wife, Anne Macham. 
In 1726 Liddell was one of the original signatories of the grand alliance, a cartel of Tyneside coal owners that came to dominate the production and sale of coal in the area. By 1750 the alliance was at the peak of its power, controlling sixteen of the twenty-seven Durham collieries that produced for the sea-going trade. Although it later declined in dominance, the alliance outlived its original organizers and remained a force in the industry into the nineteenth century. 
Liddell pursued a parliamentary career that spanned nearly fifty years and included membership in both houses. He was first elected as a member for Morpeth in 1734, and was raised to the peerage as Baron Ravensworth in 1747. He was an active parliamentarian, attending regularly and speaking occasionally. While he was always solicitous of the interests of his fellow coal owners, he made his political reputation as an independent whig. He started out as a follower of Sir Robert Walpole and later supported the Pelhams, but often showed an independent streak. On occasion in the 1740s he clashed with William Pitt the elder on the issue of Hanoverian troops. Later, in 1778, he was one of a handful of peers to oppose the annuity bill for Pitt's heirs. 
Ravensworth's best-known intervention in politics came in 1753, when, prompted by an anonymous memorial from Horace Walpole, he accused several of those in charge of the education of the prince of Wales -- Andrew Stone and William Murray, together with James Johnson, the bishop of Gloucester -- with having been Jacobites. The charge caused a sensation and was investigated by the cabinet. It was found to be groundless, and Ravensworth emerged as one who seemed both sincere and gullible. It did not, however, break him of the habit of raising politically awkward questions. In 1763 the duke of Newcastle characterized him as a 'Wild Man' when he moved for financial accounts of the war in Germany (BL, Add. MS 32947, fol. 164, 3 March 1763); he was ultimately dissuaded from dividing the upper house by the prospect of being a minority of one. By this time he was regarded as a political eccentric, respected for his honesty but viewed as erratic in his judgement. Shortly after his motion for the accounts, George III, in a letter to Lord Bute on 11 March 1763, used Ravensworth as an example of the sort of man he considered unfit for office. 
At times Ravensworth espoused populist causes. He became a staunch early supporter of John Wilkes: Lord Ilchester described him on 3 May 1765 as 'so zealous for Wilkes that he is half mad' (BL, Add. MS 51421, fol. 41). In 1766 he pressed the Chatham administration for a bill to allow the import of rye and rye meal to alleviate the suffering of the common people of the north-east. 
In January 1756 Ravensworth's only child, Anne ['see 'Fitzpatrick, Anne, countess of Upper Ossory (1737/-1804)], married Augustus Henry Fitzroy, earl of Euston (1735-1811). During the 1760s the rise of his son-in-law, by then the duke of Grafton, to a position of importance gave Ravensworth closer connections to those at the highest level of politics. He, however, continued his independent course, voting both for and against Grafton's hard-pressed administration during the spring of 1767. His daughter later eloped with John Fitzpatrick, second earl of Upper Ossory (1745-1818), whom she married after her marriage to Grafton was dissolved in March 1769. 
After 1770 Ravensworth increasingly inclined towards opposition. He often opposed the North administration's colonial policy and the resultant war in America. He was also strongly critical of the government's handling of the Gordon riots. He supported economical reform in 1782, and Shelburne listed him on 6 May 1782, in a letter to George III, as among 'the most independent people' who supported the 'Contractor's Bill' (Shelburne to George III, 'Correspondence of King George the Third', 6.8-9). 
Ravensworth died on 30 January 1784 and was buried on 8 February at Lamesley. His widow survived him by ten years, and died on 12 June 1794 at their house, 13 St James's Square, London. The peerage became extinct on Ravensworth's death, but the title was revived in 1821 in favour of the son of his nephew and heir. 


@@@@@


doc= 40434


Norwood, Robert (c.1610-1654), parliamentarian army officer, is of obscure origins: as yet no trace has been found of his father and mother. The family name was not uncommon and is found in Buckinghamshire, Gloucestershire, Hertfordshire, Lincolnshire, Middlesex, Yorkshire, and particularly in Kent, from where it may have originated. Robert Norwood was put apprentice to Thomas Stocke of the Grocers' Company on 19 March 1628, and gained his freedom on 6 April 1636. In December 1639 Norwood began living at the sign of the Chequer in the parish of All Hallows, Bread Street, London. Some years later he claimed that before the calling of the Long Parliament he suffered imprisonment, seizure of goods, and long, tedious suits at the hands of Charles I and his privy council. He seems at this time to have shared mutual business interests with his elder brother (or perhaps cousin) the presbyterian John Norwood ('b'. 'c'.1602, died in or after 1662), and to have acted on behalf of his kinsman Richard Norwood of Bermuda. In September 1642 he signed the petition in favour of the appointment of Lazarus Seaman as rector of All Hallows, Bread Street. On 15 November 1642 Norwood was appointed a commissary of horse, and in the same month an assessor (Bread Street ward) for raising money for the defence of the kingdom. By the following summer he was commissioned as captain of a troop of horse in Colonel Edmund Harvey's regiment. His banner displayed a newly granted coat of arms and crest. It also carried the motto taken from 'Zechariah' 4:7 of Zerubbabel's encouragement to finish the Temple, a device that may have been suggested by Thomas Goodwin's fast sermon of that name preached before parliament in 1642. Norwood's nominally sixty-strong troop of horse was mustered in London on 18 August 1643 and thereafter probably saw heavy fighting at the first battle of Newbury in September that year. In December, after further encounters with royalist troops, Norwood was stationed at the garrison town of Newport Pagnell with a nominally 48-strong troop of horse, besides officers. In May 1644 the troop was mustered again at Colnbrook. Norwood probably served with Colonel Harvey until June 1644, perhaps even later. 
Following the new modelling of Harvey's regiment under the command of Colonel John Hurrey, Norwood was sent to the west of England as part of the spring campaign of 1645. Thereafter, he appears to have temporarily returned to civilian life. It was during this time that, by his own account, Norwood was 'threatned' for publicly opposing 'the Scotish interest then on foot' (Norwood, 'Case and Trial', 20). In April 1648 he was one of several men appointed to bring in the arrears of the assessments for the army, and in February 1649 one of sixty-four men appointed to sit on the court for the treason trials of the five lords -- Norwood was one of the thirty-five men who on 6 March 1649 signed the warrant for the execution of James, earl of Cambridge (the duke of Hamilton). Norwood's services were also required as a cavalry officer in the Irish campaign of 1649. His troop seems to have been mustered in the spring of 1649, quartering at Chester before landing at Dublin on 26 July 1649. Commanding a nominally eighty-strong troop of horse, besides officers, Norwood may have supported Colonel Michael Jones's forces in their victory over the earl of Ormond at the battle of Baggotsrath. Four days later, on 6 August 1649, Norwood and his cavalry troop repulsed Sir Thomas Armstrong's forces in a skirmish outside Dublin. It is possible that Norwood was wounded in these engagements. In November 1649 it appears that he returned to England, perhaps docking at Liverpool. The following year, on 26 March 1650, Robert Norwood was made a member of the high court of justice. Despite incurring, by his own account, a 'just debt' of about $3000 in the state's service, Norwood at this time still appears to have been a relatively wealthy merchant (Norwood, 'Form of an Excommunication', sig. A2'v'). He had committed himself to a millenarian scheme to establish a utopia in the Bahama Islands, and seems also to have had interests in foreign trade. In common with a number of London merchants, Norwood was a congregant of Sidrach Simpson's gathered church that met at St Mary Abchurch. 
On Thursday 25 April 1650 TheaurauJohn Tany, the self-proclaimed prophet and Lord's high priest of the Jews, issued a broadside. Its title was 'I Proclaime from the Lord of Hosts the Returne of the Jewes', and it is possible that Norwood may have helped pay towards its printing. Norwood was, at any rate, to contribute an epistle to another of Tany's works, 'His Aurora in Tranlagorum in Salem gloria' (1651). On Sunday 13 April 1651 Tany addressed a large gathering at Norwood's house in the parish of St Mary Aldermary; similar concourses apparently followed. In March that same year members of Sidrach Simpson's gathered church, troubled by Norwood's 'erroneous opinions', had spoken with Norwood at his home (Norwood, 'Case and Trial', 1). The following month, on 21 April 1651, Robert Norwood made a public profession of faith at St Mary Abchurch before the whole assembled church. Simpson, implacable, admonished Norwood for failing to repent his 'blasphemous Errors' and excommunicated him from his church in early May (Norwood, 'Form of an Excommunication', 2). 
Afterwards, by his own account, Norwood was summoned before Oliver Cromwell, and there entreated by Joseph Caryl and John Owen to retract his errors. Evidently he was setting a bad example. Norwood, however, remained unrepentant. In June 1651 he was brought by warrant of Thomas Andrewes, lord mayor of London, before the bench at the sessions house in the Old Bailey. At the next sessions an indictment was prepared jointly against himself and Tany. The principal charges were that the two maintained that 'the soul [of men and women] is of the essence of God' and that 'there is neither hell nor damnation' (Norwood, 'Case and Trial', 9-10; Norwood, 'Brief Discourse', title-page, 3-4). On 20 June 1651 Norwood was removed from his place on the high court of justice by order of parliament. Five days later Norwood and Tany appeared at the Old Bailey and pleaded not guilty to the charges presented against them. Proceedings continued. Then on Wednesday 13 August 1651, after adjournments the two previous days, at 7 o'clock in the morning Tany and Norwood again appeared at the Old Bailey to answer the charges presented against them in the indictment. Norwood at the last wavered, and seems to have been ready to recant -- to no avail. The two were convicted of blasphemy by a jury of twelve men and sentenced to six months' imprisonment each in Newgate. Norwood was to intimate that his conviction owed much to the plotting of Thomas Andrewes, a long-time member of Sidrach Simpson's church, and another merchant, Alderman Stephen Estwick (died 1657). Even so, it was on the charge of blasphemy that he became notorious. 
Following their conviction for blasphemy, Tany and Norwood were committed to Newgate. The conditions for those that could not afford the services of the gaoler were intolerable. Norwood, it appears, was nearly financially drained by the experience. There followed a series of legal proceedings in the court of upper bench as Norwood brought forward a writ of error in an attempt to overturn the guilty verdict found against himself and Tany. The cardinal points of error in the writ were that two persons were not to be joined in one indictment -- 'their charge being severall', that judgment should not be given jointly, and that the defendants' alleged opinions fell outside the ambit of the 'Blasphemy Act': Norwood and Tany had been convicted for supposedly saying that 'there is no hell nor damnation', whereas the act condemned only those that maintained that 'there is neither Heaven nor Hell, neither Salvation nor Damnation' (Norwood, 'Brief Discourse', 1, 4). Moreover, even though Norwood and Tany professed that the soul of man is of the essence of God, none the less the theological leap that the pair thus affirmed the mere creature to be very God had been provided by the framers of the indictment. On Tuesday 10 February 1652 the judges of the upper bench appear to have made their judgment. Chief Justice Henry Rolle rejected the writ. 
On Monday 16 February 1652 Robert Norwood and TheaurauJohn Tany, having served their terms of six months' imprisonment, were each released upon $100 bail -- pending good behaviour for one year. In Easter term 1652 Robert Norwood prosecuted a new writ of error in the court of upper bench. After several hearings the judges deferred proceedings until the following law term. And then on Monday 28 June 1652, in Trinity term, after two more hearings, the judges ordered that 'the Judgement' against Norwood be reversed and the 'p[ar]tie restored' (TNA: PRO, KB 21/13, fol. 212'r'). Wary of setting a precedent, the judges of the upper bench had adhered to the strict letter of the law. Indeed, their decision to reverse the guilty verdict pronounced upon Norwood at the Old Bailey made manifest the discontiguous relationship between the 'Act against Atheistical, Blasphemous and Execrable Opinions' and the supposed errors of doctrine propagated on the streets and public places of London: Tany and Norwood were convicted by inferring and taking out of context the true sense and meaning of their words, thereby making their opinions rigidly conform to the strictures of the 'Blasphemy Act' of August 1650. 
Following their release from Newgate, relations between Tany and Norwood appear to have cooled. Norwood, it seems, may have believed that the spirit of God had deserted Tany. During this period he wrote one pamphlet in which he advocated the readmission and toleration of the Jews and two other works, both published in the summer of 1653. These last two tracts, the one entitled 'A Pathway unto England's Perfect Settlement', the other 'An Additional Discourse' (both printed by Richard Moone), were concerned with constitutional theory, and in part derived from John Sadler's 'Rights of the Kingdom, or, Customs of our Ancestours' (1649). 'England's Perfect Settlement' was dedicated to Oliver Cromwell. It bears some resemblance to 'Mr. Norwoods proposalls for settlement', an undated manuscript of about 1649 addressed to the republican army officer and politician Sir Arthur Hesilrige, suggesting the printed text may have been a reworked and substantially enlarged version. These publications were censured in turn by John Spittlehouse, a former member of the army, and a group of six presbyterian booksellers. John Lilburne, however, commended Norwood's 'An Additional Discourse', calling it 'one of the excellentest pieces that lately I have read in England, for clearing up the ancient fundamental laws, rights, and liberties', and thought its author a 'sober and rational man' (J. Lilburne, 'The Upright Mans Vindication', 1653, 29-30). On 8 June 1654 Norwood was back with Tany, witnessing his claim under the name ThauRam Tanjah to the seven crowns of England, France, Reme, Rome, Naples, Sissiliah, and Jerusalem. It may have been about this time that Norwood became acquainted with Roger Crab ('c'.1616-1680), a former army agitator who had taken to a hermit's life. Crab subsisted on a vegetarian diet consisting of bread, bran, herbs, roots, dock leaves, mallows, and grass. It was said that Norwood, 'enclining' to his 'opinion, began to follow the same poore diet till it cost him his life' (R. Crab, 'The English Hermite, or, Wonder of this Age', 1655, 'To the reader'). Robert Norwood died at one Mr Manning's house, in Enfield, on 17 September 1654. Administration of his estate was granted to his brother John Norwood on 24 October 1654. His place of burial, however, is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 40435


Franklin, William (b. c.1610), self-proclaimed reincarnation of Christ, seems to have been born at Overton, near Andover, in Hampshire, about the year 1610. It was to be said of him that he became an apprentice rope-maker in London and that he married about 1634. In 1650 he was reported to have a wife and three children living in Stepney. If so, he may be identified with the William Franklin, rope-maker of Ratcliffe Highway, who had four children by his wife, Margery, baptized in the parish of St Dunstan, Stepney, between January 1639 and October 1642. Franklin was accounted a 'civil man', 'well esteemed' for his zealous and constant observance of gospel ordinances. He was a member of a gathered congregation (perhaps that presided over by William Greenhill) and regarded by the godly as an 'eminent Saint'. In 1646, having been 'much afflicted' by the plague and apparently 'somewhat distracted in his brain', Franklin was bled 'divers times' by a surgeon (Ellis, 'Pseudochristus', 6). During his sufferings he was alleged to have blasphemed, 'saying, 'That he was God, that he was' 'Christ''. Upon his recovery Franklin repented, declaring that he had been seduced by the wiles of Satan. Afterwards, however, he 'plunged' deeper still into 'such spiritual delusions', pretending that he had 'received some Revelations and Visions'. He may have become acquainted with those that denied 'Ordinances, Scriptures, Christ', and supposedly claimed that he had the gift of prophecy. In addition, he imagined that he could 'speak with new Tongues' and would 'babble out words' which neither he nor others were able to understand. Franklin was also said to have ceased carnal relations with his wife and 'to keep company with other women'. For 'all which evils' he was excluded by his congregation (ibid., 7). 
Some time in 1649 Franklin was introduced to 
In November 1649 Franklin and Gadbury arrived in Andover on the wagon that travelled weekly between there and London. While lodging at The Star inn Franklin began to preach. His obscure yet seemingly spiritual words, delivered with 'a very plausible and affected (though slow) manner of speech', began to attract attention (Ellis, 'Pseudochristus', 17). Thereupon, Franklin departed for London. In his absence Gadbury spread a rumour that she had seen Christ 'in the person of a man' -- her account of 'a plaine man in gray cloaths' answered to Franklin's description (ibid., 18, 19). Gadbury, moreover, perhaps now pregnant with Franklin's illegitimate child, declared that she was like 'a woman in travail' (ibid., 20). At her trial she reportedly claimed that 'shee was ye bride & ye Spouse ye lambes wife... ye Virgin Mary yt bare Christ & yt shee was deliured... of a fiery flyeing serp[an]t and of ye old dragon w[hi]ch shee had sent unto ye place of perdition. (Clarke MS 18, fols. 27'v'-28'r')' A disciple likewise affirmed that he had seen her 'delivered' of 'a Dragon', suggesting that her initial hope of procreating the saviour of the world was transformed by the ensuing misshapen stillborn (Ellis, 'Pseudochristus', 22). 
Franklin returned from London on 8 December only to find a cold welcome at The Star inn. Warned 'to depart', he and Gadbury left Andover bound for the village of 'Crooxeason' (Crux Easton). There they were entertained for six weeks or so by the local minister, William Woodward, and his wife, Margaret (Ellis, 'Pseudochristus', 25). While at Crux Easton Franklin began to preach at Woodward's house, declaring that he was 'ye Christ crucified without ye gates of Jerusalem ye son of god & saviour of ye world', 'the Lion of the Tribe of Judah' that had 'the key of the bottomlesse pit' 'and yt he was come to gather ye elect' (Clarke MS 18, fol. 27'v'; Ellis, 'Pseudochristus', 31). He soon attracted followers to whom he assigned 'offices and titles'. One was John the Baptist, 'sent forth to tell that 'Christ' 'was come upon the earth''. Another was a 'destroying' angel 'sent forth to curse the earth' (a figure from the 'Revelation'). Another still was usually a 'healing' angel, but at other times 'one of the two Witnesses' (of 'Revelation' 11: 3; Ellis, 'Pseudochristus', 31-2). 
Franklin and three of his adherents were apprehended by warrant and brought to Winchester on 27 January 1650. Witnesses were examined before two justices of the peace and a recantation drawn up and offered to Franklin. To this he subscribed his name. Gadbury proved more obdurate and was dispatched to 'the house of Correction' (Ellis, 'Pseudochristus', 44). Chastened and whipped, she recanted by subscribing her mark. While imprisoned the pair were questioned by Humphrey Ellis, a minister of the cathedral church of Winchester. Ellis, who had previously preached a sermon warning of 'the abundance of heresies, and the great increase of false christs, false teachers, and deceivers amongst us', found Franklin 'very ignorant' in the 'Principles' of religion (Ellis, 'Two Sermons', 30; Ellis, 'Pseudochristus', 48). Ellis supposed that Franklin had 'sucked' his 'wicked Principles' from 'the Familists', though he added that Franklin was 'sometime a zealous Professor [of] 'Anabaptism'' (Ellis, 'Pseudochristus', 48, 60, 59). Franklin and Gadbury were subsequently tried at the assize (western circuit) beginning on 7 March 1650 before Lord Chief Justice Henry Rolle. Franklin was sentenced to remain in gaol 'till he give good security for his good behaviour'. Gadbury received further 'correction' before eventually being released at the quarter sessions held the week after Easter (ibid., 51, 52). On 22 April she left Winchester on the wagon that travelled weekly between there and London. Nothing else is known of her. 
In May, Ellis published his relation of the 'Grand Impostures' of William Franklin and Mary Gadbury. It was entitled 'Pseudochristus'. After the Restoration, Thomas Comber used Ellis's account in his denunciation of the 'Several Kinds of Inspirations and Revelations Pretended to by the Quakers'. Comber's index referred his readers to 'Frankelin... 'and the Hamp-shire Revealers'' (Comber, title-page, index). The number of Franklin's followers, however, remains unknown (contemporary estimates of 500 or 600 converts appear exaggerated). In June 1666 William Woodward, having previously had his Hampshire living 'sequestred from him', was deprived of his living of Trottescliffe, Kent (Ellis, 'Pseudochristus', 52). Woodward had been charged with uttering profane and blasphemous speeches: that the Lord's prayer was not commanded to be used, that the Church of England might as well be called the Church of Rome, that he had attained such perfection that he could not sin, and that one 'William Franeklin', a rope-maker who had lived with him, was the Christ and Saviour. 


@@@@@


doc= 40436


Everard, William (bap. 1602?, d. in or after 1651), Digger, probably came from Reading. A William Everard was baptized on 9 May 1602 in the parish of St Giles, Reading, as William Evered. It appears that aged fourteen this William Everard was apprenticed on 14 August 1616 to Robert Miller of the Merchant Taylors' Company, London, for the term of eight years; his name appears in the apprentice binding book as William Everad, son of William Everad, yeoman of Reading, Berkshire. It does not appear that this William Everard completed his term of apprenticeship, though it is noteworthy that Everard's future associate Gerrard Winstanley was a freeman of the Merchant Taylors'. It may be assumed that William Everard's family was poor for no one with the name Everard was assessed in the borough of Reading for a parliamentary subsidy between 1625 and 1641. On 20 February 1642 'William Everet' took the protestation oath in St Lawrence, Reading -- a parish where John Pordage (1607-1681) was to become successively curate and vicar. In the early months of 1643 William Everard seems to have been acting as a parliamentarian spy for Sir Samuel Luke, scouting mainly in the Berkshire and Oxfordshire area. Perhaps he was captured on one of these sorties, for William Everard is not heard of again until May 1647, when his name appears as an ensign on a petition voicing the grievances of the army under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax. Implicated in a plot to kill Charles I and subsequently detained at Windsor in the marshall-general's custody, William Everard was one of several men who in December 1647, while awaiting court martial, petitioned Fairfax against the injustice of their imprisonment. Some time afterwards Everard was cashiered from the army. 
At an unknown date, but probably between December 1647 and March 1649, Everard visited the Baptist Samuel Fisher at his house in Lydd, Kent. Fisher recalled that in accordance with 'Revelation' 2:17 Everard had adopted a new spiritual name: 'Chamberlin'. This was apparently because Everard claimed to reside 'in the secret chambers of the most high' and accords with another reference to him as ''Chamberlain the' Redding 'man''. Fisher had recently renounced infant baptism and 'received real baptism'. But Everard, formerly a Baptist himself and 'pretending that he was immediately sent from God', urged Fisher to relinquish believer's baptism as well. Fisher, however, remained unconvinced, mocking Everard's 'strange' ecstasies, 'uncouth deportment', 'blasphemous pratings', and presumptuousness, likening him to one of Satan's archangels of darkness (Samuel Fisher, 'Baby-Baptism Meer Babism', 1653, 304). 
In 1648, after spending the night in Kingston, Surrey, William Everard was imprisoned by the bailiffs of the town, allegedly at the instigation of 'Ministers, and some common people'. Everard's companion, Gerrard Winstanley, defended him in a work entitled 'Truth Lifting up its Head above Scandals' (the preface to the reader is dated 16 October 1648). According to Winstanley, 'the Redding man, called after the flesh, William Everard' had reportedly held blasphemous opinions 'as to deny God, and Christ, and Scriptures, and prayer'. Winstanley declared Everard and himself innocent of these slanders ('Works of Gerrard Winstanley', 103). Everard was soon the cause of scandal again. On 6 March 1649 he was bound by recognizance to appear at the Middlesex sessions of the peace. There he was charged with interrupting a church service at Staines in a threatening manner, shaking a hedging bill (a long-handled agricultural tool for cutting hedges) at the minister and shouting 'come down thou sonne of perdition come down'. Two men stood bail for Everard, Henry Snelling of Walton and John Barker of Cobham, who became a Digger (LMA, MJ/SR 1025/60). 
Everard may also have been involved in a dramatic incident at Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, about mid-February 1649, when six soldiers reportedly entered the church after evening service, one holding a lantern with a candle burning in it and four unlit candles. Prevented from going up into the pulpit and then speaking in the church, the lantern bearer went into the churchyard where he revealed to his auditors that he had received a vision and divine command to deliver God's message. This consisted of five lights, corresponding to the five candles: that the Sabbath was abolished as an unnecessary Jewish ceremonial law; that tithes were abolished for the same reason; that ministers were abolished as ''Antichristian'' and now replaced by Christ's Saints whom he enlightened with ''Revelations, and Inspirations''; that magistrates were abolished, being redundant now that Christ had ''erected the Kingdom of Saints upon earth''; and that the 'Old and New Testaments' were abolished because Christ had now arrived in glory, imparting ''a fuller measure of his Spirit to his Saints'' than the scriptures. On delivering the message the soldier set fire to his 'Bible' (Clement Walker, 'Anarchia Anglicana', 1649, 152-3). If Everard had already been cashiered, then identifying him as this unnamed soldier is problematic, unless he retained his uniform. Even so, it must be emphasized that the abolition of the Sabbath, tithes, and ministers -- together with anti-scripturism -- were all theological positions characteristically if not exclusively maintained, with varying degrees of subtlety, by several General Baptists. 
In April 1649 Everard attained even greater notoriety. On either Sunday 1 or 8 April, together with four others, all described as living at Cobham, he went to St George's Hill in Walton-on-Thames and began digging the earth. The men sowed the ground with parsnips, carrots, and beans, returning the next day in increased numbers. The following day they burned at least forty roods of heath, which was considered 'a very great prejudice' to the town. By the end of the week between twenty and thirty people were reportedly labouring the entire day at digging (Firth, 2.210, 210-11). It was said that they intended to plough up the ground and sow it with seed corn. Furthermore, they apparently threatened to pull down and level all park pales and 'lay all open' ('Perfect Occurences', no. 120, 13-20 April 1649, 450), thereby provoking fears of an anti-enclosure riot (a familiar form of agrarian protest). Everard and Winstanley were the acknowledged leaders of these 'new Levellers' or 'diggers'. It was said of Everard that he 'is no other then a madd man' and that he 'termeth himself a prophett' (Firth, 2.212, 210). Indeed, Everard had justified the new communal experiment with a vision bidding him 'Arise and dig, and plow the Earth and receive the fruits thereof' ('Kingdomes Weekly Intelligencer', no. 308, 17-24 April 1649, 1334), while Winstanley declared that during a trance he had heard 'these words, 'Worke together. Eat bread together''. St George's Hill was revealed as the place where, by 'righteous labour, and sweat of our browes', work should begin in making the Earth ''a common Treasury of livelihood to whole mankind, without respect of persons'' (Sabine, 190, 257, 260, 266, 315). Complaints, however, were soon made to the authorities against these 'new fangled', 'distracted, crack brained', 'disorderly and tumultuous sort of people' (Raymond, 393; 'Impartiall Intelligencer', no. 8, 18-25 April 1649, 61; Firth, 2.209-10). Wary of a royalist rendezvous gathered under cover of the commotion caused by such 'ridiculous' activities, the council of state instructed Lord General Thomas Fairfax to investigate. Two cavalry troops under the command of Captain John Gladman therefore marched from London, four advance riders encountering Everard and Winstanley while the remaining twenty or more Diggers -- 'feeble souls' with 'empty bellies' -- were dispersed (Raymond, 395). According to one report, frequently reprinted in the newsbooks, Everard and Winstanley refused to remove their hats in deference to Fairfax. Moreover it was said that Everard had asserted that: 'he was of the Race of the Jewes, & that all the liberties of the people were lost by the coming in of William the Conquerour; and that ever since, the people of God have lived under tyranny and oppression. (Raymond, 394)' But now the 'time of deliverance was at hand, and God would bring his people' out of their Egyptian 'slavery' and 'restore them their freedoms', thereby enabling them to enjoy 'the fruits and benefits of the Earth'. Intending to 'restore the Creation to its former Condition', the Diggers justified their actions as a fulfilment of the prophecy ''This Land which was barren and wast is now become fruitfull and pleasant like the Garden of' Eden' ('Ezekiel' 36:35). In addition, by renewing 'the ancient Community' and distributing the earth's produce to the poor and needy they performed gospel injunctions to feed the hungry and clothe the naked. The Diggers thus welcomed those who would willingly submit to their communal precepts -- especially the golden rule 'to do to others as we would be done unto' ('Speeches of the Lord General Fairfax... to the Diggers', 40), promising to provide newcomers with food, drink, clothing, and other necessities. They were also opposed to using weapons in self-defence and when one was struck he turned the other cheek. Nonetheless, Walton's inhabitants were predominantly hostile to the 'new Plantation' on St George's Hill. Winstanley claimed that several Diggers were imprisoned in Walton church and beaten by the 'rude multitude', while the acre of ground they had worked was 'trampled down' and 're-levelled', their 'new Creation utterly destroyed' by the 'Country people' thereabouts ('Modest Narrative of Intelligence', no. 4, 21-28 April 1649, 32). Undeterred, a 'considerable party' of Diggers returned intending to sow hempseed. Within days they had issued their first manifesto, 'The True Levellers Standard Advanced', the London bookseller George Thomason dating his copy 26 April 1649. Everard and Winstanley headed the list of fifteen named subscribers, contending that so long as a system of landlords and their rent-paying tenants persisted, the 'Great Creator Reason' remained 'mightily dishonoured'. Buying, selling, and enclosing land, which had been gotten through oppression, murder, or theft, kept it 'in the hands of a few', placing the 'Creation under bondage'. Nor would the English be a 'Free People' until the landless poor were permitted 'to dig and labour the Commons' and 'Waste land', averting starvation through their 'righteous Labours' ('Works of Gerrard Winstanley', 2.1-39). Everard's name does not appear in connection with the Diggers again, though in May mistaken reports in the press placed him with the Leveller mutiny in Oxfordshire, the newsbook writers confusing him with the army agitator Captain Robert Everard. 
In August 1649 Everard appeared at Bradfield, Berkshire, where John Pordage was rector, although Pordage was to claim that Everard's appearance was in the form of 'a spirit', with 'his wearing apparel, Band, Cuffs, Hat, &c.' (Pordage, 72). The following summer Everard reappeared at Bradfield, this time in the guise of a harvest worker, much in the manner of his former comrade Winstanley, who had found employ as a wheat thresher on Lady Eleanor Douglas's estate at Pirton, Hertfordshire. Then, on Sunday 8 September 1650, there was bedlam in Bradfield. It was reported that Pordage had fled the local church in a 'Trance, running out... and bellowing like a Bull', before retiring to his rectory. The previous Sunday, 1 September, a thirteen-year-old boy called William Snelling had recited mysterious verses proclaiming 'the great Jehova'. The likelihood is that Pordage, Everard, and 'one Tawny, who stiled himself King of the Jews' had been together at the rectory in Bradfield on or about that day. This 'Tawny' was Theaurau John Tany, the self-proclaimed prophet and lord's high priest of the Jews. Local suspicions, however, pointed to 'one Everet', 'reputed to be a Conjurer' and a 'man suspected to be a Sorcerer or Witch', as the malefic presence in the parish ('A most Faithful Relation', 2, 4; Pordage, 9, 11-12; Fowler, 54, 59-60; Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D 864, fol. 233'v'; a riddle, 1 Sept 1650?). This 'Everet' was William Everard, and shortly after, in September 1650, Everard was seen in a 'frantick posture' in London ('A Most Faithful Relation', 4). In October he was apprehended. His ravings proved to be feigned and, in accordance with the instructions of the council of state, he was committed to Bridewell by order of the lord mayor of London at the sessions of the peace. His wife failed to find the money necessary to have him removed to Bethlem Hospital. All the while Everard's 'distracted' state persisted. In November he was 'manacled' for violent and desperate behaviour, and in December it was reported that 'many of Ranting Everard's party are lunatick, and exceedingly distracted; they talk very high against the Parliament, and this present Government; for which some of them have received the lash' (court minute book of Bridewell and Bethlem Hospital, MS 33011/9, pp. 464, 471; 'The Ranters Recantation and their Sermon', 1650, 6). By February 1651, Everard had become so 'distracted' and 'outragious' that he could no longer be kept in Bridewell 'without dainger'. It was ordered that he be removed to Bethlem Hospital, 'there to be kept with diett phisick' (court minute book of Bridewell and Bethlem Hospital, MS 33011/9, p. 484). On 19 March 1651 William Everard was sent to Bethlem Hospital. Nothing more can be said of him with certainty except that if he died at Bethlem then, unlike another patient, he was not buried at St Botolph without Bishopsgate. A William Everard was, however, buried at St Katherine Cree, London, on 2 March 1659. 


@@@@@


doc= 40437


Bromley, Thomas (bap. 1630, d. 1691), mystical writer, was baptized on 1 February 1630 in the parish of St Michael Bedwardine, Worcester, a younger son of Henry Bromley (died 1647) of Upton upon Severn, Worcestershire, a descendant of Sir Thomas Bromley, Elizabethan lord chancellor, and Mary (died 1658), daughter of Sir William Ligon of Madresfield. According to his biographer, 'in his younger years' he was 'religiously educated' (Bromley, 3). Admitted as a commoner of Oriel College, Oxford, in June 1650, he matriculated on 22 November. How long he remained there is unknown, though battels receipts indicate that about April 1652 he migrated to All Souls College. According to Richard Roach's account, while at Oxford Bromley and a companion heard a sermon at the university church 'preached in great Power' by John Pordage (1607-1681), rector of Bradfield, Berkshire (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D. 833, fol. 63'v'). Together with his companion, Edmund Brice, fellow of All Souls, Bromley spoke with Pordage and was deeply satisfied with what he heard. About April 1654 he left Oxford 'when he was to have beene elected fellow of All Soules... according to the statutes of the house as kinsman to the founder'. At the election day he went to join Pordage's community at Bradfield, 'and never returned to Oxford againe' (Nicolson, 279). 
About three weeks before his departure Bromley preached a sermon on 'Acts' 14: 22, 'That we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God'; some years later his elder brother Henry Bromley (1626-1667) believed that Thomas had expected 'to draw wisdome out of a clearer fountaine, and to be call'd by God to preach the Gospell' (Nicolson, 279). Bromley's mother, Mary, 'a sober, pious Woman', did not prove so understanding, and prevailed upon her son to pass on his writings to Richard Baxter, who deemed 'that their Guide differed much from the Scripture'. Baxter found Bromley to be of 'a very good Disposition, aspiring after the highest Spiritual State, and thinking that visible Communion with Angels was it, he much expected it, and profest in some measure to have attained it'. None the less, Baxter perceived that Bromley was 'a young, raw Scholar of some Fryar whom he understood not', and in a letter intended for Bromley dated 30 May 1654 he attempted to confute some of Bromley's opinions, attacking 'Diabolicall Delusory Apparitions' and a dependence on spirits and voices. Some years later Baxter was again to write against Pordage 'and his Family, who live together in Community, and pretend to hold visible and sensible Communion with Angels, whom they sometime see, and sometime smell' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.78; Baxter, 'Worlds of Spirits', 176; DWL, MS Baxter Treatises, III 67, fol. 302'r'). 
On 5 October 1654 John Pordage was brought before the commissioners for ejecting of scandalous ministers for the county of Berkshire, nominally to be tried on charges of blasphemy, although others, it seems, cast covetous glances at the lucrative living of Bradfield. During these proceedings it appears that Bromley conceded to having seen a vision of a woman's guardian angel 'in her morning coat'. Pordage was found guilty 'of denying the Deity of Christ' and ejected from his living on 8 December 1654, though he continued to live at Bradfield (Fowler, 102, 116; J. Pordage, 'Innocencie Appearing through the Dark Mists of Pretended Guilt', 1655, 1, 3). It seems that Bromley, 'his chief Proselyte' and companion, remained with him (Baxter, 'Worlds of Spirits', 176). In 1655 Thomas Bromley published 'The Way to the Sabbath of Rest', a mystical treatise heavily influenced by the writings of Jakob Boehme, which Richard Baxter judged to be a 'most clean and moderate piece' of doctrine (Baxter, 'Key for Catholicks', 331). This work was to be translated into Dutch, German, and Swedish. 
Bromley appears to have spent many years at Bradfield in the company of Pordage and his 'family'. In the fire of London he lost 'about [$30] worth of books, most Greeke and Hebrew', and an edition of the polyglot 'Bible' (Nicolson, 279). In the episcopal returns of 1669 he was suspected, along with Pordage, of holding a conventicle at Bradfield. Bromley was also a correspondent of Viscount Conway, and for several years, despite illness and infirmity, he solicited money from Conway which he distributed charitably among the poor of London and the surrounding countryside. By November 1670 Bromley had returned to Upton upon Severn. From Upton he corresponded with Anne, Viscountess Conway, visiting her on occasion at her country seat at Ragley, Warwickshire. It was at Ragley that Bromley made the acquaintance of the Cambridge Platonist, Henry More, and of Franciscus Mercurius van Helmont. Bromley was also written to in 1680 by Richard Baxter, who outlined for him his judgement on the nature of free will. All the while, it seems that Thomas Bromley maintained contact with John Pordage and his community; he was bequeathed money for a mourning ring by Pordage in his will, and commended a Behmenistic work called 'A Fountain of Gardens' by Jane Lead, who was to found the Philadelphian Society. 
Bromley's last years appear to have been spent at Upton. He died on Easter Monday, 13 April 1691, and was buried at Upton on 15 April. His estate was administered by his niece, Elizabeth. Some months after his death his library, containing works on the apocalypse, Socinianism, atheism, heresy, and Jakob Boehme, was auctioned. Bromley also left several works in manuscript, some of which were published in the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 40438


Wyke, Andrew (fl. 1645-1663), Baptist minister and Ranter, is a man of whom nothing as yet is known of his early life. His name, derived from the Old English word for dwelling or village, was spelled variously as Wyke, Wykes, Wix, and Weeks. It is found as a surname in Kent, Sussex, and Essex. It is possible that Andrew Wyke came from the Ipswich area -- in 1646 he claimed to have friends living nearby. By his own account Wyke served parliament in the civil war, though in what capacity is not known. Perhaps he was a soldier; he was later to claim that he was owed over $40 in arrears of pay. At some point Wyke became associated with the soap-boiler and Baptist Thomas Lambe (died 1673). Together with Lambe, Wyke was apprehended at an unlawful assembly, and on 1 May 1645 committed by order of the committee for plundered ministers into the custody of the city marshal of London. Lambe and Wyke were imprisoned briefly for 'anabaptisme' and then released, the prosecution failing to convict them on the newly enacted charge of lay preaching (BL, Add. MS 15669, fols. 63'r', 68'v', 73'r', 74'v'). Later, Wyke was to claim that he had been ordained 'by a Reformed Church' in London, most probably Lambe's Baptist congregation meeting in Bell Alley, Coleman Street (A. Wyke?, 'The Innocent in Prison Complayning', 1646, 4). It is also likely that Wyke was rebaptized by Lambe, perhaps in 1644, before being ordained by his church in the early months of 1645. 
By the autumn of 1645 Wyke had gone forth from the church to spread the gospel message. He went to live in Debach, Suffolk, and was to spend nearly nine months preaching and rebaptizing in the surrounding area. His activities came to the attention of the heresiographer Thomas Edwards, who described Wyke as 'a Mechanick' turned 'great Preacher and Dipper' (Edwards, 3.169-70). On 3 June 1646, like Lawrence Clarkson before him, Andrew Wyke was imprisoned for preaching and rebaptizing by order of the committee of Suffolk at Bury St Edmunds. Upon his release Wyke continued his Baptist evangelizing, this time in Rutland and the adjacent counties. He was joined in this endeavour by Thomas Lambe and another of Lambe's converts, the Norwich weaver Samuel Oates (1614-1683). In December 1647 several ministers from Rutland and close by, despairing of the 'erronious & seducing spirits lately crept in amongst us', petitioned the House of Lords to apprehend Oates (Betteridge, 206). Wyke may have left the Rutland area shortly after. By 25 December 1649 he was in Essex, living in the parish of St Nicholas, Colchester. 
In March 1650 Andrew Wyke, in the company of a kinswoman of his, one Mistress Wallis, made a 120 mile journey from Colchester to Coventry. He arrived in Coventry on Wednesday 6 March 1650, and was said to have lain three nights in Wallis's 'Chamber' ('A Perfect Diurnall', 11-18 March 1650, 128). The purpose of Wyke's visit to Coventry was to visit Abiezer Coppe (1619-1672), a Baptist preacher imprisoned for blasphemy, who in January had been moved to the town gaol from Warwick. Perhaps Wyke brought with him money, collected by various Baptist churches, to pay for Coppe's prison debts. Wyke was soon joined in Coventry by a comrade of Coppe's, Joseph Salmon ('fl'. 1647-1656), who on Sunday 10 March 1650 preached in the town for an hour to the 'admiration of all honest men'. Soon after, Salmon and Wyke were believed to have said that 'the Scripture... was no more than a ballad' to them. They were also accused of denying the Devil and of swearing oaths, though they claimed that 'it was God' in them that swore. Wyke was also alleged to have called a soldier a friend of Hell and a child of the Devil, before proceeding to kiss him three times and say 'I breathe the spirit of God into thee'. Described as confident men 'of acute wits' and 'voluable tongues' they were seized by Captain Robert Beake and committed to Coventry gaol for the misdemeanour of swearing and for defying an order prohibiting the visiting of Coppe ('Leyborne-Popham MSS', 57; 'A Perfect Diurnall', 11-18 March 1650, 128). They were bound over until the next session of the assizes while the mayor and justices of Coventry informed the council of state in London of proceedings. On 19 March 1650 Coppe was moved to Newgate prison on the instructions of the council of state. From Newgate he wrote to Salmon and Wyke, playing on the word Wick to call Wyke his 'fort and strongehold' (Smith, 117). 
While imprisoned Salmon and Wyke began preaching every Sunday from the prison grate. Wyke's message was 'the Love of God in pardoning sin, finishing transgression & bringing in everlasting Righteousnesse' (A. Wyke to the mayor and aldermen of Coventry, MS Clarke 18, fol. 25'v'). It was reported that many stood in the streets to hear them. By the beginning of April they were prevented from preaching. News of their imprisonment began to spread, and it was during their confinement that Salmon and Wyke were visited by George Fox. In his journal, Fox was to describe them as 'Ranters' for they 'began to rant and vapour and blaspheme', saying that 'they were God', justifying their words upon the authority of the first epistle of 'Peter' and other scriptural texts ('Journal of George Fox', 46-7). Prison probably had a debilitating effect on Wyke. His health may have suffered in poor sanitary conditions and he may have lacked the funds necessary to secure food from his keeper, Mr Butler. To this end he wrote to the mayor and aldermen of Coventry, rebuking them for condemning 'the just' ('A Perfect Diurnall', 18-25 March 1650, 141). His entreaties rebuffed, Wyke wrote again, this time calling himself a prophet. Adopting the mantle of Isaiah, Wyke reproduced the words of the prophet, attempting to speak with his voice to admonish his captors. 
On 5 July 1650 Andrew Wyke was released from Coventry gaol on bail. He was taken to London to be questioned by the council of state. Wyke's fate is unknown. Perhaps he was imprisoned for blasphemy, though it is equally possible that he offered to recant his opinions and give an undertaking of good behaviour for one year. In August 1651, little over a year later, Wyke was dispatched to Ireland as an army preacher. After a brief stay at St Michan's, Dublin, he was moved north in October to preach the gospel at Lisburn and Belfast. Wyke was described as a man of 'meek spirit', but evidently the old fire soon returned, for in November he was being spoken of as 'a rare minister' and 'a most powerful preacher' (R. Dunlop, 'Ireland under the Commonwealth', 2 vols., 1913, 1.60-61; 'CSP Ire.', '1647-60', 383). The congregation at Lisburn swelled and Wyke came into favour. In addition to his annual salary of $120, it was ordered that he should have a house at public expense together with sufficient pasture land to provide for his wife and family. Not all, though, were as well disposed to Wyke. Dorothy Rawdon, sister of Lord Conway, disliked him; the Presbyterian minister Patrick Adair referred to him as 'an Anabaptist' and guessed at his lack of university training, describing him as 'void of human learning, never educated that way, but a tradesman, and imprudent' (Adair, 186). Wyke's preaching duties were extended in 1654 to cover Dromore, Lurgan, and Kilwarlin, but by March the following year he had become involved in a controversy with the Quaker Richard Cleaton. 
George Rawdon came to despair of him, complaining of Wyke's inability to perform 'punctual duties besides preaching' ('CSP Ire.', '1647-60', 564). In May 1658 he withheld the Lisburn tithes from Wyke, took his land from him, and petitioned for the reallocation of the tithes towards the building of a free school at Lisburn. Wyke took his case before the lord chief baron. His cause, however, did not prevail. Forced to leave Lisburn, in October 1658 Wyke was appointed on an annual salary of $100 to preach to the united parishes of Donaghcloney and Tullylish in co. Down. The following summer, Wyke's replacement at Lisburn, Philip Tandy, brought charges against Jeremy Taylor, seemingly a private chaplain to the Conway family. It has been suggested that Wyke, aggrieved by his treatment at the hands of the Rawdon and Conway families, may have encouraged Tandy to bring his action against Taylor. In September 1659 Andrew Wyke's duties were increased to include preaching the gospel to the congregation of largely English settlers at Magheralin. In 1663 the marquess of Ormond ordered the arrest of a number of nonconformist ministers. By the summer eleven, including Wyke, were incarcerated at Carrickfergus. In early August Ormond dispersed the most dangerous, Wyke among them, to prisons in Limerick, Cork, Youghal, and Waterford. Wyke was subsequently removed to England. As yet, nothing more is known of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 40439


Robins, John (fl. 1641-1652), subject of deification, may have come from Wells, Somerset. The Baptist preacher Thomas Collier coupled his name with that of Joshua Garment (fl. 1631-1660) writing that in 'Wells was the seat of the old Ranters, Garment and Robins, who was proclaimed the great God, came to a shameful end' (Collier, 16). In his youth it is possible that Robins may have been influenced by the doctrines of the Somerset minister John Traske. Traske's teaching emphasized the applicability of the 'Old Testament' laws to Christians. He and his followers kept the dietary laws of the Jews and observed the sabbath on Saturday. It is therefore suggestive that in 1627 John Robins, joiner of St Martins Le Organ, London, and father of a John Robins, bequeathed money to Traske as well as to Meredith Madey, a Calvinist preacher whose troublesome and vexatious behaviour had resulted in his deprivation from the rectory of Blagdon, Somerset. 
John Robins was to be variously described as a 'Shoomaker', 'Glazier' or husbandman ('Faithful Scout', 23-30 May 1651, 171; W. Birchley [J. Austin], 'The Christian Moderator', 1651, 21). No one by that name, however, was admitted as a freeman of the Cordwainers' Company between the years 1636 and 1648. Nor was anyone by that name listed as a freeman of the Glaziers' Company in their contribution to the poll tax of 1641. John Robins was probably married, most likely to a woman called Joan. In October 1640 a Joan Robins, wife of John Robins of Southwark, was questioned by the court of high commission, though the reason why remains unclear. 
John Robins took the protestation oath in July 1641 in the parish of St Margaret's, Edgware, signing his name John Robbards. Likewise, in March 1642 Joshua Garment took the protestation oath in the parish of St Cuthbert's, Wells, signing himself Josuah Garment. By his own account, Garment served as a parliamentarian soldier for three years in the civil war. On leaving the army Garment had a vision of an angel offering him bread. In his vision Garment ate this sacramental food, perhaps to symbolize his new covenant with God. Garment was also addressed by the prophetic name 'Josherbah' and told that 'the time draws near that the Jews, even the Hebrews must be gathered and delivered'. This was the second of Garment's supposed visions, for he was also to claim that in 1631 he foresaw the abolition of episcopacy and monarchy (Garment, 3-4). It may have been about this time -- if later reports of her confession are to be believed -- that Joan Robins came 'by the Word of the Lord' to live with Garment as his wife ('The Ranters Creed', 1651, 2). She was said to have stayed with him three years. Though accounted a poor man, Garment was much talked of. A former parliamentarian army chaplain, Robert Bacon, had heard Hugh Peters 'particularly' speak of him, and Bacon himself visited Garment at his house (Bacon, 41). On 10 July 1650 Joan Robins, subsequently described as the wife of John Robins of Edgware, was indicted on the charge of witchcraft at the Old Bailey. It is possible that the root of the accusation lay in the public uttering of curses, interpreted as incantations, rather than in the actual practice of witchcraft. She was found not guilty. Some time in early November she appears to have become pregnant by John Robins. 
In late August 1650 it was reported that six people had gone forth from Somerset, four from Glastonbury and two from Wells. It was said that they pretended to have 'an immediate call from God to goe and preach the Gospel in Gallilee' ('A Perfect Diurnall', 26 Aug - 2 Sept 1650, 472). They had sold their estates and were bound for London. It may have been this group of some 'half a dozen' men and women that Robert Bacon recounted meeting on the road near Marlborough. Bacon related that they told him that in effect 'they were Jews, and that the time of their gathering together out of all Lands', especially England, was at hand (Bacon, 41). They intended to go to Jerusalem -- circumcised. In March 1651 letters were received from Somerset carrying news of some who 'pretend themselves to be Prophets'. It was said that these prophets preached and prayed at Wells, Glastonbury, and Tunbridge. One claimed that he and 'his fellow Prophets' would shortly 'walk over the River of Thames' at high tide ('Weekly Intelligencer', 18-25 March 1651, 102-3; 'Faithful Scout', 21-28 March 1651, 108). By this time, it seems, John Robins and Joshua Garment had become acquainted. According to Garment a vision came to him in 1650 of John Robins: 'Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, this is thy Lord, Israels King, Judge, and Law giver... This is the Melchizedek that Abraham met in the way, even the Adam that was the first created man, who is restored, set and sent by God his Creator... to gather and deliver the Hebrews... This is he that shall... divide the Seas, and lead the Hebrews to their own Land, even as Moses did out of Egypt... Deliverance will be this year... The manchild will be born this year, even he that shall come and rule with a rod of iron all Nations... The sea shall be divided, and many Jews that [are here] in England shall go thorow on dry foot towards Judea and the Lord said, I will gather all the Jews in the world unto one place, and with signs and wonders in great power bring them thorow all countries, bring in the ten Tribes unto us... John Robins is the man ordained by the Creator of heaven and earth to lead the Hebrews. (Garment, 3-5)' Lodowick Muggleton provided some additional and belated details to the story: 'John Robins was to gather out of Engla[n]d and else where, an Hundred and Forty Four Thousand Men and Women, and lead them to Jerusalem to Mount Olivet, and there to make them happy: And that he would feed them with Manna from Heaven: And that he would divide the Red Sea, and that they should go through upon dry Land. (Muggleton, 21)' In these relations of Robins there is a discernible millenarian scheme: a divinely ordained mission to 'gather and deliver the Hebrews'; a prophetic calling to lead the Ten Tribes of Israel out of captivity and return with them unto 'their own Land'; the metaphor of the Jews as God's chosen people; the prophecy taken from the revelation of the 'Hundred and Forty Four Thousand' of all the tribes of the children of Israel; the Mount of Olives overlooking the temple at Jerusalem; and the assumption of the threefold offices of Christ, that is king, priest, and prophet. Moreover, Garment regarded Robins as that 'great Type of Christ', Melchisedek, who was 'made like unto the Son of God' and of whose priestly order Christ was 'for ever after' 'an high priest' (J. Gauden, 'The Case of Ministers Maintenance by Tithes', 1653, 12; cf. 'Hebrews' 7: 3, 5: 6, 10). This was attested to by Robert Bacon who encountered Garment and Robins at a wealthy merchant's house in London. Bacon remembered how Robins spoke in tongues and 'mentioned oft Melchisedeck, the High Priest, or Priest-hood, the name Judah, and Jesus, with such zeal, that the fire seemed to me, even to sparkle out of his eyes: he did besides... curse with great bitterness the Priest-hood... that was not after the order of Melchisedeck. (Bacon, 41-2)' The priesthood that 'was not after the order of Melchisedeck' was the priesthood of the circumcised, the priesthood of Aaron. And the self-appointed high priest of Aaron's order was TheaurauJohn Tany, a self-proclaimed prophet who, in the minds of some, was to become linked to John Robins's millenarian schemes. 
On Monday 12 May 1651, two men and five women were apprehended in St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. They were brought before Laurence Whitaker, justice of the peace for Middlesex. On examination it was found that they believed John Robins to be 'the God and Father of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ' and Joan Robins to be pregnant with 'the Saviour of all that shall be saved in this world'. They also affirmed that John Robins had 'power to raise the dead' (E. H., 3-4; Taylor, 2). The occupations of the men were given as glazier and wire drawer. None of the women had a husband and most could not sign their name. They were taken prisoner to the Gatehouse, Westminster. All save one recanted, and were released on bail on 20 June 1651. The obdurate disciple, Thomas Kerby, was convicted of blasphemy and served three months of his six-month sentence. According to some reports, on Sunday 18 May 1651, at about 3 o'clock in the morning, John Robins, Joshua Garment, Joan Robins, and several others were apprehended at Shoreditch. Robins was supposed to be a 'Witch' and his followers accounted 'Ranters' ('Perfect Passages of Every Daies Intelligence', 23-30 May 1651, 318). On 24 May they were examined before Thomas Hubbert, justice of the peace for Middlesex, and committed to the New Prison at Clerkenwell on the charge of blasphemy. While imprisoned Garment wrote 'The Hebrews Deliverance at Hand'; its publication perhaps paid for by the London merchant that had formerly entertained him. His case was brought to the attention of the House of Commons, who referred it for examination to the committee for plundered ministers. At the same time it appears that Robins began to receive an assortment of curious visitors, come to 'dispute and converse' with him (G. H., 3). Among them was John Reeve, who later claimed to be greatly disturbed by an apparition of Robins's face staring at him while he lay in his bed. It seems that some of Robins's former followers became known to Reeve and Muggleton. Perhaps the connection was one of kinship. Moreover, three of Robins's female disciples came from Bocking or Braintree, in Essex -- an area later inhabited by several Muggletonians. Indeed, it may have been with the intention of founding his own sect on the remnants of Robins's group that Reeve, too, claimed to have received his own divine commission three days on end in February 1652. On 4 February 1652 Reeve and Muggleton confronted TheaurauJohn Tany, or so they were to claim. On 5 February 1652, Reeve and Muggleton visited John Robins in gaol. Reeve declared Robins to be 'that last great Antichrist, or man of sin' spoken of 'in the 'Thessalonians'' and pronounced him 'cursed in soul and body' -- a trick he may have learned from Robins (Reeve, 'Spiritual Treatise', 6, 10). In time Reeve and Muggleton came to see scriptural knowledge and 'spiritual witchcraft' as the source of Robins's great power, identifying his doctrines as a definitive 'influence' in the formation of Quaker thought (J. Reeve and L. Muggleton, 'A True Interpretation of the Eleventh Chapter of the Revelation of St. John', 1662, 158). Two months after receiving his sentence of damnation John Robins wrote a letter of recantation to Oliver Cromwell. He was released from prison, 'gave all his disciples about London the slip', and returned 'into his own Country'. There he repurchased his land with the money of his former followers -- or so Reeve and Muggleton were to claim (Reeve, 'Spiritual Treatise', 10; Muggleton, 47). Though the truth of this story remains questionable, nothing more is known of John Robins. Joshua Garment, however, informed against Thomas Collier shortly after the Restoration, identifying Collier as the author of a petition demanding 'that justice should bee executed' upon Charles I for hindering the Lord's work. 


@@@@@


doc= 40441


Adams, Mary (supp. fl. 1652), self-proclaimed virgin mother, is a fiction whose existence rests in the creation of one pamphlet formed around her alleged misdeeds and blasphemies. This work is called 'The Ranters Monster' and was printed in London for George Horton in March 1652. 'The Ranters Monster' relates how one Mary Adams of Tillingham, Essex, named herself the Virgin Mary, claiming that 'she was conceived with child of the Holy Ghost'. Furthermore, it was reported how she denied the teachings of the gospel and wickedly declared that 'Christ was not yet come in the flesh; but she was to bring forth the Savior of the World, and that all those that did not believe in him were damn'd'. For these blasphemies it was ordered by the local minister that Adams be imprisoned until the time of her delivery. After a protracted labour of eight days, she gave birth on the ninth day to a stillborn, ugly, misshapen monster. This loathsome creature was said to have neither hands nor feet, but claws like a toad. Adams herself became consumed by disease, rotting away, her body disfigured by blotches, boils, and putrid scabs. To compound her sins she refused to repent, and committed the terrible crime of suicide. This 'true Relation' was confirmed by a group of village notables, among them the minister, churchwardens, and parish constable, their names appended to the end of the text ('The Ranters Monster', 3-5). The account in 'The Ranters Monster' was reproduced in some contemporary newsbooks, and later in a broadside enumerating the great blasphemers of the times. It may also have come to the attention of John Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton, who were to denounce the false Christs, false prophets, and 'counterfeit Virgin Mary's' of the world (Reeve, 5). 
No one by the name Adams nor any one of the witnesses named in 'The Ranters Monster' occurs in any of the records of the parish of Tillingham, Essex. It can only be concluded that the pamphlet is fictitious. The supposed profusion of 'false Virgin Maries' in the minds of Reeve and Muggleton hint at the genesis of the tale (Muggleton, 157). For the story of Mary Adams bears a strong resemblance to the case of Joan Robins, the supposed spouse of John Robins, whose disciples were said to believe that in July 1651 she would give birth to 'the Saviour of all that shall be saved in this world' (E. H., 3). Moreover, 'The Ranters Monster' can also be seen as forming part of an older tradition, that of the genre of monstrous births. Monstrous births could be interpreted as providential signs warning against private and public sin, and their appearance was chronicled with great care. There are several examples of this type of literature in the period, among them 'A Declaration of a Strange and Wonderfull Monster' (1646), from which the woodcut illustration on the title-page of 'The Ranters Monster' was taken. In this earlier work the alleged begetter of a monstrous child is stigmatized as a papist, this association of the deliverance of evil into the world by a sinful creature being a recurring theme in works of this kind. Indeed the character of Mary Adams can be seen as serving a particular function in 'The Ranters Monster': as a warning against the licentiousness of the Ranters. Constructed as a devout, godly woman, Adams becomes victim to the familiar slippage through various forms of religious belief, becoming successively a Baptist, a member of the Family of Love, and finally a Ranter. As a Ranter she is said to maintain diabolical tenets: the denial of God, heaven, and hell, and the opinion that a woman may have sexual relations with any man -- regardless of his marital status. As such 'The Ranters Monster' is instructive both for its fictive, yet evidently believable, account of a woman claiming to be the new Virgin Mary, soon to be delivered of a Christ child, and for its construction of assumed Ranter beliefs. 


@@@@@


doc= 40442


Foster, George (fl. 1650), millenarian and religious writer, is virtually invisible in contemporary records. Nearly everything known about him comes from two tracts of 1650. In 'The Sounding of the Last Trumpet', which was circulating in April Foster recorded a series of visions he had experienced in the first two months of the year, beginning on 14 January, and which he claimed had been commanded by God to be printed. In these visions God had prophesied to Foster that unequal wealth would end; that after its recent tyrannical treatment of the Levellers parliament and its forces would be overthrown by an army led by Lord Fairfax, whom Foster unsuccessfully attempted to meet on 15 January in order to deliver his prophecy; and that a period of equality in wealth and power would follow. In November, Foster published a reset but otherwise unaltered version of this tract together with 'The Pouring Forth of the Seventh and Last Viall', which combined the message of social levelling with a philosemitic one (Foster now signed himself Jacob Israel). The saints and converted Jews, he predicted, would in 1651 gather in Italy where they would proceed to defeat and by 1654 kill the pope, and by 1656 kill the sultan of Turkey. This would clear the way for the founding of Sion in Jerusalem, first as a large temple resembling St Paul's Cathedral, then as a purely spiritual construction: the community of the saints. However, between April and November Fairfax had resigned his command as commander-in-chief of the parliamentary army and retired to Yorkshire; the leader of Foster's apocalyptic crusade would be an unspecified Englishman. 
Foster's visions were of God revealing a fiery apocalypse to come, in which all inequality of wealth would disappear and some people would be destroyed. The very rich and very poor would respectively find their lot eroded or raised up to the level of the godly middling sort; charity would abound; and all forms of selfish behaviour would cease. Foster stated that the New Model Army was to be accepted as the instrument of God, its occupying presence in London being a way of silencing all opposition to millenarian politics. The language of these works is impeccably both prophetic and experiential. It inhabits and refashions the writings of several 'Old Testament' prophets (notably 'Isaiah' and 'Daniel'), and the epistle of 'James', and is painstaking in its detailed account of elaborate vision sequences, and the physical fits, shakings, and tremblings that accompanied them. These would sometimes last some seven hours, and some had, in Foster's mind, musical accompaniments. Characteristically, God was experienced by Foster as an interpreter of the visions, and occasionally angels visited with divine messages. There is evidently some connection, at least in 'The Sounding of the Last Trumpet', with the writings of the ranters Abiezer Coppe and Laurence Clarkson, and possibly also of Digger Gerrard Winstanley, since Foster appears to repeat some of their key phrases. This suggests that Foster may have been part of the ranter circles, though in the absence of further evidence it may be that Foster simply read ranter tracts. His interest in the joining of Jews and Christians resembles in outline the vision of the prophet Thomas Tany. 
Foster had a distinctive vision of the final 'revolution of all things', as he put it: a construction by God of new, non-fleshly bodies for the souls of everyone. He understood man to be an angel driven into a fleshly form at the fall, and the recovery of Eden to involve a vegetarian (indeed, vegan) paradise of subsistence on fruit, with animals brought into the universal freedom enjoyed by humans. In the fallen world, Foster claimed, the spirits of dead, wicked men possessed witches and noisy animals such as dogs and hens. This was the state of hell, which would last for the wicked until the general restitution. Finally, in the redeemed world, only one language would be spoken. 
Charges for Cromwell's entertainment on 6 June 1652 from, among others, Israel Jacob, may locate Foster in Canterbury among aldermen and city officials, in more elevated company than he is usually supposed to have kept. 


@@@@@


doc= 40447


Adrian, Max (1903-1973), actor, was born on 1 November 1903 in northern Ireland, the son of Edward Norman Cavendish Bor and his wife, Mabel Lloyd, 'nee' Thornton. He was educated at Portora Royal School, Enniskillen, renowned for its teaching of English, whose past pupils included Samuel Beckett. Adrian described himself as being 'one third Irish, one third English and one third German', whose supposed national attributes he considered were reflected in his acting. He had an Irish love of words and an English restraint, often combined with a penchant for the sardonic 'double entendres' of a nightclub compere from the Weimar republic. Despite this distinctive style, he was a versatile and accomplished actor, equally at home in classical drama, intimate revue, and the theatre of the absurd. He also appeared with distinction in films, television, and one-man shows. 
Adrian began his stage career as a chorus boy on the lowest rung of the theatrical business, performing in a chorus line while the reels were being changed at a silent moving-picture house. He graduated to the Gaiety Theatre at Douglas in the Isle of Man, before touring in George Gershwin's 'Lady be Good' (1927) and receiving his first West End walk-on part at the Globe Theatre during the run of 'The Squall' (1927). He decided to become an actor rather than a dancer and gained experience in weekly repertory in Northampton, where he took on about forty leading roles a year (1930-32). 'They're extraordinary people in Northampton', he later recalled, 'they hold nothing against you. I still have friends there' (interview with Barry Norman, 'The Times', 4 Sept 1972). 
Adrian's first big opportunity came when he appeared as Albert Arnold in an early Terence Rattigan comedy, 'First Episode' (1934), which started out at a theatre club, Q, transferred to the Comedy Theatre in the West End and to New York under another title, 'College Sinners'. But the play was less successful than expected and he returned to smaller roles and provincial appearances before appearing for the first time in a classical repertory company in London, playing Shakespeare and George Bernard Shaw. His performance as Pandarus in a modern-dress 'Troilus and Cressida' at the Westminster Theatre (1938) was further developed in a Royal Shakespeare Company production in 1960, and transformed for a generation the understanding of this lascivious, brooding character in Shakespeare's powerfully ambiguous, anti-war play. 
Adrian joined the Old Vic company in 1939, playing the Dauphin in Shaw's 'Saint Joan', and joined John Gielgud's company at the Haymarket (1944-5) as Puck in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' and Osric in 'Hamlet'. During the Second World War, exempted from military service, he discovered his talents in intimate revue, playing in Herbert Farjeon's 'Light and Shade' (1942) at the Ambassadors. This genre, rarely seen today, gave him the chance to sing, dance, take part in short sketches, and explore his gift for timing pointed witticisms. He appeared in 'Tuppence Coloured' (1947), 'Oranges and Lemons' (1948), 'Penny Plain' (1951), and 'Airs on a Shoestring' (1953), which ran for almost two years at the Royal Court Theatre in London and subsequently toured. Its contributors included Michael Flanders, Donald Swann, and Joyce Grenfell, while the producer was Laurier Lister, who became Adrian's lifelong partner. 
'A pleasant and genial revue', wrote Ivor Brown in 'The Observer' in 1953, in which 'Max Adrian carries out most of the men's jobs', but the days of such light-hearted entertainment were coming to an end. The mood of British theatre was changing with John Osborne's 'Look Back in Anger' (1956) and the arrival of the Angry Young Men. The English Stage Company took over at the Royal Court Theatre, where Lister had his successes. A new generation of satire approached with 'Beyond the Fringe' (1959). Adrian appeared in two less successful revues, 'From Here to There' (1955) and 'Fresh Airs' (1956), which he co-directed, but in December 1956 he went to New York to play Dr Pangloss in 'Candide' at the Martin Beck Theater. He stayed in the US to join summer stock companies and in 1958, appeared in a double bill, 'The Lesson' and 'The Chairs', by the French-Romanian absurdist writer Eugene Ionesco, at the Phoenix Theater. The 'New York Times' critic, Brookes Atkinson, wrote that his 'elaborate politesse, giving way gradually to fanaticism and ghastly exuberance, is funny and grisly at the same time' (obituary in 'New York Times', 20 Jan 1973, quoting from a review published in 1958). 
In Britain there were vigorous attempts to transform repertory theatre into a system which more closely resembled the continental models. The first came with the establishment of the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC) from its origins in the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre at Stratford upon Avon. Its leader was the director Peter Hall, and the company was hired on long-term contracts to play in repertory in Stratford and London. Adrian was invited to join Hall's company with such actors as Peggy Ashcroft, Peter O'Toole, and Diana Rigg, a time which he recalled as the happiest in his life. 'There was a magic about that company' (interview with Barry Norman, 'The Times', 4 Sept 1972). 
At the RSC actors were encouraged to extend their acting ranges by taking on roles for which they might not usually have been cast. Adrian played Feste in 'Twelfth Night', Jacques in 'As You Like It', Father Barre in John Whiting's 'The Devils', and a range of smaller parts. His abilities as a team member brought him to the attention of Sir Laurence Olivier, who invited him to join the first National Theatre company in 1963. He played Polonius in the opening production of 'Hamlet', Serebryakov in Chekhov's 'Uncle Vanya', and the Inquisitor in Shaw's 'Saint Joan'. After leaving the National Theatre, he played in West End and regional theatres, before devising (with Lister) his first one-man show, 'An Evening with G. B. S.' (George Bernard Shaw). With this and another one-man show, 'Gilbert and Sullivan', he toured the British Isles, the United States and (under the auspices of the British Council) many Commonwealth countries. 
Adrian's screen career began with 'The Primrose Path' (1933) and continued through many distinguished British films, such as Olivier's 'Henry V' (1944). He usually provided memorable cameos rather than centre-screen performances, but under the director Ken Russell his sardonic but detached presence pervaded such films as 'The Music Lovers' (1970) and 'The Devils' (1970, from Whiting's play). He also appeared in lighter screen roles, in 'The Boy Friend' (1971), or as Frankie Howerd's stooge in the television series 'Up Pompeii'; but his most haunting performance perhaps came in Ken Russell's film made for television, 'Song of Summer', about the relationship between the infirm and partly paralysed composer, Delius, and his intuitive secretary, Eric Fenby. As Delius, Adrian's gestures were minimal, but he evoked the composer's fastidious and haunted sensibility. 
Adrian died from a heart attack on 19 January 1973 at his home, Smarkham Orchard, Shamley Green, near Guildford, Surrey, after returning from the television studios where he had been recording Bertolt Brecht's 'The Caucasian Chalk Circle' (1973) for the BBC. At his memorial service, the great names of British theatre at the time paid tribute to his style and professionalism. The lessons were read by Alec Guinness and Laurence Olivier, the tribute paid by Joyce Grenfell. He was survived by his partner, Laurier Lister, with whom he lived at Shamley Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 40448


Andrews, Henry Stewart Fleetwood (1910-1989), actor, was born on 10 November 1910 at St Mary's, Pembury Road, Tonbridge, Kent, the son of Scottish doctor Henry Arthur Andrews and his wife, Amy Diana Frances Horner. He was educated at Tonbridge School and at Wrekin College, Shropshire. His father was a keen amateur actor, but Andrews considered careers as a professional cricketer and a policeman before he joined Liverpool Playhouse; he made his debut there as John in 'The Long Christmas Dinner' (1933), and in London, at the St James's Theatre, as John in 'Worse Things Happen at Sea' (1935). In that year he took over the role of Tybalt in the Olivier-Gielgud production of 'Romeo and Juliet', and in New York in 1936 he played Horatio to Gielgud's Hamlet. In 1937-8 he appeared in Gielgud's Shakespeare-Sheridan-Chekhov season, and in 1939 he played Laertes opposite Gielgud's Hamlet, at the Lyceum. He always performed as Harry Andrews. 
Throughout the Second World War, Andrews served with the Royal Artillery's 15th Scottish division, ending as acting major. He was soon back on stage, with Olivier's Old Vic company at the New Theatre, playing roles in 'Henry IV', parts 1 and 2, 'Oedipus', and 'The Critic' before transferring with the company to New York in summer 1946. From September of that year until 1949 he was again with the company at the New Theatre, appearing in a string of successes that included Cornwall in 'King Lear', Bolingbroke in 'Richard II', Hortensio in 'The Taming of the Shrew', Orsino in 'Twelfth Night', and Lucifer in 'Dr Faustus'. Meanwhile Anthony Quayle had become director of the Memorial Theatre, Stratford upon Avon, in 1948, and for its transformation Andrews was one of the big names that he attracted from the Old Vic. In 1949 Andrews played Macduff in 'Macbeth', Don Pedro in 'Much Ado about Nothing', Theseus in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', Pisanio in 'Cymbeline', and Wolsey in 'Henry VIII', before touring Australia with the company; in 1950-51, again with Gielgud, he was Vincentio in 'Measure for Measure', Brutus in 'Julius Caesar', Edgar in 'King Lear', and Benedick in 'Much Ado about Nothing'. Late that year he appeared in New York with Olivier's two Festival of Britain productions, 'Caesar and Cleopatra' and 'Antony and Cleopatra'. 
Andrews was tall, with a powerful frame, a 'distinguished Shakespearean actor with a commanding presence and a resonant speaking voice' ('The Times'). However, the major Shakespearian roles had eluded him; there was a suggestion that he lacked an understanding of their deeper subtleties. His career now turned almost exclusively to films. Having hitherto avoided their lure (and the likelihood of an operation on his protruding ears) he made his film debut as the Scots sergeant major in 'The Red Beret' (1953). Despite being a gentle giant it was authoritarian roles, especially military ones, for which he was best known. He played most ranks from sergeants ('A Hill in Korea', 1956), through captains ('Reach for Glory', 1962), to generals ('The Night of the Generals', 1967). He played an air vice-marshal in '633 Squadron' (1964) and a variety of police inspectors and other officers. He added his presence to a number of epics -- as Hector in 'Helen of Troy' and Darius in 'Alexander the Great' (both 1956), in '55 Days at Peking' (1963), and 'The Agony and the Ecstasy' (1965). He was noteworthy in 'Moby Dick' (1956), as Lord Lucan in 'The Charge of the Light Brigade' (1968), as Mr Earnshaw in 'Wuthering Heights' (1970), as the loopy thirteenth earl of Gurney in 'The Ruling Class' (1972). He lent particular gravitas to roles as a senior civil servant in 'Battle of Britain' (1969), as Grand Duke Nicholas in 'Nicholas and Alexandra' (1971), and as an elder in 'Superman' (1978). Perhaps his best-remembered role was as the 'epicene boy-chaser', Ed, in the filmed version of Joe Orton's 'Entertaining Mr Sloane' (1970). Despite the apparent similarity of many of his film parts his strength was in underplaying, and he displayed many subtle shades in his performances. 
The stage was not totally abandoned. Back in Stratford for the 1956 season he played Claudius in 'Hamlet', and Othello. He was Henry VIII at the Old Vic in 1958, Menenius to Olivier's Coriolanus in 1959, and in 1960 played General Allenby opposite Alec Guinness in 'Ross' at the Haymarket. In 1971 Andrews finally played Lear, in Edward Bond's reworked version at the Royal Court, but though 'a performance of towering power and passion... it was difficult for him to convey Lear's childishness in senile insanity' ('The Times'). His last stage role was Ivan Kilner in 'A Family' (1978), at the Haymarket. In his later years he appeared in many television movies and several series -- 'Clayhanger' (1976), 'A. J. Wentworth, B.A.' (1982), 'Dynasty' (1985) -- and in plays, including 'All Passion Spent' (1986), in which he was splendid as the elderly admirer of the widowed Wendy Hiller. 
As a younger man Andrews enjoyed cricket, tennis, sailing, and riding. Later he enjoyed gardening and the country life at the home -- Church Farm Oasts, Salehurst, Sussex -- that he shared with his companion, actor Basil Hoskins. In 1966 he was appointed CBE. He died at his home, of bronchitis and emphysema, on 7 March 1989. 


@@@@@


doc= 40449


Atkins, (Alexander) Robert (1886-1972), actor and theatre director, was born in Dulwich, London, on 10 August 1886, the son of Robert Atkins and his wife, Annie ('nee' Evans). He was educated privately and then studied at the Academy of Dramatic Art from 1905 to 1906. For professional purposes he shortened his name to Robert Atkins, and while at the Academy of Dramatic Art he made his first public appearance walking on in a student production of 'Nero'. When he left in 1906 he won their highest award, the Bancroft gold medal. The academy had been founded by Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree and it was there that Tree saw Atkins playing Shylock in the trial scene of 'The Merchant of Venice' and engaged him to join his company at His Majesty's Theatre. He stayed there for three years, graduating from small to leading roles, then joined John Martin Harvey's company and in 1911 played the Public Prosecutor in the famous production of 'The Only Way' at the Lyceum Theatre. He then joined Johnston Forbes-Robertson's company and in October 1915 went to the Old Vic playing leading roles. 
In 1919, after army service, Atkins returned to the Old Vic as actor and director. There he played King Lear, Caliban, Richard III, and Sir Toby Belch; he also directed several productions, including 'Hamlet' -- in its entirety at matinees -- 'Peer Gynt', and 'Trelawny of the Wells'. It was in 'Peer Gynt' that he made his final appearance with the company in 1925, playing James Telfer. He then entered into management of the New Theatre, formed the Forum Theatre Guild, and in 1927 was appointed director of the British Empire Shakespeare Society, and also took his own Shakespearian company to Egypt. He produced and played leading roles in practically every theatre in London and the provinces, notably the Shakespeare canon, and in 1932 played Napoleon and also produced John Drinkwater's adaptation of Signor Mussolini's play of that name, for which he was made 'cavaliere' of the order of the Crown of Italy. When Mussolini led Italy into the war against Britain Robert, a patriot to his soul, was asked what he intended to do about the order. 'Send the bloody thing back' he seethed, and promptly fitted the action to the word. He directed 'Twelfth Night' with its stunning black and white costumes and decor. Jean Forbes-Robertson played Viola with 'the latent wistfulness of an evening in high summer', which would have appealed to Atkins, who was ever the romantic. 
In 1933 Atkins embarked on his long and successful association with the open-air theatre in Regent's Park, playing Caliban, Sir Toby Belch, and Bottom. From then until 1943 he produced all the plays at that theatre, and in 1939 was appointed its director as well as its producer. At the height of the Second World War he also had built an Elizabethan platform in Southwark Park and staged 'The Taming of the Shrew' with Claire Luce in the lead. Seats cost from 6died to 2's'. He directed George Robey as Falstaff, with Lady Tree as Mistress Quickly in 1934, and 'Chu Chin Chow' at the Palace Theatre in 1940. 1944 saw his appointment as director of productions at the Memorial Theatre, Stratford upon Avon. He produced sixteen plays there, resigning in 1945 and resuming his association with the open-air theatre, where he appeared and directed until 1960. In 1949 he was made CBE for services to the theatre. He played Sir Toby Belch in 'Twelfth Night' at the 1956 Baalbek Festival, when he was awarded the Lebanese order of the Cedar. In 1961 he joined the Old Vic company at the Edinburgh Festival in 'Dr Faustus', and continued his directing career until 1963. He first appeared on film in 'Peg of Old Drury' in 1935, but although he made many other film and television appearances, it was the theatre that was closest to his heart. 
As Atkins had helped to shape Shakespearian drama throughout his career, Shakespeare had helped to shape him. Certain of his greatest roles, Falstaff and Sir Toby Belch, were reflected in facets of his own personality, and the precision, the poetry, and the imagery, sacred and profane, of Shakespearian dialogue influenced every part of his private language. It was never possible to misunderstand what he meant. His turn of phrase, whether succinct or embellished, never missed its mark. To this day many of his ripostes continue to resound through the rehearsal rooms and hostelries used by later theatricals. When Colonel Fordham Flower, of Flower's Brewery and chairman of the board of Stratford Memorial Theatre, requested Robert's resignation, it drew from Robert a less than flattering reference to Flower's Bitter, which will live as long as brewers brew and actors drink. Everyone who worked with him recalled some 'bon mot' originated by him. 
Atkins was immensely loyal to his cast, his stage management, and staff, whom he re-engaged production after production. The male members he invariably addressed as 'old son' and it was possible to tell minutely, by the tone and inflection he used, the status of the relationship. His production methods were basically traditional. He dressed his productions in Shakespearian style and favoured incidental music which reflected that feeling. In Regent's Park this was provided by Rosabel Watson and a small female ensemble from a tent on the side of the stage. They were always referred to by him as 'Rosabel and the girls', to whom he was, as he was to all ladies, invariably gallant. He appreciated good work at all levels of theatre, but did not suffer fools, or those not as devoted to their profession as he wished, gladly. In rehearsal he wore, or kept nearby, a grey trilby hat and in moments of great stress, or at any sign of inaudibility, one of his 'betes noires', he would cast it to the ground with a cry of 'for Christ's sake' and either kick it or jump upon it, depending on the space available. At the end of his working life he became hard of hearing and consequently the trilby took a hammering. 
Atkins was a cigarette smoker during the day but a cigar man of an evening after rehearsals or performances were over. A gregarious man, when at Regent's Park his local was The Volunteer on Baker Street, convenient also for his home at Ivor Court, just around the corner. In the West End of London he had his own strapontin seat at the corner of the bar in Rules restaurant on Maiden Lane, and at both venues he held court. As actor and as director he enriched the theatre and in particular Shakespearian drama, and as a man he enriched life in general for all who were fortunate enough to bask in the warmth of his friendship. His first marriage, to Mary Sumner, with whom he had a son, was dissolved; he then married Ethel Davey. He died in Hackney Hospital, Hackney, London, on 10 February 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 40450


Baddeley, (Madeleine) Angela (1904-1976), actress, was born on 4 July 1904 at 64 Pretoria Road, West Ham, London, one of the four daughters of William Herman Clinton-Baddeley, journalist, and his wife, Louise Rosalie Bourdin. She was a descendant of Sir Henry Clinton, the British general who captured New York during the American War of Independence. A first marriage, to Stephen Kerr Thomas, was short-lived, but produced a daughter. After a divorce she married on 8 July 1929 Glencairn Alexander Byam Shaw (1904-1986), with whom she had a son and a daughter. Byam Shaw was an actor and theatrical producer known for his work with theatrical classics and in opera. 
Angela Baddeley made her professional debut in London in 1915 and by her early twenties had become one of the leading actresses on the West End stage. Her performance in 'Richard III' was the first of many classical roles, but she played in many different kinds of production -- as did her sister, Hermione Baddeley (1906-1986) -- and was known as a versatile actress. Some theatre critics wondered if she was almost too versatile, in that she never concentrated on one kind of role, but such a professional attitude served Baddeley well, as her career in live theatre lasted until her death. James Agate once favourably commented that she could be 'an ingenue without being a ninny', and Baddeley's versatility in performance came from what many viewed as a charming personality and depth of sensitivity. She was known to possess a 'subtle technique', which she developed throughout her long career. Her early theatre work included frequent stints as Jenny Diver in the long-running revival (1920-23) of John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera', as well as roles in popular new plays such as J. M. Barrie's 'Mary Rose'. She toured Australia with the theatrical producer Dion Boucicault and was as likely to be working in the West End as in one of the independent or more experimental theatres of the day, such as the Everyman at Hampstead or the 'Q' in Richmond. Notable performances were those in R. B. Sheridan's 'School for Scandal' (as Lady Teazle in 1927) and as Florrie in W. Somerset Maugham's expressionistic play 'Sheppey' (1933). During the 1930s she became well known for her work in productions of Emlyn Williams's plays, and was one of his favourite actresses. 
Williams's work began to have a real impact on the West End theatre in the mid-1930s and Angela Baddeley played to great acclaim as Olivia Grayne in his macabre 'Night Must Fall' in 1935. This role took her to her American stage debut at the Barrymore Theater in New York in 1936. She worked a great deal with Williams during the 1930s and 1940s, often playing opposite him in lead roles, and became a founder member of what Richard Huggett claims can be loosely termed the Emlyn Williams repertory players. The connection with Williams also entangled her with Binkie Beaumont, one of the most powerful theatre producers of the day. Beaumont was notoriously camera-shy, despite, or perhaps because of, his immense power within the fairly closed London theatrical world of the mid-twentieth century, and Baddeley features, along with Williams, in one of the most famous first publicity shots of Beaumont printed in 'The Tatler' in 1947. The photo, taken by the prolific and influential theatrical photographer of the day Angus McBean shows Beaumont as the 'puppet master' controlling the strings of the actors (Baddeley and Williams) in yet another of his West End hit productions, Terence Rattigan's 'The Winslow Boy'. Baddeley's association with Beaumont and his production company from the 1930s to the 1950s led to significant roles in such plays as Dodie Smith's 'Dear Octopus' (1938) and Williams's 'The Light of Heart' (1939). She starred alongside such notable performers of the day as Michael Redgrave and Gladys Cooper. A notable performance was in Noel Coward's 'Relative Values', produced by Beaumont in 1950 as part of the Festival of Industry and the Arts. 
Angela Baddeley was also acclaimed as a Shakespearian actor. She was a member of the Old Vic company in the late 1940s, and had major roles during numerous seasons at the Royal Memorial Theatre in Stratford upon Avon in the 1950s. Especially noteworthy were her appearances as the Nurse in 'Romeo and Juliet', and as Mrs Hardcastle in Oliver Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer'. Her own favourite roles were as Cattrin in 'The Light of Heart' by Emlyn Williams and Stella in J. B. Priestley's 'Eden End'. In 1975 she was appointed CBE. 
Unusually for a female actor, Baddeley sustained a career in live performance until her death, when she was appearing as Madame Armfeldt in 'A Little Night Music' by Stephen Sondheim in the West End. But her most significant triumph in her later years was the immense popularity of her Mrs Bridges in the ITV television series 'Upstairs Downstairs', a chronicle of an upper-class Edwardian household. Baddeley played the feisty cook throughout the series, which lasted from 1971 to 1975, and there were even rumours of plans for a follow-on series which focused on the relationship between Mrs Bridges and the butler, Mr Hudson (played by Gordon Jackson), now married and running a seaside boarding-house. Such rumours were never borne out as Angela Baddeley died following a serious viral flu infection on 22 February 1976 at Grayshott Hall, Grayshott, Hampshire, near Haslemere. She was survived by her second husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 40451


Badel, Alan Fernand (1923-1982), actor and theatre producer, was born in Rusholme, Manchester, on 11 September 1923, the son of Auguste Firman Joseph Badel (1891-1962), a shipping clerk and office manager of French birth, and his wife of Huguenot descent, Elizabeth Olive Till (died 1973). He had two brothers and a sister, as well as numerous cousins in Languedoc, where he spent holidays in his youth. Educated at Burnage high school, he gave his first public performance in a school production of James Bridie's 'The Anatomist' in 1938, and in the following year, when barely sixteen, he entered the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA). There he soon distinguished himself, making his professional debut in 1940, while still a student, as George in Bridie's 'moral play' 'The Black Eye' at the Oxford Repertory Theatre, and winning the coveted Bancroft gold medal in 1941. On leaving RADA he had time for two engagements before his call-up for military service, as Pierrot in a revival at the Mercury Theatre in August 1941 of the mime-play 'L'enfant prodigue' and as Lennox and First Murderer in 'Macbeth' at the Piccadilly in July 1942. In the same year he married the actress (Marie) Yvonne Owen (1923-1990), who had been a contemporary at RADA and Pierrette to his Pierrot: their daughter Sarah ('b'. 1943) also became a successful actress. 
Enlisted in the 6th airborne division, Badel served as a paratrooper until the Second World War's end, rising to the rank of sergeant and being wounded in action following the Normandy landings. Later he was attached to the army play unit, for which he played Othello to military audiences in Egypt and the Middle East. Before returning to the West End he was at the Farnham Repertory Theatre, where he took the lead in Emlyn Williams's 'The Corn is Green' (April 1947), and was then cast as Stevie, the young resistance worker in Noel Coward's 'Peace in our Time' (Lyric, Hammersmith, July 1947) and as Sandman in Peter Ustinov's 'Frenzy' (St Martin's, March 1948). From February to July 1949 he was a member of the Birmingham Repertory company, playing the title role in Michael Brown's 'The Modern Everyman', the Fool in Henri Gheon's 'The Marvellous History of St Bernard', the Scoundrel in Rodney Ackland's version of Aleksandr Nikolaevich Ostrovsky's 'The Diary of a Scoundrel', and a demonically driven Richard III, a performance which established his credentials as a Shakespearian actor. 
Moving to the Stratford Memorial Theatre to play Ratty in a Christmas production of A. A. Milne's 'Toad of Toad Hall', Badel remained there for the 1950 festival season, appearing as Claudio in 'Measure for Measure', the Lord Chamberlain in 'Henry VIII', and Octavius in 'Julius Caesar'; in 'King Lear' he was much admired as a whey-faced, bird-like Fool, fearfully clutching a child's broken toy for a bauble. After playing the Prince in Nicholas Gray's 'Beauty and the Beast' at the Westminster in December, he returned to Stratford in 1951 as Poins and Justice Shallow in 'Henry IV, Parts 1 and 2', the Dauphin in 'Henry V', and in 'The Tempest' an Ariel at once lithe and statuesque, accounted by 'The Times' 'a performance of flawless beauty' (27 June 1951). Engagements at the Old Vic in successive seasons broadened his Shakespearian range to include a fusspot Peter Quince in 1951-2 and in 1952-3 a lovesick Romeo, an unashamedly adolescent interpretation which, opposite Claire Bloom's touchingly childlike Juliet, thrilled its audiences, if not many critics, and served twice to prolong the play's run. After a brief appearance as Eilert Lovborg in Ibsen's 'Hedda Gabler' at the Lyric, Hammersmith, in September 1954, he rejoined Anthony Quayle's Stratford company and opened the 1956 season with Hamlet, followed by Berowne in 'Love's Labour's Lost' and, most tellingly, an affectedly Italianate Lucio in 'Measure for Measure'. 
The year 1957 witnessed a tentative reorientation of Badel's career. Having already directed the British premiere of Fritz Hochwalder's 'The Public Prosecutor' (in which he also played the eponymous revolutionary magistrate) at the Arts Theatre in October, he formed a partnership with Viscount Furness, Furndel Productions Ltd, dedicated to presenting adventurous work unlikely to attract commercial managements. They gave the first British performance of an adaptation from James Joyce entitled 'Ulysses in Nighttown' (Arts Theatre, May 1959), in which Badel was a haunting Stephen Dedalus, and mounted three further new plays at the Westminster: James Saunders's 'The Ark' (September 1959), Gore Vidal's 'Visit to a Small Planet' (February 1960), and Joseph Carole's 'Roger the Sixth' (May 1960). Following the demise of Furndel, a progressive deafness, the legacy of wartime combat, exacerbated the strain of stage performance and impelled Badel increasingly towards cinema, television, and radio, though his intermittent theatrical appearances were no less accomplished: as Hero, the dissolute, self-loathing seducer of Jean Anouilh's 'The Rehearsal' (Globe, April 1961), as a wittily polished John Tanner in George Bernard Shaw's 'Man and Superman' (New Arts, November 1965), and as a perfectly cast, exhilaratingly romantic Edmund Kean in Jean-Paul Sartre's 'Kean'; the latter he enterprisingly played in repertory with one of the great tragedian's most famous roles, Othello, though, unlike Kean, without 'blacking up' (Oxford Playhouse, September-October 1970). His last performance was a reprise of a favourite role, Richard III, at St George's Theatre, Islington, in summer 1976. Offstage, unlike many actors, he remained happily married, and was an enthusiastic gardener and handyman, having mastered such unactorly skills as carpentry and bricklaying. 
Despite making his screen debut in 'The Young Mr Pitt' as early as 1942, Badel was rarely well served by his subsequent films. The two starring roles which his theatrical reputation earned him in Hollywood, as John the Baptist in 'Salome' (1953) and Richard Wagner in 'Magic Fire' (1954), suffered from indifferent accompaniment, and thereafter he was restricted to prominent, but largely two-dimensional character parts, the most interesting of which were the rugby-promoting north-country industrialist in 'This Sporting Life' (1963), the megalomaniac oil magnate in 'Arabesque' (1966), the minister in 'The Day of the Jackal' (1973), the sinister Dominican cardinal in 'Luther' (1976), the KGB colonel in 'Telefon' (1977), and the traitorous British naval officer in 'The Riddle of the Sands' (1979). Television provided more rewarding opportunities, notably as Rawdon Crawley in 'Vanity Fair' (1956), Mr Darcy in 'Pride and Prejudice' (1957), Don Juan in Shaw's 'Don Juan in Hell' (1962), the Cardinal in Bridget Boland's 'The Prisoner' (1963), the Husband in Harold Pinter's 'The Lover' (1963), Edmond Dantes in 'The Count of Monte Cristo' (1964), Tom Simkins in Stan Barstow's 'A Raging Calm' (1974), Edmund Gosse in Dennis Potter's 'Where Adam Stood' (1976), Svengali in 'Trilby' (1976), and Count Fosco in 'The Woman in White' (1982), made in the last months of his life and screened posthumously. He died suddenly of a heart attack at his home, 1A St Martin's Square, Chichester, Sussex, on 19 March 1982. 
Although the dazzling youthful promise, which had captivated no less a critic than Harold Hobson, was never entirely fulfilled, Badel remained an actor of magnetic stage presence and mesmerizing vocal command, from the suave to the spitfire, the elegiac to the barnstormingly heroic. Perceived as redolent of an outmoded romantic tradition, and thereby limiting the parts offered to him, his style of performance was none the less informed by an acute intelligence and an ironic view of character and situation, effectively undercutting all inflated emotion with a modern sensibility. Deplorably few openings came his way in work by post-war British playwrights, but arguably more regrettable still is that he never became a member of either the Royal Shakespeare Company or the National Theatre, where his distinctive gifts would have had greater scope to confront the classic roles of an international repertory. 


@@@@@


doc= 40453


Beckett, Samuel Barclay (1906-1989), author, was born on 13 April 1906 at Cooldrinagh, Kerrymount Avenue, Foxrock, co. Dublin, the second of two children of William Frank Beckett (1871-1933), a quantity surveyor, and his wife, Maria, known as May (1871-1950), daughter of Samuel Roe, a miller of Newbridge in co. Kildare, and his wife, Annie. He was descended from middle-class, solidly protestant, Anglo-Irish stock. William Beckett was an affectionate father and a charming, clubbable, 'absolutely non-intellectual' man, as his son described him (Knowlson, 10), who left his case of Dickens and encyclopaedias unopened. The fiercely independent, strong-willed Beckett had a much more difficult relationship with his protective, equally strong-willed mother, whose 'savage loving' at times overwhelmed him. On the whole he grew up happily in prosperous Foxrock, a village close enough to Dublin for businessmen to commute by train, but rural enough for Beckett to take himself off into the countryside to wander or read alone. He was a fearless, adventurous boy, later an intrepid motorcyclist and an excellent sportsman. 
After attending a small kindergarten school run by Miss Ida and Miss Pauline Elsner in nearby Stillorgan, Beckett went to private schools, first Earlsfort House in Dublin, then Portora Royal School in Enniskillen, co. Fermanagh, where his elder brother, Frank, was already a boarder. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1923 and read French and Italian in the modern European literature course. It is often forgotten that he also studied English literature for two years with the Shakespeare scholar Professor Wilbraham Fitzjohn Trench. In 1927 he obtained a first-class degree with a gold medal, doing outstandingly well in French, under his true mentor at Trinity College, Professor Thomas Brown Rudmose-Brown, who inspired Beckett's love of Ronsard, Sceve, Petrarch, and Racine, as well as introducing him to a wide range of modern French poets. Beckett also took Italian classes from a private tutor, Bianca Esposito, who took him through Dante's 'Divina commedia'. Dante's great poem was a constant source of fascination and a great inspiration to him. While he was at Trinity College, he had his first experience of love in the person of a scintillating, brilliant young woman, Ethna MacCarthy, also a pupil of Rudmose-Brown. Although he adored her and she inspired two of his most beautiful poems, 'Alba' and 'Yoke of liberty', she did not reciprocate his love -- though they remained friends for the rest of her life. After graduating he taught French for two terms at Campbell College, Belfast, an experience which he disliked intensely. To his parents' horror he then had a serious love affair with his first cousin, Ruth Margaret (Peggy) Sinclair. 
In November 1928 Beckett took up a post as 'lecteur d'anglais' (teaching assistant in English) in Paris at the distinguished Ecole Normale Superieure in the rue d'Ulm. He became friendly in the capital with the self-exiled Irish writer James Joyce. Beckett was strongly influenced by the force of Joyce's personality, by the range of his culture, and by his total dedication to his art. Joyce's example inspired him to write. But, although aware from an early stage that he needed to discover his own distinctive voice, he found it extremely difficult at first to escape from Joyce's stylistic influence: 'I vow I will get over J. J. ere I die. Yessir', he wrote in 1931 to Samuel Putnam. 
While living in Paris Beckett wrote (and saw published) a prize-winning poem about Descartes called 'Whoroscope' (1930). He also published his first two critical essays, one (guided in his reading by Joyce) on early sections of what was to become 'Finnegans Wake', entitled 'Dante... Bruno. Vico... Joyce' ('transition', 1929), the other a brilliant, precocious study of Proust, published in 1931. He returned to Dublin in autumn 1930 to take up a lectureship in French at Trinity College, where he lectured on Racine, Moliere, the Romantic poets, Balzac, Stendhal, Flaubert, Proust, Gide, and Bergson. He was, however, pathologically shy and detested the self-exposure that lecturing involved. Always a stern auto-critic, he also regarded this activity as 'teaching others what he did not know himself'. So he resigned his appointment after only four terms and set out instead to become a writer, translator, and literary journalist. 
After a short stay with Peggy Sinclair's family in Kassel early in 1932, Beckett returned to live in Paris, where, installed for six months in the Trianon Palace Hotel, he wrote the major part of a novel entitled 'Dream of Fair to Middling Women', begun in Dublin a year earlier. He failed to get the book published at the time, however, and it appeared posthumously in 1992. It is a clever, probably much too clever, linguistic extravaganza, full of reworked literary quotations. But it overturns most of the conventions of traditional fiction and is a remarkable bravura performance for so young a man. Because of a clamp-down on foreigners, Beckett found that he had to leave Paris and, desperately short of money, he returned home via London to a family situation where he found himself in constant conflict with his concerned but dominant mother. 
Just two months after the death of Peggy Sinclair from tuberculosis, Beckett's father died on 26 June 1933, leaving him feeling guilty and depressed -- primarily at having let down his father by resigning from his academic post. He was suffering from panic and a racing heart, which had disturbed him in a milder form ever since his student days; his troubles were diagnosed as likely to be mental in origin, and he was forced to go to England to seek psychological help in London (psychoanalysis was not permitted in Dublin at the time). He underwent psychotherapy for almost two years with Wilfred Rupert Bion at the Tavistock Clinic. During this period, Beckett also read books on psychology and psychoanalysis by Freud, Stekel, Adler, Jones, and Rank. He several times visited the Bethlem Royal Hospital, where an old Portora schoolfriend worked as a doctor. Beckett's own experience of psychotherapy and his enduring interest in schizophrenia, obsessional neuroses, and other forms of mental disturbance had a deep impact on his later prose fiction and plays. Although he had turned his back earlier on an academic career, he remained a scholar at heart, reading widely in the mid-1930s on philosophy, literature, and science; most of his philosophy notes have been preserved. From this date on, his writings had a strong philosophical infrastructure. 
In 1934 Beckett published 'More Pricks than Kicks', a collection of ten witty and satirical short stories about an Irish intellectual called Belacqua Shuah, borrowing the name of Belacqua from Dante's indolent figure in the 'Purgatorio'. He had also used the name in 'Dream of Fair to Middling Women' and recycled some of the abandoned 'Dream' material in 'More Pricks than Kicks'. In 1935 he assembled the best of his erudite but highly personal poems into a slim volume entitled 'Echo's Bones and other Precipitates'. He also tried to create a name for himself in literary circles by contributing poems and book reviews to 'The Spectator', 'The Bookman', and 'The Criterion'. But both the poems and the reviews tended to be learned and obscure, and he had scant success. 
During his stay in London for psychotherapy Beckett began a novel, set in London and Dublin, called 'Murphy'. Completed by June 1936, this was turned down by dozens of publishers and was not published until 1938. An intellectual, comic novel of ideas, 'Murphy' is probably one of Beckett's least experimental works. Yet it still deals with some of his most persistent themes: the uneasy relationship of mind and body and the desire to escape from the 'big blooming buzzing confusion' (Beckett, 'Murphy', 245) of a world of ambition, aspiration, and will, to seek out instead a state of quietistic peace. 
In 1936-7, dogged by ill health, Beckett toured Nazi Germany, indulging his passionate interest in painting and sculpture. On returning home he became involved in a celebrated court case when he acted as chief witness for his uncle, Harry Sinclair, who had been libelled by Oliver St John Gogarty. While standing up for his uncle's good name, he was publicly humiliated as the 'bawd and blasphemer from Paris'. After a blazing row with his mother he left Ireland to settle down finally in Paris, where on 5 January 1938 he was stabbed by a pimp. When his assailant met Beckett in court, he told him that he did not know why he had done it. Beckett had been in a coma for a few hours and, although the knife had narrowly missed his heart, he was seriously ill for some time. 
Before and after the stabbing Beckett had a number of affairs. One was with the American art collector and heiress Peggy Guggenheim, who admitted that she was 'entirely obsessed for over a year by the strange creature, Samuel Beckett' (P. Guggenheim, 'Out of this Century', 1980, 167); they had a turbulent sexual relationship which evolved into a strange friendship. Another was with the Frenchwoman Suzanne Georgette Anna Deschevaux-Dumesnil (1901-1989), an accomplished pianist. He had met Suzanne some ten years before, and when she learned of his stabbing from a newspaper she visited him several times in hospital. They were soon living together at 6 rue des Favorites but did not marry until 1961. 
Although Beckett described the period just before the outbreak of the Second World War as a 'period of lostness, drifting around, seeing a few friends -- a period of apathy and lethargy' (Knowlson, 295), he was evolving specifically as a French writer. In 1938-9 he wrote some poems in French and translated 'Murphy' with the help of a friend, Alfred Peron, who had been the French 'lecteur' during Beckett's final year as a student. 
After the fall of France in June 1940 Peron introduced Beckett, supposedly neutral as an Irishman, to a local resistance cell, Gloria SMH, which was in secret touch with London. Beckett worked as a liaison officer and translator, receiving and passing on messages from various agents, first to a photographer for microfilming, then to a courier to be taken over the line into the unoccupied zone. But the cell was infiltrated, and in August 1942 its members were betrayed by a French priest, Robert Alesch, who was working for the German Abwehr. Many members of the group were arrested and deported to concentration camps but, forewarned by Peron's wife, Beckett and Suzanne managed to escape with hours to spare. After spending several weeks on the run, they lived out the rest of the war in the little village of Roussillon in the Vaucluse, where Beckett wrote his extraordinary novel 'Watt', partly as a stylistic exercise and partly in order to stay sane in a place where he was cut off from most intellectual pursuits. Written in English, it was a daring linguistic experiment and, because of its strange subject matter as well as its manner, was not published until 1953. After the war he was decorated with the medals of the Croix de Guerre and the medaille de la Reconnaissance Francaise. Characteristically, he told nobody about these decorations -- not even his closest friends. 
After the war Beckett returned to Ireland to see his mother, but in order to obtain permission to return to France to join Suzanne he volunteered to work as an interpreter and storekeeper at the Irish Red Cross hospital in the Normandy town of St Lo, which had been devastated by allied bombing and shelling after the D-day landings. He returned to Paris to endure the most poverty-stricken years of his life. At this time he engaged in a remarkable 'frenzy of writing' in French, while Suzanne worked at dressmaking and gave music lessons in an attempt to make ends meet. 
The war had a lasting effect on Beckett's personal philosophy and his writing. Many aspects of his later works were born out of his experiences of uncertainty, disorientation, danger, deprivation, and exile. While visiting his mother in Foxrock he also had a 'revelation' which marked something of a turning point in how he approached his writing: ''Molloy' and the others came to me the day I became aware of my own folly. Only then did I begin to write the things I feel' (Graver and Federman, 217). He recognized earlier that he had to divorce himself from Joyce's stylistic influence. Now he realized that he had to follow a radically different path from Joyce, who believed that knowledge was a creative way of understanding and controlling the world. Beckett's 'own way was in impoverishment, in lack of knowledge and in taking away, in subtracting rather than adding' (Knowlson, 352). Light, knowledge, understanding, and success were replaced by darkness, impotence, ignorance, and failure. Beckett also realized that he needed to draw on the turmoil and uncertainty of his own inner consciousness rather than on the external, 'real' world; contradictions would be allowed greater freedom; the imagination would be given the scope to construct alternative worlds. To express this vision Beckett rejected some of the techniques that he had followed earlier. Writing in French allowed him to achieve a greater simplicity and objectivity. His prose was no longer full of the densely layered quotations and erudite allusions of his English prose of the 1930s. 
Beckett's first novel in French, 'Mercier et Camier' was finished in 1946. He regarded it later as an apprentice work and was unwilling to have it published until 1970. It was, however, something of a sourcebook for his later writing and allowed him to experiment with dialogue, preparing him for his excursions into drama. At the beginning of 1947 he wrote his first full-length play in French, 'Eleutheria' -- the title being a Greek word for freedom. He was very insistent throughout his life that this should be neither published nor performed, perhaps because it contained certain autobiographical features or had some flaws in its construction. As a result the play was published only after his death. 
Beckett's financial situation and his health were precarious immediately after the war. But he wrote frenetically and in French. He completed the novel trilogy 'Molloy' (1951), 'Malone meurt' ('Malone Dies') (1951), and 'L'innommable' ('The Unnamable') (1953), on which, with his play 'En attendant Godot' ('Waiting for Godot'), so much of his reputation as an innovator and a master stylist in French and English rests. For, unusually, Beckett himself translated most of his prose texts and his plays from one language into the other, working in both directions and re-creating the work each time in the other language. The novels and novellas of the post-war years showed how much the revelation in his mother's house had affected his writing. Characters blend into each other; clues followed, as if in a detective novel, lead nowhere; radical uncertainties about the world and the self predominate; philosophical, psychological, literary, or artistic motifs are no longer used allusively but are integrated into the structure of the work. Suzanne carried the original French manuscripts of the novels around a variety of publishers and, after dozens of refusals, a young publisher, Jerome Lindon, at the Editions de Minuit finally accepted them. 

'Waiting for Godot' was first written in French between October 1948 and January 1949. Beckett's theatrical imagery for this play is stark and minimalist. Two tramp-clowns, Estragon and Vladimir, wait for someone called Godot to come. They hope that his visit will 'save' them. In the meantime they fill in 'the terrible silence that is waiting to flood into this play like water into a sinking ship' (Beckett) with banter and repeated actions. Two other passers-by (Pozzo and Lucky) arrive to provide a distraction (and display a view of life as a series of purposeless movements). After the visitors have left, a boy messenger comes to inform them that Mr Godot will not come today, but will certainly come tomorrow. The same pattern is repeated with significant variations in the second act: Lucky has become mute; Pozzo has gone blind. But a boy messenger returns to convey the same message about Mr Godot. Such apparent simplicity disguises some profound themes: life's brevity and its pain; the human need for something to confer meaning on a mysterious existence; in its absence, a compensatory need for friendship to protect and sustain, yet fail to satisfy; a Cartesian concern with the uneasy interplay of mind and body; and, above all, a radical uncertainty which characterizes every aspect of the two friends' lives. Man is seen, in Beckett's own words, as a 'non-know-er, a non-can-er'. The French actor-director Roger Blin, again contacted by Suzanne, then by Lindon, eventually managed to raise enough money to put on 'En attendant Godot' at the tiny Theatre de Babylone in Paris in January 1953. The extraordinary success of this first production in French was responsible for Beckett's rise to worldwide fame, as the play rapidly became an object of intense international interest and controversy. The first production of Beckett's own English translation, directed by Peter Hall, was staged at the Arts Theatre Club in London in August 1955. Kenneth Tynan's and Harold Hobson's reviews made it into an intellectual hit which has since been regarded as having transformed the British stage. 
With money left to him by his mother Beckett had a small country house built near Ussy-sur-Marne outside Paris. For the first time in his adult life he also found himself comfortably off owing to the success of 'Waiting for Godot'. In 1954 he lost his brother to cancer. He was with Frank until the end in what was one of the most devastating experiences of his life. Soon after this, however, he felt the return of his creative energy and wrote a first draft of 'Fin de partie' ('Endgame'), a play profoundly marked by his brother's death. It was premiered in French in London on 3 April 1957. 
In 1956, at the request of the BBC, Beckett wrote a radio play, 'All that Fall'. It drew on memories of his protestant childhood and his later abandoned faith. While writing the play Beckett was plunged into a state of depression, but the play itself is full of wit and vitality. He was further shattered by news that Ethna MacCarthy, married by then to one of his closest friends, A. J. Leventhal, was dying of cancer. But memories of her, combined with a number of related themes -- a gnostic contrast of light and dark; the relationship with one's former self; an exploration of similarity and difference in human life -- inspired his short play 'Krapp's Last Tape'. At about this time he began a long-term relationship with Barbara Bray (1924-2010), a script editor at the BBC, with whom he remained on very close terms for the rest of his life, while never leaving his wife, Suzanne. He received an honorary degree of DLitt from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1959. 
Beckett started writing the play 'Happy Days' (1961) in October 1960 and it opened on 1 November 1962. As in all Beckett's plays, philosophical concerns take the form of striking theatrical images. In this play a woman is buried up to her waist in act I and up to her neck in act II: 'a new stage metaphor for the old human condition -- burial in a dying earth, exposure under a ruthless sun' (Cohn, 'The Comic Gamut'), as the sands of time literally engulf her. 'Krapp's Last Tape' and 'Play' tend to 'destabilize and disperse' (Lawley) individual identity in plays which are built on a clever use of monologue. Yet we respond first at a human level to the physical, the concrete, and the visual. Only then do we move to the philosophical significance of the images, actions, or words. 
Beckett felt that, because of its very physical, corporeal nature, theatre inevitably involved compromise. In his post-war prose fiction he was less restricted in exploring his deepest concerns. He was freer to explore and attempt to express being, which for him was chaotic, formless, enigmatic, and mysterious. Language is form and form represents an obstacle to capturing being. Form is a sign of strength, whereas Beckett was seeking what he once referred to as a 'syntax of weakness'. So breaking down the traditional forms of fictional and theatrical structure and language became an essential element in a bold attempt to express such formless being. The novel trilogy, and 'Comment c'est' ('How It Is') (1961) in particular, deal with issues of consciousness and the self. For to talk of the self one must objectify that self, hence create a self which is different from the one doing the observing or the describing. This results in a constantly receding series of observers or storytellers, voices or listeners. 
On 25 March 1961 Beckett secretly married Suzanne Deschevaux-Dumesnil in Folkestone. He wanted Suzanne to inherit the rights to works whose publication she had tirelessly arranged. But he continued to see Barbara Bray, who had moved to live in Paris. His next play, 'Play' (1964), parodied the conventional responses of a man and two women involved in an emotional triangle. 
In the mid-1960s Beckett's theatre commitments became very taxing. From that time on he directed his own plays both for the stage and for television. Chiefly he directed at the Schiller-Theater in Berlin and in the studios of Suddeutscher Rundfunk in Stuttgart, but also in Paris and London. In his own productions he refined his plays in the light of theatrical practicalities, introducing many small cuts and changes to his texts. Beckett's own theatrical notebooks prove that he was an excellent choreographer, with a talent for what he described as 'form in movement'. He also worked in New York on a film, entitled 'Film' (1965), starring Buster Keaton and directed by his American director friend Alan Schneider; and on a play for television, 'Eh Joe' (1967). While receiving treatment for what turned out to be a benign tumour in the roof of his mouth, he wrote a short play in English, 'Come and Go' (1967), in which three women comment on their illnesses or imminent deaths. 
During this same period Beckett wrote a number of spare, minimalist prose texts in French. 'Imagination morte imaginez' ('Imagination Dead Imagine') (1965) is set in a white rotunda in which two figures exist like embryos waiting for birth or extinction. In 'Le depeupleur' ('The Lost Ones') (1971) a larger cylinder is inhabited by 200 people who live out a strictly regulated Dantesque existence. 'Bing' ('Ping' in English) (1966) features a single figure in a small white cube. These works come very close to being formalist constructs, creating alternative worlds. Yet the texts are powerful as well as enigmatic and, in spite of all appearances, they do draw from and reflect on the 'real' world. What remains of consciousness in a world where all is reduced? How can the imagination persist when it seems already to have died? Such 'residua' are attempts to continue expressing in a world of receding possibilities where one of the major restrictions is an acute awareness of the inadequacy of language to express. 
Beckett's plays of the 1970s come much closer to basic human concerns: in 'Not I' (1973), a Mouth high in the darkness spews out words in an unstoppable stream -- the theatrical equivalent of a Munch-like scream of despair; in 'Footfalls' (1976) we are confronted by an image of distress and loss in the person of May, literally 'revolving it all in her poor mind', as she paces across the stage; in 'That Time' (1976) the discontinuity of self, yet persistence of a basic consciousness, is revealed in a verbal kaleidoscope of images from different periods of the narrator's life. The central visual image, often inspired by particular paintings of the old masters (Giorgione, Rembrandt, Antonello, Durer), is crucial to the dramatic effect. Yet Beckett combines words and visual images in a highly innovative way, as he explores what is essential to theatre for it still to remain theatre. 
In the early 1980s Beckett produced for a Beckett conference in Ohio a play called 'Ohio Impromptu' (1981), which, with its two almost identical, gowned figures sitting at a table, resembles a Rembrandt or a Terborch painting. He also wrote the beautiful short play 'Rockaby' (1981), in which a woman dressed in black is rocked backwards and forwards in a chair to the rhythm of her recorded voice. Her recorded words take the form of a poem. From time to time the live figure repeats the line 'Time she stopped' in synchronicity with the recording. Billie Whitelaw, one of Beckett's favourite actresses, played the woman in its first production. 
In 1980 'Company', a highly original prose text, first written in English, was published. Although there are autobiographical reminiscences, especially from Beckett's childhood, it is in no sense a conventional autobiography, for the text revolves around some of his most basic themes: solitude, loneliness, the unreliability of memory, uncertainties to do with both the self and the other. Another woman in black is recalled by the narrator of the prose piece 'Mal vu mal dit' ('Ill Seen Ill Said'), written in French and published in 1981. Surrounded by twelve shadowy figures, the woman is drawn to a stone that resembles a white tombstone. Then, this time in English, and partly inspired by Edgar's speech in 'King Lear', 'The worst is not so long as one can say, This is the worst', he wrote another quite extraordinary prose piece, 'Worstward Ho' (1983), about the will to 'fail better'. Though concerned with the failure of language, it achieves a chilling vibrancy in its stark prose. 'Stirrings Still' (1988) was Beckett's last prose text, although his final piece of writing was a poem, 'Comment dire' ('What is the Word') (1989), written after he had regained consciousness in a hospital following a fall. 
As a young man Beckett was shy, taciturn, and self-absorbed. In later life he became far more genial and was noted for his kindness and his generosity towards others. Although witty, warm, and friendly with close friends, he was never gregarious and hated invasions of his privacy. He refused to be interviewed or to have any part in promoting his books. His physical appearance was very striking: he was 6 feet tall, with a face like an Aztec eagle, piercing blue eyes, large ears, and spiky hair. 
Beckett's interests were highly intellectual. He read widely in English, French, Italian, and German literature. In his late twenties and early thirties he read a lot of philosophy: the pre-Socratics, Plato, Descartes, and the occasionalists, Spinoza, Leibniz, and Kant. His interest in the painting of the old masters and in sculpture remained with him throughout his life and he was a friend of many modern painters, in particular Bram and Geer van Velde, Henri Hayden, and Avigdor Arikha. He owned paintings by all these artists. He was a good pianist, who loved Haydn, Schubert, Beethoven, Chopin, and Mozart and attended concerts and recitals with his wife, who was also an excellent pianist. He did not generally like opera, but he did go to see several ballets in the 1930s. Music and painting were probably among the most important influences on Beckett's own writing, and his late work for the stage appears sometimes closer to painting or sculpture than it does to traditional theatre. 
In his political views Beckett was broadly left-wing and anti-establishment, although not a communist. He felt a natural sympathy for the underdog, the victim, the down-and-out, and the prisoner. He never allowed his art, however, to become part of any political agenda, although he wrote one play, 'Catastrophe', in 1982 for the Czech dissident writer Vaclav Havel, then under house arrest, who later became president of Czechoslovakia. He was a firm supporter of human rights movements throughout the world and a fierce opponent of all forms of censorship and repression. 
Beckett's health, which had so often been precarious, began to decline seriously in 1986 with the onset of respiratory troubles soon diagnosed as emphysema. In the following year, being deprived of oxygen, he had several falls, and in the summer of 1988, after falling badly, he went to live in a modest nursing home, called Le Tiers Temps (the Third Age). He was taken ill again on 6 December and died in the Hopital St Anne in Paris of respiratory failure on 22 December 1989. After a small private funeral he was buried with his wife, who had died fewer than six months before, in the cemetery of Montparnasse, Paris, on 26 December. 
Beckett changed the entire face of post-war theatre and also inspired many modern painters and video or installation artists. His prose, too, was immensely influential. He is often described as a pessimist or nihilist, and it would be wrong to understate the sombre nature of his dark vision. Yet such categorizations are wholly inadequate. They ignore the persistent need of the characters in his fiction and his drama to go resolutely, stoically on. They also ignore the humour which is a major feature of what might be called his early and middle periods. Beckett was awarded the Nobel prize for literature in 1969: 'For his writing which -- in new forms for the novel and drama -- in the destitution of modern man acquires its elevation' (citation). And it is easy to ignore a positive, almost cathartic effect that may be gained from laughing at the worst that life can throw at you or from merely enduring it in a brave, perhaps even an uplifting way. 


@@@@@


doc= 40455


Brown, Pamela Mary (1917-1975), actress, was born at 45 Howitt Road, Hampstead, London, on 8 July 1917, the daughter of George Edward Brown, a journalist, and his wife, Helen Blanche Ellerton. She was educated at St Mary's Convent, Ascot, and subsequently studied at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (1935-6). Pamela Brown made her stage debut at Stratford upon Avon, in the 1936 season, playing Juliet, The Widow in 'The Taming of the Shrew', and 'a delicious' Cressida, which she played lisping, drawing critical attention to herself (Trewin, 112). Her London debut came in November 1936 at the Little Theatre, in 'The King and Mistress Shore'. Between 1937 and 1941 she played seasons in repertory in Oxford with occasional forays into the West End. Her work in Oxford established her as an actress to be reckoned with -- in such parts as Hedda Gabler, Lady Teazle, Bella Manningham in 'Gaslight' by Patrick Hamilton, Sadie Thompson in 'Rain' by J. Cotton and C. Randolph, and Nina in 'The Seagull' by Anton Chekhov. An early marriage to the actor Peter Copley ended in divorce in February 1953. 
The intelligence of Pamela Brown's work and her remarkable incandescent personality and striking good looks began to be recognized during the early years of the Second World War. Michael Powell, the film director, recalled how at that time she was 'a spectacular young actress with resplendent chestnut hair to her shoulders, and great liquid eyes full of disdain, that could dart a glance backward like a nervous thoroughbred. She was tall, with a long back and lovely legs' (Powell, 478). She played Ophelia in 1944 to Robert Helpmann's Hamlet and in 1946 she was Cordelia to Laurence Olivier's King Lear. She was by then an accepted star actress, the favourite of James Agate, the most influential critic of his time. He praised her 'superb performance' in the eponymous role in Jean-Jacques Bernard's 'Madeleine' (1944), adding that 'I shall be content to echo a colleague's 'She stands higher than any of her generation for flashes of revealing fire'' (Agate, 92). 
Pamela Brown made her New York debut at the Royale Theater in 1947 as Gwendolen Fairfax in Oscar Wilde's 'The Importance of being Earnest', and in 1949 had an outstanding success in the play with which she has been closely associated, 'The Lady's not for Burning', in the role of Jennet Jourdemayne, specially written for her by Christopher Fry. 'Miss Pamela Brown glides, sidles, darts and twists with a wonderful grace and flash, and she matches Mr Gielgud's delivery. Technically, it is all dazzling' (Worsley, 83). After London, the play was taken to New York and Washington, and Pamela Brown continued her alternation of West End hits and the major classic roles. For John Gielgud's season at the Lyric, Hammersmith, she played Mrs Millamant in 'The Way of the World' by William Congreve and Aquilina in 'Venice Preserv'd' by Thomas Otway. 
From the early 1950s illness was beginning to make playing on the stage difficult: owing to an arthritic condition, which began when Pamela Brown was aged only fifteen, her mobility was restricted and she was in great pain, kept at bay by drugs. Nevertheless, in December 1953, she appeared in Wynyard Browne's 'A Question of Fact', opposite Paul Scofield. According to one reviewer, 'Pam Brown brought to a part that didn't have all the character that it might have had, enormous character' (Duff, 86). Despite her health problems, Brown continued to appear in films down to the early 1970s. These included appearances in 'Lust for Life' (1956) with Kirk Douglas, the Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor 'Cleopatra' (1963), and remakes of 'Wuthering Heights' (1970) and 'Dracula' (1974) with Jack Palance as Dracula. By and large her films were not as distinctive as her stage work, but her physical presence had a luminous quality which drew attention to her, enabling her stillness to leave impressions which lasted well after the film had run its course. Of her appearance as Jane Shore in Olivier's film of 'Richard III' (1955), an obituarist noted that although this was a non-speaking part, 'in her hands [it was] an eloquent symbol of clandestine love and conspiracy' ('The Times', 20 Sept 1975). Her appearance as Nicklaus, in 'The Tales of Hoffman' (1951), a silent, mocking smile playing around her lips, her eyes eloquently commenting on the folly and rashness of her master, lingers in the memory. 
Pamela Brown lived for many years with the film director, Michael Latham Powell (1905-1990). She died from cancer on 19 September 1975 at 4 Lee Cottages, Avening, Gloucestershire, and was buried in Holy Cross churchyard, Avening. Because of the fading away of her career, Pamela Brown's passing received scant notice in obituaries. Her memorial remains in 'The Tales of Hoffman', the masterpiece of Michael Powell, whose great love and muse she was. As Amy Greenfield has written, 'Allusions to Brown's situation and Powell's relationship to her are scattered throughout the film' (Greenfield). 


@@@@@


doc= 40456


Browne, (Elliott) Martin (1900-1980), theatre director, was born at Zeals House, Zeals, Wiltshire, on 29 January 1900, the third son of Colonel Percival John Browne and his wife, Bernarda Gracia 'nee' Lees. He was educated at Eton College, and Christ Church, Oxford, where he took seconds in modern history (1921) and theology (1923). On graduating from Oxford he was appointed by Kent county council to be religious drama adviser for that county. On 20 December 1924 he married the actress Henzie Raeburn 
(Henzie Helena Flesch; 1896-1973)
, the daughter of Henry Charles Flesch, insurance broker. They had two sons. She supported his work and appeared in many of his productions. From 1924 to 1926 he was warden of an educational settlement in Doncaster. In 1927 he made a brief appearance in a Stage Society production at the Regent Theatre in London and immediately afterwards went to the United States as assistant professor of drama at the Carnegie Institute of Technology, Pittsburgh. For the following three years he played in various local 'stock' companies. 
Back in England in 1930 Browne was appointed by George Bell, bishop of Chichester, to be director of religious drama for the diocese. One of Browne's early assignments was to organize a pageant, 'The Rock', to raise funds for the building of Anglican churches in the expanding suburbs of London. Through the good offices of Bishop Bell, T. S. Eliot was persuaded to write a series of choruses linking the loosely historical scenes of the pageant, which was played by amateurs and presented at Sadler's Wells Theatre from 28 May to 9 June 1934. On the strength of it, Bell invited Eliot and Browne to collaborate on a play to be presented at the Canterbury festival the following year. The text was to be written by Eliot and the production to be directed by Browne. Eliot gave to the play the title 'Fear in the way' but during rehearsals the title was changed. Some say the change was suggested by Henzie Raeburn, others that it was suggested by Bernard Shaw. (The former seems the more likely candidate, in the circumstances.) The new title was 'Murder in the Cathedral' and it was this production that established a working relationship of twenty years between Eliot as poet-playwright and Martin Browne as director. This first production of 'Murder in the Cathedral', with Robert Speaight as Becket, was staged in the chapter house (not in the cathedral itself) at Canterbury and was then taken to London, where it ran, astonishingly, for almost a year. It established Browne as the high priest of the then renascent 'poetic drama' movement. In February 1938, at the Ritz Theatre in New York, he directed the first American production of 'Murder in the Cathedral', playing the part of Fourth Tempter himself with Henzie Raeburn as the Chorus Leader. 
In March 1939 Browne directed Eliot's second play, 'The Family Reunion', in London and in the same year, in association with the Arts Council, he launched a touring company which he called the Pilgrim Players (not to be confused with an earlier company -- 1906 to 1911 -- of the same name, run by Barry Jackson and John Drinkwater). The programme of Martin Browne's pilgrims, described in Henzie Raeburn's book, 'Pilgrim Story' (1945), was dominated by the plays of Eliot and -- to a lesser degree -- of James Bridie (O. H. Mavor), the Scottish dramatist of rising reputation at that time. These tours continued until 1948. 
Immediately after the Second World War, Browne took over the tiny Mercury Theatre in Notting Hill Gate and devoted it for the next three years entirely to the production of modern verse plays: first productions of plays by Christopher Fry, Ronald Duncan, Norman Nicholson, Anne Ridler, and Gilbert Horobin were staged, all directed by Martin Browne himself, together with revivals of already known plays by Bridie, Eliot, and others. 
From 1948 to 1957 Browne was the director of the British Drama League, an organization devoted to giving assistance to the work of serious-minded amateur theatres. In 1951 he was responsible for the revival -- the first since 1572 -- of the medieval cycle of York mystery plays, which he himself directed in the ruins of St Mary's Abbey, York, for the York festival (and in the year of the Festival of Britain). He repeated the production of the cycle at York in 1954, 1957, and 1966. Alongside these various activities in those years he continued his collaboration with T. S. Eliot, directing 'The Cocktail Party' in 1949, 'The Confidential Clerk' in 1953, and 'The Elder Statesman' in 1958. And in 1969 he published 'The Making of T. S. Eliot's Plays'. Various studies have pointed to Eliot's debt to Browne (for example F. B. Pinion, 'A T. S. Eliot Companion', 1986, and D. E. Jones, 'The Plays of T. S. Eliot', 1960). 
For six months of each year from 1956 to 1962 Martin Browne served as visiting professor of religious drama at Union Theological College, New York, and from 1962 to 1965 he was drama adviser to Coventry Cathedral, directing the medieval mystery plays there in 1962 and 1964. In 1967 and 1968 he was directing at the Yvonne Arnaud Theatre in Guildford, the plays being 'Murder in the Cathedral', 'The Family Reunion', Thornton Wilder's 'Our Town' and 'The Long Christmas Dinner', and the medieval morality play, 'Everyman'. 
Browne was a specialist of absolute integrity and of massive determination. Though his passion for theatre-as-art was intense and his work became, deservedly, well known on both sides of the Atlantic, he never showed any inclination to compromise his aesthetic ideals for the sake of popular acclamation or commercial appeal. It is true that his directorial style was perhaps 'caviare to the general', somewhat solemn and spare, on occasion. J. C. Trewin, the theatre critic, said of Browne's production of Laurie Lee's 'Peasants' Priest' at the 1949 Canterbury festival: 'E. Martin Browne directed with some ingenuity... Ingenuity, yes: but where was the drama's kindling flare?' (Trewin, 120). And the same critic remarked, about the Mercury Theatre venture, 'Martin Browne, father-confessor of the new poet-dramatists, is a good actor and a director of talent. But I can only regret his choice of plays' (ibid., 90). But seen in its totality Browne's work added a unique and valuable dimension to the pattern of English mid-twentieth-century theatre. He was appointed CBE in 1952. Following the death of Henzie Raeburn, he married on 24 November 1974 Audrey Johnson, a medical social worker, the widow of John Rideout and daughter of Noel Johnson Tuck. He died in the Middlesex Hospital, Westminster, on 27 April 1980, survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 40458


Edwards, Hilton Robert Hugh (1903-1982), actor and theatre director, was born on 2 February 1903 at 1 Bathurst Mansions, 460 Holloway Road, London, the only child of Thomas George Cecil Edwards (died 1910), a district magistrate in India, and his second wife, Emily Murphy (died 1926), a woman of Irish descent. He lost his father at the age of seven when the unfortunate man died as a result of a pig-sticking incident in India. Young Bobby Edwards, as he was then called, was educated at East Finchley grammar school, Middlesex and, briefly, at St Aloysius College, Highgate, Middlesex, a college for Roman Catholic boys. 
After a brief spell in the machine-gun corps and on army reserve, Hilton Edwards began his acting career in 1921 when he was employed as assistant stage manager and walk-on actor with Charles Doran, a Shakespearian actor-manager. From this he progressed in 1922 to the Old Vic Theatre in London, where he remained for three years, acting and singing in a number of increasingly important Shakespearian roles. The turning point in Edwards's life came in June 1927 when he was engaged by Anew MacMaster for his Intimate Theatre Company tour of Ireland. MacMaster's travelling company presented Shakespeare in the small towns of Ireland and included in the company was MacMaster's brother-in-law, Micheal MacLiammoir (born Alfred Lee Willmore) (1899-1978). 
Edwards and MacLiammoir immediately became lovers and this was the beginning of a lifelong partnership. Drawn together by a shared enthusiasm for modern theatre, they made plans during the summer of 1927 to move to Dublin and to set up a permanent company, directing and designing works of contemporary drama. The handsome and flamboyant MacLiammoir, a former child actor and self-invented Irishman, was the perfect partner and foil for the pragmatic and determined Edwards. Edwards's abilities as a director and actor were perfectly complemented by MacLiammoir's flair for acting, writing, and design. This enduring relationship as Ireland's most visible and much-loved gay couple was one of the most remarkable features of their career. 
This career began on 14 October 1928 with the first Gate Theatre Studio production at the Peacock Theatre, next to W. B. Yeats's Abbey Theatre in Dublin. They presented the Irish premiere of Ibsen's 'Peer Gynt', with Edwards directing and also taking the title role, and with MacLiammoir as designer. They followed up the success of this first play by producing Wilde's 'Salome', another premiere for Irish theatre. Edwards's skill as a director was confirmed by his championship of a rejected Abbey play, Denis Johnston's 'The Old Lady Says 'No'!', which opened in June 1929. Johnston's masterpiece was the Gate Theatre Studio's greatest artistic and commercial success at this point, allowing them to find a permanent theatre in the Rotunda Assembly Rooms, an eighteenth-century hall at the north end of Dublin's O'Connell Street. 
Edwards and MacLiammoir lived at 4 Harcourt Terrace in the centre of Georgian Dublin and this remained their permanent base for the rest of their lives. Over the next forty years Edwards acted and directed at the Gate Theatre. One of his most important discoveries as a director was the sixteen-year-old Orson Welles, on a visit to Dublin in 1931 as part of a European vacation and already eager to act. Edwards cast Welles in a series of plays during the Gate Theatre's winter season of 1931-2 and this began a lifelong association between Welles and the Dublin Gate Theatre. In his film version of 'Othello' (1950) Welles cast Edwards as Rodrigo and MacLiammoir as Iago, the novelty of film acting for Edwards being only somewhat marred by scant payment of salary. To compensate, Welles agreed to narrate a short film, 'Return to Glenascaul', directed by Edwards and released in 1950. Edwards's other important excursion into cinema came in 1961 when he appeared in 'Victim', a ground-breaking film about homosexuality directed by Basil Dearden and starring Dirk Bogarde and Sylvia Syms. In 1958 Edwards published 'The Mantle of Harlequin', an entertaining but autobiographically uninformative account of his life and his work in the theatre. 
Perhaps the greatest artistic achievement for Hilton Edwards came in 1960 with 'The Importance of being Oscar', a one-man show on the life and the writings of Oscar Wilde, devised and directed by Edwards and performed by MacLiammoir. This show, described by Bernard Levin as 'a beautiful flower on his [Wilde's] grave' (Fitz-Simon, 232), was a crucial text in rehabilitating Oscar Wilde for a general theatre audience. Such was its popularity that it toured in Ireland, Britain, America, South Africa, and Latin America, and was eventually televised. Edwards's talents as a director found a new medium in 1961 when he was appointed head of drama at the new Irish television station, Radio Telefis Eireann. In 1973, as a mark of affection from their adopted city, Edwards and MacLiammoir were made freemen of Dublin, and when MacLiammoir died in 1978 the president of Ireland attended the funeral and paid his respects to Edwards as acknowledged life partner and chief mourner. Edwards died of diverticulitis at the Royal City of Dublin Hospital on 18 November 1982 and was buried by MacLiammoir's side, in St Fintan's cemetery, Howth, Dublin, on 22 November. After their deaths the Gate Theatre continued to flourish as a living presence in Dublin's artistic life. 


@@@@@


doc= 40460


Greene, (Henry) Graham (1904-1991), author, was born on 2 October 1904 at St John's, Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, the fourth of six children of Charles Henry Greene (1865-1942), teacher, and his wife and cousin, Marion Raymond (1872-1959), eldest daughter of the Revd Carleton Greene, whose wife, Jane Wilson, was a first cousin of Robert Louis Stevenson. 
Graham Greene spent his first sixteen years at Berkhamsted School, where his father, a shy man of modest talents but high moral standards, was headmaster. His tall and regal mother was a powerful force in the boy's life, but she was emotionally reserved and showed more interest in Graham's sisters, Molly and Elizabeth, than in him and his brothers -- Herbert, Raymond, and Hugh Greene (who became director-general of the BBC). A troubled child, Greene felt uncomfortable on both sides of the green baize door that divided the main schoolroom from the family quarters. The need to satisfy his father as both a pupil and a son proved overwhelming, and caused the boy so much distress that he tried to kill himself. He developed a particular fascination for Russian roulette and, in later years, gave various accounts of a period in his teens when he supposedly played the deadly game with a revolver borrowed from an older brother. 
Until he was thirteen Greene lived with his parents, and thus was spared the communal struggle of dormitory existence. When he finally joined one of the boarders' houses at his father's school, he found the experience traumatizing. He was bullied ruthlessly, partly because he was the headmaster's son, and partly because he was an awkward, bony youth with an introverted personality and little aptitude for games. His fellow boarders mocked him to his face, played cruel jokes on him, jabbed him with sharp objects, twisted his arm, and punched him. He grew desperate and tried running away. 
Alarmed by his inability to cope with life as a boarder, Greene's parents took a step that was radical by the standards of their class and generation. They sent him away for psychiatric treatment in London. He was only sixteen when he was placed in the care of an amiable amateur psychoanalyst called Kenneth Richmond. After six peaceful and relatively pleasant months living with Richmond and his wife, Greene returned to Berkhamsted, where he was allowed to live in the family quarters as a day boy while finishing his final year at the school. 
In 1922 Greene went up to Balliol College, Oxford, where he kept largely to himself, developed a fondness for writing verses, and was influenced by T. S. Eliot's early works. Though he found Oxford more to his liking than Berkhamsted, he continued to suffer from periodic bouts of depression and was often bored with his studies. In the memoirs of his famous contemporaries, he is rarely more than a vague presence among the ''Brideshead' set'. Evelyn Waugh observed that 'Graham Greene looked down on us (and perhaps all undergraduates) as childish and ostentatious. He certainly shared in none of our revelry' (Shelden, 86). It was only after they were both established novelists that Waugh and Greene became friends. Cyril Connolly summed up Greene's social life at Balliol by saying 'he was of us, but not with us' (Connolly, 10). 
Greene spent much of his time and energy on poetry, which he contributed to the student magazine 'Oxford Outlook' and to the 'Weekly Westminster Gazette'. His verse also appeared in three successive volumes of the prestigious annual 'Oxford Poetry'. In 1925, his last year at university, Basil Blackwell published his short collection 'Babbling April'. The book attracted so many bad notices, however, that a disappointed Greene abruptly surrendered his ambition to be a poet. After coming down from Oxford with a second-class degree in history, he spent several months looking for work and finally decided to make his living as a journalist, starting as an unpaid assistant at the 'Nottingham Journal'. 
While at Oxford Greene fell in love with Vivienne (later Vivien) Dayrell-Browning (1905-2003), an apprentice assistant to Basil Blackwell, and the daughter of Sidney and Muriel Dayrell-Browning. A sentimental, dreamy young woman, she shared Greene's love of poetry and wrote one book of verse. In later years she won renown as an authority on antique dolls' houses and wrote a history of the subject, 'English Dolls' Houses of the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries' (1955). On 15 October 1927 Greene and Vivienne were married at St Mary's, a small Catholic church in Hampstead. They had two children, Lucy Caroline and Francis, born in 1933 and 1936 respectively. 
A convert to Catholicism before her marriage, Vivienne encouraged her future husband to take an interest in her religion. While working in Nottingham he met Father George Trollope, of Nottingham Cathedral, and received religious instruction from him. In February 1926 Father Trollope baptized Greene in a simple ceremony with no friends or family present. Though Greene later objected to being called a 'Catholic novelist', he became celebrated for employing religious themes in his works, praised by Catholic critics during his lifetime for the powerful way in which his novels explore the subjects of sin, damnation, evil, and divine forgiveness. But Greene's relationship with the church was never easy, and he was often critical of the religion. In his last years he began referring to himself as a 'Catholic atheist' (Shelden, 6). 
Greene and his wife made their first home in London, where in 1926 he had been appointed a sub-editor at 'The Times'. In his spare time he wrote his first novel, 'The Man Within', which enjoyed widespread critical and commercial success when Charles Evans, the managing director at William Heinemann, published it in June 1929. The novel sold 13,000 hardback copies, an amazing feat for a first novel by an unknown author who was only twenty-five. Emboldened, Greene negotiated a generous financial arrangement with his publisher and was able to leave his job at 'The Times'. 
In many ways, however, 'The Man Within' was a false start for Greene. A rousing historical romance about the smuggling trade on the Sussex coast in the early 1800s, the novel is an apprentice effort set in a time and place that Greene did not know well. But the book's success made him think that his future lay in writing more tales of the same kind, and he quickly produced another two novels of romantic adventure, 'The Name of Action' (1930) and 'Rumour at Nightfall' (1931), neither of which enjoyed the popularity of his first book. By 1931 he was in debt to his publishers and was worried that his income would soon dry up. In an effort to save money, and to revive his literary fortunes, he moved to a thatched cottage in the Cotswolds, on the outskirts of Chipping Campden, and began work on a new fictional work set on the Orient Express. 
As Greene later admitted, 'Stamboul Train' (1932) was a calculated effort to win back a large readership and to keep him in business as a full-time writer. In particular, he wanted to please Hollywood, believing that his story was perfect for a lucrative screen adaptation. Long before the appearance of such films as 'The 39 Steps' and 'The Lady Vanishes', he was able to see the cinematic potential of a drama unfolding on an express train crossing vast expanses. He had briefly visited Constantinople in 1930, while on a cruise, but his only experience of the Orient Express was limited to its run from Ostend to Cologne. Relying mostly on his imagination, he created a narrative involving a vivid cast of exotic characters caught up in political intrigue, spying, and crime. During the first eight months of 1932 he stayed in the Cotswolds and wrote his book, exercising the rigid discipline that became a familiar feature of his career: he began a steady habit of writing a certain number of words (usually 500) each day and then stopping until the next day. 

'Stamboul Train' was a considerable success, selling 21,000 copies in its first year and earning $1500 in film rights from Twentieth Century Fox. The book became the first of Greene's so-called 'entertainments', a term that was meant not only to attract readers of popular fiction, but also to disarm highbrow critics. It was a convenient way of telling the reviewers that he had more serious ambitions in mind, and that writing thrillers was simply a kind of hobby, albeit a profitable one. In any event, his thrillers helped him to move to more spacious quarters, first to an expensive modern flat in Woodstock Close, Oxford, and then to a large, elegant house in London at 14 North Side, Clapham Common. The house was built in 1720 and had once been the home of Zachary Macaulay, the historian's father. Greene and his family occupied the house from 1935 until 1940, when bomb damage during the blitz made it uninhabitable. 
Greene once explained that his entertainments were 'exciting' stories 'with just enough character to give interest in the action', but that 'in the novels I hope one is primarily interested in the character and the action takes a minor part' (Pryce-Jones, 62). 'Stamboul Train' saved his career; but its designation as an 'entertainment' created a false impression of his talent, for his entertainments have much in common with his supposedly 'serious' works, and are not mere trifles to be tasted once and thrown aside. All the powerful obsessions that fill the pages of his masterpieces -- 'Brighton Rock' (1938), 'The Power and the Glory' (1940), 'The Heart of the Matter' (1948) -- are also present in 'Stamboul Train', 'A Gun for Sale' (1936), 'The Ministry of Fear' (1943), and other entertainments. It is also not the case that the 'minor' works lack fully developed characters. Two of Greene's most compelling creations are the assassin Raven in 'A Gun for Sale' and the petty racketeer Harry Lime in 'The Third Man' (1950). Even Greene was occasionally uncertain of the dividing line between his entertainments and his other work. When it was first published, 'Brighton Rock' was called an entertainment in the American edition, but not in the British edition. After the 1950s the author stopped trying to label his works of fiction, but the impression remains among some readers that the thrillers are potboilers that do not deserve serious consideration. If this were true Greene would never have bothered to create, for example, the complexity of Arthur Rowe's nightmare world of private and public war in 'The Ministry of Fear', or the intricate duel between good and evil in 'The Confidential Agent' (1939). Until much later the artist in Greene was never far behind the entertainer. 
In his entertainments Greene was not imitating a tried-and-true commercial formula, but was creating a new form of fiction -- one that stands somewhere between the traditional art of the novel and the new art of the cinema. He tried to reproduce on paper the experience of watching a well made film. Nowhere is this more apparent than in 'A Gun for Sale'. Many of its scenes are placed in short sections that seem ready to go before the camera. The opening section arrests the reader's attention with a no-nonsense, almost wordless scene in which two people are swiftly and brutally murdered by a mysterious gunman. Even the killer looks at the murder scene as though it is something his eyes have filmed. When he enters the house where his victims are working, he looks slowly round the room, like a cameraman executing a careful panning shot, taking notice of every detail. 
Greene was a self-taught student of the cinema. At Oxford he was an avid filmgoer and contributed his first film review to the 'Oxford Outlook'. In the 1930s he spent four and a half years writing film reviews for 'The Spectator', commenting on over 400 productions. He was also film critic for the short-lived 'Night and Day' magazine which he helped to start. (It folded after Greene lost a libel suit brought against him by the representatives of the nine-year-old Shirley Temple in 1938 for suggesting that she exploited male sexual desire.) The works he liked best were those that filled the screen with evocative images. The 'poetry' of the cinema spoke to his concerns as a novelist, giving him new ideas for literary imagery. He was especially fond of lingering close-ups. Reviewing 'Anna Karenina' in 1935, he was impressed by the shots of Greta Garbo leaning over a croquet ball and of her face emerging from a cloud of locomotive steam. What he learned from such a film was a way to make images carry more of the meaning in his own fiction. Memorable images such as Raven's harelip in 'A Gun for Sale', the gulls swooping over the pier in 'Brighton Rock', the yellow-fanged 'mestizo' in 'The Power and the Glory' (1940), all seem to have sprung from the darkness of the cinema. 
Until he went to work as a screenwriter for the movie mogul Alexander Korda in the 1940s, Greene was not fully aware that what he had been creating in his works of the 1930s were very sophisticated, highly polished versions of a 'screen treatment'. Under Korda's guidance, and with the help of a true genius of the cinema, British director Carol Reed, Greene became so adept at the art of the screenplay that he never produced one without first writing a complete treatment of the story, and some of these works eventually emerged as books. The short novel 'The Third Man' is simply the screen treatment that Greene created as a first step in the production of the film version, which appeared in 1949 and which won first prize at the Cannes film festival. 
In large measure, speed and intense concentration were the secrets of Greene's success as a writer of entertainments. His steady method of working meant that he could finish a book in less than a year, and this focus of attention allowed him to achieve the unity of vision that works so well on film. In a few cases his pace became almost feverish, as though he were trying to live through each frame of the story as he wrote it. 'The Confidential Agent' was written in only six weeks, 'The Third Man' in eight. 

'Brighton Rock' is his most successful attempt to create a work that is as fast-paced as a thriller and as complex as a more leisurely character study. It deals with the racecourse gangs who created havoc in Brighton during the 1930s and is an exciting story of murder and duplicity in the underworld. More important, it offers the unforgettable portrait of Pinkie Brown, a bloodthirsty young gangster who courts damnation with the zeal of a saint seeking salvation. Partly inspired by a gruesome murder in Brighton in 1934, the novel provides a deeply disturbing insight into the cruel heart of a killer who cannot decide whether he is God's child or Satan's. He uses religion to enhance the pleasure of doing evil, and then dares God to save him as a perverse test of divine mercy. 
Each of Greene's three masterpieces is overflowing with what his friend Douglas Jerrold called 'emotion recollected in hostility' ('Picture Post'). Vague, festering grievances lie at the heart of each story, and the main characters wrestle with the question of whether it is best to lash out at an unjust world or to destroy themselves in a private war against God. In 'The Power and the Glory' the unnamed whisky priest finds that he is the last representative of the Catholic church in a rebel Mexican state that recognizes neither the power nor the glory of the church. He decides to stay in the dangerous land not because he is faithful to his religion, but because he wants to live outside the rules of both God and man. He revels in his own condition as an outcast in a lawless world and seeks power and glory in personal independence. 
Disloyalty, betrayal, and the grim satisfactions of self-destruction also infect the heart of the colonial policeman Major Scobie, in 'The Heart of the Matter', who is tormented by a loveless marriage that he cannot escape and a guilt-ridden affair with a vulnerable younger woman. Like the whisky priest, he is a traditional figure of authority who finds that he cannot keep order in his own life. Suicide appeals to him as a desirable way out of his troubles. He thinks that the only escape is to embrace defeat and to take pride in suffering the fate of a defiant loner unfettered by loyalty to anyone or anything. 
Not long before he died, George Orwell reviewed 'The Heart of the Matter' and harshly condemned it. From his perspective as a moral critic, he could not approve of Greene's fascination with sin, suicide, and damnation. A straightforward thinker who had once been a colonial policeman himself, Orwell found no evidence in the novel of the 'ordinary human decency' that he valued so much in life and literature. Indeed, he detected a certain snobbishness in Greene on the question of hell: 'He appears to share the idea, which has been floating around ever since Baudelaire, that there is something rather 'distingue' in being damned; Hell is a sort of high-class nightclub, entry to which is reserved for Catholics only' ('New Yorker'). 
Most contemporary readers, however, did not share Orwell's reservations. 'The Heart of the Matter' was enormously popular, selling more than 300,000 copies in Britain. It was also a main selection of the Book-of-the-Month Club in America. Though Greene considered the book his most serious work to date, it brought him more money than all his previous entertainments combined. ('The Ministry of Fear', for example, sold a 'mere' 18,000 copies five years earlier.) From 1948 until his death Greene continued to enjoy large sales, widespread critical respect, and largely favourable publicity in the mainstream press, both at home and abroad. After nineteen years of hard work -- in which he brought out a new book almost every year -- he was established for life. 

'The Heart of the Matter' is set in wartime Sierra Leone, where Greene worked as an intelligence officer for fourteen months between 1941 and 1943. After the Second World War broke out his first government job was at the Ministry of Information in London, where he commissioned and edited various works of propaganda. At night he served as an air raid warden. But he soon grew weary of the bureaucratic dullness at the Ministry of Information, and sought more adventurous work with the Secret Intelligence Service (MI6). He officially joined the service in July 1941 and became officer 59200, the same code number given to Wormold's immediate superior in Greene's later parody of the espionage world, 'Our Man in Havana' (1958). He held a position in section V, the unit responsible for counter-espionage. After receiving his training in England, he went to west Africa and spied on the Vichy French colonies and on neutral ships that docked at his home base in Freetown. As a cover, he was placed in the police service of the Colonial Office. 
When he returned to Britain, Greene took a job in the Iberian department of the service, which kept track of intelligence operations in Gibraltar, Lisbon, Madrid, and Tangier, all of which were hotbeds of espionage activity. His immediate superior was Kim Philby, who later achieved notoriety when he was exposed as a secret agent for the Soviet Union. Greene worked closely with Philby and liked him, but if he somehow discovered that his friend was a double agent, he never betrayed him. Instead, he abruptly submitted his resignation from service less than a month before the D-day invasion in 1944 and kept his distance from Philby, who continued to rise in the Secret Intelligence Service hierarchy until the 1950s. After the spy defected to the Soviet Union in 1963 Greene wrote a sympathetic introduction to Philby's autobiography, 'My Silent War' (1968), revealing a certain degree of admiration for the skill with which his former boss had managed such a long and intricate scheme of deception and betrayal. He sometimes spoke of Philby as though he were a character in one of his own novels and may have used the spy as a model for Harry Lime in 'The Third Man'. As Greene was aware, Philby had been involved in an underground socialist movement in Vienna in 1934 and, like Harry Lime, had used the city's extensive network of sewers as a hide-out. 
Greene's own fondness for secrecy and deception is evident in his willingness to continue serving the Secret Intelligence Service unofficially for many years. As late as the 1980s he was still providing help to his contacts, giving assistance during his many foreign trips. From the 1950s to the 1970s one of his closest contacts in the service was Maurice Oldfield, who became director-general in 1973. In exchange for expenses he gave his help to the organization in many places -- most notably Vietnam, Poland, Russia, and China. On a trip to Warsaw in 1955, for example, he spied on the Catholic Pax movement, which was a Soviet-sponsored group. During several visits to Vietnam in the 1950s, he actively spied on both the French colonial army and the communist insurgents, and worked closely with Trevor Wilson, the British consul in Hanoi, who was also the local Secret Intelligence Service station chief and a wartime colleague of Greene's in section V. In 1957 alone, Greene's foreign journeys covered, by his own estimate, 44,000 miles, and much of this travel was paid for by the service. The thrill of spying and the opportunity for constant travel helped to ease the burdens of writing, and allowed him to keep at bay the depression and boredom that plagued him for much of his life. In the words of his official biographer Greene 'was the perfect spy... an intensely secretive man' (Sherry, 2.xiv). 
As his literary fame grew in the 1950s and 1960s Greene took pains to make public declarations of his sympathy for international socialism and his suspicion of American capitalism and military expansion. But friends who knew of his work for the Secret Intelligence Service did not take such public comments seriously. In 1960 Evelyn Waugh confided to a friend that he was not fooled by Greene's occasional efforts to praise the Soviet Union, explaining that Greene 'is a secret agent on our side and all his buttering up of the Russians is 'cover'' (Waugh, 'Letters', 548). Waugh knew that his fellow novelist had previously shown little interest in the left and had, in fact, been closely associated in the past with men who favoured the right, such as the tory MP Victor Cazalet (who backed 'Night and Day' in 1937) and the apologist for Franco Douglas Jerrold (who employed Greene as his deputy at the publishing house of Eyre and Spottiswoode in the mid-1940s). In any event Greene was not averse to wealth and privilege. With his literary earnings he acquired a villa on Capri, apartments in Antibes and Paris, and, towards the end of his life, an apartment overlooking Lake Geneva. To reduce his taxes he decided in the 1960s to end his status as a permanent resident of England and to move to the continent. Afterwards, whenever he made brief visits to London, he invariably stayed at the Ritz. 
After the war Greene separated informally from his middle-class wife and began a passionate affair with the rich American-born beauty Catherine Walston (1916-1978), who was married to Henry Walston, later Lord Walston, the Labour peer. Greene never divorced his wife, but did not live with her after 1946. Instead, he spent as much time as possible with Catherine Walston, visiting her at her homes in Cambridgeshire and travelling with her to Capri for long holidays. She was the great love of his life and the inspiration for his powerful novel about the pains and pleasures of adultery, 'The End of the Affair' (1951). A highly unconventional society hostess, she liked to shock guests at her dinner parties by wearing jeans and doing cartwheels across the floor. Her playful, mischievous manner prompted one of her friends to call her 'a Marie-Antoinette in elegant jeans' (Shelden, 359). 
Greene became obsessed with her and demanded that she spend all her time with him. But she had other lovers, as well as a husband and five children, and was unable to give Greene the attention he craved. Inevitably, they quarrelled and began to drift apart because she would not leave her husband. The intense dynamics of this three-way relationship are vividly portrayed in 'The End of the Affair' (1951), and the narrator's heart-rending comments on his turbulent affair are some of the most compelling passages in Greene's work. He dedicated the book to 'C' in the British edition and to 'Catherine' in the American. The real affair survived the novel's publication, but the acute tension between the lovers gradually decreased in the 1950s, and their tumultuous romance ended in the early 1960s. 

'The End of the Affair' is not a conventional love story: the protagonist and narrator, Maurice Bendrix, says in the opening chapter that he will provide the reader with a record of hate. The story of this affair with a married woman becomes a harrowing tale of spiritual torture because sin and guilt stimulate the couple more than love. What gives the novel its special power, however, is Greene's ability to show the many complex ways in which love and hate can become confused. In life and art he was fascinated by borderlines and liked exploring the ambiguities that attend them. His best novels portray destabilized worlds in which all the borders collapse, and this in turn forces individual characters to chart their own course in a 'journey without maps' (this was the title of a travel book about Africa that Greene published in 1936). 
For many critics 'Greeneland' has become a convenient term for describing the murky territory of shifting boundaries inhabited by Greene's characters. The first critic to use the term was Arthur Calder-Marshall in 1940, but the novelist himself suggested the pun four years earlier in 'A Gun for Sale'. In the minds of some readers Greeneland is associated with rugged landscapes in dangerous parts of Latin America or Africa or Asia. But until the 1950s the novelist set most of his works of fiction in Europe. 'The Power and the Glory' and 'The Heart of the Matter' are the notable exceptions. It is only after 'The End of the Affair' that Greene shifts his focus almost entirely to regions outside Europe. Indeed, Greeneland has two different sets of cast and scenery. One is an urban, lower-middle-class world of sordid European streets haunted by lonely killers, desperate lovers, and assorted lost souls; the other occupies desolate backwaters of wretchedly poor Third World countries where tortured Europeans find their lives halted at a dead end. This second version is evident in 'The Quiet American'; 'Our Man in Havana' (1958); 'A Burnt-Out Case' (1961), set in Africa; 'The Comedians' (1966), set in Haiti; and 'The Honorary Consul' (1972), set in South America. 
By writing about such places as Haiti, the Congo, Cuba, and Vietnam, Greene was able to establish a reputation for himself in the cold war era as a writer with a strong social conscience and a keen interest in other cultures. But that reputation was misleading. Though he altered the landscape of his fiction, the major themes in his work changed very little from the 1930s, and have only slight connections to political, social, or cultural ideology. Whether the backdrop is Brighton or Haiti, Greene always places his greatest focus on the torments that distinguish an individual character's private hell. In 'The Quiet American', for example, the political references and exotic details help to disguise the fact that the story is essentially the same as that in Greene's third novel -- 'Rumour at Nightfall', an almost forgotten work -- which is set against the background of the Carlist wars, in the 1870s. In both books a tough-minded journalist covering a controversial war betrays an idealistic friend partly out of jealousy. The wartime atmosphere in the later novel is brilliantly conveyed, but its treatment of political matters is as superficial as that in the earlier book. Though the British journalist Fowler in 'The Quiet American' has complete contempt for imperial adventurism, he is not 'committed' to anything in Vietnam besides his opium pipe. 
Despite his extensive travels in the cold war era, Greene rarely stayed in one place for very long, except when he was at home in Britain, France, or Italy. The portrait of Papa Doc Duvalier's Haiti in 'The Comedians' is based on a visit in 1963 that lasted only a fortnight. Greene visited Latin America often, but never bothered to learn Spanish and spent much of his time cultivating the goodwill of such undemocratic regimes as Fidel Castro's in Cuba and General Omar Torrijos's in Panama. In the 1970s and 1980s he visited Panama frequently and made so many friends among the members of Torrijos's military entourage that the general once paid for his flight home on Concorde. He had a personal obsession with Torrijos, as is clear in his non-fiction work 'Getting to Know the General' (1985). Fifty years earlier, when he was fascinated by the Carlist wars, he developed a special liking for the doomed figure of a Spanish general called Torrijos. He thought fate had brought him together with Panama's leader of the same name. But none of the Panamanians seems to have known that their fondness for him was compromised by his continuing contacts with his old friends in the British intelligence community. 
Greene's last major novel was his most explicit treatment of the world of espionage. 'The Human Factor' (1978) is set in the 1970s, but the writer drew his material primarily from his wartime memories of office life at Philby's section V headquarters in central London. After a quarter of a century of avoiding London as a setting in his fiction, he returned to it with great success, bringing vividly to life a part of town that he knew better than any other place in the world. In the novel the old red bricks of St James's Palace glow in the winter afternoon, the night porter scrubs the steps of the Albany (where Greene once kept a set of chambers), a young woman giggles into a telephone at Piccadilly Circus station, and prostitutes lurk in the doorways of Soho. Sure of himself and intimately knowledgeable about his subject and his primary setting, Greene produced a novel that ranks just below his masterpieces written before the cold war. It also enjoyed the greatest commercial success of any of his works, selling especially well in the United States, where it stayed on the 'New York Times' best-seller list for six months. 
After his relationship with Catherine Walston ended, Greene began an affair with another married woman who soon became his principal companion, and who remained as such until his death. In 1959 he met Yvonne Cloetta (1923-2001), the wife of a French businessman, and moved to Antibes in the 1960s partly because he wanted to be near her home in Juan les Pins. Though she never left her husband, Jacques, she was almost always at Greene's side when he was in Antibes, and would usually spend holidays with him on Capri. He had a comfortable life with Mme Cloetta, who made few demands on him, and he was reasonably content in Antibes, where the local people left him alone and the authorities treated him with respect. In 1969 the French government appointed him chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. In the early 1980s, however, his life in Antibes became difficult after he made angry charges of corruption against the mayor of Nice in a pamphlet he called 'J'Accuse: the Dark Side of Nice' (1982). Threats were made against his life, and he was successfully sued for libel in a Paris court by one of the men he charged with corruption. 
Greene finally left France in 1990 and spent the last year of his life at the village of Corseaux, outside Vevey, Switzerland, sharing an apartment with Mme Cloetta. Suffering from a mysterious blood disease, he sought treatment at Vevey's Hopital de la Providence, where he was given transfusions every fortnight. The new blood helped and, for a while, it seemed that he would recover. But late in March 1991 he became seriously ill and was rushed by ambulance to the Hopital de la Providence, where he died just before noon on 3 April 1991. His last words were 'Why must it take so long to come?' He was buried on 8 April in the small cemetery at Corseaux. 
In most studies of twentieth-century British fiction Greene's considerable body of work ranks high. In the period between the great depression and the beginning of the cold war the three indispensable novelists are Greene, George Orwell, and Evelyn Waugh. Of the three, Greene is the one whose career was the longest and most diverse. He left behind more than two dozen novels, several plays, many essays and short stories, three travel books, two volumes of autobiography, a history of British drama, and a literary biography of the Restoration poet Lord Rochester (1974), which he had begun in his twenties (Rochester's rebelliousness, passionate nature, and ambiguous relationship with sin appealed to Greene, but publishers had found the sexual content too explicit in the 1930s). He wrote the screenplay for one of the most highly regarded British films of the twentieth century -- 'The Third Man' -- and since his death his fictional works have continued to attract film-makers. All his major novels have been filmed -- 'The End of the Affair' twice (1955, 2000) -- and 'Travels with my Aunt' (1969) has been adapted for both the screen and the stage. 
Greene had a rare ability to capture the confusion and terror of the twentieth century. His sharp narrative voice misses nothing. In arresting detail it reveals the cracks waiting to open up, the towers beginning to lean. The monstrous Pinkie of 'Brighton Rock' forever slouches towards the bright lights of the resort town with nothing but destruction in mind. The charmingly ruthless Harry Lime perpetually prowls the ruined streets and labyrinthine sewers of post-war Vienna like a refugee from hell. Both Pinkie and Harry are iconic figures of the twentieth century whose hearts of darkness reflect the worst fears of the age. In his talent for plumbing the depths of that darkness, Greene stands without rival among the writers of his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 40461


Grein, Jacob Thomas (1862-1935), drama critic and impresario, was born on 11 October 1862 in Amsterdam, the elder son of Jacob Herman Grein ('fl'. 1840-1888), merchant, and his wife, Frances (died 1920), daughter of Dr Thomas Davids of Amsterdam and his wife, Louisa. 
Educated in Dutch and German schools, and a Bremen commercial college, Grein then worked in business for two uncles. By 1882 he was drama critic for Amsterdam's leading newspaper, 'Algemeen Handelsblad'. When Grein moved to London in 1885 he remained in commerce but continued writing for continental journals. Subsequently he was drama critic for 'Life' (1888-91), the 'Sunday Special' (1897-1918), and 'Ladies Field' (1911-14). His final assignment was with the 'Illustrated London News' (1920-35), where he wrote alongside his wife, Alice Augusta Greeven 
(pseudonym Michael Orme; 1874-1944)
, whom he had married on 14 July 1904. His assessments of some of the 12,000 plays he claimed to have witnessed were published in 'Dramatic Criticism' (5 vols., 1898-1903). 
Grein's major achievement was establishing the Independent Theatre in London in 1891. Modelled after Andre Antoine's Theatre Libre, Grein adopted many of Antoine's principles but eschewed what he termed the immorality and slovenliness of Antoine's work. Grein endeavoured to stage plays of high literary and artistic value rejected by the commercial theatre or suppressed by the censor (whom the Independent Theatre circumvented by being a subscription society). Its first production was Ibsen's 'Ghosts' (1891), regarded as cutting-edge drama and already censored. More than 3000 people applied for tickets, and the production became a 'cause celebre': Ibsen was vilified by traditionalist critic Clement Scott, but defended by William Archer. The subsequent repertoire proved less radical and sensational although it included the 1892 production of 'Widower's Houses', the first of Shaw's plays to be performed. Since there were only 175 regular subscribers Grein subsidized the organization until it became a limited company in 1895 (the year of his naturalization). The Independent Theatre ceased operations in 1897. Grein was involved with similar ventures, such as the Stage Society (1899 onwards), the London German Theatre (1901-7), the French Players (1917), and the People's Theatre (1923). He began the People's National Theatre (1930) with actress Nancy Price, but her domineering personality and Grein's ill health forced him to withdraw within a year. He died of a heart attack at his London home, 4 Cambridge Place, Victoria Road, on 22 June 1935. 
Rather short and stocky, with a round, moustached face, Grein was genial and incurably enthusiastic. As a critic he was cosmopolitan but undiscriminating; he lacked the trenchant, scintillating style of Bernard Shaw or Max Beerbohm. However, Grein's dedicated organizational abilities nurtured serious drama and he planted the seeds of the alternative theatre movement, an achievement recognized by numerous honours. 


@@@@@


doc= 40463


Hurry, Leslie George (1909-1978), painter and theatre designer, was born on 10 February 1909 at 53 High Street, St John's Wood, London, the third and last child of Alfred George Hurry ('c'.1880-1951/2), funeral director, and his wife, Edith Louise Perry, 'nee' Butcher ('c'.1880-1954). Sickly and perhaps unwanted, he was largely brought up by his elder sister. He remained devoted to her. At Haberdashers' Aske School (1920-25) he knew he had to paint, and with his sister's help resisted pleas to join the family's undertaking business. He went to St John's Wood Art School (1925-7), then won a five-year scholarship to the Royal Academy Schools, but left after his third year (1927-31). A small allowance let him continue painting, including landscape murals for public houses. Between 1934 and 1936 he painted further watercolour landscapes in Britain and Ireland, which were exhibited in London and praised by Herbert Read ('The Listener', 31 March 1937). Commissions for more landscapes followed, but Hurry became depressed, feeling that his art lacked 'a rhythmic organisation of colour from the tensions between himself' and his subjects (Lindsay, 9). He fled to Thaxted, Essex, and sought ways to depict the workings of his mind within his increasingly abstract pictures. Many he destroyed. There followed moves to Brittany and then Paris, but illness forced him home. When war was declared in 1939, Hurry's poor health meant that he was not recruited; however, a flood of surreal paintings appeared. Waste, destruction, and the plight of humanity troubled him deeply, and even the portrait of 'Grace Sholto Douglas' (1940; exh. Royal Festival Hall, 1990; Tate collection) shows the dying patroness, clad in crimson and with hands so like Hurry's own, looking away from strange ritual figures. 
In 1941 Hurry had two London exhibitions; here dancer-choreographer Robert Helpmann realized that Hurry's paintings matched his preparations for a dance-mime 'Hamlet' for Sadler's Wells. The action was within the prince's dying brain, with characters and events overlapping. The nervous Hurry knew nothing of theatre, but agreed to submit designs, provided that Helpmann destroyed them if they displeased him. When 'Hamlet' opened at the New Theatre in 1942, Hurry found himself 'greatly congratulated on his decor and costumes' ('Punch', 3 June 1942). The phantasmagoric set, in blood-red and crimson, evoked a 'decadent palace' (Beaumont, 8), dominated by a Janus-faced figure, Revenge; all characters wore asymmetrical Gothic-style costumes in contrasting colours. 'Hamlet' proved Hurry's intuitive grasp of stage design. In 1943 he designed Sadler's Wells' new 'Swan Lake', and was hailed for his 'quite outstanding imagination' ('The Spectator', 18 Sept 1943). Three further Sadler's Wells-Covent Garden 'Swan Lakes' followed: 1952, 1965, and 1971. From the adventurous surrealism of 1943 to the autumnal romanticism of 1971, Hurry's 'Swan Lakes' have influenced greatly fifty years' worth of ballet-goers. 
Over a period of thirty-five years Hurry designed for major companies more than sixty productions, though he always stressed he was not a designer but a painter. Until 1950 he did just one show a year and his paintings flourished; partly influenced by designs, they placed a growing emphasis on mankind. 'Bombers' and 'War' (both 1944; exh. The Minories, Colchester, 1987; IWM) show war's destructiveness; 'Atom Bomb' (1946; exh. Barbican, 1987; priv. coll.) his horror; and 'Liberation' (1945; V&A) owes much to his 'Hamlet' schemes (see also Shakespeare's play, 1944, Old Vic at New Theatre). Two emotive oil 'Self-Portraits' (1944; both exh. The Minories, Colchester, 1987; NPG and Tate collection) stress further Hamlet-like qualities. In October 1950 he joined a delegation of artists to visit Moscow, and later addressed the Society for Cultural Relations Between Peoples of the British Commonwealth and the USSR. Hurry was not a communist but was deeply egalitarian; this incident prevented him from entering the USA in 1955. It arose because the director Tyrone Guthrie staged Marlowe's 'Tamburlaine the Great' (at the Old Vic in 1951), where 'the golden glory of Hurry's decor will haunt the memory of all' ('Theatre World', November 1951). This production was remounted in 1955-6 for Toronto and New York; Hurry visited Canada but the United States banned him. By now he was designing full-time, including Wagner's 'Ring Cycle' (Covent Garden, 1954) which let him buy his Suffolk cottage, fourteen Old Vic and five Sadler's Wells productions, plus new works like the set for Graham Greene's 'The Living Room' (Wyndham's Theatre, 1953) and costumes for Lionel Bart's 'Maggie May' (Adelphi, 1964). 
In 1960 Hurry became a Royal Shakespeare Company associate designer; he contributed, among others, his 'sandpit 'Troilus and Cressida'' (1960-62) ('The Times', 24 Nov 1978). Urged to become more sculptural, he achieved this, particularly after 1964, by designing six productions for the thrust stage of Canada's Stratford Festival, Ontario. Included were Sheridan's witty 'School for Scandal' (1970-71) and a magnificent 'Pericles' (1973-4). His final Canadian commission was 'Caesar and Cleopatra' (Shaw festival, Niagara on the Lake, Ontario, 1975). British design had ended earlier with Humphrey Searle's opera, 'Hamlet' (Covent Garden, 1969). Its rich, vivid, but fractured sets and costumes matched the paintings which again preoccupied Hurry. Still he tried to reflect, in their detailed sensibility, both the visible and psychological worlds he perpetually experienced. Landscape again reasserts itself, but the pictures now have a breathing openness, whether expressing regret in the surreal 'Egypt/Israel War, October 6-22' (1973; exh. The Minories, Colchester, 1987; priv. coll.) or delight in the more representational Suffolk scenes (1968-78). When he died, his cottage was crammed with unseen works. 
Tall, gaunt, and always breathless, Hurry's moods were volatile. In the theatre he could be very funny, very ironic, but always praised those who interpreted his designs. When painting, he still lacked confidence. Unmarried, he really trusted only a few women friends and his sister. He died on 20 November 1978 at the London Chest Hospital and was cremated a week later at Golders Green. His sister's son took his ashes home to Suffolk. In life, Hurry had paintings and designs exhibited throughout Britain and in Ontario, Canada; posthumously, major retrospectives have occurred. His paintings can be found in many British galleries, and his designs are well represented in London's Theatre Museum, Stratford upon Avon's Shakespeare Birthplace Trust, and the Metropolitan Library's art department in Toronto. 


@@@@@


doc= 40469


Leighton, Margaret (1922-1976), actress, was born on 26 February 1922 at Barnt Green, Worcestershire, the elder of two daughters in a family of three children of Augustus George Leighton, businessman in the cotton trade, and his wife, Doris Isabel Evans. She was educated at the Church of England College, Edgbaston, Birmingham, and began work as an assistant deputy stage manager at Barry Jackson's Birmingham Repertory Theatre, making her first appearance on stage in 1938, aged sixteen, as a cockney girl in 'Laugh With Me'. 
For the next few years Leighton played innumerable parts with Basil Langton's Travelling Repertory Theatre, rejoining Barry Jackson in December 1942. Leighton was something of a protegee of Jackson and his 'adjutant', the South African-born director H. K. Ayliff. Her contemporary Paul Scofield commented that 'hers was a formidable combination of talent and beauty... she assimilated from H. K. a kind of female version of his towering qualities and his authority' (O'Connor, 147). 
In 1944 Laurence Olivier, Ralph Richardson, and John Burrell came to see her perform and asked her to join their newly formed Old Vic company. For $17 a week she made her London debut as the Troll King's Daughter in Ibsen's 'Peer Gynt'. She remained with this historic company for three years, playing other parts including Yelena in Chekhov's 'Uncle Vanya', Regan to Olivier's Lear, Roxane to Richardson's Cyrano, and the Queen to Alec Guinness's Richard II. 
On 16 August 1947 Leighton married Max Reinhardt (1915-2002), the publisher, living in some style in Albany, Piccadilly, and in a country house near Guildford. A year later she entered films, appearing as Flora MacDonald in 'Bonnie Prince Charlie' for Alexander Korda's London films, and as the daughter in 'The Winslow Boy' by Terence Rattigan with Robert Donat. Under contract to Korda, she was in great demand on both stage and screen, although she never perhaps achieved the success in films that might have been expected. She was divorced from Reinhardt in 1955. 
In the theatre Leighton continued to thrive, playing a 'deeply touching' Celia in T. S. Eliot's 'The Cocktail Party' (1950), and Masha in an all-star 'Three Sisters' by Chekhov (1951) which reunited her with Ralph Richardson. They appeared together at Stratford upon Avon the following year as the Macbeths and as Prospero and Ariel. It was thought that Richardson had fallen in love with her during the Old Vic season, but Leighton was also playing a delightful Rosalind (although Kenneth Tynan found her 'rather like a popular head girl') opposite Laurence Harvey (1928-1973), and was falling in love herself. Born Hirsch Moses Skikne in Lithuania, Harvey was making a name for himself in films. They married, on a ship moored off Gibraltar, in 1957; passionate and tempestuous, they were very much the celebrity couple, playing their private lives in public. 
Leighton was enjoying huge and glamorous success in theatres on both sides of the Atlantic. At the Haymarket in 1953 she played Orinthia in G. B. Shaw's 'The Apple Cart', starring with Noel Coward. They also made some sparkling recordings together of his plays and poetry, and he considered her to be a peerless interpreter of his work. In 1954 she began a long run (nearly four years in London and New York) as Anne Shankland and Sybil Railton-Bell in the double bill of Terence Rattigan's 'Separate Tables', co-starring with Eric Portman and winning a Tony award as best actress. In 'Variations on a Theme' (1958) Rattigan provided her with a role whose inspiration lay in Leighton's marriage to Harvey. The play was not a success. 
Leighton was a radiant Beatrice to Sir John Gielgud's Benedick in New York (1959), and then scored another US triumph as Hannah Jelkes in Tennessee Williams's 'The Night of the Iguana' (1962), playing with Bette Davis and winning a second Tony award. Her marriage to Harvey now over, she at last found happiness and stability with the actor Michael Wilding (1912-1979), the son of Henry Wilding and his wife, Ethel Thompson. They were married in 1964; it was Wilding's fourth marriage -- his second wife had been Elizabeth Taylor with whom he had two sons. 
Apart from an acclaimed Cleopatra at Chichester in 1969, for which she was the Variety Club's best actress, Leighton's later stage performances did not really match the achievements of earlier years. She had continued to work extensively in both film and television. On film she appeared in John Ford's 'Seven Women' (1966) and was querulous and dotty in 'The Madwoman of Chaillot' (1969) and chilling as the mother in 'The Go-Between' (1970), for which she was Oscar nominated and won the British equivalent. Leighton had made her first appearance on television in 1955 in 'A Month in the Country' by Turgenev; later appearances included 'Gaslight' (1960), 'The Vortex' (1968), and Gertrude to the Hamlet of Richard Chamberlain -- television's Dr Kildare -- in 1970, for which she won an Emmy. 
Leighton made her last appearance on stage in 1975, in an adaptation of Ivy Compton-Burnett's 'A Family and a Fortune' with her friend Alec Guinness, acting her role in a wheelchair. She had in fact been ill for some years with multiple sclerosis, the crippling effects of which she bore with great bravery. Always a wildly social figure (Coward and Rattigan both adored her, she adorned their arms at many a function, and Rattigan's house in Brighton included a permanent bedroom for Leighton), she lived with Wilding in a cottage near Chichester known locally as Vodka Villa. Tall, sometimes painfully thin, with sorrowful blue eyes, she had beauty, grace, intelligence, wit, and 'cheerful vulgarity' (Stephens, 122). The writer Enid Bagnold spoke of her as 'an extraordinary and shining woman, made of moonshine and talent and deep self-distrust, astonished at success' ('The Times', 14 Jan 1976). Appointed CBE in 1974, she died on 13 January 1976 in Chichester. 


@@@@@


doc= 40471


Lohr, Marie Kaye Wouldes (1890-1975), actress, was born on 28 July 1890 in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, the daughter of Lewis J. Lohr, treasurer of the opera house, Melbourne, and his English wife, Kate Bishop (1848-1923), who had acted on the London stage for twenty years and had been a member of the original cast of 'Our Boys' at the Vaudeville Theatre in 1875: she was the sister of Alfred Bishop (1848-1928), the actor-manager. Marie Lohr first appeared on stage at the age of four in 'The World Against her' in Sydney, and after moving to England made her London debut in 1901 at the Garrick Theatre in 'Shockheaded Peter', a children's play by Philip Carr and Nigel Playfair, and 'The Man who Stole the Castle'. She first went on tour with her godparents, the actors William and Madge Kendal, in 1902, and continued to tour with the Kendals until 1907. 
After the Kendals retired in 1908 Lohr embarked on a successful acting career, playing Mrs Reginald Bridgenorth in the original production of G. B. Shaw's 'Getting Married' at the Haymarket Theatre in 1908. She was closely associated with Herbert Beerbohm Tree at His Majesty's Theatre, playing the part of Margaret in 'Faust' in 1908, and Lydia in a revival of Shaw's 'The Admirable Bashville' in 1909. Also in 1909 she was Lady Teazle to Tree's Sir Peter Teazle in R. B. Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal' and Ophelia to his Hamlet. W. Somerset Maugham wrote the part of a country-bred parlourmaid for her in 'Smith' (1909), and in 1911 she appeared with Sir John Hare (1844-1921) in 'The Marionettes' by Gladys Unger, and 'Better not Enquire'. She married Anthony Leyland Val (1888-1942), son of Val Prinsep RA, in 1911: they had one daughter. She continued to act leading roles for several West End managers, including Gerald Du Maurier and Charles Frohman, until January 1918, when in partnership with her husband she took on the management of the Globe Theatre in Shaftesbury Avenue (opened as the Hicks Theatre in 1906 and renamed the Globe in 1909). They opened in 1918 with Somerset Maugham's 'Love in a Cottage', and she went on to appear in several successful productions at the Globe, including 'Nurse Benson' by R. C. Carton and J. H. McCarthy (1918), 'The Voice from the Minaret' by R. S. Hichens (1919), and 'A Marriage of Convenience' by Sydney Grundy (1920). After her New York debut in 1922 as Lady Caryll in 'The Voice from the Minaret' she returned to the Globe to appear in successful productions of 'The Return' and Alfred Sutro's 'The Laughing Lady' in the autumn of 1922. Her final role at the Globe was as the Hon. Margot Tatham in Frederick Lonsdales's 'Aren't we All?' in 1923. After this she retired from active management of the theatre and was replaced as leading lady by Margaret Bannerman, who became Anthony Prinsep's second wife after he and Marie Lohr were divorced in 1928, when Prinsep also gave up the management of the Globe. Lohr continued to pursue a successful career as a light comedy actress. At Christmas 1927 she made the first of several appearances as Mrs Darling in J. M. Barrie's 'Peter Pan', and her successes in the 1930s included roles in Somerset Maugham's 'The Breadwinner' (1930), Dodie Smith's 'Call it a Day' (1935), Esther McCracken's 'Quiet Wedding' (1938), and Lynne Dexter's 'Other People's Houses' (1941). She played in several musicals, including 'Casanova' (1932), and Ivor Novello's 'Crest of the Wave' (1937). 
Lohr was also a popular film actress, first appearing in the film version of 'Aren't we All?' in 1932. Two of her best performances were in films of plays by G. B. Shaw, as Mrs Higgins in 'Pygmalion' (1938), and as Lady Britomart in 'Major Barbara' (1941), and in 1942 she was in the cast of the wartime thriller 'Went the Day Well?' After several years' absence from the stage, she returned in 1947 in 'Caste' by T. W. Robertson at the Duke of York's Theatre, and she continued to act in the West End for the next twenty years. She had parts in Terence Rattigan's 'A Harlequinade' (1948), John Whiting's 'A Penny for a Song' (1951), William Douglas-Home's 'The Manor of Northstead' (1954), and Noel Coward's 'Waiting in the Wings' (1960). She also continued to appear in musicals, including 'Jubilee Girl', which opened in Bristol in 1956, although it was so poorly received that she left the cast before its London opening. She took the part of Lady Bracknell in 'Half in Earnest' (1958), a musical based on Oscar Wilde's 'The Importance of being Earnest', performed to inaugurate the new Belgrade Theatre in Coventry, and she was in John Osborne's 'The World of Paul Slickey' (1959), which was booed on the opening night, and lasted only six weeks in the West End. She made her last stage appearance in 1966 as Mrs Whitefield in a revival of Shaw's 'Man and Superman'. She died on 21 January 1975 at her home in Brighton, 24 Harrington Road, and was buried in the Brompton cemetery, West London, on 30 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 40474


Marshall, (James) Norman Hamilton (1901-1980), theatre director, was born at Rawalpindi, India, on 16 November 1901, the second son of Lieutenant-Colonel Daniel Grove Marshall of the Indian Medical Service and his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Mackie). He was educated at Edinburgh Academy and at Worcester College, Oxford, where he gained a second in English in 1925. After a false start as a journalist in London and a brief spell as an actor in a touring company, he found his real -- and lifelong -- niche when appointed 'stage director' ('stage manager' in later terminology) by Terence Gray at the Cambridge Festival Theatre in 1926. After less than a year he was promoted one of the resident directors of the theatre, his first production there being C. K. Munro's 'The Rumour' in 1927. In the next six years the Festival Theatre gave Marshall, in his late twenties, play-producing opportunities that were then unique. A selection of the plays produced there illustrates the kind of theatre that Marshall and the brave, celebrated but short-lived Cambridge Festival Theatre were excited about: 'The Insect Play' (Capek), 'Beggar on Horseback' (Kaufman and Connelly), 'The Knight of the Burning Pestle' (Beaumont), 'The Emperor Jones' (O'Neill), 'The Shoemaker's Holiday' (Dekker). They were different, both from each other and -- especially when put together in a single programme at one theatre -- from the great mass of plays produced at other theatres at the time, and established Marshall as a pioneer of non-commercial theatre. 
Marshall's first London production was in June 1928, a single Sunday-evening performance for the Stage Society, the play being Franz Werfel's 'Paul among the Jews'. In his book 'The Other Theatre' (1947), Marshall himself says: 'The actual performance went off without mishap but as a production it did not make much impression on any of the critics except St. John Ervine, who in 'The Observer' advised me to abandon forthwith all hopes I might have of ever becoming a producer [director]. He helpfully suggested the profession of a nonconformist minister as more suitable.' Fortunately, the alternative profession was never needed because from 1932 onwards he was continuously in demand as a director of plays in London, New York, and elsewhere (including Israel and South Africa). Especially notable is his work as the artistic director at the Gate Theatre, London, throughout the 1930s where, among many other things, he introduced London audiences to the plays of Jean-Jacques Bernard (for example, 'Martine', 'The Unquiet Spirit', 'The Springtime of Others'). 
From 1940 to 1942 Marshall served in the army. In December 1942 he was discharged from the fighting forces and formed his own theatre company, in association with the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts (the forerunner of the Arts Council of Great Britain). The company toured extensively in England for the rest of the war. From 1943 to 1949 he directed no less than fifteen London productions, following these with a production of 'Hamlet' which toured the British, French, and American zones of occupied Germany. In 1950 he directed 'Twelfth Night' at the Florence festival and in 1952 Jonson's 'Volpone' at the Cameri Theatre in Israel. His long string of London productions continued until 1972. Some of these, so far as choice of play is concerned, show a distinct decline of his formerly artistically adventurous spirit; he was, in many cases, content to ride the easy waves of current commercial success. 
Norman Marshall wrote two highly regarded books: 'The Other Theatre' (1947) and 'The Producer and the Play' (1957). He also published an edition of Congreve's plays (1959). He was the head of drama for Associated Rediffusion Ltd from 1955 to 1959, chairman of the British Council's drama committee (1961-8), chairman of the British Theatre Association (1961-4), and joint chairman, with Sir Laurence Olivier, of the National Theatre building committee. He served for a number of years as one of the governors of the Old Vic and was Shute lecturer on drama at the University of Liverpool, for the academic year 1953-4. 
Marshall was enormously sensitive to what he saw as a developing danger in British theatre. Particularly in the latter part of his career he often referred to it both in his lectures and in private conversation, and he included a trenchant reference to it in the 1975 edition of 'The Producer and the Play': 'Seventeen years ago I finished this book by declaring my belief in the Director's Theatre as the healthiest form of theatre. Now I have my doubts. It is all too possible, as John Barbour [Barber] warned in an article in the 'Daily Telegraph', that we may be approaching the days when directors are richer, cleverer, more famous and more in demand than authors -- or indeed actors. 'I find it', says Barbour, 'a disturbing thought'. So do I. (p. 344)' There were no distractions from his continuous, incessant theatre work, and no digressions; scarcely any recreations or 'hobbies'. Over the luncheon table or the dinner table he was silent until the theatre was mentioned. Instantly he would become quietly animated, illustrating his often-challenging views with a wealth of remembered incidents and instances. 'Go to the theatre all the time', he would say: 'Even if some of the plays are awful, still go: it's the only way to learn. Don't just 'talk' about it. Go to the theatre.' Although invariably the most knowledgeable person present, he presented that vast range of learning and experience with charm, almost with diffidence. On one occasion he turned to his nearest neighbour at table and said 'Do just remind me -- how does 'The Man with a Load of Mischief' end?' This was in 1978: the play in question (written by Ashley Dukes) was last played in London in 1924 and the rest of the luncheon party had either long forgotten it or had never even heard of it. 
Marshall was appointed CBE in the birthday honours list of 1975. He never married. He died at St Stephen's Hospital, Chelsea, after a brief illness, on 7 November 1980. 


@@@@@


doc= 40476


Mercer, David Stuart (1928-1980), playwright and scriptwriter, was born on 27 June 1928 at the Maternity Hospital, Blenheim Road, Wakefield, amid the coalfields of west Yorkshire, the younger son of Edward Mercer, a railway engine driver, and his wife, Helen Elizabeth, 'nee' Steadman, who had been 'in service' before the marriage. Both of David Mercer's grandfathers were miners. Raised in a time of considerable hardship, he came from a strict and respectable upper-working-class family. His parents, who, when he was young, had left Methodism for low-church Anglicanism, were ambitious for him and his brother, Reuben; the family dictum, David recalled later, was 'do owt as long as tha doesn't get th'hands mucky' ('Theatre Quarterly'). A childhood illness incarcerated him in plaster for a time, giving him opportunity to read, yet he failed to follow his brother to grammar school. 
After leaving elementary school at fourteen, Mercer found work as a pathology laboratory assistant at the local hospital. Three years later, in what he subsequently described as an act of misguided patriotism, he joined the Royal Navy, and was employed there in a pathology lab. He was shore based for eighteen months, then posted to HMS 'Vanguard'. Apart from treating his marine colleagues for venereal disease, Mercer spent most of his time reading escapist fiction, and he discovered then that he longed for the education he had missed. He won his release in 1948 and used his former serviceman's grant to attend Wakefield Technical College. He matriculated in a year and went on to study chemistry at University College, Durham, but he soon switched to King's College, Newcastle upon Tyne (then affiliated with the University of Durham), to study fine art; he gained a 2:2 BA honours degree in 1953. During his time at college, Mercer devoured books on poetry, politics, philosophy, history, and psychiatry. 
On 5 June 1953, just after graduation, Mercer married his first wife, Jitka Sigmund ('b'. 1926/7), a refugee from Olomouc, Czechoslovakia, who had been studying economics at King's. He travelled to Paris to become a painter, and lived there with his wife among other emigres from communist regimes. On realizing that he was not cut out to be a painter, he burnt all his canvasses and turned to writing novels, all of which remained unpublished. Back in England after two years, he settled in London, earning a subsistence living as a supply teacher. In 1957 he started a relationship with Dilys Johnson, a graduate civil servant in the Ministry of Housing; his marriage collapsed, he had a nervous breakdown, and he was accepted at the pioneering Tavistock Clinic as 'a suitable case for treatment'. 
It was while undergoing analysis in 1959 that Mercer started writing his first play. He had begun to visualize ideas in the form of images and speeches, and when he went to see Shelagh Delaney's 'A Taste of Honey' he thought he could do better. The result was 'A Death in the Family', a script that drew heavily on his own background. By the good luck of an accidentally circuitous route, the script landed on the desk of the formidable play agent Margaret (Peggy) Ramsay. Within twelve months Mercer had received commissions to write plays for radio and television, and in the following year, 1961, he gave up teaching and became a full-time playwright instead. The breakthrough, however, did not come in the theatre, as Mercer and Ramsay had intended, but in television, the dramatic output of which was barely taken seriously at the time. Mercer changed that. He became the pathfinder and opened the way for writers like Dennis Potter, creating new benchmarks for the medium through his unconventional and compelling narrative technique, his urgent treatment of ideas, and the sharpness of the interplay between the political and the personal. 
Mercer's first television play was a revised version of 'A Death in the Family', retitled 'Where the Difference Begins'. It formed the opening part of the innovative trilogy entitled 'The Generations' (1961-3), a typically astringent portrait of waning ideals, set in the world of the anti-nuclear movement and the cold war. In some of his television plays, however, Mercer focused more upon the individual, as in 'A Suitable Case for Treatment' (1962) or 'In Two Minds' (1967), works in which he explored madness, as either the only strategy for, or the personal cost of, survival. 
Mercer's career as a playwright took off in 1965 with 'The Governor's Lady', performed by the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC), which was to stage six of his plays, and, in the West End, with 'Ride a Cock Horse', in which Peter O'Toole played a successful working-class writer whose sense of self is undermined by his anxiety at the way he treats the three important women in his life. Friends maintain that the first of these women was modelled on Dilys Johnson, whom Mercer had married on 3 December 1960. She had seen him through the breakdown, but found it hard to share him as his circle widened and he became a striking figure on the literary scene. His desire for abundance -- in money, drink, and women -- did not help, and the second marriage disintegrated too. A long string of relationships, including one with novelist Penelope Mortimer (1918-1999) and another with a German actress, Maria Machado, with whom he had a daughter, ended only with his third and last marriage, on 5 November 1974, to Israeli speech therapist Dafna Hemdi ('b'. 1950). Their daughter, Rebecca, was born the following year. Mercer spent much of his later life in Israel. He was the inspiration behind the character of Malcolm Sloman in Trevor Griffith's play 'The Party' (1973), in which the drunken working-class writer punctures the political pretensions of the assembled revolutionary sloganizers. 
In all Mercer had two plays broadcast on radio, twenty-six plays broadcast on television, sixteen stage plays produced, and five screenplays made into films. He won three Writers' Guild awards for television scripts ('A Suitable Case for Treatment', 1962; 'In Two Minds', 1967; 'Let's Murder Vivaldi', 1968), the 1965 'Evening Standard' award for most promising dramatist ('Ride a Cock Horse'), the 1966 BAFTA award for best screenplay ('Morgan'), the French Film Academy Cesar award for 'Providence' (1977), and an Emmy award in 1980 for the television play 'A Rod of Iron'. The BBC wiped much of his television work (as was its custom then), but texts were published. As for his stage writing, Mercer was always frustrated by lack of recognition, despite the success of 'After Haggerty' (1970), the first new play from the RSC to transfer to the West End. 
An internationalist and anti-Stalinist Marxist who became disillusioned with the shortcomings of all his favourite causes, Mercer never stinted in asking the awkward questions. A huge bear of a man, topped by a full mop of hair and fronted by a cropped moustache and beard, he was, like his work, full of volatile contradictions: vulnerable and violent, loving and loathing. He excoriated his masculinity but could not escape it; he raged at injustice worldwide but felt powerless before the enormity of it -- and so he wrote his plays, which bear the stamp of his passion and his pain. David Stuart Mercer died of a heart attack on 8 August 1980 in Haifa, Israel, where he was buried, many miles from Wakefield. 


@@@@@


doc= 40477


Morley, Robert Adolph Wilton (1908-1992), actor and playwright, was born on 26 May 1908 in Semley, Wiltshire, the son of Major Robert Wilton Morley, retired, of the 4th dragoon guards and his wife, Gertrude Emily Fass. He was educated at several preparatory schools -- his parents' lives being somewhat itinerant -- and at Wellington College (1921-4), which he detested. He was by nature an individualist, unathletic, and opposed to formal teaching. At Folkestone, aged thirteen, he saw Bernard Shaw's 'The Doctor's Dilemma' and was immediately determined to be an actor: his love of Shaw and hatred of public schools probably activated his lifelong socialism. 
After leaving Wellington and studying in Germany, France, and Italy, his father favouring a diplomatic career, Morley chose to study for the stage at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. His first professional theatre engagement was at the Hippodrome, Margate, on 28 May 1928 after which he spent several years touring and in repertory theatres. Working with the fading and forgetful Shakespearian actor Frank Benson, Morley learned some invaluable lessons: how to improvise, how not to believe in the sanctity of any text, the joy of being surrounded by eccentrics (S. Morley, 38). With another humorous heavyweight, Peter Bull, he essayed repertory at Perranporth, Cornwall. After almost deciding to give up the stage he was chosen to play Oscar Wilde at the Gate Theatre in London (September 1936). He made a considerable success in the role, displaying both wit and pathos. 
He had another flamboyant role as Alexandre Dumas in 'The Great Romancer' (May 1937) and was soon established as a leading actor, repeating his success as Oscar Wilde in New York (October 1938). On 23 February 1940 he married Joan North Buckmaster (1910-2005), the eldest child of the actress Dame Gladys Cooper and her first husband, Herbert John Buckmaster; they had two sons and a daughter. As the outrageous Sheridan Whiteside in 'The Man who Came to Dinner' (Savoy, 1941) he had a tremendous success; the play ran in London and on tour until 1943. In July 1945 he played the prince regent in 'The First Gentleman', which ran for over a year. After this came his greatest all-round success 'Edward, my Son' (1947) which he co-wrote with Noel Langley -- starring as a ruthless but amusing media mogul: it subsequently played in New York, Australia, and New Zealand (1948-1950). 
Morley then discovered a new comic writer suited to his talents: the Frenchman Andre Roussin, whose 'The Little Hut' (1950), adapted by Nancy Mitford, achieved another long run. In 1954 Morley himself adapted and starred in Roussin's 'Hippo Dancing' and in 1958 he repeated the formula with 'Hook, Line and Sinker'. Before this last he had appeared in the musical 'Fanny' (1956). Although unable to sing or dance he gave a performance of rare emotional depth. Later successes included Peter Ustinov's 'Halfway up the Tree' (1967), considerably rewritten by Morley, and 'How the Other Half Loves' (1970) by the young Alan Ayckbourn. The new school of playwright was not used to 'monstres sacres' with a cavalier attitude to the text, and when he told Ayckbourn 'I've left a trail of richer but sadder authors behind me' ('The Times', 4 June 1992), he was right on both counts. 'A Ghost on Tiptoe' (1974) did well enough but by then boulevard comedy was on its way out. Morley, despite his progressive views, was uneasy with contemporary drama and, when asked by Peter Hall to play Falstaff, declined, never having enjoyed Shakespeare. Life continued with some brilliant journalism, solo performances, and lucrative commercials: at length he found two more plays to match his talents. The first was 'Banana Ridge' (Savoy, 1976), an uproarious Ben Travers revival, the second Alan Bennett's 'The Old Country' (Australian tour, 1980). Morley played a Philbyesque spy in exile; his son, the critic Sheridan Morley (1941-2007), extolled 'a truly breathtaking performance' in this his father's last stage appearance (S. Morley, 208). 
Morley's film career was prolific almost to the end. Following his first New York appearance he went to Hollywood to play Louis XVI in 'Marie Antoinette' (1938). Back in England he was an outstanding Undershaft in 'Major Barbara' (1941). Always the lead in stage plays, in films he was content to play supporting parts, enlivening scores of routine pictures by his zestful personality. Among his best screen roles were the gross Almayer in 'Outcast of the Islands' (1951), Katharine Hepburn's brother in 'The African Queen' (1952), Gilbert in 'Gilbert and Sullivan' (1953), a comically evil mobster in 'Beat the Devil' (1953), a heart-rending if over-mature reprise of 'Oscar Wilde' (1960), a gentleman crook in 'Topkapi' (1965), and a fastidious critic in 'Theatre of Blood' (1973). 
Morley's own plays included 'Short Story' (1935) starring Marie Tempest, 'Goodness how Sad' (1937), written for the Perranporth company, and the domestic tragedy 'Edward, my Son'. None of them has been revived -- nor indeed have many of the plays in which he starred and which he cheerfully rewrote. The lack of his own presence in them leaves a void hard to fill. 
Robert Morley was unique. 'Your father always seemed to be having so much fun in the theatre' said a slightly puzzled Peggy Ashcroft (S. Morley, 86). That sentence encapsulates the secret of his success. Although his outsize form and features -- equally adept at expressing pompous petulance, astonishment, and hearty 'joie de vivre' -- are happily preserved on film, his true place was on the stage creating enormous fun for himself and his audiences: a heavyweight with a charmingly light voice and the lightest of comic touches. Like a hotelier, each night he catered for a different clientele. To suit it he would unabashedly readjust his performance, sometimes disconcerting his fellow players but never short-changing his public. On stage and off, the perfect entertainer, he was the last light comedian in the Edwardian Hawtrey and Du Maurier tradition. For all his television 'personality' chat-show appearances he was, like his predecessors, a thoroughly accomplished actor. 
In 1957 Morley was appointed CBE. In 1966 he wrote (with Sewell Stokes) 'Robert Morley, Responsible Gentleman', and he subsequently brought out a number of journalistic anthologies. For a time he was in management with Robin Fox. Morley's was a happy life: he was an enthusiastic gourmet, traveller, and gambler whose faults -- childlike egotism and obstinacy -- were far outweighed by his virtues: huge generosity, love of life, devotion to family and friends. He died, following a stroke, at Dunedin Hospital, Bath Road, Reading, on 3 June 1992: many of his friends commented that he would have been annoyed to have missed the Derby, which was run later that day. 


@@@@@


doc= 40478


Nesbitt, Cathleen (1888-1982), actress, was born on 24 November 1888 at 1 Liscard Grove, Liscard, Cheshire, the eldest of the five children of Thomas Nesbitt and his wife, Mary Catherine Parry. Thomas Nesbitt was a young naval lieutenant who subsequently became the captain of a tramp steamer, the 'County Antrim', owned by the County Shipping Line, of Belfast. At that point, when Cathleen was seven or eight years old, the Nesbitts moved to Belfast. 
Cathleen was educated at Victoria College, Belfast. The family's financial circumstances were very narrow and her schooldays were scarred by privation. Later this situation eased somewhat and the family moved once again, this time to London. About this time Cathleen spent a year at a school in Lisieux, France. The move to London had been prompted partly by her mother's desire to live there and partly by Cathleen's growing interest in the theatre. She had been bewitched by it ever since she had been taken, at the age of eight, to see Sarah Bernhardt in 'La dame aux camelias' at the Belfast theatre. Settled in London in 1907 she became a pupil of the actress Rosina Filippi, who in addition to playing regularly in the London theatres also gave lessons in acting to young aspiring professional performers. Cathleen Nesbitt proved an apt recruit; almost immediately after completing her training she made her first professional London appearance at the Royalty Theatre in 1910 in a play now long forgotten, 'The Master of Mrs. Chilvers'. When this closed she at once secured a place in W. B. Yeats's Irish Players, in Dublin, and with them went to New York, causing something of a sensation there for her playing of Molly Byrne (the part originally played five years before by Sara Allgood) in J. M. Synge's 'The Well of the Saints'. 
Back in London in 1912 Cathleen Nesbitt was cast as Perdita in Granville Barker's famous and innovative production of 'The Winter's Tale' at the Savoy Theatre; she had originally been cast as Mopsa -- one of the two comic servants -- but was promoted during the course of rehearsals to the much more important part. Several contemporary critics refer not only to the sense of freshness and innocence that she conveyed in this role but also to her extreme physical beauty, though she herself, in her autobiography, complains constantly of having been 'too fat' and describes her shape at that time as being roughly equivalent to that of a pillar box. Be that as it may it was her playing of Perdita that first attracted the attention of the poet Rupert Brooke, who was so smitten by her that he went back to see the play twice more, in spite of the fact that he had an irrational and rooted prejudice against women on the stage. 'I'd better state before going further', he said to her in a letter of 1913, 'that as a matter of fact I loathe women acting in public' (Jones, 372); and in a later letter he added 'I hope you'll be giving up this beastly stage business soon' (ibid., 394). But in spite of the wild infatuation that she (along with others, both men and women) felt for Brooke she was not about to give it up 'soon' -- or indeed ever: she played her last part in 1980, at the age of ninety-two. 
There can be little doubt that Cathleen Nesbitt was deeply and genuinely in love with Brooke, as -- in his way -- he was with her. During 1912 and 1913 they saw a great deal of each other. But her early years of hazard and penury had given her a gritty personality and a staunchly realistic outlook on life: she was not easily fooled. In spite of the perfervid tone of the sonnets and poems that Brooke addressed to her ('Cathleen! Loveliest creature! Nymph divine! / Unhoped for, unapproachable, yet mine!') she measured him shrewdly. Long after his death she recalled: 'Like all artists who have a neurotic strain he would always have needed another woman... I felt if I were married to him I would probably suffer a great deal, because I thought there was no chance of his ever being a one woman man. (Jones, 367)' So she continued with her career, play after play. And, from 1922 onward, film after film -- thirty-seven of them between 1922 and 1975 -- and dozens of television plays.In 1920 Cathleen Nesbitt was invited by Charles Morgan, at that time president of the Oxford University Dramatic Society, to play Cleopatra in the Shakespeare 'Antony and Cleopatra'. Cecil Ramage, president of the Oxford Union, was Antony. 'On the last night there was a farewell party and we danced together continually' (Nesbitt, 146). Sentiments from the play seem to have slopped over into off-stage life ('Let's have one other gaudy night'); at the end of the dance he proposed marriage to her and was accepted. They married -- unhappily as it turned out -- in 1921. They had two children: Mark, born in 1922, and Jennifer, born in 1925. 
Cathleen Nesbitt was equally at home in plays of fluff and frivolity and in sterner plays of greater consequence. Among the latter may be noted her roles in G. K. Chesterton's 'The Man who was Thursday' (New York, 1916), 'The Merchant of Venice' (London, 1919), John Webster's 'The Duchess of Malfi' (London, 1920), and Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd' (London, 1921). She also appeared in more modern plays -- as Jennifer Dubedat in Bernard Shaw's 'The Doctor's Dilemma' (London, 1923), in Flecker's 'Hassan' (London, 1923), and as Jessica in Granville Barker's 'The Madras House' (London, 1926). In later life she continued to appear on stage, with roles in two of T. S. Eliot's plays: 'The Cocktail Party' (Edinburgh, 1949) and 'The Family Reunion' (Guildford, 1964), in which she took the part of Amy. She also played in Enid Bagnold's 'The Chalk Garden' (on tour in the USA in 1957) and in a version of Henry James's 'The Aspern Papers' (Chichester, 1978). Among those confections of the lighter sort perhaps the most notable is her playing -- aged over ninety but looking about sixty -- of Mrs Higgins in 'My Fair Lady', on tour in America in 1980. Equally sought after in England and in the United States she crossed the Atlantic many times as offers of parts reached her sometimes in one country, sometimes in the other. 
It would be false to describe Cathleen Nesbitt as a great actress: she was never that. However, she was a steady, sturdy professional: meticulous, reliable, and infinitely capable. Her professional career was astonishingly continuous: in a profession notorious for its hazards and sudden vicissitudes she was never out of work for more than a month or so in a career spanning seventy years. In 1975 she published her autobiography, 'A Little Love and Good Company' (the title is from George Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem') -- a pleasant, chatty, sentimental, quite undistinguished piece of work containing a plethora of conventional commendatory adjectives of a very cliched kind and the names of many well-known actors and actresses of the twentieth century in both England and America. She was appointed CBE in 1977, and died in London on 2 August 1982. 


@@@@@


doc= 40479


Price, (Lillian) Nancy Bache (1880-1970), actress and author, was born on 3 February 1880 at Rockmount in the small village of Kinver on the Worcestershire/Staffordshire border, the daughter of William Henry Price and his wife, Sarah Julia Mannix. Her father was 'an aristocrat by birth and choice', a pillar of the local church community, but a remote parent. She had a stronger bond with her mother, who encouraged her artistic talents. Following the death of her elder sister, May, at the age of five from diphtheria, Nancy was brought up as an only child. She sketched, wrote diaries, and played the violin until her father, who was worried about her health and posture, stopped her from doing so, according to one of her several accounts. She attended the village school at the age of nine, before being sent away to a boarding-school, Malvern Wells, which she hated. 
Nancy Price had an independent streak in her character. One teacher called her 'not naughty but rather wild' (Price, 'Into an Hour Glass', 16). She liked to think of herself as a vagabond, as in the titles of her later books, such as 'Vagabond's Way' (1914) and 'The Heart of a Vagabond' (1955). She was thought by her parents to be a sickly child, but she liked riding and walking. Her childhood memories of the midlands landscape delighted her readers, among them Lord Dunsany, who described her tribute to the Lake District, 'Shadows on the Hills' (1935), as the 'book of my choice'. 
Nancy Price decided to become an actor at the age of fourteen, a choice of profession which her father deplored for moral and economic reasons. She joined F. R. Benson's company in her last term at school and made her non-speaking stage debut at the Theatre Royal, Birmingham, in September 1899. Benson staged the summer Shakespeare seasons at Stratford upon Avon, one of the best training grounds for young actors in the United Kingdom. He was also famous for his love of sport and Nancy Price suspected that she was chosen for her skills at golf, tennis, and hockey, as well for her acting. But she was talented enough to attract the attention of the actor-manager Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree, whose premieres at His Majesty's Theatre then provided the high points of London's theatre seasons. 
Tree cast Price as Calypso in Stephen Phillips's 'Ulysses' (February 1902), a four-hour epic, described in 'The Times' as 'a majestic enterprise' (3 Feb 1902). Samuel Coleridge-Taylor composed the incidental music and the sculptor Auguste Rodin designed the sets. Nancy Price was described as 'authentically Homeric', and also as 'the nymph with braided tresses', and her success led to further West End roles. A. W. Pinero wrote for her the part of Hilda Gunning, the shop-girl with airs above her station, in 'Letty' (1904), a forerunner of Bernard Shaw's Eliza Doolittle. Max Beerbohm concluded of her performance that 'every sentence rang phonographically true' ('The Times', 1 April 1970). She played several seasons with Tree's company and Sir Henry Irving wanted her to play Portia to his Shylock, but she had a prior engagement and turned him down. Nancy Price joined the Pioneer Players at the Kingsway Theatre in 1911 in a season which included 'feministic' plays. In 1913 she appeared as India in Sir Edward Elgar's 'Crown of India'. 
On 17 May 1907 Nancy Price married Charles Raymond Maude (1881/2-1943) at a register office; he was an actor who came from a family distinguished for its army and stage connections. His grandmother was Jenny Lind, the 'Swedish nightingale'. Their marriage lasted until his death in 1943 and they had two daughters, Joan and Elizabeth, who both became actresses. According to her memoirs it was not an easy relationship. She had many 'affairs of the heart' and complained that in art as well as life her husband was a perfectionist. He was a member of Harley Granville Barker's repertory company at the Duke of York's Theatre in 1910, a season distinguished for new-wave drama, including Granville Barker's 'The Madras House' and 'Waste'. But his acting career was short. In the First World War he applied for a commission and rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel; but he retired from the stage after the war and never acted again. 
During the war Nancy Price continued to act but also raised money for war charities, worked with the blind, and in one bizarre episode, joined a ship's crew off the east coast as a cook, which provided some vivid descriptions for her book, 'The Gull's Way' (1937). During the 1920s she was an established leading lady, if not of the first rank, playing in Sutton Vane's 'Outward Bound' (1924), Pirandello's 'Henry IV' (1925), and opposite Mrs Patrick Campbell in Ibsen's 'John Gabriel Borkman' (1928). She lectured on Shakespeare and illustrated her talks with extracts, and led a remarkably active social life in which (from her memoirs) she seems to have met almost every famous person in western Europe from Cork in Ireland (where she had relatives) to Rome, where she met Mussolini. She was committed to many of what were then good causes, among them anti-vivisection and state subsidies for the theatre. 'Even the half-starved Serbian peasant', she wrote in 1940, 'pays tribute to the upkeep of the theatre' (Price, 'Nettles and Docks', 33). 
The aim was to establish subsidized repertory companies along the continental lines. Shaw and Granville Barker campaigned for a national theatre, while Lilian Baylis at the Old Vic claimed that hers was the true national theatre. In 1930 Nancy Price joined forces with the playwright-manager J. T. Grein, to found the People's National Theatre, which produced eighty-two plays in various theatres over a period of twenty years. Grein, who died in 1935, soon left the company, but Price became its honorary director. Under her leadership the company presented a worthy repertory of history plays by such writers as Clifford Bax and John Drinkwater, poetic dramas including those of W. B. Yeats, and 'realist' plays in the style of Ibsen and Shaw. Her most popular role was as the grandmother, Adeline, in Mazo de la Roche's 'Whiteoaks' (1936), which ran for two years. 'Amazing!', wrote Shaw, 'There has been nothing like it in London since Irving captured it with 'The Bells'!' (Price, 'Into an Hour Glass', 183), which she took as a compliment. Her finer performances were held to be as Mrs Jones in Galsworthy's 'The Silver Box' (1931) and as Edith Cavell in 'Nurse Cavell' (1934). 
As Adeline, Nancy Price had an on-stage parrot, Boney, with whom she became very friendly. Her interest in all kinds of birds, mammals, and natural landscapes is a feature of all her books, which numbered over twenty. She was a founder of the Council of Justice to Animals. A talented amateur naturalist, she wrote with equal enthusiasm about the wildlife in London's parks as about the Sussex Downs. At first she disliked the cinema, but appeared in some non-starring film parts, and edited a theatre magazine called 'Pedlar's Pack'. In their day, Nancy Price's books were popular and widely read. Through them she scattered names in short but not very revealing anecdotes. She drove with Sir Malcolm Campbell and recalls the 'many delightful hours I spent with Elgar in his studio', without relating what happened in either car or studio. Her style evoked the world of P. G. Wodehouse. 
Nancy Price was indisputably what Wooster would have called 'a good egg'. In his foreword to 'Nettles and Docks' (1940) Norman Birkett described her as 'a fighter on the side of all things which are honourable and true and of good report amongst men'. She was made a CBE in 1950 for her services to the theatre and died on 31 March 1970 at 145 Rowlands Road, Worthing, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 40480


Seyler, Athene (1889-1990), actress, was born on 31 May 1889 at 18 Goulton Road, Hackney, London, the seventh and youngest child by ten years of Clarence Heinrici Seyler, secretary and financial adviser to a Greek millionaire, and his wife, Clara Thies, a baker's daughter. Both parents were of German extraction. Her father was a Hellenophile; he called all his daughters by Greek names. Athene was educated at Coombe Hill, a progressive co-educational school where the emphasis lay on tutorials not textbooks, and Bedford College, London, where she studied Restoration comedy, of which she was to become a peerless interpreter. 
From her first performance as a child, dancing a hornpipe at the Conway Hall and reducing the audience to helpless laughter when her 'draws fell down', Athene Seyler was determined on a stage career. Her father died when Athene was fifteen years old leaving wife and daughter in straitened circumstances, and although both parents had disapproved of her theatrical ambitions, Sir Henry Irving, a one-time neighbour, encouraged the young Athene (she had once fainted while watching his death scene in Tennyson's 'Becket'). With his support she applied to the Academy of Dramatic Art, auditioning for Arthur Wing Pinero, Sir Squire Bancroft, and the pioneering female director Lena Ashwell, who took her aside and told her she would never make an actress because of the way she looked. But Athene persevered, recited as Rosalind, and gained a scholarship. She made her debut at the academy as Charles the Wrestler in 'As You Like It' and graduated as the gold medallist in 1908. It was Ashwell who gave Seyler her first professional role as Pamela Grey in W. T. Coleby's 'The Truants' (1909) at the Kingsway Theatre. 
Between her debut and the end of the First World War, Athene Seyler appeared in almost thirty productions, in London and on tour, but it was not until 1920 at the Lyric, Hammersmith, that she began to attract attention: as Rosalind (her favourite role), and particularly in Sir Nigel Playfair's Restoration revivals, as Melantha in John Dryden's 'Marriage a la mode' and Mrs Frail in 'Love for Love' by William Congreve. Athene Seyler never stopped working, alternating between the classics and scores of forgotten light comedies, glorying in such wonderfully named characters as Mrs Bucket, Savina Grazia, Mrs Nelly Fell, and Lavinia Mildmay. Classical highlights included three Lady Fidgets in William Wycherley's 'The Country Wife' (1924, 1926, and 1934), Titania (1923) and Hermia (1924), another Melantha and Miss Prism back at the Lyric, Hammersmith (1930). She toured Egypt, South Africa, and Australia in the 1930s; played in a season at the St James (1932) as Emilia and Nerissa to Ernest Milton's Othello and Shylock; and in 1933 joined the Old Vic/Sadler's Wells Company as Maria, Mme Ranyevskaya, Lady Bracknell, Mrs Frail, and also as first Weird Sister in 'Macbeth'. 
In 1937 Athene Seyler shone as Mrs Candour in an all-star (Peggy Ashcroft, John Gielgud, Michael Redgrave, and Alec Guinness) 'School for Scandal' by R. B. Sheridan at the Queen's Theatre and in 1941 played another and much admired Ranyevskaya in Chekhov's 'The Cherry Orchard', both directed by Tyrone Guthrie; and was unusually in modern dress for Lillian Hellman's 'Watch on the Rhine' (1942) and as Veta Louise in 'Harvey' (1949) by Mary Chase. In the 1950s she played the Nurse at the Old Vic, and Mrs Malaprop. Her final stage appearance was in 1966, with her old friend Dame Sybil Thorndike as the sweetly murderous spinster sisters in 'Arsenic and Old Lace' by J. Kesselring. 
In a stage career of nearly sixty years Athene Seyler was recognized as one of the great technical experts on the playing of high comedy, relishing with instinctive wit the turn of a phrase or the eloquent manipulation of a fan. In 1943 she co-wrote a book, 'The Craft of Comedy', which took the form of an exchange of letters with the actor Stephen Haggard (1911-1943), who died on active service. They had acted together in the British premiere of G. B. Shaw's 'Candida' (1937) and in Haggard's own play 'Weep for the Spring' (1939). The book offered a marvellous series of reflections on the practice of playing comedy. Seyler wrote that 'Comedy is the sparkle on the water, not the depths beneath. But note the waters must run deep', and she developed a system for the getting of laughs: 'Have I been heard? Have I been truthful? Has the feed line been heard?' (Seyler and Haggard, 11). 
Athene Seyler made her (silent) film debut in 1921 as Rachel Wardle in 'The Adventures of Mr Pickwick', and managed to appear in over sixty films in a career dominated by the stage. She was invariably cast in comic cameos, as eccentric and imperious aunts or dowagers, and unsurprisingly in several more Dickensian adaptations -- as Misses La Creevy, Witherfield, and Pross in 'Nicholas Nickleby' (1947), in 'The Pickwick Papers' (1952), and in 'A Tale of Two Cities' (1958). In the 1950s and 1960s she made a few television appearances, in the classics and in 'The Avengers'. 
On 14 February 1914 Athene Seyler had married James Bury Sterndale-Bennett (1889/90-1941), a journalist, the grandson of Sir William Sterndale-Bennett, composer and entertainer. They had one daughter. In 1922 she met the actor Nicholas 'Beau' Hannen (1881-1972), the son of Sir Nicholas James Hannen and his wife, Jessie Woodhouse, and he was to be the love of her life. She changed her name by deed poll to Hannen in 1928, but they were not to marry until 1960, after the death of his first wife, who had refused a divorce. Although Seyler was appointed CBE in 1959, it was generally assumed that the DBE many thought rightfully hers was withheld on account of her unmarried partnership with Beau. 
In 1950 Athene Seyler was elected president of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, the first former pupil to hold that post, and in the same year became life president of the Theatrical Ladies Guild. She lived for some fifty years in the Coach House, Chiswick Mall, and would explain to passers-by the finer points of the boat race (and that she was not in fact Margaret Rutherford). She abandoned an autobiography because its leading character bored her but in her hundredth year she was still working, making mischievous appearances on television chat shows and a belated debut at the Royal National Theatre on her 101st birthday, vividly recalling G. B. Shaw and Sir Henry Irving, Ellen Terry, and Mrs Patrick Campbell. She died three months later on 12 September 1990 at the Coach House, 26 Upper Mall, Hammersmith, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 40481


Smith, Dorothy Gladys (1896-1990), playwright and writer, was born on 3 May 1896 at Stonycroft, Whitefield, in Lancashire, the only child of Ernest Walter Smith ('c'.1868-1898), a bank manager, and his wife, Ella (Nell) Furber (1874-1914). Her father died when Dodie was two, and her mother took her to live with her grandparents, three uncles, and two aunts at Kingston House, Old Trafford, Manchester. So Dodie enjoyed a charmed childhood at the centre of eight doting adults, who involved her in all their activities, an upbringing to which she later attributed her success as a playwright. The Furbers were dedicated to amusement and passionate about the theatre; they held music and recitation soirees at home, and the uncles acted in productions by the Atheneum, one of Manchester's sixty-four amateur dramatics societies. Here Dodie made her stage debut at eight, and fixed on becoming an actress. When her mother remarried in 1910 (her new husband was Alec Gerald Seton-Chisholm), Dodie accompanied them to London, where she attended St Paul's Girls' School. In 1912, at the age of sixteen, she successfully auditioned for the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, but her first year there was blighted by the death of her mother from cancer at forty. 
Despite Dodie's lack of acting talent or beauty (she was only 5 feet tall, with strong features and a heavy bosom; 'my looks had gone,' she always said, 'by the age of seven'), she managed to scrape a precarious existence for several years on the stage. 'I could always talk myself into a part,' she would say, 'and act myself out of it.' Living in a girls' hostel called the Three Arts Club in the Marylebone Road, London, she acted in army concert parties, end-of-pier farces, and touring productions. She took a job at the newly formed Everyman Theatre in Hampstead, London, and was seduced (with her enthusiastic co-operation) by its founder, Norman MacDermott. Eventually, at twenty-six, she decided that a proper job would be preferable to penury and went to work at Heals, the furniture emporium, running its art gallery. Here she embarked with determination upon an affair with the married chairman of the company, Ambrose Heal, who already had an established mistress, Prudence Maufe. Ambrose gave her the Underwood typewriter on which she wrote, in 1929, her first play, 'Autumn Crocus'. She had been to the Leipzig toy fair to buy goods for Heals, and while there dreamed up a plot about a spinster schoolmistress from Lancashire who falls in love with a married Tyrolean innkeeper. The play was bought by Basil Dean for $100. It made Dodie, who had been earning $4 a week, rich and famous overnight in 1931. 'Shopgirl writes play', proclaimed the billboards. 
After an apparently disastrous first night, 'Autumn Crocus', starring Fay Compton and Francis Lederer, ran for a year in the West End, and was later filmed. It was followed by a succession of light comedies: 'Service' (1932), 'Touch Wood' (1934, the first to be written under her own name instead of the pseudonym C. L. Anthony), 'Call it a Day' (1935), 'Bonnet over the Windmill' (1937), and 'Dear Octopus' (1938), which established Dodie Smith as the most consistently successful woman playwright of her time. She appeared to have a deft touch, knowing just what the 1930s West End audience wanted: well-crafted middlebrow comedies with a skein of sentiment. But with 'Dear Octopus', centred on a family reunion, and starring John Gielgud, Marie Tempest, and Leon Quartermaine, she achieved her biggest triumph. The play, catching the mood of the time exactly, ran for two years; and its moving 'grand toast' speech (originally delivered by Gielgud), a paean to the durability of the family, ensured its place in repertory for the next sixty years. 
But at the height of her fame, with her name in lights, Dodie went into exile. At Heals she had met her future husband, Alec Beesley (1903-1987), seven years her junior. Handsome, gentle, and artistic, he gave up his job (as advertising manager of Heals) to become Dodie's business manager and devoted helpmeet for the rest of her life. Beesley, the son of a survivor of the 'Titanic' (Lawrence Beesley, author of 'The Loss of the 'Titanic'', and later a consultant on the film 'A Night to Remember'), was a pacifist, so the couple decided to leave for the United States as the Second World War loomed. In January 1939 they left their cottage, The Barretts, at Finchingfield in Essex, in the care of the impresario Hugh (Binkie) Beaumont, and sailed for New York on the 'Queen Mary' with their pale grey Rolls-Royce and their adored Dalmatian, Pongo. The dog had been a thirty-eighth birthday gift from Alec to Dodie in 1934 when she had jestingly remarked that, since her Regent's Park flat was decorated in fashionable monochrome with white carpets and black curtains, 'All I need now is a Dalmatian.' Pongo was destined for immortality as the hero of 'The Hundred and One Dalmatians' after Dodie's friend Joyce Kennedy, the actress, remarked: 'He would make a nice fur coat,' thus unwittingly becoming the prototype for Cruella de Vil. 
Dodie and Alec married in Philadelphia in 1940, and spent the next thirteen years in rented houses mostly in Hollywood -- Dodie was in constant demand at the film studios, rewriting screenplays -- but sometimes in New England. When the war ended, their return home was delayed by her fear of opprobrium for abandoning England in wartime, and by the prospect of quarantining their three Dalmatians. Dodie wrote one new play for Broadway ('Lovers and Friends', 1942) but the principal features of her years in the United States were her journal writing (one million words, mostly agonizing over having left behind her devoted audience); the birth of fifteen puppies in 1942 to her two Californian Dalmatians, Buzz and Folly, an event later incorporated into 'The Hundred and One Dalmatians' (1956); and her close friendship with two fellow British writers in California, John van Druten and Christopher Isherwood. Dodie became one of the few people to whom Isherwood showed his work in progress. More importantly, she had written her first (and finest) novel, 'I Capture the Castle' (1949), a captivating story located in a medieval castle she had seen at Wingfield, Suffolk, in 1934, and written in the form of the diary of Cassandra Mortmain, aged seventeen, essentially based on the young Dodie. It was an instant success in the USA and in Britain, and its wit and charm, with its appeal to readers of all ages, has kept it in print ever since: it became a 'Virago Modern Classic' in 1996 and a Folio edition followed in 1997. 
Dodie and Alec returned to their Essex cottage in 1953. Having felt viscerally heartsick with nostalgia for England, Dodie could not have chosen a worse time to relaunch herself as a playwright, when the kitchen sink school of drama was shortly to erupt. She had two flops at the Aldwych: 'Letter from Paris' (1953; adapted from Henry James's 'The Reverberator') and her own adaptation of her novel 'I Capture the Castle' (1954), which closed in four weeks despite universally rapturous reviews for Virginia McKenna as Cassandra. In a spirit of defiance, Dodie Smith wrote a highly praised children's book, 'The Hundred and One Dalmatians', the long-term survival of which was ensured by Disney's subsequent film adaptations: the hugely successful animated feature, '101 Dalmatians' (1961), and the 1996 live film of the same title. In the 1960s two new plays ('Amateur Means Lover', and 'These People: These Books') failed to come into the West End; a further half-dozen plays were never produced at all. 'Dear Octopus' enjoyed a West End revival in 1968, with Jack Hulbert and Cicely Courtneidge as the golden wedding couple, on their own golden wedding anniversary. 
But Dodie never stopped writing. Always longing to revive her theatrical success, about which she reminisced indefatigably in her diaries, she consoled herself by writing five increasingly fanciful novels: 'The New Moon with the Old' (1963), 'The Town in Bloom' (1965), 'It Ends with Revelations' (1967), 'A Tale of Two Families' (1970), and 'The Girl from the Candle-Lit Bath' (1970). She also published two more children's books ('The Starlight Barking', 1967, and 'The Midnight Kittens', 1978), as well as four autobiographical volumes: 'Look Back with Love' (1974; about childhood), 'Look Back with Mixed Feelings' (1978; about her twenties), 'Look Back with Astonishment' (1979; about her success in the 1930s), and 'Look Back with Gratitude' (1985; about America.) Living a hermit-like existence, seeing few friends (among them the actress Gwen Ffrangcon-Davies, and the novelist Julian Barnes, who became her literary executor) Dodie remained alone at her cottage after the death of Alec in September 1987. She died at Finchingfield on 24 November 1990, and was cremated there, leaving an estate valued at $473,833, of which $2000 was willed to the care of Charley, her seventh and last Dalmatian. 


@@@@@


doc= 40482


Taylor, Cecil Philip (1929-1981), playwright, was born on 6 November 1929 at 10 Burnbank Terrace, Glasgow, the only son of Max Taylor ('b'. 20 March 1898), a commercial traveller, and Fay, 'nee' Leventhal ('b'. 1901). Both parents were Jewish and born in Russia. Max, who was born Max Girschovitz, became a naturalized British citizen in February 1920. Cecil Taylor left Queen's Park secondary school, Glasgow, in 1943 at the age of fourteen and had no other formal education. He began a succession of jobs, including electrician, television engineer, and record salesman, while writing stories and poems in his spare time. In 1954 he won a prize from the Jewish Congress for his play 'Mister David', which eventually received its premiere production at the Jewish State Theatre, Warsaw, thirteen years later. On 8 March 1956 C. P. Taylor, as he was known professionally, married his first wife, Irene Rebecca Diamond ('b'. 30 April 1931), with whom he had two children, Avram and Clare. In 1957 he left Glasgow for Northumberland, where he lived for the rest of his life. 
In 1962 Taylor's first professional production, 'Aa Went to Blaydon Races', was staged in Newcastle upon Tyne. He started his long association with the newly formed Traverse Theatre Club in Edinburgh in 1965 with 'Happy Days are Here Again', which played to packed houses. At this time Taylor met Elizabeth Anne Screen ('b'. 6 Dec 1945), with whom he lived from 1966 and had two children, David and Cathryn. His divorce from Irene was achieved in February 1973 and he married Liz on 9 April 1973. 
Meanwhile, Taylor had become, and was to remain until the end of his life, among the most prolific dramatists of his, or any other, generation. He battered out an extraordinary profusion of scripts for stage and television, and for amateur and professional performance, on a series of manual typewriters in a wooden shed in his garden. Since there is no precise audit of his lifetime's work, it is difficult to put a final figure on the number of plays he wrote. His conviction that playwrights should contribute usefully to the community in which they lived compelled him to write prolifically for youth theatres, especially the Northumberland Experimental Youth Theatre at Backworth Drama Centre, and for schools, including Northgate special school, near Morpeth, where he worked regularly with disabled children. At the same time Taylor was literary adviser to the Tyneside Theatre Company in Newcastle upon Tyne and the Liverpool Everyman Theatre. He was also a willing mentor to every aspiring playwright who sought his support and advice, and was a founding member of both the Scottish Society of Playwrights and the Northern Playwrights' Society. 
Taylor's small Northumberland homes, first at Capheaton and later in Longhorsley, were always full of children and animals (he was an enthusiastic naturalist) and marked by the sound of the constantly ringing telephone. In the relative peace of his garden shed he worked at white heat, knowing that he would edit or discard most of what he wrote. At a time before word processing, he would always reckon to produce at least ten drafts of every play. While producing scripts did not seem to be a problem to him, shaping and structuring what he wrote certainly was. He needed to work with actors and a director he could trust, and produced his performing drafts out of the experience of the rehearsal room. For this reason his working relationships with the Traverse Theatre in Edinburgh, the Live Theatre Company in Newcastle upon Tyne, and, towards the end of his life, with the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC), were especially productive. The eccentricity of his method was demonstrated while he was working on his two full-length Walter plays, 'Getting By' and 'Going Home' (Traverse, 1977), in which a dying Glaswegian music hall comedian reviews his complicated domestic and sexual relationships and his lifelong commitment to revolutionary socialism. The two plays were to be performed on consecutive evenings, and Taylor astounded the company after the first read-through by withdrawing the second play in its entirety, returning two days later with a new second script. His hyperactive working method, coupled with his inability to file his various drafts in any sort of order, continue to make the jobs of publisher and producer especially difficult. Typically, the success of 'Good' (RSC, 1981), which tells the story of how an apparently good man ends up running a Nazi extermination camp, owes a great deal to the work of the original director, Howard Davies, and to the RSC actors. 
At the outset of his career Taylor was convinced that his plays would inspire the working classes to demand social justice, taking to the streets if necessary. Experience caused him to scale down this headstrong ambition and one of the resultant dilemmas faced throughout his work is seen in the idealist's attempt to affect the course of history contrasted with his seeming inability to control his own private and personal life. In addition to 'Good', essential reading in Taylor's 'oeuvre' includes 'Allergy' (Traverse Theatre Club, 1966; published by Penguin, 1966), in which Jim, the editor of 'Socialist Reflection' (circulation 150 copies) erupts in a skin rash every time he seeks sex and political enlightenment from Barbara; 'Bread and Butter' (Traverse Theatre Club, 1966; published by Penguin, 1967), which traces the lives of two Scottish-Jewish couples from 1931 to 1965 and examines the way in which the great events of history affect their domestic relationships and political views; and 'Lies about Vietnam' (Traverse Theatre Club, 1969; published in 'Methuen Gay Plays', 2, 1985), in which two gay anti-Vietnam War activists are harassed by a homophobic hotel manager. 
Taylor's death was sudden and unexpected. He returned home from London after the opening of 'Good' on 9 December 1981 in a state of exhaustion and was eventually taken to Morpeth General Hospital, where he died hours later from heart failure. With cruel irony 'The Guardian' had announced his new play thus: 'Goodbye, C. P. Taylor'. He left no will and his estate was shared between his widow and his four children. He was buried on 15 December in St Helen's churchyard, Longhorsley, Northumberland. 


@@@@@


doc= 40483


Terriss, Ellaline (1871-1971), actress, was born (Mary) Ellaline Lewin on 13 April 1871 at the Ship Hotel, Stanley, Falkland Islands, the eldest of the three children of William Charles James Lewin ['see 'Terriss, William (1847-1897)], actor, and his wife, Isabel Lewis 
(Amy Fellowes; died 1898)
. She was among the most successful musical comedy actresses of the late Victorian and Edwardian periods. She was educated privately. As a girl she had no ambition to go on the stage although she made a single appearance in a pantomime at the Alexandra Theatre, Liverpool, on 1 January 1887 when she 'danced a hornpipe with much success' (Broadbent, 319-20). Her career began in earnest when, having played Mary Herbert in Alfred Calmour's one-act play 'Cupid's Messenger' at home as a treat for her father, she was summoned by telegram by Herbert Beerbohm Tree to take the part at the Haymarket Theatre, London, on 14 February 1888. 
This led to a three-year engagement with Charles Wyndham at London's Criterion Theatre. Terriss then moved to the Princess's Theatre, London, appearing first as Arrah Meelish in Dion Boucicault's 'Arrah-na-pogue' on 29 August 1891. She went on to play leading parts at the Court Theatre where, 'inter alia', she appeared in a one-act musical duologue, 'His Last Chance', with (Edward) Seymour Hicks (1871-1949). After a brief courtship they were married on 3 October 1893; their solitary wedding breakfast was Irish stew and burgundy. Their partnership -- described as 'one of the happiest, both private and professional, the theatre has known' ('Richmond Times', 3) despite Hicks's perennial lack of thrift -- was commemorated by an exhibition at the British Theatre Museum in 1971. 
Terriss was the heroine of Oscar Barrett's Christmas pantomime 'Cinderella' at the Lyceum Theatre, London, in 1894, which transferred to Abbey's Theatre, New York. On her return she appeared as the original Thora in W. S. Gilbert's 'His Excellency' at the Lyric Theatre in October 1894. 
At the Gaiety Theatre, London, in 1895, Terriss played Bessie Brent in the trend-setting 'Shop Girl', by H. J. W. Dam and Ivan Caryll 'the very first musical comedy' (Macqueen-Pope, 318), followed in May by J. T. Tanner's 'My Girl' and Dora Wemyss in the 'Circus Girl' by J. T. Tanner and W. Paling. Terriss's greatest successes were here, until 1898, and at other London theatres, the Vaudeville (1900-05) and the newly built Aldwych and Hicks (later Globe) theatres (1905-10) in leading parts in musical plays. Many of these were scripted by Hicks, including the 'Runaway Girl' (1898), the 'Cherry Girl' (1903), the 'Catch of the Season' (1904), the 'Beauty of Bath' (1906), the 'Gay Gordons' (1907), and the 'Dashing Little Duke' (1909); the best loved among them, and one of her own favourites, was 'Bluebell in Fairyland' (1901), in which she sang the 'Honeysuckle and the Bee'. This was revived in 1905 for the opening of the Aldwych and was brought back to the Prince's Theatre in 1916. Among her other roles she was also acclaimed as Phoebe Throssell in J. M. Barrie's 'Quality Street' at the Vaudeville (1902). 
However, life was darkened for a time in 1897 when Terriss's first child died shortly after his birth, her father was stabbed to death by a deranged actor outside the Adelphi Theatre, London, and her mother died shortly afterwards. She and Hicks adopted an Irish girl, Mabel, at about this time. Their own daughter, Betty, was born in 1904. 
The couple lost money in the building of three London theatres: the Aldwych, the Hicks, and the Queen's. From 1911 they toured theatres and music halls in Britain and abroad, although Ellaline returned to the London stage for some dozen productions, finally playing Mrs Thornton in Hicks's 'Miracle Man' at the Victoria Palace in May 1935. She also made recordings of her most popular songs, and appeared in films including 'Blighty' (1926), 'Land of Hope and Glory' (1926), 'Atlantic Glamour', 'A Man of Mayfair', and 'The Iron Duke' (1934). She and Hicks were among the first performers to go to France in 1914 to entertain the troops. In 1940 they went to the Middle East with the Entertainments National Service Association (ENSA). 
In later years Terriss took up painting and was tutored in South Africa, where she and Hicks spent much of the Second World War, by the marine artist George Pilkington, and an exhibition of her work was held at Foyle's Art Gallery, London, in February 1959. Her husband, who was knighted in 1935, died on 6 April 1949. 
Terriss was 'an actress of great freshness and sweetness' ('The Times', 17) and was regarded as a 'perfect type of English beauty' with a 'Dresden shepherdess air of delicacy' ('Daily Telegraph') but was known also for her warmth and kindness. She wrote two volumes of autobiography, 'Ellaline Terriss by Herself and with Others' (1928) and 'Just a Little Bit of String' (1955). Ellaline Terriss died at the Holy Family Nursing Home, Hampstead, London, on 16 June 1971 following a hip fracture. 


@@@@@


doc= 40484


Webster, Margaret (1905-1972), actress and theatre director, was born on 15 March 1905 in New York, the only child of Benjamin (Ben) Webster (1864-1947), actor and member of a well-known theatrical family, and his wife, Mary Louise (May) Whitty (1865-1948) ['see under 'Webster, Benjamin], actress and campaigner for good causes. When Ben's American tour ended the Websters returned with their baby daughter to 31 Bedford Street, off the Strand, their London home for forty-seven years. 
Peggy, as she was then known, was educated at Queen Anne's School, Caversham, where she played Puck in a school production of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'. She studied for the stage at the Etlinger Theatre School. Realizing that her chosen profession was going to be a struggle and that the slight cast she had in one eye would be a handicap, she underwent two successful operations. Her first job was in 1924 as a member of the chorus in 'The Trojan Women' at the New Theatre, with Sybil Thorndike and Lewis Casson (at 1 guinea a performance). In 1925 she played the Gentlewoman in 'Hamlet' with John Barrymore at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket, and then returned to the Cassons to lead the chorus in 'Hippolytus' followed by her first experience of touring when she understudied Sybil Thorndike in 'Saint Joan'. Small parts in unmemorable plays were interspersed with appearances with Sunday societies. 
On the suggestion of the critic St John Ervine she changed her name to Margaret, but solid success still evaded her until she was spotted in a makeshift production by Lilian Baylis, who offered her a place in the Old Vic company of 1929-30, in which John Gielgud had his first shot at 'Richard II' and 'Hamlet' (in which she appeared as the Player Queen). She was in two other plays with Gielgud. The first, 'Musical Chairs' by Ronald Mackenzie, directed by Komisarjevsky, had a long run which prevented Margaret from joining the Vic at the start of the next season, although she was released to play Lady Macbeth in a production that lived up to the play's reputation for ill luck. She commented that she was probably the only Lady Macbeth to have had four husbands in three weeks. She grew restless during the run of 'Richard of Bordeaux' (1933), her second engagement with Gielgud in a new play, so in 1935 she turned to directing. In 1937 Maurice Evans, whom she had known when he was an ambitious amateur in London, invited her to direct his 'Richard II' on Broadway. This was the first of her Shakespearian productions in New York. Although critical of the high costs and a lack of good speaking in the American theatre, she relished the opportunities. Her production of 'Othello' with Paul Robeson (in which she played Emilia) ran throughout the 1943 Broadway season, which no other Shakespeare play had previously done, and her percentage was the largest she ever received. 
With Eva Le Gallienne Margaret Webster hoped to establish the American Repertory Theatre, but this proved to be a short-lived and expensive failure. Having decided that New York was not the right place for the kind of serious theatre they had in mind, she embarked on gruelling bus and truck tours, often visiting towns that had not had a professional theatre for thirty-five years. The long distances, union troubles, and unhappy actors would have broken the spirit of a less determined and idealistic management. The venture was a financial disaster and was dissolved in 1948. To her surprise Rudolf Bing invited her to direct 'Don Carlos' at the Metropolitan Opera House in 1950. There was a chorus of ninety-eight people, whereas on tour there were eight. She found the production schedules difficult to put into practice but on the whole enjoyed her operatic interlude. 
Margaret Webster inherited from her mother a devotion to good causes and fought hard on behalf of Actors' Equity on both sides of the Atlantic. This, and directing Paul Robeson in 'Othello', made her suspect in the eyes of Senator McCarthy, and in 1953 she received a summons to appear before the Senate Sub-Committee on Investigations. Her case was dismissed but the experience damaged her confidence for some time. When she returned to Britain in 1955 she was impressed with the state of the theatre and was delighted with an invitation to direct 'Measure for Measure', a play which had always interested her, although the 1957 Old Vic production was disappointing. In 1960 she was back with the Cassons when she directed Noel Coward's 'Waiting in the Wings'. Set in a home for retired actresses, the play had a cast which, as well as Sybil and Lewis, contained several other old friends. She took to lecturing chiefly on Shakespeare, and travelled all over the United States and to South Africa, where she directed Eugene O'Neill's 'A Touch of the Poet' in 1961. She made good use of her experiences for her book 'Shakespeare without Tears' (1942). She disliked intensely the idea that Shakespeare wrote for scholars. She wrote and acted in a one-woman programme on the Brontes which she performed in America and at the Arts Theatre, London, in 1963-4. 
In her last years Margaret Webster divided her time between her house on Martha's Vineyard and one in Hampstead, London, which she shared with the novelist Pamela Sydney Frankau (1908-1967). She died of cancer in St Christopher's Hospice, Sydenham, London, on 13 November 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 40485


Neal, Mary Clara Sophia (1860-1944), social worker and folk-dance collector, was born on 5 June 1860 at 21 Noel Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, the eldest of the three children of David Neal (1834-1918), button manufacturer, and his wife, Sarah Ann, 'nee' Smith (1833-1914). The family was prosperous, but Clara Sophia, as she was then known, felt that her life was snobbish and hypocritical. In February 1888 she was one of a number of 'ladies of leisure, culture, refinement and devotion' (Bagwell, 25-6) who joined the recently formed Methodist West London Mission, becoming 'Sisters of the People', unpaid social workers among the poor of Soho and Marylebone. At this point she took the name 'Mary' by which she was henceforth known. 
One of Neal's special tasks was the running of a club for working girls, and in 1891 she was joined in this by Emmeline Pethick, her closest friend for the rest of her life. In 1895 they left the mission and established their own Esperance Girls' Club, later linked with a commercial tailoring establishment called the 'Maison Esperance', independently putting into practice the gospel of socialism. Important innovative elements in their work were the use of drama and dancing, and also the introduction of an annual country or seaside holiday for the girls. 
After Emmeline's marriage to Fred Lawrence in 1901, she was succeeded by Herbert MacIlwaine as musical director. In 1905 he suggested that the girls might enjoy the folk-songs then being collected by Cecil Sharp. This was so successful that Neal asked for dances which might have a similar popularity. Sharp recalled seeing the Headington Quarry Morris Dancers in 1899 and gave her William Kimber's address. Neal promptly took a train to Oxford and a hansom cab to Headington Quarry, where she found Kimber and arranged for him to come to London to teach his dances to the girls. On 15 February 1906 the club held a belated new year party at the Passmore Edwards Settlement and the songs and dances were greeted with immense enthusiasm, Laurence Housman telling Neal that she and her girls must show the country what they had discovered. 
On 3 April 1906 a public concert was held, preceded by an introductory lecture by Sharp. This was a defining moment in the history of the folk revival. Both Sharp and Neal felt that they had become instruments in a direct and transforming restoration of a lost English heritage. For Neal there was the added incentive that the girls of the Esperance Club were themselves to be the means by which this might happen, teaching the songs and dances in towns and villages throughout England. She revelled in her role as publicist and organizer of this new national movement, the Association for the Revival and Practice of Folk Music, later to become the Esperance Guild of Morris Dancers. Bernard Partridge's cartoon, 'Merrie England Once More' ('Punch', 13 November 1907), symbolized the hopes and expectations which were being engendered. 
Unfortunately there were differences of approach between Neal and Sharp. Sharp, the professional educationist, was concerned with scholarly accuracy. Neal, the philanthropic social worker, was more directly concerned with the joy of the actual dancer: she believed in the power of the material to transmit itself, and regretted the necessity for books of instruction. From 1910 to 1914 there was a bitter struggle between Sharp's English Folk Dance Society (EFDS) and Neal's guild. At the time it was by no means clear that Sharp would be the winner. Neal had many influential supporters; she had her popular 'Esperance Morris Books'; she had recruited a men's morris side before Sharp achieved this; she had friendly contacts with many traditional dancers; she had the use of the restored Crosby Hall for her guild meetings; and she had Clive Carey as a highly capable musical director and collector. 
But the First World War brought the cessation of Esperance activity and Neal became involved in pensions administration on the Isle of Dogs. In west Sussex after the war she still had tentative thoughts of reviving her role in the folk world. But this was no longer possible: the future lay with Sharp and the EFDS, a more stable, middle-class affair, with a professional educational basis. She never again became directly involved in folk activity, although privately she encouraged Rolf Gardiner in his quest for independence from the EFDS. One big new commitment in 1920 was her adoption of Herbert MacIlwaine's son, Anthony, after he was orphaned. In 1925 she moved to Littlehampton, Sussex, where for twelve years she worked as a magistrate, particularly concerned with children's cases. A measure of belated public recognition came in 1937 when she was made CBE 'for services in connexion with the revival of folk songs and dances'. 
In 1906 Neal had been at the inaugural meeting of the Women's Suffrage and Political Union, actually taking the minutes on that occasion, and she remained a firm supporter of the suffrage movement. Her unorthodox religious views were centred in an intense personal sense of mysticism. In person she was tall and imposing, with vivid blue eyes and an equally notable sense of humour. In 1940, when Littlehampton was affected by the war, she went to stay with the Pethick-Lawrences at Gomshall in Surrey and remained there until she died from cancer on 22 June 1944, at The Retreat, Rad Lane, Peaslake, Shere, Surrey. She was cremated in Woking two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 40486


Nicol, George (1740?-1828), bookseller and publisher, was probably born in May 1740 in Scotland. Little is known of his family and early life. By 1769 he was living in London, where he was employed as an assistant and subsequently as a partner to his uncle David Wilson, a bookseller on the Strand: their joint names appear in the imprint to Stephen Hales's 'Statical Essays' (first published 1733) and Robert Wallace Johnson's 'New System of Midwifery' (1769). On his uncle's death, Nicol inherited a share in 'The Gazetteer', in which he took a close interest. 
In 1773, at James West's sale, Nicol purchased the majority of the Caxtonian volumes for George III, an act which upset rival booksellers, such as John Almon, but might have helped Nicol gain the position of bookseller to the king in 1781 (which he held until relinquishing it in 1820). Four years later (on the request of George III and under the guidance of Sir Joseph Banks) Nicol was responsible for republishing a second, superior edition of Captain James Cook's account of his third and last voyage (3 vols., 1785). Nicol also became involved with John Boydell's Shakspeare Gallery and its attendant publications, and probably initiated plans to publish Boydell's edition of Shakespeare from his own press at his home in Pall Mall. Although the task was eventually carried out by William Bulmer, Nicol remained involved in the project with responsibility for supervision of the letterpress. Together with Bulmer, Boydell, and the typefounder William Martin, Nicol wished to create a type that combined utility with beauty to rival continental designs. Their aim was achieved with a typeface -- later named the 'Bodoni Hum' -- produced in a hoax experiment by the Shakespeare printing office, which experts took to be the work of the continental master Bodoni. The output from this printing office contributed largely to the growing reputation and popularity enjoyed by British produced books at the turn of the century. 
Throughout his career Nicol gained a reputation for arranging and cataloguing the libraries of members of the aristocracy. In 1812 he organized the sale of books owned by the late third duke of Roxburghe, for which he wrote the catalogue and oversaw a highly successful auction, prompting what Thomas Frognall Dibdin termed 'bibliomania' and the establishment of the Roxburgh Club: the collection, assembled by Nicol for $5000, sold for $23,341 during the forty-two-day sale. 
On 8 September 1787 Nicol married Mary Boydell at St Olave Jewry in the City of London. 
Towards the end of his life George Nicol described himself, though poor, as having credit 'without end', owed in part by his confidante and friend Lady Essex Ker, sister of the duke of Roxburghe, from whose estate Nicol and later his son attempted to regain their moneys after her death. Courteous and tactful in business, Nicol was said to be 'not a bookseller but a gentleman dealing in books' ('GM', 98/2, 279). He retired from business in 1825 and died at his house in Pall Mall, London, on 25 June 1828, after a long illness. He too was buried at St Olave Jewry. 


@@@@@


doc= 40487


Mary Nicol (bap. 1747, d. 1820), print collector and writer, was Nicol's second wife; no detail is known of his first marriage, from which he had a son, William. Mary Boydell, one of the nine children of Samuel Boydell (1727-1783), farmer, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Turner (1725-1764), was born at Broad Lane, Hawarden, Flintshire, and was baptized on 10 December 1747 at Hawarden. Her younger brother Josiah Boydell later achieved fame as an artist and publisher. Prior to her marriage she travelled on the continent with her uncle, the publisher and owner of the Shakspeare Gallery, John Boydell. Her manuscript memoirs of the tour were illustrated by a collection of drawings. A noted beauty with 'a countenance [which] beamed with the benevolence which formed the distinguishing feature of her character' ('GM', 1824), she attracted many admirers, including the miniature and portrait painter Ozias Humphry. In 1786 she survived an attempt on her life by shooting, near Leicester Square, London. From 1790 to 1791 she acted as lady mayoress of London when her uncle served as lord mayor. Mary died at Pall Mall on 21 December 1820 and was buried in St Olave Jewry. Following her death her collection of prints was sold, with the duke of Buckingham the principal purchaser. 


@@@@@


doc= 40488


Martin, William (d. 1815), typefounder, was probably born in Birmingham, the son of a local printer whose family originally came from Scotland. It is likely that William began work at John Baskerville's type foundry at Easy Hill, Birmingham, where his brother, Robert, was Baskerville's foreman. In London from about 1787, Martin was employed by the bookseller and publisher George Nicol, in whose house on Pall Mall he developed his types for seven years before moving to his own foundry in Duke Street, St James's, Piccadilly. 
During his time with Nicol, as well as after, when he worked principally for William Bulmer at the Shakspeare Press, Martin aimed to produce a type uniting 'utility, elegance and beauty' (preface to Bulmer's edition of 'The Poems of Goldsmith and Parnell', 1795) superior to that of rival British presses, and a competitor to continental designs. Martin and Nicol achieved their ambition with a type that confounded the experts in a hoax known as the Bodoni Hum in which connoisseurs mistook Bulmer's printing and Martin's types to be a product of the leading typefounder Bodoni. An integral contributor to the success of Bulmer's Shakspeare Press, Martin was rightfully acclaimed for his work on the magnificent volumes printed by John Boydell, among them 'The Poetical Works of John Milton' (3 vols., 1794-7), 'An History of the River Thames' (2 vols., 1794-6), and 'The Dramatic Works of Shakespeare' (9 vols., completed 1802). 
In their design Martin's types drew on Baskerville, but were influenced more significantly by Bodoni. He adapted to the transition from the old to the modern face, discarded the long 's', and created his own individual style by ameliorating the rotundity of the old face and the angularity of the modern, thereby making the result more pleasing to the eye. His romans, which appeared in Thomas Frognall Dibdin's three works 'Typographical Antiquities', 'Bibliotheca Spenceriana', and 'Bibliographical Decameron', were admired for their clarity as were his italics, though these were criticized also for being too calligraphic. However, it was Martin's orientals and greeks that evidenced his outstanding talent. It was through his oriental face design that he gained the title 'oriental type founder and printer to the East India Company' in 1803. Though widely praised, his greek characters, exhibited in Musaeus's 'The Loves of Hero and Leander' (1797), none the less divide critics, who maintain either that his work makes the text easier to read or that the faces are 'cramped' (Reed, 326). 
Aside from William Bulmer, John McCreery of Liverpool was probably the first publisher to use the Martin types, in his poem 'The Press' (1803); they also appear in 'A Specimen of the Improved Types of G. R. Harris' (1807). A 'man whose modesty was equal to his talents' and one who would 'listen to every hint of improvement' (Nicol, 3), William Martin died in London in 1815. His foundry, which had been supported by the Shakspeare Press, was continued for a short time by William Bulmer, but was merged with that of Henry Caslon in 1817. 


@@@@@


doc= 40489


Macklin, Thomas (1752/3-1800), printseller and picture dealer, may have been the son of 'the Reverend Garrard Macklin of the Kingdom of Ireland' mentioned in the will of Thomas Wilson, prebendary of Westminster, from whom Thomas Macklin inherited considerable property in 1784. His friend the engraver John Landseer said that Macklin had been an 'Irish cabin boy' and later a frame gilder who had learned stipple engraving from Francesco Bartolozzi (Landseer, 'Algernon Sidney's Letter', 22). In 1777 he married Hannah Kenting (died 1808). In 1779 he began business as a printseller at 1 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, and in 1782 moved to 39 Fleet Street. In the same year he enjoyed considerable success with his print of the recently deceased Rear-Admiral Richard Kempenfelt, which sold 7000 copies. Two years later he inherited half of Thomas Wilson's $20,000 estate, and not long thereafter he began the print speculations which were to make him famous. 
On 1 January 1787 Macklin announced his plan to commission 100 paintings illustrating the works of the English poets to be published as engravings at monthly intervals between February 1790 and January 1795. In the event the progress of 'Macklin's English Poets', better known as 'The Poets' Gallery', was inhibited by the war with France (which closed the continent to the extensive British export trade in prints) and by the death of his sleeping partner Edward Rogers (1750-1795) of Liverpool who had invested $11,000. Even with this assistance the project remained prohibitively expensive. The considerable sum of $500 was paid for Sir Joshua Reynolds's 'Cottagers', also known as 'The Macklin Family' on account of its depiction of Macklin's wife and their daughter Maria. Between 1788 and 1799 only six parts (each containing four prints) were published. In addition to work by Reynolds, these parts included paintings by Henry Fuseli, Thomas Gainsborough, Angelica Kauffmann, Thomas Stothard, and Francis Wheatley, with most of the engravings being undertaken by Bartolozzi. Like his rival printsellers, John Boydell and Robert Bowyer, Macklin held annual exhibitions, the first of which opened in Pall Mall on 14 April 1788. 
In 1789 Macklin announced plans for an illustrated folio 'Bible' in three (eventually six) volumes to promote 'the glory of the English school' of painting and engraving and 'the interest of our HOLY RELIGION'. New type (cut by Joseph Jackson and Vincent Figgins) and new paper were created for the venture, and the historic paintings were to be 'finished in a style of elegance [and magnificence in Paper, Printing, and Engraving] of which there is not in Europe or the world any example' (Macklin's 'Holy Bible' prospectus, 1789). Macklin initially proposed sixty prints (eventually seventy-two) plus vignettes. The largest number of paintings (sixteen, in addition to 111 vignettes) were undertaken by Philippe Jacques de Louthenbourg; Hugh Douglas Hamilton produced a further twelve paintings and John Opie seven. Other artists included Richard Cosway, Benjamin West, and Richard Westall, as well as Fuseli, Kauffmann, Reynolds, and Stothard, and the subscription list for 703 copies at $46 1's'. apiece was headed by the king, the queen, and the prince of Wales. Macklin's project was again ambitious and costly. He paid Reynolds $500 for his 'Holy Family' and William Sharp $700 for its engraving; the average cost for forty-five of the 'Bible's' other engravings was $220 and the total cost of the publication was an estimated $30,000. Macklin's resulting indebtedness required him to sell some of the Poets' Gallery paintings by lottery in 1797, but with the financial assistance of John Wilson of Liverpool work on Macklin's 'Holy Bible' was finally brought to its triumphant conclusion. The last engraving was finished just five days before his death, aged forty-seven, at Fleet Street on 25 October 1800, and the last of the vignettes was completed six weeks later. The Macklin 'Bible' endures as the most ambitious edition produced in Britain, often pirated but never rivalled. 
A major force in the florescence of book illustration in England in the 1790s, Macklin also spent possibly as much as $300,000 as a patron of the arts. His widow continued the Poets' Gallery until 1801 when, on 27-30 May, the remaining paintings were sold. Another, unsuccessful, auction was held after her death on 12 January 1808. Macklin's second daughter, Hannah, was left in such financial dolour that appeals were made to the Royal Academy for her living expenses in 1821 and her funeral in the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 40490


Small, William (1734-1775), physician and natural philosopher, was the third son of the Revd James Small (died 1771), and Lilias, 'nee' Scott (died 1775), of Carmyllie, Forfarshire, Scotland. He was born there on 13 October 1734 and was educated at Marischal College, Aberdeen, where he received his MA in 1755 and his MD in 1765. In 1758 Small was in America to take up the post of professor of natural philosophy at the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia, where he revolutionized the teaching of the subject, introducing a lecture system, newly fashionable in Europe. Among his students were John Page, later thrice governor of Virginia, and Thomas Jefferson, whom he taught ethics, rhetoric, and belles lettres, and with whom he remained in contact. He seems to have met Benjamin Franklin in Williamsburg in the spring of 1763. However, Small was unhappy in Virginia, in poor health (apparently with malaria), and bitterly at odds with other faculty members. When he travelled to London in the autumn of 1764 to buy scientific apparatus, he chose not to return to America. 
In London, Small was a guest of the surgeon John Belchier at the Royal Society on 24 January 1765. Following Benjamin Franklin's letter of recommendation on his behalf to Matthew Boulton, Small moved to Birmingham in May, where he quickly became established in the town's medical and scientific network. He shared rooms at 9 Temple Row with John Ash, and became a subscriber to the proposed general hospital; they both served on its founding committee from 1765. In the same year Small joined the embryonic Lunar Society of Birmingham; he was one of its first four members, and increasingly acted as its honorary secretary. Meanwhile, his medical practice was thriving. While holding a daily hour-long free clinic for the poor, he had a prosperous clientele, which included Matthew Boulton and William Russell, a wealthy Birmingham merchant, as well as their families. In his 'Medical Miscellany' (1769) Thomas Tomlinson thanked both Ash and Small for their guidance. Small's fees were substantial and from town practice alone he earned an average of $500 a year, rising to $600 in the 1770s. His scientific investments, which were a considerable further source of income, included a share in Boulton's Soho development, where he acted as a technical consultant. Small's friendships and acquaintances were extensive, all based on his wide scientific interests. He was an early supporter and correspondent of James Watt, whom he had known in Glasgow, and seems to have introduced him to Matthew Boulton. Through his connections with Boulton and the Lunar Society, Small was also linked to John Baskerville, Joseph Black, Erasmus Darwin, Thomas Day, Richard Lovell Edgeworth, James Keir, and Josiah Wedgwood. He carried on an extensive correspondence with most of these men and his advice was often sought, for example in the difficulties of extending Watt's patent. Small became involved in town affairs: from 1769 he served on the committee for lighting and improving Birmingham, and became a subscriber to the new theatre in King Street in 1774. 
Small's own scientific work was many-sided. He was interested in improving clock mechanisms, in optics (telescopes and microscopes), in geology, metallurgy, ceramics, gunnery, chemistry (especially alkali) -- even in making a new kind of lead pencil. He corresponded with Joseph Priestley when the latter was writing his major work on air, and he urged James Watt to publish his research. Small himself took out a patent in 1773 (no. 1048) for a simplified clock design. 
Small seems to have had a withdrawn, shy personality; he never married and Erasmus Darwin noted that he lived 'quite a recluse studious life'. Unlike other 'Lunatics', Small did not write for publication, although his correspondence was considerable. He appears never to have enjoyed robust good health and to have always greatly preferred scientific work to medical practice. Even towards the end of his life in 1773 he was considering leaving Birmingham and taking up an academic post in Scotland. However, he died in Birmingham, apparently of 'ague', aged only forty, on 25 February 1775: Boulton had noted how ill Small had been earlier in the month. Small was buried in St Philip's churchyard, Birmingham, on 15 March. Erasmus Darwin wrote an obituary poem to him, and there were many expressions of loss at his death. His portrait sketch shows a simply dressed, plainly wigged man, arms folded defensively, sitting near his quill pen, inkpot, and books -- clearly his world. William Withering took over much of Small's medical work when he moved to Birmingham in May 1775. 


@@@@@


doc= 40491


Garbett, Samuel (1717-1803), industrialist and ironmaster, was born in humble circumstances in Birmingham; nothing else is known about his early life. In August 1735 he married Anne Clay (died 1772) of Aston. They had four children, two of whom died in infancy. Francis, his son, was associated with his father in some of his business enterprises, as was Charles Gascoigne, husband of Garbett's eldest child and only daughter, Mary. 
Garbett was probably almost entirely self-taught but he soon made his mark as a brassworker and became an agent for a London merchant in the purchase of Birmingham ware. He entered into partnership with John Roebuck as a refiner of gold and silver and a consultant chemist to local industries in Birmingham. This early work gave them both the technical skill and the financial resources to begin the manufacture of sulphuric acid in Birmingham and from 1749 at Prestonpans in Scotland. Ten years later the Scottish interests took a major leap forward with the start of the ironworks at Carron, Stirlingshire, in which Garbett and Roebuck each held 25 per cent of the initial capital of the Carron Company. William Cadell (bap. 1708, d. 1777) and his son William Cadell (bap. 1737, d. 1819) ['see under 'Cadell family (per. c.1740-1934)] were also financially involved. 
Roebuck's wayward genius could not be restrained even by Garbett's commercial acumen. The Carron works was soon greater than anyone had expected and Garbett was called on to finance much of the expansion. The strain was worsened by the activities of Francis Garbett in a shipping company and by those of Gascoigne. The latter took control of most of the family's Scottish interests and eventually ousted his father-in-law before going to Russia to set up a major iron foundry. Such commercial expansion, usually initiated by others, called for financial support beyond Garbett's means. The general financial crisis of 1772 deepened his difficulties and ten years later Garbett was declared bankrupt. His friend Matthew Boulton was a trustee and his loyal supporter in all his difficulties. Boulton especially encouraged him to re-establish his business in Birmingham; Garbett was eventually able to leave more than $12,000 on his death, though with creditors not fully discharged. 
From the crisis of 1772 Garbett's financial affairs were in such complex disarray in a mass of interlocking and intricate legal actions that Boulton deemed them beyond his comprehension. While Garbett gave them much attention, at the same time he became a pioneering political lobbyist on behalf of manufacturers and a commentator on political and economic affairs. The key figure in his political contacts was the second earl of Shelburne and first marquess of Lansdowne (1737-1805), but Garbett corresponded widely with the result that letters from him are to be found in many manuscript collections. 
In 1783 Garbett promoted the Birmingham Commercial Committee to look after the city's interests, especially of its manufacturers, and was its chairman until 1782. Though concerned initially with local industries, he was convinced of the need to be able to exert wider influence by collective action. In 1785 the threat of reciprocal trading privileges for Ireland led him to co-operate uneasily with Josiah Wedgwood (1730-1795) in promoting a general chamber of manufacturers to lobby parliament on behalf of all manufacturers. Local jealousies ensured that the general chamber did not survive the test of the commercial treaty negotiated with France in 1786 by William Eden, first Baron Auckland. Though influenced by the growing acceptance of free trade views among some of his close friends, Garbett showed traits of a lingering mercantilism in his reluctance to allow free movement overseas of men and machinery. His liberal sympathies are evident in an investigation into the Royal Mint, undertaken with his son, Francis, at the request of Shelburne in 1782. The report, published in 1837, shows the authors' intimate knowledge of the trade in precious metals, offers suggestions for more economical methods of coinage, and pointedly draws attention to the proliferation of sinecures. 
Garbett's public life centred on Birmingham. He helped set up the city's assay office in 1773 and was warden from 1796 to 1800. He was active in the Birmingham General Hospital and was chairman of a commission of 1769 to widen and clean the streets. He pioneered the campaign for the abolition of slavery and took part in work on poor relief, excessive consumption of alcohol, and public order. On issues where extremes dominated, he was often a moderating influence. He adhered to the Church of England, but in Scotland associated with the established (Presbyterian) church there, and he defended Joseph Priestley and other dissenters when they were attacked by a mob in 1791. 
After Garbett's death Boulton offered the best assessment of his character: 'I have always found his principles unfailingly just, honourable and liberal' (M. Boulton to W. Davies, 12 Dec 1803; Matthew Boulton MSS). His personal misfortunes arose chiefly from the reckless schemes of others, notably of Roebuck and Gascoigne. Garbett died in Birmingham on 5 December 1803 and was buried in the grounds of St Philip's Church (now the cathedral), of which he had been a churchwarden. 


@@@@@


doc= 40493


Raphson, Joseph (fl. 1689-1712), mathematician and writer, was possibly born in 1648, though this date, found in some standard biographies, must be regarded as speculative. No details of his early life have been found. 
Since the middle of the sixteenth century, mathematicians had been able to solve analytically simple polynomial equations of a single variable up to the fourth order, usually known simply as quartic equations. More complicated equations were generally intractable. Mathematicians tried to resolve these using numerical methods, the standard but slow one being that of Francois Viete. In 1689 Raphson replaced the divisor in Viete's method by what is now called the first derivative or slope of the function in the equation to be solved, though he did so without reference to the calculus of either Newton or Leibniz. His formula was novel in that it could be used repeatedly, making the method iterative. He showed that on each step the number of correct decimal places of the solution doubles, which means that convergence to the solution is rapid. He published his work in 1690 in the form of a book, 'Analysis aequationum universalis'. 
On 27 November 1689 Edmond Halley proposed Raphson for fellowship of the Royal Society, and he was elected just three days later. On 4 December he was admitted and signed the charter book and a bond guaranteeing payment of dues, on which he described himself as being 'of London, Gent.'; this might indicate that he was a landowner, but no corroborating records have been found. These are the only known signatures, and like many other fellows he seems not to have taken the second very seriously -- surviving records show payments only in 1692 and 1693. By 1708 he had been excused such, possibly because he was unable to attend the society's meetings. 
In the summer of 1691 Halley and Raphson met Newton with the intention of publishing Newton's work on the quadrature (integration) of curves, though ultimately Newton published it himself. The following year a royal mandate issued on 30 March instructed the University of Cambridge to confer on Raphson the degree of MA, and he was admitted to Jesus College as a fellow-commoner on 31 May. It was customary to donate silver to the college in these circumstances, and his unnecessarily extravagant gift was a monteith weighing no less than 46 ounces 10 pennyweight. He gave his address at this time as Middlesex. 
Raphson was well educated, but no details of his schooling have been traced. He wrote up his own work consistently in Latin, even at a time when the use of the vernacular was becoming popular. His second, more learned, book was 'De spatio reali', published in 1697 as an annex to the second edition of the 'Analysis'. An English translation of 'Mathesis enucleata' by Johan Christoph Sturm appeared in 1700 under the abbreviated Latin form 'J.R. A.M. & R.S.S.', which is presumed to mean that Raphson was the translator. His translation of Ozanam's 'Dictionnaire mathematique' appeared under his full surname in 1702, and in November he even took the trouble of advertising in the press that the publishers had added material that he wished to disclaim, and had misspelt his name. 
The full extent of Raphson's scholarship became apparent with the publication in 1710 of the heavy-going 'Demonstratio de Deo', which shows that his knowledge even extended to the cabbala, which together with his name suggests that he was probably of Jewish extraction and of an Irish immigrant family. 
Roger Cotes reported in a letter dated 15 February 1711 that he met Raphson in the summer of 1709 and was surprised by his lack of interest in some of Newton's papers relevant to the writing of Raphson's 'Historia fluxionum'. When this was published posthumously in 1715 it turned out to be a biased history of Newton's development of the differential calculus. No direct record of Raphson's death is known; conflicting circumstantial arguments place it in either 1715 or, more probably, late in 1712, the last year for which he was listed as belonging to the Royal Society. 
Raphson's works continued to be published and reprinted after his death, and indeed his translation of Newton's 'Arithmetica universalis' appeared for the first time as late as 1720. His method was formally related to Newton's fluxional calculus in 1740 by Simpson, and survives to this day in a form due to Lagrange (1797) but often attributed to Newton: '
'a'&rarr;'a'- 'f'('a')/'f''('a')' in which 'a' is the iteratively estimated solution of the equation 'f'('a') = 0 and 'f''('a') is the slope of 'f' at 'a'. This is now commonly called the Newton-Raphson method and is very often the method of choice in computer programs, where its simple iterative structure and rapid convergence are both desirable advantages. 


@@@@@


doc= 40494


Jacson, Maria Elizabetha (1755-1829), writer on botany, was born at Bebington, Cheshire, the daughter of the Revd Simon Jacson and Anne Fitzherbert. Her family had held land and clerical livings in Cheshire and Derbyshire since the early seventeenth century; Maria grew up in the rectory at Bebington, then lived with her widowed father, privately in Stockport in 1777-87, and later in the rectory at Tarporley, Cheshire. Neither Maria nor her sister Frances Jacson, a novelist, married. After the death of their father in 1808 the sisters lived in Somersal Hall, an Elizabethan manor house, in Somersal Herbert, Derbyshire, which belonged to a maternal relative. 
Maria Jacson had family connections to Enlightenment science culture in the midlands through Erasmus Darwin and her cousin Sir Brooke Boothby of Ashbourne, Derbyshire. Her interest in plants showed itself early in botanical drawing, gardening, and experiments in plant physiology. In 1788 she gave a drawing of a Venus's fly-trap to Darwin, who described her as 'a lady who adds much botanical knowledge to many other elegant acquirements' (Shteir, 114-15). When she was forty-two, induced by family financial circumstances, Maria Jacson began writing for money, and published her first book, 'Botanical Dialogues, between Hortensia and her Four Children' (1797). An introduction to Linnaean botany 'for the use of schools', it takes the form of conversations within a family. The book features a mother who believes in the mental and moral utility of botanical knowledge. Hortensia teaches her children about the Linnaean system of classifying and naming plants, and instructs them about dissecting flowers and examining them under the microscope. In a commendatory note included in the book, Darwin and Boothby praised the author for 'so accurately explaining a difficult science in an easy and familiar manner'. While reviews of the book noted the clarity and elegance of Jacson's exposition, 'Botanical Dialogues' was too learned for the juvenile market, and did not go past the first edition. 
Probably more a botanist than an educator, Jacson recast her material into a book for general adult readers, under the title 'Botanical Lectures' (1804). Shorn of the conversational form and family setting of the earlier title, this book promoted the importance of learning botany from the proper sources and using Latin botanical nomenclature. In the 'Advertisement' Jacson styled her book 'a complete elementary system, which may enable the student of whatever age to surmount those difficulties, which hitherto have too frequently impeded the perfect acquirement of this interesting science'. She situated her own work as introductory to the translation of Linnaeus's 'System of Vegetables' (1783) by Erasmus Darwin and the Botanical Society of Lichfield. Jacson's third book, 'Sketches of the Physiology of Vegetable Life' (1811), mirrored a shift in focus within early nineteenth-century botany from classification and nomenclature to plant structure and function, and was intended for younger students of physiology. The book reflects wide reading in contemporary botanical literature, as Jacson explores topics such as plant motion, propagation, and analogies between plant and animal functions. She exhorts readers to see for themselves, and describes experiments she conducted on crocus bulbs; her own drawings illustrate the development of bulbs and seeds. 
Jacson's books clearly sought to enlarge female education. Nevertheless, the maternal teacher in 'Botanical Dialogues' declares that women should: 'avoid obtruding their knowledge upon the public. The world have agreed to condemn women to the exercise of their fingers, in preference to that of their heads; and a woman rarely does herself credit by coming forward as a literary character. (238)' Science books by women were an emergent feature of publishing at the turn of the nineteenth century, and reviewers commented favourably on female author-educators. At the same time, learned women were suspect, and social conventions about female modesty often led women to publish anonymously and to make careful, strategic claims about their expertise. Jacson's books are identified only as 'by a Lady' or 'by the Authoress', or with the initials M. E. J. 
In addition to her popular botanical writing, Jacson was an early female horticultural writer, preceding the better-known Jane Loudon by several decades. Her 'Florist's manual: hints for the construction of a gay flower-garden with observations on the best method of preventing the depredations of insects' (1816) was directed to women flower growers. Jacson seeks to 'render my sister Florists partakers of my pleasures' to 'enable them more methodically to arrange their flowers, and so to blend their colours, that through most part of the spring and summer months they may procure a succession of enamelled borders' ('Florist's Manual', 1816, 3-4). The book discusses garden design, including the shape of flowerbeds and placement of a rockery, recommends 'mingled' or mixed beds, and gives a catalogue of suitable herbaceous flowers, bulbs, and grasses. She encourages readers to have a conservatory for spring bulbs. Jacson suggests in her concluding remarks that women can find both horticultural and personal benefit in botany, and hopes to 'induce even a few of my sister Florists to exercise their intellect, or relieve their ennui' through 'the study of vegetable existence'. 'Florist's Manual' was Jacson's most successful work; a second, enlarged edition was published with coloured plates in 1822, and a subsequent edition in 1827. John Claudius Loudon cited from it at several points in his 'Encyclopedia of Gardening'. 
Little is known about Maria Jacson's social circle in later years. Maria Edgeworth recalls meeting the 'gay garden lady' in Lichfield in 1818 (Colvin, 141). Jacson died of a fever at Astle Hall, near Chelford, Cheshire, on 10 October 1829, and was buried at Chelford. 


@@@@@


doc= 40495


Jacson, Frances Margaretta (1754-1842), novelist, was born on 13 October 1754 at Bebington rectory, Cheshire, one of the five surviving children of the Revd Simon Jacson (1728-1808) and his wife, Anne Fitzherbert ('c'.1729-1795), elder daughter of Richard Fitzherbert of Somersal Herbert, Derbyshire. Her elder brothers, Roger and Shallcross, both took holy orders, and in 1771 her father relinquished his living in favour of Roger, the heir, who quickly became a much respected incumbent. Of the three daughters, Anne (died 1805) married into the Atherton family in Lancashire, but Frances and her younger sister Maria Elizabetha Jacson (1755-1829) remained single, moving from Bebington with their parents to Stockport and then to Tarporley, where Simon Jacson took up the rectorship. There the sisters cared for their father, particularly after their mother's death in 1795. He became increasingly infirm, and died in 1808. 
It was during their time at Tarporley that the Jacsons became increasingly concerned about Shallcross, who, over-fond of drink and horse-racing, had run into debt and was hardly an ornament to the church or to a respected clerical family. To help him out of his difficulties the sisters turned to writing, Maria to manuals on botany and gardening, and Frances to fiction. Her popular first novel, 'Plain Sense' (1795), was followed in 1797 by 'Disobedience'. In 1808 the sisters had to find a new home and after much uncertainty they gratefully accepted the offer of Somersal Hall, the beautiful old partly Tudor house lent them for life by Lord St Helens, a Fitzherbert relation. Shallcross's troubles soon resurfaced, and at Somersal Frances wrote, in the same vein as her first two books, 'Things by their Right Names' (1812) and the more accomplished 'Rhoda' (1816). Appalled by her brother's physical and mental state, and with the help of Roger and Maria Jacson, Frances again arranged to clear his debts, now amounting to $1760. His unlooked for death in 1821 was a melancholy release. 
A period of calm followed with 'Isabella', Frances's last book, published in 1823, but then in 1829 Maria fell gravely ill, and died while the sisters were staying with friends at Chelford. Returning desolate to Somersal, the unhappy Frances eventually settled, resuming her social life among the local gentry and family connections: the Vernons at Sudbury, the Fitzherberts at Tissington, and her friends at Ashbourne. Among her many nieces and nephews, Henry Gally Knight was a special favourite and kept her in touch with the politics of the time. A firm whig, she had scant sympathy for the waverings of William IV over the 1832 'Reform Bill', recording that 'the poltroony of the King' and the duplicity of the tories 'shocked every moral feeling' (diary, 18 May 1832). 
However immediate a financial purpose her novels served, Frances Jacson never abandoned her moral feeling. She was a devout Christian and all her novels have a strong didactic element, as is suggested by the titles of the first three. All are set in high circles of society, moving between London (the site of temptation, libertinism, and schemers) and country estates and parsonages (havens largely though not entirely beneficial). All feature a heroine, tracing her history through varying circumstances, some of doubtful probability, but not more so than others in the genre. Plotting was not Frances Jacson's strength but what becomes increasingly evident is the author's creative insight into character and motive, exposed through her accounts of developing relationships, particularly of courtship and marriage. The rather flat Ellen in 'Plain Sense' excepted, Jacson's lively heroines are convincingly shown evaluating their surroundings and coming to see the flaws in their perceptions, or those of others. Moreover, her minor characters are often presented with highly effective irony, and many of the situations depicted with considerable humour. In 'Rhoda', for example, Jacson outlines the heroine's growing worldliness, and sympathetically depicts the workings of her mind as she struggles with dilemmas; the incompatibilities in Rhoda's marriage with Sir James Osbourne are both insurmountable and sad. Offset is the clever contrast of the sourness of the marriage of Mr and Mrs Strickland, the latter who 'always admitted truth in the abstract and never practised it in detail' ('Rhoda', bk 2, 160). Equally skilfully drawn is Mrs Nesbit in 'Isabella', whose self-righteous loquacity makes her a worthy sister to Jane Austen's Mrs Norris. 
Frances Jacson died on 17 June 1842 at her home in Somersal and was buried in the Fitzherbert vault there on 24 June. Her only other known writing is a religious pamphlet, 'Every Day Christianity' (1816). 
Frances Jacson's novels enjoyed considerable contemporary popularity; 'Rhoda' was singled out by Maria Edgeworth as superior to Jane Austen's 'Emma', and it was also admired by Sydney Smith, who recommended it to Lady Holland. Although her works have obvious limitations, Jacson's gifts are well worth recognition in any history of the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century English novel. The novels' anonymity was guarded, and her authorship faded into obscurity, so that secure assignment of the novels to her took place only in the late 1990s. Despite the twentieth-century interest in women writers of the past, Jacson has been neglected, probably in part because of an earlier confusion of her works with those of Alethea Lewis (pseudonym Eugenia de Acton). Her eclipse may also be due to the fact that her diaries, written from 1829 until her death, were originally thought to have been written by her brother. 


@@@@@


doc= 40496


Greville, Charles Francis (1749-1809), mineralogist and horticulturist, was born, probably at Warwick Castle, on 12 May 1749, the second son of Francis, eighth Baron Brooke and first earl of Warwick (1719-1773) and his wife, Elizabeth (1720/21-1800), daughter of Lord Archibald Hamilton. His elder brother was George Greville, second earl of Warwick and a noted art collector. He was educated at Harrow School and Edinburgh University (although he seems not to have graduated), and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1772. Later vice-president of the society, he contributed two papers to its 'Philosophical Transactions'. He was MP for Warwick in 1774-90. On the Board of Trade from 1774 to 1780, he left to become a lord of the Admiralty. From 1794 to his death he was vice-chamberlain of the royal household. 
Greville is most commonly remembered for his involvement with Emma Lyon (1765-1815) ['see 'Hamilton, Emma, Lady Hamilton], later the wife of his uncle William Hamilton (1731-1803) and subsequently the mistress of Horatio Nelson. They lived in Paddington Green, Middlesex, where Greville also indulged his passion for collecting minerals, plants, and works of art. Emma was his mistress for four years until, anxious to find a wealthy bride (a search which ultimately ended in failure), he sent her in 1786 to stay with his widowed uncle, then ambassador to Naples. At this time Greville was managing his uncle's Welsh estate in his absence, laying the foundation for Milford Haven's future development as a port. 
Greville made lasting contributions to mineralogy and horticulture. It has been said that his appreciation of beauty eclipsed any truly scientific interest or understanding of these subjects, but this is perhaps unfair -- he was a patron of science almost on a par with Joseph Banks. Greville's mineral collection, based on that of Ignaz von Born (1742-1791), was begun in 1773 and was strong in meteorites and gem minerals. By 1803 it was one of the finest in the world. He was the principal supporter of the comte de Bournon, mineralogist and refugee from the French Revolution, and much of the excellence of Greville's collection must be attributable to his influence. (Although not recognized by him at the time, the first specimen of the rare lead chloro-carbonate, phosgenite, was later found in his collection, among specimens acquired in Derbyshire about 1785.) Greville was a member of a panel convened in 1799 to assess the mineral collection of the British Museum: to improve the disappointing national collection it recommended the purchase of the collection of Charles Hatchett (1765-1847) which was to lay the foundation for the museum's subsequent rise to international status. It was also Greville's recommendation that established Adolarius Forster as the first state mineralogist in New South Wales in 1803. 
Greville is credited with the introduction to Britain of several species of lily, peony, camellia, and magnolia. He joined the Linnean Society in 1802 and in 1804 helped found the Royal Horticultural Society. He was one of the society's first vice-presidents and its treasurer from 1806 to his death. The genus 'Grevillea' was named in his honour by Robert Brown in 1808. Elected to the Society of Dilettanti in 1774, Greville became its 'very high steward' in 1778. He was a patron of the artist Paul Sandby (1730-1809) and has been credited with the introduction to England of aquatint engraving made popular by Sandby, though it is likely that Sandby acquired the method independently. 
Greville died intestate at his home in Edgware Row, Paddington Green, on 23 April 1809 and was buried in the family vault at St Mary's Church, Warwick. His 14,800 mineral specimens were bought for the nation for $13,727. The 5200 faceted gems were sold separately. The acquisition raised the British Museum's mineral collection to the first rank but few of Greville's specimens can now be recognized within it. 


@@@@@


doc= 40498


Nooth, John Mervin (1737-1828), physician and army officer, was born on 5 September 1737 at Sturminster Newton, Dorset, the son of Henry Nooth, apothecary, and his wife, Bridget, daughter of John Mervin, apothecary. He studied medicine at Edinburgh, graduating MD in 1766, and subsequently spent some time on the continent. In 1773 he was living in London and acquainted with some members of the Royal Society. Part of a letter he had written to Benjamin Franklin suggesting improvements to an electrical machine was read to the society in June 1773, and in the following March he was elected a fellow, Franklin being one of his sponsors. 
The paper for which Nooth is chiefly remembered was read on 15 December 1774: 'The description of an apparatus for impregnating water with fixed air' ('PTRS', 65, 1775, 59-66). 'Fixed air' was the name given to carbon dioxide in 1756 by Joseph Black, and the treatment of diseases, particularly those of a 'putrid' nature such as scurvy, by imbibing water impregnated with fixed air, had been advocated by Joseph Priestley. Nooth's apparatus for absorbing fixed air in water consisted of three glass vessels fitted together with airtight joints. Fixed air generated in the lowest vessel passed through a valve into water contained in the middle vessel. Any water displaced upwards by the gas entered the top vessel. The apparatus, which made possible the domestic production of 'spa water', was commercially successful, and large numbers were manufactured. A modified form of Nooth's apparatus was used in December 1846 to administer the ether in the first-known employment of a general anaesthetic in a surgical operation. 
Probably shortly before Nooth's departure to New York in 1775, to take up an appointment as physician-extraordinary and purveyor to the forces, North America, he married Sarah Williams, a young widow. They had three children. Their two sons, John Mervin (1778-1821) and Henry (1781-1861), were born in New York and both had military careers. A third child, Mary, was born in Quebec in 1791 and died unmarried in 1846. 
In 1779 Nooth became superintendent-general of hospitals for the British forces in North America. He returned to England in 1784, after the War of Independence was over, but was recalled to serve in Quebec in 1788. He took a great interest in the political and economic situation in Lower Canada, and corresponded on the subject, at great length, with Sir Joseph Banks. He left Canada in 1799, subsequently serving in Gibraltar, where his wife died in 1804, from 1804 to 1807. He retired to Bath in 1807 and on 19 August that year married a widow, Elizabeth Willford (1761-1850). He had acquired a high reputation, and in 1800 Edward, duke of Kent (the father of Queen Victoria), whom he had attended in Canada in 1798 after a riding accident, had appointed him physician to his household. Nooth died at his home, 12 Great Pulteney Street, Bath, on 3 May 1828, and was buried at St Nicholas, Bathampton. 


@@@@@


doc= 40503


Knox, Sir (Thomas) Malcolm (1900-1980), academic administrator and philosopher, was born on 28 November 1900 at Birkenhead, Cheshire, the elder son of James Knox (1871-1956), Congregational minister of Tillicoultry, Clackmannanshire, and his wife, Isabella Russell Marshall. His parents were both of Scottish descent, and although he was educated in England, Knox was always strongly conscious of his Scottish roots. His first wife (whom he married in 1927), Margaret Normana McLeod Smith, came from Tarbert, Harris, and this underlined the Scottish attachment. Bury grammar school and the Liverpool Institute provided the principal elements of his early education. A scholarship at Pembroke College, Oxford, was followed by a first in 'literae humaniores'. In 1923 he became secretary to the first Lord Leverhulme, and this connection with Lever Brothers was continued in various secretarial and executive positions in firms managing the conglomerate's west African interests, 1925-31. Not long after the tragically early death of his wife, in 1930, he returned to academic life at Oxford, first as bursar and lecturer in philosophy at Jesus College, where his experience in business was combined with his scholarly prowess, and subsequently as fellow and lecturer in Greek philosophy at Queen's College. In 1934 he married Dorothy Ellen Jolly (died 1974) of Thornton-le-Fylde, Lancashire, who was a much cherished companion and hostess. There were no children of either marriage. 
By 1936 Knox was ready for a major move, which entailed his 'spiritual return' to Scotland and his appointment to the chair of moral philosophy in the University of St Andrews. Henceforth his entire career, until his retirement in 1966, was spent at, and indeed devoted to, Scotland's most ancient seat of learning, assisted by his wife, who became chatelaine of University House, St Andrews. The older and more conservative tradition of teaching and of 'doing' philosophy was then still alive at St Andrews, and this trend was eminently suited to Knox's mindset and experience. He rapidly acquired the reputation of an excellent and exacting teacher and that of a man of affairs in the administration of the university. It was largely due to those latter attainments that he was elected to the court of the university (the governing body in Scottish universities), which gave him a position of influence in academic and administrative developments. 
When the health of Sir James Irvine, the principal and vice-chancellor of St Andrews, began to fail, Knox became the obvious choice to step into the breach as deputy (subsequently acting) principal (1951-3), and this led eventually (1953) to the substantive appointment as vice-chancellor and principal of the university. Now fully in charge, he embarked at once on some overdue reforms: he arranged for the words 'to engage in research' to be written retrospectively into the contracts of all lecturers and readers, where the pursuit of research (in contrast to professorial contracts) had (deliberately?) been omitted. He took immense trouble over professorial appointments in particular: the first two chairs to fall vacant during his term of office were those of Greek (filled by Kenneth Dover, later chancellor of St Andrews University) and of moral philosophy, Knox's own former chair, now to be occupied by A. D. Woozley. He saw to it that the academic reputation of St Andrews University was re-established in all its ancient glory. 
Two further problems required Knox's most urgent attention. The financial situation of the university was extremely precarious and needed immediate amelioration. His financial skills and tough governance succeeded in placing the university's fiscal position on a sound footing in record time. Furthermore, the relationship between St Andrews and its constituent college at Dundee had long been tense. Knox managed to reconcile the two sectors of the university by winning the confidence of his Dundee colleagues, who became the new principal's keenest supporters. Yet the Robbins report on higher education (1964) and the virtual doubling of the number of British universities led inexorably to the establishment in 1966 of Dundee as an independent university. Knox, with characteristic excess of rectitude, saw in this development the failure of his stewardship and decided -- quite unnecessarily -- to resign at the same time. 
Knox's principalship had been a marked success. He himself had set an example in thrifty administration and in the continuance of his scholarship -- despite heavy burdens of management. He worked hard himself in order to persuade his colleagues to engage in research rather than waste their time in committees. He favoured old-fashioned academic virtues and preferred minimalism to gratuitous expansion of the sort proposed by the report of the Robbins committee. He enjoined his closest friends to see to it that any future memoir written about him should contain the words of opprobrium (considered by him as praise), uttered by a highly placed leader of academe at a meeting of the vice-chancellors and principals committee in the early 1960s, that he was 'an academic dinosaur'. He was knighted in 1961, and a number of honorary doctorates were conferred on him. 
Knox's extra-curricular 'savoir-faire' imposed on him demands to serve on a number of government-appointed commissions, such as the Catering Wages Commission, the national reference tribunal for the UK coal industry, the Scottish Tourist Board, the Advisory Council on Education in Scotland, and the review body on doctors' and dentists' remuneration. He was also chairman of governors of Morrison's academy, Crieff. His academic duties and pleasures were never neglected, especially not his work on Hegel, to which he remained single-mindedly devoted. Thus he was invited to deliver the prestigious Gifford lectures at Aberdeen University (1965-8) and was elected to membership (later to the vice-presidency) of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. 
Knox owed his initial interest in Hegelianism to his father, who had studied under Edward Caird at Glasgow. He first began to explore the wider implications of Hegelianism during his undergraduate years at Pembroke, when he came under the influence of Robin Collingwood. Caird had brought out its theological significance, its capacity for countering destructive scepticism, for reanimating moral and religious convictions, for resolving the apparent conflict between science and faith. Collingwood, while he was tutoring Knox, was in the process of thinking through what he had learned from immersing himself in the Italian tradition, in the writings of Vico, Croce, and Ruggiero -- in clarifying his ideas on truth and error, on aesthetics, and on the relationship between history and philosophy. 
It was this spectrum of general preoccupations which established the framework for the whole of Knox's subsequent approach to Hegel studies. When he returned to Oxford in 1931, he was concerned primarily with the interdisciplinary potential of Hegel's systematic work -- he gave lectures on the 'Encyclopedia', and prepared but did not publish an article on the 'Philosophy of Nature'. By 1932 he had begun to appreciate the importance of the work Dilthey and Lasson had done on Hegel's development, especially on account of the light it threw on the mature conception of the relationship between ethics, politics, and religion. It was this that came to dominate his thinking, and the publication of Michael Foster's book on the political philosophies of Plato and Hegel (1935) which finally persuaded him to start work on a new translation of the 'Philosophy of Right'. 
At the time, concerning oneself with Hegel's political philosophy was bound to create a stir and give rise to criticism, and in 1940 ('Philosophy', 15, 1940, 51-63) Knox felt obliged to publish an article on 'Hegel and Prussianism', in which he pointed out the foolishness of simply writing this philosophy off as a glorification of the state and a precursor of Nazism. The publication of the translation by the Clarendon Press in 1942 proved to be a milestone in the development of British Hegel studies, since for the very first time one of the key texts was presented with a full-scale commentary, placing the subject matter in its historical context and analysing the cogency of the expositions. 
It was this work, which he brought out in a revised edition in 1945 and which was then reissued five times over the next twenty years, which established Knox as the leading authority on Hegelianism in the English-speaking world. He followed it up by co-operating with Richard Kroner on an edition of the 'Early Theological Writings', published in America in 1948, and with his pupil Zbigniew Pelczynski, tutor and lecturer at Pembroke College, Oxford, on a corresponding edition of Hegel's minor 'Political Writings', published by the Clarendon Press in 1964. He also continued to cultivate his wider interests, planning a comprehensive account of Hegel's development, preparing a draft translation of parts of Boumann's edition of the 'Philosophy of Subjective Spirit', and after his retirement working steadily on the 'Aesthetics', the two magnificent volumes of which he finally saw through the press in 1974. During his last years he was working on the standard text of the lectures on the history of philosophy. 
Knox had decided views on the general philosophical significance of attempting to create an informed and up-to-date Hegelian culture in the English-speaking world. He was anything but enthusiastic about the growing preoccupation with the phenomenological approach and, when G. R. G. Mure's study of the 'Logic' appeared in 1950, greeted it with a suitably appreciative review ('Philosophy', 26, 1951, 180-83). He stated publicly, thirty-five years after the event, that when he first read the 'Tractatus logico-philosophicus' soon after its publication, the book made no impression on his mind whatever: 'It seemed to me to be ingenious, to be about problems other than those with which in my study of philosophy I was trying to grapple, and to be not altogether exempt from what I took to be philosophical errors. If I had been told at that time that in the course of forty years I would see philosophical and historical theology eclipsed and find the philosophical scene dominated by doctrines which owed far more to Wittgenstein than to my own masters in the subject, I would have been altogether incredulous. ('Two conceptions of philosophy', 'Philosophy', 36, 1961, 289-308)' During his retirement Knox did all he could to further what he saw as worthwhile developments in Hegel studies, and in 1978 made a substantial financial contribution to the founding of the Hegel Society of Great Britain. 
Knox was stocky with a markedly round head and strong rimless glasses. The obituarist in 'The Times' rightly pronounced him 'a wily committee-man, a coiner of sharp aphorisms, and a master of formidable silences' ('The Times'). Once convinced of someone's loyalty, he gave his friendship unstintingly. His musical knowledge and tastes were discriminating; he played the piano well; theology and a wide range of history and literature mattered to him; vintage claret was much favoured -- as was the company of a select circle of close friends. He died of cancer at his home, 19 Victoria Terrace, Crieff, Perthshire, on 6 April 1980 and was buried at Perth on 10 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 40504


Longrigg, Stephen Hemsley (1893-1979), military governor and petroleum company executive, was born on 7 August 1893 at Sevenoaks, Kent, the younger son of William George Hemsley Longrigg (1859-1941), a banking official and businessman, and his wife, Kate Thorp (died 1937). 
Longrigg attended Highgate School in north London and subsequently went up to Oriel College, Oxford, in 1911. He read classics and obtained a first-class degree. Because of army service in the Royal Warwickshire regiment in 1914-21 (major in 1918) he received his MA degree in 1921 when on home leave from Iraq. Early during his subsequent service in the Iraq government, from 1918 to 1931, he married, in 1922, Florence (1890-1976), daughter of Henry Aitken Anderson. They had two sons (John and Roger) and a daughter. In the Iraq administration Longrigg rose rapidly and at an early age became inspector-general of revenue, from 1927 to 1931. In addition to his official duties he developed his authorial talents by writing a highly competent history of Iraq entitled 'Four Centuries of Modern Iraq' (1925), which has not been superseded. This work established his reputation as a serious historian and orientalist. His familiarity with Iraq extended beyond its borders to the whole of the Fertile Crescent and the Arabian peninsula. 
The success of Longrigg's first work was followed by several other books, many articles, and a steady stream of lectures throughout his life. His firsthand knowledge of the scene and personalities of the area enlivened both his felicitous pen (put to paper in a fine hand) and his remarkable fluency as a speaker. When on one occasion, during a lecture to a university audience, the lights failed, he discarded his script and continued without hesitation or pause. 
His long service in Iraq enabled Longrigg to acquire an admirable command of Arabic. This facility served him in good stead when, from 1931 to 1951, he became a senior executive of the Iraq Petroleum Company and in this capacity negotiated oil contracts with some of the rulers of the Arabian peninsula. King Ibn Sa'ud was one of the principal partners of his negotiating skills. 
The Second World War ushered in a third career as pro-consul. Longrigg became a brigadier for the duration of the war and served on the general staff of general headquarters Cairo, mainly concerned with the preparations for the military administration of the expected occupation of the Italian colonial possessions in Africa. When he was appointed chief administrator (military governor) of Eritrea, he was fully ready for the task, which he always considered the high point of his career. For the best part of three years, from 1942 to 1944, he presided over a military (yet quasi-colonial) government which reflected Longrigg's own efficiency and humaneness. 
Longrigg was fortunate in having on his staff a number of officers of high calibre who were skilled in colonial administration, anthropology, and some of the languages of the area. Longrigg himself was initially no expert in Ethiopian history or languages, but he acquired a knowledge of the former by remarkably skilful and eclectic reading, while for the latter he made use of his extremely serviceable Italian and his command of Arabic. Although the lowlands of Eritrea were predominantly inhabited by Muslims who knew little or no Arabic, he would insist on talking to them in that language -- suggesting that it was sheer quirkiness on their part to claim that they could not understand him. 
Longrigg's governorship was undoubtedly the most prosperous as well as the most quiescent time during the eleven years of British military administration in Eritrea. In his official capacity Longrigg could be aloof and gubernatorial, with the natural air of authority which he so amply possessed, but as host at the Villa Vicereale he was relaxed and attentive to the comfort of his guests. The less cerebral among his officers might have been slightly restive during his weekly lectures, but the majority enjoyed his intellectual vigour as much as the lecturer himself did. 
Towards the end of his governorship Longrigg wrote 'A Short History of Eritrea' (1945) which, though not primarily based on independent research (as he himself stressed repeatedly), gave an excellent and succinct picture of country and people, their past and prospects for the future. His views on that future (the Christian highland provinces to go to Ethiopia, the Muslim lowlands to be annexed to Sudan) bore fruit only with regard to the former proposal. 
On Longrigg's return to England he rejoined the Iraq Petroleum Company until his retirement in 1951. As well as accepting a number of honorary positions, he continued his literary activities at an astonishing pace. His earlier book on Iraq was now brought up to date in 'Iraq, 1900 to 1950' (3rd impression, 1968) and was followed by works on oil, on the Middle East, and on Syria and Lebanon. He was much in demand as a lecturer, particularly in the USA. 
Longrigg was appointed OBE in 1927, and in 1955 he supplicated successfully for an Oxford DLitt. He received the Lawrence of Arabia medal in 1962 and the Richard Burton medal in 1969. His wife predeceased him in 1976 and he himself died on 11 September 1979 at the Otara Nursing Home, Kingsley Green, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 40506


Trevaskis, Sir (Gerald) Kennedy Nicholas (1915-1990), colonial official, was born on 1 January 1915 at Hove, Sussex, the eldest of three children of Hugh Kennedy Trevaskis (1882-1962), civil servant in India, and his wife, Eva Gwendolin Constance Mytanwy (1897-1969), daughter of Captain Alfred Ephrot Tizard RN and Mytanwy Tizard. The early retirement of his father from the Indian Civil Service and his ordination in the Church of England gave Trevaskis and his siblings a truly happy family home from 1932 at the rectory, Rusper, Sussex. 
Kennedy Trevaskis was educated at Summer Fields School, Oxford, and then at Marlborough College from 1928 to 1933. He was a school prefect, a member of the cricket eleven in 1932 and 1933, and he was described as an extremely useful medium-fast bowler and good batsman. He studied at King's College, Cambridge, from 1933 to 1936, where he was captain of cricket in 1934-6 and of rugby in 1934. He married Sheila James Harrington ('b'. 1920), daughter of Colonel F. J. Harrington, at the Brompton Oratory on 25 August 1945. They had two sons and a daughter. 
Trevaskis joined the colonial administrative service in Northern Rhodesia in 1938, at a time when that service was at the peak of its prestige; and the Northern Rhodesia regiment, initially as a sergeant, in September 1939, being taken prisoner by Italian forces in August 1940 in British Somaliland, following one of the last set-piece battles fought in Africa. He learned Italian and was thereby asked to join the British occupied enemy territory administration, Eritrea. 
Trevaskis now showed his mettle. He was a big man, physically, but also mentally: to his work he brought a keen intellect, guided by academic rigour. The peoples of his first posting, the Keren, had a strong feudal structure. He presided with skill over mixed-culture tribunals dealing with complex land disputes; later, in his 'left-wing phase', he organized the freeing of the serfs of a combined Keren-Agordat western province from their ancient feudal dues and services. He served in 1947-8 as a member of the British delegation to the four-power commission on former Italian colonies. As political secretary and liaison officer, United Nations commission, he sought in 1950 to secure for Eritrea an independent future; but he was defeated by Haile Selassie's prestige and the United States' need of facilities in Eritrea, which he offered, to monitor communications across the Indian and Pacific oceans. Trevaskis's account of Britain's and his own stewardship is given in 'A Colony in Transition: the British Occupation of Eritrea, 1941-52' (1960). 
Realizing that he could do nothing further, Trevaskis returned to Northern Rhodesia in 1948, becoming district commissioner of Ndola, headquarters of the immensely wealthy copperbelt region. In 1951 he transferred to the Aden protectorate as political officer, western Aden protectorate, becoming deputy British agent in 1952 and adviser and British agent in 1954. He was back in an environment, essentially Muslim, where his experience, personal qualities, and sympathies were at home. 
Trevaskis's first success was the inauguration on 11 February 1959 of the Federation of South Arabia, for which he was appointed CMG. Three years later, largely due to the diplomatic skills of Trevaskis, exercised in fluent Arabic, Aden agreed to join the federation, a necessity if the federation were to cease to be economically dependent on Great Britain. Trevaskis became high commissioner on 16 August 1963 and was advanced to KCMG. Over the following year the colonial secretary, Duncan Sandys, worked at hectic pace, exhausting British officials and Arabian ministers, to bring the Aden-South Arabia Federation to successful birth. This was bitterly opposed by President Nasser of Egypt: a hand grenade was thrown at Trevaskis at Aden airport in December 1963; two lives were lost, and he was wounded. 
These efforts were aborted when in late 1964 the general election in Britain was won by the Labour Party, hostile to attempts to maintain British influence east of Suez, and to 'feudal and reactionary' rulers, as one reviewer put it. Anthony Greenwood, Labour's colonial secretary, summoned Trevaskis home. While he waited to see the new minister, his successor, Sir Richard Turnbull, was being dispatched to Aden; Greenwood's order was that the press was to be given no information and that Turnbull's departure was to be secret. Trevaskis had his commission terminated on 23 November 1964. 
Trevaskis was subsequently adviser to Sunningdale Oils and was much valued by them on account of his Arabian contacts. He maintained friendly contacts with several Arabian rulers, but his career was, at an age of not yet fifty, effectively at an end. He wrote the history of and the case for the policies he stood for: 'Shades of Amber, a South Arabian Episode' (1968) must take its place beside his work on Eritrea as an evocative account of a lost cause. Both gave testimony to his sympathies for the intellectually advanced, though economically under-developed, peoples of the Horn of Africa. 
Trevaskis's marriage, a sharing of thirty years abroad and in England, was greatly damaged by the effects of the Aden bombing. He and his wife finally parted in 1976, but did not divorce. Trevaskis had a stable and long-lasting relationship with a young widow, Valentine Sylvia Donovan (1935-1997), who later took his name by deed poll. He bought the Old Rectory, Rusper, where he spent his last years. 
In the 1980s, his first love, Eritrea, reclaimed Trevaskis. He became a valued adviser to the Eritrean Peoples' Liberation Front, which in 1993 secured independence. He would have been a principal guest at a conference organized by the Eritrean Peoples' Liberation Front at the beginning of March 1990, but that same March, during an operation for a suspected hiatus hernia, he was found to have extensive cancer. He died shortly after recovering consciousness on 4 March 1990 at Gatwick Park Hospital, near Crawley, Sussex, and was buried on 21 March in Rusper churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 40507


Guthrie, Matthew (1743-1807), physician and natural philosopher, born on 24 March 1743, probably in Edinburgh, was the son of Hary Guthrie (1709-1794), an Edinburgh lawyer of known Jacobite sympathies, and his first wife, Rachel Milne (1719-1746). His grandfather was Gideon Guthrie (1663-1732), a well-known Scottish Episcopalian minister. The historian William Guthrie (1708?-1770) was his uncle. Matthew was the middle child, being flanked by an elder sister, Euphan, and a younger brother, William. Euphan's eldest daughter, Rachel (1759-1852?), married John Robison (1739-1805), who became professor of natural philosophy at Edinburgh, and it was with Robison, who was secretary to Admiral Sir Charles Knowles, that Guthrie arrived in St Petersburg in the late summer of 1769. Before this Guthrie had been apprenticed to an Edinburgh surgeon, William Inglis; after serving at sea in the employ of the East India Company he decided on his return to Scotland in 1764 to take a course in medicine at the University of Edinburgh. His name appears, under the date 24 December 1764, in the class-list for 'Anatomy, Chemistry and Theory and Practice of Medicine'. Among his teachers were John Hope, Robert Whytt, Alexander Monro secundus, William Cullen, and Joseph Black. Guthrie was also a friend of Andrew Duncan of the Medical Society of Edinburgh. It appears that he spent some time practising in London 'where his friends advisd him to goe to St Petersburgh where they hear there is great demand for people of his profession' (Cross, 'By the Banks of the Neva', 147). On his arrival in Russia, however, Guthrie was appointed only to the lowly level of lekar or surgeon, so he returned to Scotland to improve his qualifications and took the MA and MD degrees at St Andrews University on 16 April 1770, by virtue of testimonials signed by Thomas Young and Colin Drummond. This was a normal process for the time and Guthrie seems to have been a competent medical man. 
Guthrie returned to Russia in 1770: his first appointment was to the admiralty ('admiralteystv-kollegiya'), and from there he was posted in 1772 as a surgeon to P. A. Rumyantsev's army corps in Moldavia and Wallachia, serving at the field marshal's headquarters at Jassy. He became involved with questions of quarantine and plague prevention, publishing a paper on the topic in 'Medical and Philosophical Commentaries' (8, 1781). Until 1776 Guthrie travelled widely in the northern coastal territories of the Black Sea, a region in whose culture he developed a deep interest, as is manifested by his 'Noctes Rossicae' in the British Library, and by his supplement to his wife's travel diary, published in 1802. Guthrie then returned to St Petersburg and in March 1778 became chief physician to the imperial land cadet corps of nobles. He was also appointed councillor of state to Tsar Paul, in the suite of the Tsarina Catherine the Great, and later to Alexander I, thereby entering the ranks of the Russian hereditary nobility. 
In 1781 Guthrie made an influential marriage to a French widow, Marie Dunant, 'nee' Romaud-Survesnes (died 1800), acting director of the imperial convent for the education of noblewomen in Russia. Guthrie wrote an account of the institution for the use of John Howard, the Quaker reformer; it is preserved in the archives of the Royal Society (letters and papers, decade 7, no. 256). Guthrie and his wife had two daughters. The beautiful and vivacious Anastasia-Jessy (1782-1855) married Charles Gascoigne (1738-1806), then the most renowned iron-founder and engine builder in Russia. Guthrie's second daughter, Mary Elizabeth (1789-1850), married General Sir James Hay (1765-1837). Guthrie was variously described as 'the ubiquitous Dr. Matthew Guthrie' (John Howard); as 'pompous and pedantic' (William Coxe); as 'a gentleman of the most amiable manners, a philosopher and well known to the world for his various scientific and literary productions' (John Carr); and as 'a man of very clear ideas, perfectly acquainted with all the physical knowledge pursuing at present in England, a frequent correspondent with Priestley, Magellan and others of the English Philosophers and a man of inventive genius himself' (Samuel Bentham). Guthrie's house was a place of first resort for all English visitors with a taste for travel, science, medicine, natural history, and technology. He was also consulted by the Russian authorities on a variety of matters, including the copper-sheathing of the wooden hulls of the Russian navy, and the identification of foreigners who might be of use in Russia. He was elected to the Free Economic Society of St Petersburg in 1777. He was well known to Joseph Black, James Hutton, James Watt, Joseph Priestley, and, indeed, to most of the scientific literati of his time. Others of his acquaintance included the Portuguese industrial spy J. H. de Magellan; the Swiss F. X. Schwediaur and M. A. Pictet; the Scots engineer Charles Baird; and Sir John Sinclair. There is a delightful description of Guthrie's outdoor study in which he received several of these men in John Carr's 'A Northern Summer' (1805, 326-7). 
Guthrie was an unceasing communicator of things scientific. Several of his publications arose from letters, such as one to John Hope ('Medical and Philosophical Commentaries', 4, 1776-7); another to Andrew Duncan on the use of 'Rhododendron chrysanthemum' for the treatment of gout and rheumatism (ibid.); one to Joseph Priestley, 'On the antiseptic regimen of the natives of Russia' (Royal Society, London, letters and papers, decade 7, no. 8); and a communication to Richard Kirwan (ibid., decade 8, no. 68) on the freezing-point of mercury, a subject about which he also wrote to Joseph Black. From 1792 to 1794 Guthrie contributed fifty pieces to James Anderson's 'The Bee, or, Literary Weekly Intelligencer'. Most of these pieces were edited or translated by Guthrie from other writers such as P. S. Pallas, M. V. Lomonosov, and even Catherine the Great herself. He may have been the translator of Catherine's story 'Khlor', translated as 'Ivan Czarowitz, or, The Rose without Prickles, that Stings not' in 'The Bee' for 28 August and 11 September 1793; but he was certainly the translator of Catherine's opera 'Oleg', which he sent to his English publishers, Cadell and Davies, who decided not to publish it. In his correspondence with Joseph Black, Guthrie asked questions about the manufacture of steel. He also wrote letters to James Hutton, the great geologist, and exchanged mineral samples with him. Guthrie was a distinguished gemmologist, having a large collection of gems of his own and being well acquainted with the Russian royal collections, as well as other royal collections. Because of his links to Laxmann, he was able to give precise locations of Russian fossils and to provide contemporary Russian monetary values for gemstones. 
Like other Scots doctors who preceded him in Russia, Guthrie disseminated rare plants and seeds, as well as common ones. Some of these were sent to John Hope, and to other collectors. Much of the stimulus to this work derived from P. S. Pallas and centred on medicinal plants, such as 'Rhododendron chrysanthemum', 'Asafoetida', and 'Rheum palmatum', but buckwheat and larch seed were also sent to Scotland from Russia. Besides these botanical matters Guthrie corresponded on textiles, animal husbandry, the prevention of scurvy, archaeology, geography, linguistics, ethnography, scientific instrumentation, and popular music, superstitions, and folklore. He collected specimens for geology, ornithology, ichthyology, entomology, and zoology. 
Guthrie was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 11 April 1782, was a member of the Edinburgh Philosophical Society, and a founder in November 1783 of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He became a corresponding member on 25 June 1752 of the societies of antiquaries of London and Edinburgh, and of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Commerce, and Manufactures; and corresponded with the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. He also belonged to the New Music Society (Novoye Muzykalnoye Obshchestvo) of St Petersburg from its foundation in 1778 to its demise in 1792, and was a friend of Ivan Prach, the composer, and N. P. Yakhontov, the court musician. One of his last publications was his edition in 1802 of his wife's travel diaries, to which he added notes of his own. He died in St Petersburg on 7 August 1807 and was buried next to his wife in the city's Smolensk churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 40508


Rogerson, John (1741-1823), physician, the son of Samuel Rogerson, was probably born at Lochbrow, Scotland. On 14 August 1765 he graduated from Edinburgh University. His thesis, 'De morbis infantum', was dedicated to James Mounsey, a physician to Tsar Peter III, on whose recommendation Rogerson gained employment in Russia. In 1766 Rogerson arrived at St Petersburg, where he was examined by the Medical College and received the right to practise in Russia. Rogerson was introduced to Catherine II by Princess Dashkova, who stated that 'Mr. Rogerson's great skill and care gave me my son back' ('Memoirs', 194). On 18 February 1769 Rogerson was appointed a court physician with a salary of 1000 roubles a year. He learned some Russian, settled in St Petersburg, and quickly established himself in fashionable society. On 18 January 1776 he was appointed physician-in-ordinary (leib-medik), with a salary of 4000 roubles a year. He was given the title of active councillor of state and was elected to the Imperial Academy of Sciences. 
In 1779 Rogerson was elected to the Royal Society of London, on account of his work in promoting scientific and intellectual links between Russia and England, through his extensive personal connections. Among his correspondents were William Robertson, the principal of Edinburgh University, whose works Rogerson introduced to Catherine II, and John Hope, with whom Rogerson had studied botany. In 1784 Rogerson's position was threatened by the promotion of Dr Weikard, under the patronage of Count Orlov, Catherine's current favourite. Rogerson petitioned for leave, ostensibly to take the waters, and sold his house in Tsarskoye Selo for 2000 roubles. However, before he could leave, another royal favourite, Lanskoy, fell ill. Weikard failed to effect a successful cure, and although Rogerson, who was called too late, was unable to save Lanskoy, he was restored to favour and was retained to help Catherine to cope with her own bereavement. 
In 1785 Rogerson undertook a short European tour to England, Paris, and Vienna, before returning to Russia the following year. Although Catherine professed scepticism towards doctors and medicines, she seems to have regarded Rogerson as the most capable physician in her entourage and often dispatched him to deal with emergencies or to treat her sick friends. Thus he was sent in 1786 to the port of Kronstadt, whose hospitals were in the grip of a deadly epidemic. He also attended Admiral Greig, who fell ill while on board ship in the port of Tallinn in 1788. Rogerson accompanied Catherine on her trips to the south of Russia and along the River Dnieper in 1786 and 1787. 
Rogerson was reputed to be absent-minded, a passionate gambler, and a gossip. These characteristics, together with his tall and angular appearance, made him the butt of jokes. Nevertheless, he possessed sufficient tact and diplomatic skills to be used regularly in unofficial negotiations, and acquired many staunch friends, among both Russians and foreigners. On 19 August 1795 he was given a present of an estate in the Minsk region which brought him an annual revenue of 6000 roubles. Although his medical skills were scorned by rival doctors at the St Petersburg court, mainly because of his predilection for phlebotomy and laxatives, he enjoyed considerable popularity among his aristocratic patients. What little is known about his medical practice reveals him to have been a doctor who recognized the particular needs of his patients, and a good diagnostician. 
Rogerson's treatment of the bereaved tsarina consisted mainly of providing a tranquil environment for her. Although she scorned medical ministrations, she accepted some of his prescriptions and acted on his advice when she acquired the patent for a popular remedy, Tinctura nervine bestuschevi. According to her own admission, her favourite, Prince Potyomkin, implicitly adhered to Rogerson's advice, finding his remedies very helpful. In Catherine's last illness Rogerson was utterly opposed to the treatment prescribed by Dr Cachoni, who insisted on treating the open sores on the tsarina's legs. In Rogerson's opinion the sores were less important than the prevention of apoplexy, which he feared on account of her advanced age and considerable weight. 
After Catherine's death from apoplexy in 1796 Rogerson remained in Russia. On 5 April 1797, the day of Paul I's coronation, Rogerson was promoted to the rank of secret councillor. Despite this, he found the new court atmosphere almost suffocating, whereas serving Catherine had been 'the most perfect freedom' (Yelnitsky). After Paul's assassination in 1801 Rogerson continued to work as a court physician and a member of the Medical Council. He visited Britain in 1804-5, and again in 1811-13. In 1809 he retired from medical practice but continued to treat his close friends. 
In 1816 Rogerson returned to Scotland, settling on his estate at Dumcrieff, near Moffat, in Dumfriesshire. He had at least one son who became a naval surgeon, and there is evidence of his nieces living with him in St Petersburg during the 1790s. He left no notes or memoirs, though some of his extensive correspondence survives, revealing the important role he played in promoting intellectual, cultural, and social contacts between Russia and Britain. Rogerson died on his Dumcrieff estate in 1823. 


@@@@@


doc= 40510


Murray, George (1741-1797), naval officer, was born on 22 August 1741 at Tullibardine, Perthshire, the fourth son and fifth of the seven children of Lord George Murray (1694-1760), Jacobite army officer, and Amelia, 'nee' Murray (1710-1766). His paternal grandfather was John Murray, first duke of Atholl, and his maternal grandfather was James Murray of Glencarse and Strowan. His father and his father's older brother, the marquess of Tullibardine, supported the Jacobite risings in 1715, 1719, and 1745-6. Lord George Murray, who served as a lieutenant-general under Prince Charles Edward Stuart, the Young Pretender, fled to the continent after the Jacobite defeat at Culloden. Young George Murray remained in Scotland and never saw his father after 1746. From 1755 to 1756 he attended the school of William Rose at Kew, and then he entered the Royal Naval Academy at Portsmouth where he remained until 1758. 
Murray began his naval career in 1758 as a midshipman on the ship of the line 'Newark' (80 guns), flagship of Vice-Admiral Francis Holburne, a fellow Scot. After a cruise in the channel, he went in 1759 to India in the 'Falmouth' (50 guns). He returned to England in 1762 in the frigate 'Terpsichore', passed his lieutenant's examination, and was appointed to the sloop 'Swift'. In 1763 he was moved to the frigate 'Tartar' which the next year joined the squadron at Jamaica where he was promoted commander of the sloop 'Ferret' in 1765. While serving on the Jamaica station he surveyed Mobile harbour in British West Florida and collected for his brother, the third duke of Atholl, specimens of flora and fauna and Native American artefacts from that region to form a valuable collection at Blair Castle in Scotland. Posted as captain of the frigate 'Renown' in 1768, he transferred to another frigate, the 'Adventure', and returned to England in 1769. From 1770 to 1775 he was on half pay and then he was appointed to the frigate 'Levant' in the Mediterranean where he served until 1779. Having next been appointed to the frigate 'Cleopatra' in 1780, he served in the downs, the channel, and the North Sea where he participated in the battle of Dogger Bank on 5 August 1781. In December 1782 he was appointed to his first ship of the line command, the 'Irresistible' (74 guns), which was paid off at the end of the American War of Independence. 
While on half pay (1783-90) Murray retired to Perthshire. On 13 May 1784 he married Wilhelmina King ('c'.1738-1795), daughter of Thomas, fifth Baron King of Ockham, and established his residence at Stanley House, Strathord. They had no children. In 1790 Murray purchased the estate of Pitkeathly near Bridge of Earn in Perthshire. At the general election of 1790 Murray, with the approval of Henry Dundas, political manager in Scotland for William Pitt, was elected member of parliament for the Perth burghs on the interest of his nephew, the fourth duke of Atholl. In parliament he gave silent support to the Pitt government and willingly vacated his seat in March 1796 for a friend of Dundas. 
Murray resumed his naval career in August 1790 at the time of the Nootka crisis with Spain when he was appointed to the 'Defence' (74 guns). The dispute, however, was soon resolved, and the 'Defence' was paid off in November. In September 1792 Murray was appointed to the 'Vengeance' (74 guns) and made commander-in-chief in the Medway at Chatham with the temporary rank of commodore. On outbreak of war with France in February 1793, Murray was given command of the 'Duke' (98 guns) and made a colonel of the Royal Marines. In March he sailed for the West Indies in the fleet of Admiral Alan Gardner. While off Martinique in June the 'Duke' was severely damaged by lightning, and Murray returned to England with a convoy in October. He was then transferred at Plymouth to another ship of the line, the 'Glory' (98 guns). 
Murray was made commander-in-chief of the North American squadron based on Halifax, Nova Scotia, in March 1794, and was promoted rear-admiral in April and vice-admiral the next year. Murray's squadron -- consisting of his flagship, the 'Resolution' (74 guns), two other ships of the line, four frigates, and a sloop -- sailed from England in May and reached Halifax in August after touching at the Delaware and Sandy Hook. Although the North American station was not a major theatre, important British interests, such as the colonies in North America, trade, and the fisheries required naval protection. With a cruising area extending from the Gulf of St Lawrence and the Bay of Fundy southwards to the Bahamas and eastwards from the coast of the United States to Bermuda, Murray's inadequate force, always short of seamen and including small vessels, operated under adverse conditions. An additional burden were the frequent confrontations with the United States over neutral rights and obligations. 
For more than two years Murray, a seasoned and experienced officer, conducted his command with vigilance, restraint, and tact. His squadron almost completely cleared North American waters of French men-of-war and privateers. He won the praise of the mercantile and shipping interests of British North America for providing adequate and timely convoys, especially for the critical cargoes of masts and naval stores bound for England. Seeing the need for an auxiliary operating base farther south than Halifax in order to expedite cruising during the winter months and to lessen the need to use the territorial waters of the United States, Murray persuaded the Admiralty to add Bermuda to his command. He authorized the survey of the anchorage at Bermuda, which would later be known as Murray's anchorage, and ordered the building of storehouses and water tanks for supplying the squadron and the establishment of a naval hospital. When Murray became aware of the availability of cedar timber and shipbuilders in the islands he initiated the building at Bermuda of sloops and smaller vessels that were critically needed by his squadron and the British navy elsewhere. 
At the beginning of Murray's third year in the North American command, Earl Spencer, first lord of the Admiralty, recommended that he should remain on the station and not be recalled when his three-year tour of overseas duty ended. Spencer emphasized that Murray, well known and liked in America, was familiar with the peculiar difficulties of the station where he had served with distinction. Murray, however, suffered a stroke in May 1796; this was followed by a more severe attack in October which forced him to relinquish the command. His departure from America elicited warm expressions of appreciation, public and private, especially in Bermuda and Nova Scotia, for his defence of the colonies and the protection of trade. He also received testimonials of affection and professional commendation from his subordinates in the squadron. After returning to England Murray died on 17 October 1797 at the home of his nephew, Lord George Murray, at Hunton in Kent. He was buried at Ockham in Surrey near his wife, who had died on 28 December 1795. A memorial tablet to his memory was erected in the parish church of All Saints at Ockham. 
Although he was held in high esteem by his superiors, both civilian and naval, and by his fellow officers and subordinates, Murray has not received the recognition he deserves. Despite his success as commander-in-chief in North America Murray's career as a flag officer was comparatively brief and entirely confined to an overseas station far distant from the scenes of major actions. Moreover his career has been sometimes confused with that of a younger admiral of the same name, Sir George Murray (1755-1819). 


@@@@@


doc= 40511


James, John (c.1550-1601), record-keeper and physician, was the only known child of Richard James ('c'.1524-1581) and Jane Overnone ('b'. 'c'.1524), of Newport, Isle of Wight. James matriculated as sizar from Trinity College, Cambridge in 1564, becoming a scholar in 1565. He proceeded BA in 1568; became a fellow in 1569 and MA in 1571; and was licensed to practise medicine in 1575 before receiving his MD in 1578. Travelling to the Netherlands in September 1578 as England's first student at Leiden University medical school, he entered the 'physic line' and successfully incorporated his Cambridge degree into a second MD. Admitted as a candidate (1582), fellow (1584), and censor (1588, 1591, 1594) of the College of Physicians, he became physician to Queen Elizabeth's household in November 1595 at a fee of $50 per annum. Skilled in Spanish and other modern languages, he also served as the queen's reader, and a prebendary of Salisbury Cathedral (1591). He married in 1570 Elizabeth Caplin, with whom he had at least three sons, including the poet Francis James. 
The patronage of the earl of Leicester and Sir Francis Walsingham, secretary of state, secured James a mastership of requests (1577), to assist Thomas Wilson, Leiden alumnus and 'clerk of the papers', in recovering government documents from private hands. James succeeded Wilson as custodian of the papers in November 1578 at $40 per annum, and often used his proficiency in languages in translating manuscripts. He found the state papers scattered among the shelves and storage chests of an inadequate Whitehall muniment room, on loan to government departments and antiquaries, and 'in the study' of Walsingham's 'post house' in Seething Lane, London. Consequently, he soon joined the council clerk Robert Beale in requesting that 'publicke' papers no longer remain in government officials' homes; and then set about to make an inventory of all of Secretary Walsingham's manuscripts, and to catalogue them in a volume entitled 'Walsingham's table book'. Next, he began using 'docquets of parcels' to itemize all manuscripts and instruments entrusted to departing diplomats, and occasionally provided them with historical briefs of Anglo-European relations, such as his 'Compendium Ansiaticum', which summarized all Anglo-Hanseatic relations, beginning with Edward VI and continuing into Elizabeth's reign. 
Now an experienced archivist, James was assigned to examine and confiscate Walsingham's official papers following his death in 1590, only to discover that manuscript collectors had already pilfered the collection. The privy council ordered James to confiscate these essential documents, many of which he successfully retrieved. Still, he grew frustrated with his inadequate staff and muniment room, as well as the lack of a principal secretary of state between 1590 and 1598. He found many of the largely unbound domestic manuscripts in disarray or missing, due to unregistered loans. He also found it time-consuming and exhausting to sort, pack, and deliver 'diverse bookes, letters and other writinges for her Majesty's service' when her court was away from Whitehall. Finally, in October 1597, James created order out of chaos by having three rooms built under the decrepit Banqueting House at Whitehall. There he installed manuscript 'presses', storage shelves, and a fireplace for drying documents, and sorted, indexed, and bundled all available letters and papers 'of lesser use' dating from 1550. Following Lord Burghley's death in 1598, his private secretary, Sir Michael Hicks, and James were ordered by the secretary of state, Robert Cecil, to transfer all books and papers from his lordship's Covent Garden house to Sir Robert's Thames-side house in the Strand; they were not deposited in the Whitehall Paper Office, in order to avoid the antiquarian pilferings of that 'engrosser of antiquities', Robert Cotton. For this and other archival services James was paid the considerable sum of $20. The substantial manuscript collections at Hatfield House, Hertfordshire, confirm Cecil's success in protecting his family's papers. However, what neither he nor James knew was that, between Burghley's death and funeral, Hicks had confiscated an equivalent 115 volumes of the treasurer's papers (now the Lansdowne MSS), and carried them off to his country house at Ruckholt, Essex. 
James represented St Ives, Cornwall, in the 1584-5 parliament at the behest of the two lords of the borough, Mountjoy and Winchester. He helped to formulate a bill making it treason knowingly to receive or aid Jesuit priests, only to be stunned by John Parry's vehement speech against the bill, and the subsequent discovery of his intent to assassinate the queen. James also scolded the 'undecent forms of speech' of the corrupt and quarrelsome member for Gloucester, Thomas Atkins, who quickly reinterpreted his speech to the satisfaction of the house. Lord Burghley's submission of a bill to the Commons to end fraudulent conveyances incensed James and his colleagues as a violation of house prerogative and procedure, as it allowed victims of such fraud to seek redress in the Star Chamber, instead of the common law courts. Later, James represented Newcastle under Lyme in the reactionary 1593 parliament, which seemed determined to end puritan political power, recently weakened by the deaths of Leicester, Walter Mildmay, Walsingham, and the earl of Warwick. Sitting at the behest of his patron Robert Devereux, earl of Essex, James protested against Archbishop Whitgift's over-zealous drive for religious conformity. He also baulked at the Lords' unprecedented demand for three subsidies of $140,000, in violation of the ancient tradition that such bills must originate in the Commons, and he served on the committee that negotiated a satisfactory compromise. His parliamentary career ended with membership on committees for 'reducing disloyal subjects to their due obedience' and investigating the activities of Staffordshire brewers. The 'Mr. Doctor James' serving on the privileges and subsidy committees of this parliament was the civilian lawyer Francis James. 
In December 1599 Elizabeth sent James to a 'desperately sick' earl of Essex with a message of comfort, the written opinions of eight physicians, and a pot of broth. Following the death at Christmas 1600 of Michael Heneage, James was promised the post of keeper of the Tower records, but took sick and died on about 26 January 1601. Soon afterwards his wife successfully petitioned Elizabeth for 'small' pensions for her sons 'to relieve her family's wants'. 


@@@@@


doc= 40519


Jellicoe, Sir Geoffrey Alan (1900-1996), landscape architect, was born on 8 October 1900 at 70 Wynnstay Gardens, Chelsea, London, the younger son of George Edward Jellicoe, publisher's manager, and later publisher, and his wife, Florence Waterson, 'nee' Waylett. His parents separated when he was about fourteen and he lived alone with his mother, his teenage older brother having been swept into fighting in the First World War. He attended Cheltenham College as an exhibitioner, seeing as little of his father as possible, and money was scarce. His mother was an artist who had been trained at the Slade School; later in life she went on to create a series of free style embroidery pictures. 
From January 1919 until 1923 Jellicoe attended the Architectural Association School of Architecture in Bloomsbury, London. He then travelled with Jock Shepherd, a fellow student, in Italy, where they collected material for their classic book, 'Italian Gardens of the Renaissance' (1925). The book was illustrated by Shepherd's exquisite plans and cross-sections, based on Jellicoe's survey drawings: 'We suddenly realised we were into an extraordinary field of discovery, because as the drawing began to appear on paper, one realised the beauty of the actual plan and how it related to the site' (Harvey, 'Reflections', 4). So started Jellicoe's lifelong and stimulating journey of discovery of landscape design, a field in which he was pre-eminent throughout his long and active life. In 1930 he was a Bernard Webb scholar at the British School in Rome. 
Soon after their return from Italy Jellicoe and Shepherd set up in practice together, but in 1931 Jellicoe started his own practice at 40 Bloomsbury Square, London, feeling the need to break free from Shepherd's dominance as a designer. He continued to write: he had published 'Gardens and Design' (1927) with Shepherd, and (as sole author) he published 'Baroque Gardens of Austria' in 1932. He also taught at the Architectural Association (1929-34). He soon had interesting design opportunities. He built the international style Cheddar Gorge Caveman Restaurant (1934), the roof of which was a glass floored pool. He created several landscapes for private clients, often co-operating with Russell Page as planting designer; one of these was the Royal Lodge, Windsor, for the duke and duchess of York. An important work was extensive new formal gardens at Ditchley Park (1935-9) for Ronald and Nancy Tree, clients who, followed by their son Michael, remained patrons for fifty years. As well as several faithful clients there were other strands of continuity in Jellicoe's richly varied career. He always lived by Highgate Hill in London, and his office was always in Bloomsbury. 
On 11 July 1936 Jellicoe married Ursula Pares [
Jellicoe did much to promote the profession of landscape architecture. In 1929 he was a founder member of the Institute of Landscape Architects (later, to his delight, broadened into the Landscape Institute). From 1939 to 1949 he was the institute's president, keeping it alive through the arduous years of war. He edited the institute's 'Journal' from 1941 to 1945. He was busy during the war on emergency housing and other mainly architectural work, including immediate restoration of areas wrecked by bombs. He recorded 'That whenever a bomb fell... I thought this means another thousand or two in one's pocket! This was so horrible that... that was why one financed landscape during the war' by passing on all money from this source to the Institute of Landscape Architects (Harvey, 'Reflections', 10). This was typical of his strong sense of honour, integrity, and generosity, which left him at the end of his long and successful life with few accumulated resources other than a collection of pictures and numerous admiring friends and colleagues. During the same period he was also principal of the Architectural Association School (1939-42), a task he found exhausting and unrewarding. In 1948 he chaired an international conference for landscape architects in London and Cambridge, at the conclusion of which representatives from sixteen countries founded the International Federation of Landscape Architects, later a worldwide organization. Jellicoe was elected first president (1948-54) and was thereafter honorary president for life. 
Jellicoe continued to run a practice until 1973, from about 1954 in partnership with the architect Francis Coleridge. Much of the work of the practice was architectural, and the design of buildings was certainly the primary source of income. For the period 1943-73 Michael Spens ascribed eighty-three works to Jellicoe, of which eighteen were abortive designs and five were in Northern Rhodesia (1947-52). Several of his landscape works during this period were seminal in character, expressive of ideas which only later became widely accepted. Hope cement works in the Peak District (1943) was a fifty-year plan for the development and restoration of an industrial site and quarry. A rooftop cafe and water garden were created at Harvey's department store in Guildford (1956-7). At Hemel Hempstead linear water gardens gave delight to those moving into the shopping centre from town car parks (1959). Waste spoil was shaped into curvaceous hills at Park Royal (1959) and Harwell (1960). A plan for the centre of Gloucester included building height restrictions to safeguard views of the cathedral tower (1961). 
During the same period Jellicoe started to collect contemporary pictures, first influenced by Frederick Gibberd, with whom he travelled each year to study important landscapes. He served on the Royal Fine Arts Commission (1954-68) and greatly enjoyed his period as a trustee of the Tate Gallery (1967-74). This led to warm friendships with Henry Moore and Ben Nicholson, whose work he greatly admired. 
For many years Jellicoe was interested in the subconscious in landscape design, an idea he explored more deeply in creating the Kennedy Memorial at Runnymede (1964). 'It gave me my first serious opportunity to put a subconscious idea into a work, so that it is more important and more lasting than the purely visual impression the eye receives' (Harvey, 'Reflections', 17). Everything seen is underlain by an allegorical unseen meaning; the granite setts represent the multitude of pilgrims on their way upwards, the woodlands the cycle of life, the slightly curved memorial stone appears to float above the ground. The place is indeed peaceful and inspiring. Jellicoe's three volumes of 'Studies in Landscape Design' (1960, 1966, and 1970) explored connections between artworks, landscapes, and hidden ideas, connections later summarized in his Guelph lectures (1983). His designs too developed in controlled and sophisticated use of more abstract forms combined with traditional, exemplified by the central pool at Wisley (1971-2), and the exquisite Shute gardens for Michael and Lady Anne Tree (1970-80). 
In 1973 'the partnership ceased, I closed the office and one retired to one's home where one thought one would probably lead a quiet old age. 'The Landscape of Man' was the last major work one ever hoped to do and that was published in 1975', Jellicoe later recalled (Harvey, 'Reflections', 23-4). 'The Landscape of Man' proved a seminal work. Geoffrey and Susan Jellicoe wrote this great book together, starting in 1957, Susan taking many of its photographs. It was an exploration of examples of man's shaping of the environment worldwide throughout time, opening with the words: 'The world is moving into a phase when landscape design may well be recognised as the most comprehensive of the arts'. 
Susan Jellicoe had by this time established herself as an important figure in the world of landscape architecture. She was elected honorary associate of the Landscape Institute in 1968. She possessed a remarkable aptitude in quickly mastering and then excelling in any subject of interest to her. She had become a fine plantsman, and prepared planting schemes for many of her husband's landscapes. She was also an excellent black and white landscape photographer, her photographs appearing in several books in which she collaborated. These included 'Modern Private Gardens' (1968) and 'The Use of Water in Landscape Architecture' (1971), both with her husband; three books with Lady Marjory Allen, including 'Town Gardens to Live in' (1977); and 'The Gardens of Mughal India' (1972), with text by Sylvia Crowe and Sheila Haywood. She was an active member of the Garden History Society. She was editor of the magazine 'Landscape Design' for twenty years, and also chairman of the Landscape Institute's journal committee, which was responsible for this magazine. She edited the 'Observer''s gardening panel from 1961 to 1965. In 1985 she was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Sheffield and was invested at home a few days before her death. She was a gifted cook and the Jellicoes frequently entertained visitors of all ages at 19 Grove Terrace. She died at the Arkley Nursing Home, Wood Street, Barnet, Hertfordshire, on 1 August 1986, of Parkinson's disease, and was cremated on 10 August at Golders Green, London. 
From the age of eighty Jellicoe's creativity enjoyed a final passionate flowering, continuing even during Susan's last years, when he nursed her devotedly. They had moved in 1984 to a small modern flat with a wonderful view over Hampstead Heath, at 14 High Point, Highgate, designed in 1936 by Lubetkin and Tecton. He seemed to be happier working on his own without the pressures involved in managing an office. With an ever-smiling round face and bouncy demeanour he would brief younger colleagues on how to carry out his designs on site. Previously an uninspiring draughtsman, he started to produce large exquisite drawings in stipple and irregular ink line, enlivened with patches of colour; he would spend his morning over a drawing board in a tiny room in the flat. He was elected a Royal Academician in 1991 and held an exhibition there in 1994. 'I have a perfectly clear philosophy now in one's old age, that one can do good through one's work, which means that through this I should like everybody to experience life at a much deeper level than that of the visible world' (Harvey, 'Reflections', 29). He read widely and was greatly interested in Jung's theories about the subconscious. 'Like the portrait painter, the landscape designer needs to be a psychologist first and a technician afterwards. He needs to dig into the subconscious' (Parkin and Fieldhouse, 7-11). 
Jellicoe's gardens at Sutton Place, Guildford (1980-86), for Stanley Seeger included a romantic lake, walled gardens on both sides of the house, a characteristic long walk leading to a 'Magritte Walk', with strange optical scale effects, and a beautifully placed sculpted wall by Ben Nicholson. The whole was an inspiration. He designed landscape town plans for Modena and Brescia in Italy, the botanical and historical Moody Gardens for Galveston, Texas, and the Atlanta Historical Gardens in Georgia. Irrepressibly he produced numerous large detailed drawings in his own hand for these projects. Though in his last few years he became unable to leave home, he entertained visitors with a flood of ideas. At his well-attended ninetieth birthday party he delivered an inspiring and forward-looking speech in response to citations by others about the past. He subsequently set about founding the Landscape Foundation to promote new ideas in landscape design. 
Jellicoe was honoured by Landscape Architects' gold medals worldwide, American (1981), British (1985), and Australian (1990). He received the Royal Horticultural Society's Victoria medal of honour in 1995. In 1961 he was appointed CBE and in 1979 knighted. He worked on cheerfully until a year before his death, on 17 July 1996, at the Check House Nursing Home, Beer Street, Seaton, Devon, of heart failure. He was cremated on 25 July at Golders Green, London. In Kathryn Moore's words, he left 'a distinctive body of work, showing the development of his ideas across a turbulent century. He also leaves us with an enduring impression of energy, passion and enthusiasm' (Harvey, 'LDT Monograph', 151). 


@@@@@


doc= 40520


D'Oyly, Christopher (bap. 1717, d. 1795), politician, was baptized on 23 December 1717 in Banbury, Oxfordshire, the eldest son of Christopher D'Oyly (1682?-1752) of Banbury, an attorney in the court of common pleas, and his wife, Susanna (died 1758). There is no record of his early education, but he was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1741 and called to the bar on 5 June 1744. He sold his chambers in 1764, but it is said that he ceased to practise in 1754 on succeeding to an estate at Walton-on-Thames, Surrey (Bayly, 64). On 2 December 1765 he married Sarah Stanley (1725-1821), the younger daughter of George Stanley (died 1734) of Paultons, Hampshire, and his wife, Sarah (died 1764), and the granddaughter of Sir Hans Sloane. There were no children of the marriage. 
Having been appointed first clerk in the war office in December 1761, D'Oyly was promoted to deputy secretary on 1 January 1763. His replacement as first clerk was Philip Francis, with whom he forged political links and a candid friendship. Both continued in post when Lord Barrington succeeded Welbore Ellis, D'Oyly's future brother-in-law, as secretary at war in 1765. On 21 December 1771 D'Oyly informed Francis that he had resigned, but offered no reason why. His departure was followed three months later by that of Francis, who quit the war office in circumstances that remain unclear. On appointment to the Bengal supreme council in 1773, Francis negotiated for D'Oyly to stand in for him at the next general election at Wareham, for which seat D'Oyly was returned in October 1774. D'Oyly maintained a regular correspondence with Francis in India about politics and family affairs. If the replies that he received were sometimes intemperate and occasionally graceless, he retained goodwill and equanimity towards his correspondent. 
In May 1776 D'Oyly was appointed under-secretary in the colonial department and commissary-general of the musters, which drew him into planning the conduct of the war in America. A friend of the naval and military commanders Admiral Lord Howe and General Sir William Howe, he was dissatisfied by what he took to be the tepid support accorded them by his superior, Lord George Germain. He resigned abruptly on 6 February 1778, only days after the dispatch of a notice recalling Sir William Howe. In a letter to Francis he wrote: 'My reasons for giving up are many, but must not be trusted in a letter' ('Memoirs of Sir Philip Francis', 2.133). 
D'Oyly declared his intention to retire from parliament in 1780. Following the dissolution in September, Lord North offered him a deal by which he would become comptroller of army accounts in exchange for the commissary-general, which North required for a sitting member of parliament. D'Oyly declined the offer but then changed his mind about leaving parliament, and was returned for Seaford on 4 December 1780. He finally retired from parliament and public life in 1784. 
For much of his official life D'Oyly's London home was in Mayfair, first in Charles Street and from around 1779 in Curzon Street. He enjoyed Twickenham as a retreat, and there he became a friend of Horace Walpole. D'Oyly was frequently in demand as a family lawyer. Besides acting as an attorney for Francis during his absence in India he fulfilled the same function for Henry Strachey. He was an executor to Clive's will, adviser to his widow, Margaret Clive, and cleared up Charles Townshend's financial affairs after his death in 1767. More administrator than politician, D'Oyly made no impact in the house; indeed, he is not recorded as having spoken. 
D'Oyly died at Twickenham on 19 January 1795 and was buried on 27 January at St Mary's Church, Walton-on-Thames. Sarah D'Oyly long outlived him, and died on 28 November 1821, aged ninety-five. A marble monument in St Mary's Church by Sir Francis Chantrey commemorates both D'Oyly and his wife, who, as a widow, was among the sculptor's first patrons. D'Oyly is well characterized in the inscription, which eulogizes 'his professional abilities... ever exercised in acts of humanity, in allaying animosities, in composing differences'. 


@@@@@


doc= 40521


Wheler, Edward (bap. 1732, d. 1784), chairman of the East India Company and administrator in India, was baptized on 27 April 1732 at Leamington Hastings, Warwickshire, the fourth of the five sons of Sir William Wheler, baronet (died 1763), and his wife, Penelope (died 1740), daughter of Sir Stephen Glynne, baronet, of Bicester, Oxfordshire, and his wife, Sophia. Although boys of the family usually attended Rugby School, Edward Wheler did not, and particulars of his education appear to have gone unrecorded. He started business as a linen draper in Cornhill, although his firm, Wheler, Higginson & Co., later handled government contracts and further diversified into providing financial services to East India Company servants and others in India. He was first elected a director of the East India Company in 1765. For the elections held in April 1773 two rival lists of candidates were presented: a house list expected to continue the policy of the incumbent administration in opposing government interference in company affairs, and a proprietors' list backed by government. Included in the victorious proprietors' list, Wheler was chosen as deputy chairman. Three months later the chairman died, and Wheler was propelled into his place. After the financial crisis of 1772 the company was in dire need of purposeful leadership. This Wheler was temperamentally ill-equipped to provide, and his thoughts turned towards securing a seat in the Bengal supreme council, which was predominantly a legislative body with authority over the East India Company's other presidencies. 
In October 1776, when Hastings's resignation by proxy was accepted by the directors, Wheler waited on John Robinson, Lord North's right-hand man, to bid for the consequent vacancy in the Bengal council. The choice lay between Wheler and Justice Chambers of the Calcutta supreme court. The king signalled his support for Wheler as 'most likely to be acceptable to the Court of Directors and as a person who has steadily supported Government' (BL, Add. MS 37833, fol. 87). Wheler was duly appointed. However, when Hastings annulled his resignation Wheler's commission had to be hurriedly altered to allow him to fill the vacancy arising from the death of Colonel George Monson. 
Wheler arrived in Calcutta in October 1777. Affable, kindly, and impressionable, he had no very strong views of his own and readily bent to those of stronger-willed individuals around him. His advent critically affected the balance between the two parties in council. Would he follow Hastings or would he join with Philip Francis? No sooner had the 'Duke of Portland' entered the Hooghly than Wheler was assiduously courted by emissaries from both factions. A decision had to be made. A genuine enough fever aided and abetted his vacillation but in the end, unsurprisingly given his past record, he sided with Francis. For the ensuing three years Wheler did his best to satisfy his demanding ally. 
Wheler's wife, Harriet Chicheley (1740-1778), the fourth of the twelve children of the Revd James Chicheley Plowden, whom he had married in 1772, accompanied him to Calcutta, but died after only seven months. In 1780 Wheler married Charlotte ('b'. 'c'.1738), the daughter of George Durnford, a Winchester attorney. There were two daughters. 
In failing to win over Wheler, Hastings wrote him off as 'a mere cypher and the echo of Francis' (Gleig, 2.186), yet after Francis had returned to England in 1780, and John Macpherson and John Stables had joined the council, Hastings came to count on Wheler's reluctant acquiescence in his policies. In 1784 he wrote: 'Mr Wheler is really a man of business. Yet I cannot convince him of it, nor persuade him to trust to his own superiority. He... will always be [guided] by those who command him, and possess, at the same time, a majority of voices. (ibid., 3.145-6)' G. G. Ducarel stated the case rather more bluntly when he observed that Wheler 'abhors Hastings's measures but has not the strength of mind to resist him' (Ducarel to Francis, 27 July 1782, BL OIOC, MS Eur. E21, item 16). In fact, Wheler claimed that Francis had previously agreed that active opposition to Hastings's measures would 'not only be 'useless', but 'dangerous'' (Wheler to Francis, 5 Dec 1782, BL, Add. MS 40763, fols. 136-8), although that did not deter Francis from trying to direct Wheler from a distance by correspondence. 
Wheler died of a burst blood vessel at Suksaghur, 35 miles north-east of Calcutta, on 10 October 1784, and was interred in South Park Street burial-ground, Calcutta, next day. He left $40,000 and the residue of his estate to his wife, and $5000 to each of his daughters. Wheler was a thoroughly decent man who rose above his capabilities. 


@@@@@


doc= 40523


Weston, James (1688?-1748?), stenographer, hailed from Edinburgh; nothing is known of his parentage or early life. He was probably employed taking shorthand at trials in London in the 1710s. Established as a shorthand 'professor' by 1722, he claimed to have taught more than 200 pupils by mid-1724, many by post, waging that no Westonian writer could be matched for speed. He courted publicity through a protracted and costly advertising campaign puffing his services and 'Stenography Compleated' (1727), the most lavish shorthand book yet printed. A projected engraved shorthand 'Bible' never materialized, but in 1730 he published part of the prayer book in shorthand, and in 1743 a reformulation of his system, as well as crib sheets and copybook materials, some in manuscript. His system's appropriation of Theophilus Metcalfe's 1630s alphabet, its dependence on arbitrary symbols and awkward rules, and its ambiguous, inelegant written results all militated against its lasting success; few Westonian manuscripts survive. 'Warlike' and 'blustering' Weston's significance in shorthand history lies rather in having 'done service by making a noise and raising attention to shorthand' ('Private Journal', 1.73; 2.327), his 'warm and proud temper' ('British Journal', 143, 1725, 4) occasioning public spats and competitions with stenographer rivals. 


@@@@@


doc= 40524


Aubin, Penelope (1679?-1738), novelist and translator, was the daughter of Sir Richard Temple, third baronet (1634-1697), and his mistress, Anne Charleton, second daughter of the physician and natural philosopher Walter Charleton (1620-1707). Suggestions, originating with Abbe Antoine Prevost, that Penelope was the daughter of a French emigre officer have been disproved by recent research that has also added substantially to aspects of her biography (Welham, 'Penelope Aubin'). Anne Charleton and her daughter lived in Hammersmith as neighbours of Catherine of Braganza and, perhaps most important for Penelope's future depictions of good Roman Catholic characters in her novels, as neighbours of the convent of the Institute of the Blessed Virgin Mary. There is no evidence that Penelope was a Catholic, and, though she later stood godparent to children baptized in Huguenot churches, her own religious preferences were staunchly Anglican. 
On 4 May 1696 Penelope married Abraham Aubin (died 1740), the eldest son of a merchant family from Jersey, at St James's Church, Duke's Street, London, without the consent of her parents. The marriage left Penelope without her portion of $1000, though a piqued Sir Richard Temple agreed to pay his daughter $50 a year for life if her husband took her to Jersey and agreed to work in the family business; he died without making arrangements to pay. The Aubins had already travelled to Jersey, where their first child, Marie Anne Arabelle, was baptized on 22 May 1697. By 1699 the family had returned to London, where in June Penelope gave birth to a son, Abraham Harcy, and then a daughter, Penelope, in March 1701. The family initially resided at Key Court, off Bow Lane, close to St Mary Aldermary, where their children were baptized; they also used an address at Princes Court in Lothbury, but by 1730 the family was living in Portugal Row, Lincoln's Inn Fields. 
Aubin was an astute businesswoman, and she assumed control of the family's affairs, particularly when her husband served in the army. In 1702 she advised Thomas Fairfax, fifth Baron Fairfax of Cameron, and Richard Savage, fourth Earl Rivers, in a salvaging expedition to the Caribbean, and in 1708 she wisely declined an invitation by the eleventh earl of Morton and the Hon. Charles Egerton, MP for Brackley, to assist in the launching of a controversial private scheme to repatriate the British pirates settled on Madagascar; her evidence during a Board of Trade inquiry in 1709 helped to discredit the scheme. 
Prevost suggested that Aubin may have tried her hand at pamphlets on current affairs, but the only writings that survive are three poems, 'The Stuarts: a Pindarique Ode' (1707), 'The Extasy: a Pindarique Ode to her Majesty the Queen' (1708), and 'The Wellcome: a Poem to his Grace the Duke of Marlbourough' (1709). The poems are Aubin's most autobiographical works, alluding to her royalist heritage and her Anglicanism. However, Aubin's literary career only began in earnest in the 1720s. Between 1721 and 1729 she produced seven novels, 'The Strange Adventures of the Count de Vinevil' (1721), 'The Life of Madam de Beaumount' (1721), 'The Life and Amorous Adventures of Lucinda' (1721), 'The Noble Slaves' (1722), 'The Life of Charlotta du Pont' (1723), 'The Life and Adventures of Lady Lucy' (1726), and 'The Life and Adventures of Young Count Albertus' (1728). Aubin's characters engage in world travel and survive on desert islands, but more central are the human predators -- pirates, slave masters, rapists, and tyrants -- who threaten them. Her heroines' resistance to these evils and their final victories are based on a belief that 'there is a just God, who rewards Virtue, and does punish Vice' ('Madam de Beaumount'). The novels were popular and the fact that 'works proffering such ideological resolutions sold well' has been described as evidence of Aubin's 'shrewd insight into the marketability of her novels' (De Bruyn, 12). Aubin's novels also drew on experience; when, for example, one of her brothers-in-law wrote from Barbados describing how his ship had been taken by pirates, thinly disguised details of the attack appeared in 'Charlotta du Pont'. 
Aubin introduced the English to various French texts: she edited 'Doctrine of Morality... According to the Stoick Philosophy' (1721), Thomas Mannington Gibbs's translation of the work by Marin le Roy, sieur de Gomberville, republished in 1726 as 'Moral Virtue Delineated'. Aubin also produced 'The Adventures of the Prince of Clermont, and Madame de Ravezan' (1722) and 'The Life of the Countess de Gondez' (1729) from the originals by Louise-Genevieve Gomez de Vasconcellos and Marguerite de Lussan. In the dedication of 'The History of Genghizcan the Great' (1722), her translation of a work by Francois Petis de la Croix, she proposed the great warrior -- 'Chaste, Just, and Temperate; an excellent Husband, Father, Friend and Master' -- as a model for England's nobility. Her most important translation is that of Robert Challes's 'Les illustres francaises' (1713), which she retitled 'The Illustrious French Lovers' (1726), a work to which Samuel Richardson in 'Pamela' and Prevost in 'Manon Lescaut' may be indebted. 
Nor was Aubin a stranger to the London stage. In 1724 'cards of Mrs Aubins' (possibly as some form of benefit night) were presented for a performance of John Dryden's 'The Spanish Fryar' at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 2 January. In December 1730 Aubin's own play 'The Merry Masqueraders, or, The Humorous Cuckold' was performed at the New Theatre in the Haymarket. Aubin spoke the epilogue and was granted the revenues of the second and final performance. The play has traditionally been viewed as a failure but evidence that it was published in 1732 and reprinted in 1733 with a new edition in 1734 makes its success or otherwise unclear. What is more certain is that by 1730 Aubin was comfortable on stage. In April 1729 she established the Lady's Oratory at York Buildings, Villiers Street, and -- announcing herself as 'Mrs Aubin' against 'Mr Henly' -- positioned herself in opposition to John 'Orator' Henley. These performances included mockery of Henley's claims that his oratory was in Lincoln's Inn Fields, rather than Clare Market, and parodying his 'henletical' style of oration. 
Aubin died in April 1738 at the house of her doctor, William Smithson, who was the dedicatee of 'The Illustrious French Lovers'. She was interred at the church of St George the Martyr, Southwark, on 23 April 1738. She was predeceased by all her children but was survived by her husband, who was buried at St Helier's parish church, Jersey, on 3 April 1740. 
A collected edition of Aubin's novels was published in 1739 and several editions of 'The Noble Slaves' and 'Charlotta du Pont' appeared in England and America between 1777 and 1815. However, she was subsequently ignored, largely because of the perception of her as a pious woman author. Commentators since the 1960s have observed in her travel adventures a 'genuine cultural anxiety over the weakening moral structure of a perplexingly changing society' (Beasley, 218) and a 'coherent ethical design' (Warner, 578) that counterbalances this anxiety with the redemptive figure of the courageous woman and virtuous wife, a figure that tacitly undermines the prevailing view of women as 'subordinate and submissive' (Zagordnik, 127). More recently Aubin's characterization as a pious stepping stone from Eliza Haywood and Delarivier Manley to Richardson has been reconsidered. Further examination of Aubin's novels has found that, despite the piety of her prefaces, her works contain 'erotic scenes at least as explicit and sexually charged (if not more so as the novels progressed) than in the works of Haywood or Manley' (Mounsey, 59). And, with many recent findings in Aubin's biography, there will no doubt continue to be revisions of her contribution to the eighteenth-century novel. 


@@@@@


doc= 40525


Stephens, Joanna (d. 1774), medical practitioner, was reputedly born in Berkshire. She flourished in London society after the publication in 1738 of 'Ten Cases of Persons who have Taken Mrs. Stephens's Medicines for the Stone', by the physician and philosopher David Hartley, who also published 'A View of the Present Evidence for and against Mrs Stephens's Medicines' (1739) and 'De lithontriptico a Joanna Stephens' (1741). Contemporary accounts suggest that bladder stones were one of the most distressing ailments of the eighteenth century. Descriptions abound of the various methods proffered for curing the stone, either by extirpation or dissolution. Despite the self-promotion of several well-known lithotomists ('cutters' for the stone), the public appears not to have shared their enthusiasm for the knife. Nearly all domestic manuals, as well as most comprehensive medical handbooks, recommended some type of lithontriptic remedy to ease the pain of the stone. 
In his 1738 publication Hartley announced that Mrs Stephens had proposed to make her medicine known to the public for the benefit of all who suffered from 'this wrath' (Wilson, 58). In exchange for this benevolence to her compatriots, Stephens demanded $5000 for disclosing her remedy. She advertised her intentions in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' between April and December 1738. By December, 189 people had contributed a total of $1356. Short of the remaining amount Stephens petitioned parliament in March 1739 for the full $5000. A parliamentary vote of 105 to 62 prompted the formation of a committee to consider her petition. The committee approved her request on 10 April 1739, agreeing to pay the whole sum if her remedy proved to be as efficacious as she claimed. In June 1739 Stephens delivered the secret recipe to the archbishop of Canterbury, who, in turn, presented it to the other twenty-eight trustees appointed by parliament for this investigation. The recipe was also sent to the editors of the 'London Gazette', where it was published in its entirety on 16 June 1739. 
The medicine consisted of a powder, a decoction, and pills. The powder consisted of calcined egg shells and snails; the decoction was prepared by boiling herbs with soap, 'Swines-Cresses burnt to a Blackness', honey, and water; and the pills consisted of calcined snails. The remedy was prepared by medical and surgical members of the trustees and administered to four sufferers of the stone for a year. On 5 March 1740 the four patients were called to the House of Lords and their medical case histories presented to the trustees. The patients claimed that their symptoms had been completely alleviated and no bladder stones were detected. Upon considering the evidence all but two of the parliamentary trustees signed a certificate verifying the efficacy of the medicine. Parliament approved the financial award on 12 March 1740. Stephens received her $5000 on 17 March 1740 and was never heard from again. 
This 'cure for the stone' was highly sought after by the public, and it provoked much comparative and competitive experimentation among physicians and natural philosophers. Stephens's remedy was frequently discussed in the periodical press, in domestic manuals, and in medical pamphlets and monographs. Notable accounts of these experiments include H. Bracken's 'Lithiasis Anglicana, or, A philosophical enquiry into the nature and origin of the stone and gravel in human bodies' (1739), S. Hales's 'Account of some Experiments and Observations on Mrs. Stephens's Medicines' (1740), and Dennis de Coetlogon's 'Full Examination and Impartial Account of All Relating to Mrs. Stephens's Cure' (1740). One physician, S. F. Morand, advertised Stephens's claims internationally when he took his own experiments with this medicine before the Academie Royale des Sciences, in France. He presented his account in 'Examen des remedes de Mad'lle Stephens, pour la pierre', in 'Histoire Academie Royale des Sciences' (1740, 1742, 177-200). Stephens died at her house in Brook Green, Hammersmith, in 1774. 


@@@@@


doc= 40526


Bostock, Bridget (b. c.1678, d. after 1749), faith healer, details of whose parentage are unknown, lived in Coppenhall, Cheshire, throughout her life and was uneducated. 'Aged about 70 years' ('GM', 18.414), Bostock came to national attention in August 1748 as the result of a report about her in a local newspaper. She had been healing locally for many years with the use of fasting spittle, a little liquor of 'a red complexion', touch, and prayer. In 1748 people of all social ranks began to visit her, and by September she was receiving crowds of 600-700 a day. She was said to cure blind, deaf, and lame people, and those with rheumatism, the king's evil (scrofula), hysteric fits, falling fits, shortness of breath, dropsy, palsy, leprosy, and cancers (though not syphilis). Bostock did not seek such fame or numbers, and by late 1748 she saw only those who had been to her before and those suffering from deafness. She was described as a frequent churchgoer and as a person of great character and faith by her minister, William Harding, whose son claimed that she cured his lameness. John Bennet, a Methodist minister, visited her twice and recorded in his diary his impressions and the reports of others, ultimately declaring himself unable to account for her cures. John Wesley, who heard accounts of her healings, did not doubt them. Sir John Price, a Welsh baronet, wrote asking her to raise his wife from the dead. Bostock refused despite Price's entreaties -- peppered with biblical texts concerning resurrection -- in his letters to her written between December 1748 and December 1749. Some visitors and commentators sought to explain her cures in natural terms, while others described her as an impostor or cheat who deceived the 'vulgar'. Several also offered accounts of her physical appearance. One described 'an old shrivelled creature seated in an elbow chair in a most dirty attire, and her petticoats not reaching above half-way down her legs', while another spoke less harshly of her dress of 'flannel waistcoat, a green linsey apron, a pair of clogs, and a plain cap, tied with a half-penny lace' (Chaloner, 6, 9-10). There is no record of what happened to Bridget Bostock after 1749, but interest in her continued into the next century, as evidenced by two letters in the 'Monthly Magazine' for June and August 1808. 


@@@@@


doc= 40531


Leavis, Queenie Dorothy (1906-1981), literary scholar, was born on 7 December 1906 at 79 Silver Street, Edmonton, Middlesex, the second of the three children of Morris Roth (1876-1953), hosier, and afterwards draper, and Jane Davis (1876-1940). Her parents were observant Jews. She was educated at Latymer School, Edmonton, and was a brilliant scholar, winning in 1925 a Carlisle scholarship to Girton College, Cambridge. In 1928 she was awarded a first-class degree with special distinction in the English tripos. She won the Charity Reeves prize, the Therese Montefiore memorial prize, the Gamble prize, and the Ottilie Hancock research fellowship at Girton. She married Frank Raymond Leavis (1895-1978), literary scholar, editor, and university teacher, on 16 September 1929, which alienated her from her parents at having 'married out' of her faith. They had three children: Ralph, born in January 1934, Kate in September 1939, and Lawrence Robin in December 1944. 
Leavis researched for the PhD (awarded in 1932), influenced by F. R. Leavis's theories of 'mass culture', but was herself an investigator of great originality, studying by questionnaire how popular writers (such as Edgar Rice Burroughs, creator of Tarzan) responded to their readership. Her dissertation was examined by E. M. Forster and published to acclaim, virtually without alteration, as 'Fiction and the Reading Public' (1932). As a thesis its subtitle had been 'A study in social anthropology', appropriately because she used popular and classic fiction to analyse successive English cultures after the Elizabethan period, inspired by the historical sociology of H. M. Chadwick's 'Early literature and history' course at Cambridge in which the multifarious artefacts of ancient societies were used to detail pictures of cultural identity. Leavis did not shrink from evaluating her data, maintaining that methods of mass publication levelled down the taste of the English reading public in the modern era. Her subsequent publications were fiercely critical of the second-rate. She was awarded the Amy Mary Preston Read scholarship for further research, the first woman to receive it. 
In 1932 her husband became editor of 'Scrutiny', published quarterly until 1953, and Leavis worked indefatigably at editorial business, but also made nearly fifty contributions, on fiction and the sociology of the literary world. Her taste was eclectic, with a love for the classics as well as the best in popular writing: she read Damon Runyon to her children and repeatedly sent second-hand copies of Randall Jarrell's 'Pictures from an Institution' to friends and pupils. She disliked Bloomsbury and Virginia Woolf's belief that a woman must have 'a room of one's own'. Leavis thought that the management of a busy household was not inherently damaging to creativity, a belief which restricted her own career as an academic, as did scant employment opportunities in Cambridge, her commitment to 'Scrutiny' and her husband's work, the demands of child rearing, and her frequent illnesses. Her decisive, scholarly, and vivid writing gained in reputation, however, especially her wartime essays on Jane Austen. When her husband delineated his definitive line of English novelists in 'The Great Tradition', he considered that his wife's work made it unnecessary to include a chapter on Austen. 
In 1946 cancer was diagnosed, from which Leavis suffered in the post-war years. In the 1960s, however, her powers returned, and she was asked to teach for the English tripos at several Cambridge colleges. She visited Harvard University with her husband, which resulted in an important essay on Emily Bronte in their joint book 'Lectures in America' (1969). Another collaboration, 'Dickens the Novelist' (1970), followed. She was afflicted again by cancer and the burns received from radium treatment. In 1977 F. R. Leavis's health began to fail: although not strong, she nursed him at home until his death in the spring of 1978. As a widow Leavis began work on a memoir of her husband, but she also lectured widely in schools and universities on novelists in the English and other traditions. Her last lecture, for the Cheltenham festival of 1980, was 'The Englishness of the English novel'. She knew well the work of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, on whom she was preparing in her last weeks to lecture. She died of heart failure in Cambridge on 17 March 1981. 
Q. D. Leavis was an important critic of the novel, English, American, and European, on which three posthumous volumes of essays were published. Personally she was vivacious and combative, with passionately held dislikes and likes. She had a strong visual sense, for clothes, house decoration, and book illustration. As an undergraduate she delighted in the novels of Henry James, she herself possessing some of the directness of an early James heroine. 


@@@@@


doc= 40533


Wilson, Thomas (c.1601-1653), Church of England clergyman, was born at Catterlen, near Penrith in Cumberland, of yeoman parents. He was sent to school at Blencow and matriculated in 1618 as a sizar from Christ's College, Cambridge, where his tutor was Joseph Mede, the famed biblical scholar. Wilson graduated BA in 1622 and proceeded MA in 1625. After gaining his BA he worked, at Mede's suggestion, as a schoolmaster in the house of John Bristow, the minister of Charlwood, Surrey, for about four years. He then entered the ministry, but his puritanism made it difficult for him to find a congenial living. He briefly served first at Capel, Surrey, and then at Farlington, Hampshire, which he found to be 'an ignorant, Heathenish place'. His third living was at Teddington, Middlesex, where he had 'great success... and much acceptance amongst them that feared the Lord'. On a return visit to his native county Wilson used the opportunity to preach in Penrith about his strict sabbatarian views (Swinnock, 6-7). Wilson's first wife, about whom no details are known, died within months of their marriage of a 'consumption', and on 9 November 1630 at St Stephen, Coleman Street, London, he married Damaris Cable, the daughter of James Cable, merchant, of London. The couple had eleven children, of whom nine survived their father. 
In 1631 Wilson was headhunted by a puritan group led by Alderman Robert Swinnocke of Maidstone, who presented him to the parish of Otham, Kent. Here Wilson was in competition with the perpetual curate of Maidstone, Robert Barrell, who was involved in long-running disputes with the town council about fees and tithes. The Maidstone puritans also complained about the 'deadness and dulness' of Barrell's ministry and preferred instead to attend Wilson's services, despite censure in the church courts. In 1635 Wilson refused to read the 'Book of Sports' and was suspended until 1639. During this period he was repeatedly called before the court of high commission at Lambeth and in September 1640 was cited by the diocesan courts for not reading the prayer against the Scots. Sir Edward Dering, knight of the shire for Kent, raised Wilson's case in November 1640 in his first speech to the Long Parliament. In February 1642 Sir Edward Partridge, MP for Sandwich, successfully moved in the house that Wilson should be appointed town lecturer in Maidstone. At the end of that year he was chosen as one of the Kent representatives to the Westminster assembly of divines appointed to advise parliament on reform of the church. 
Wilson published a catechism for children, 'A Childes Trade' (1645), and two of his sermons to the House of Commons. The first, 'David's Zeale to Zion', preached on 4 April 1641, was dedicated to Dering and called generally for further Church reforms. The second, 'Jerichoes Down-Fall', was preached on 28 September 1642 and was more outspoken. Wilson made plain his support for 'root and branch' reform and argued that there was no 'jus divinum' for prelacy. He attacked Archbishop William Laud by name and urged the members of the Commons to reform both church and state. In June 1644 Wilson also testified at the archbishop's treason trial about his suspension. Despite being a member of the Westminster assembly, Wilson did not neglect his duties in Maidstone and he also preached regularly at the assizes, although none of his local sermons was printed. Wilson regarded preachers as 'the strength of a land, the charets ['sic'] of Israel and horsemen thereof'. As a preacher he was described as 'one that did divide the word aright... a Boanerges, a Son of Thunder'. In 1644 he was appointed perpetual curate at Maidstone, where he enforced sabbath observance and set an exemplary and godly example. Prior to this Maidstone was characterized as 'a very prophane town', but under Wilson's aegis one of the assize judges observed that 'in all his circuit he never came to a town where the Lords Day was so strictly observed' (Swinnock, 40-41). 
Wilson died in 1653 after contracting a 'violent feaver' and was buried on 23 March at Maidstone. He appointed his widow, Damaris, his executor, and left $100 to each of his four sons and five daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 40534


Vere, Mary, Lady Vere (1581-1671), gentlewoman and patron of ministers, was born on 18 May 1581, the youngest daughter of Sir John Tracy (died 1591) of Toddington, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Ann Throckmorton. Her mother died three days later. When she was nineteen Mary married William Hoby (died 1602?) of Hailes, Gloucestershire; during a brief marriage they had two sons, Philip (died 1617) and William (died 1623). In November 1607 she married Sir Horace Vere, from 1625 Baron Vere of Tilbury (1565-1635). Vere had already established his military reputation in the Dutch wars against Spain and later served as governor of the cautionary town of Brill between 1609 and 1616. In the early 1620s he commanded the English volunteer force in the palatinate. The couple became strongly associated with the international Calvinist cause. While he was on campaign Vere supplied his wife with continental news about the wars, which she circulated to other members of her family. Lady Vere's interest in news continued after his death in 1635, and in 1637 she informed Sir Ferdinando Fairfax of a Swedish victory against imperial forces, which she observed 'will hinder the Emperor's design to send forces against the Low Countries' (Johnson, 1.313). Vere's death left her 'indebted', although she was the main beneficiary as well as the executor of his will. Nevertheless, in 1635 Lady Vere still hoped to raise dowries of between $3000 and $4000 for two of her daughters. 
Vere employed a number of puritan clergy as his personal chaplains and Lady Vere shared his religious tastes. In 1649 the presbyterian cleric, John Geree, described her as 'an ancient mother in our Israel' (Geree, A2'v'). In particular Lady Vere celebrated the protestant credentials of the Tracy family, which were firmly rooted in the early days of the Reformation. William Gurnall recorded that Lady Vere 'took much delight' in the story of her ancestor William Tracy (d. 1530), who was mentioned in Foxe's book of martyrs and whose remains were burnt after Archbishop Warham declared his will to be heretical in 1532 (Gurnall, 126-7). This incident was also recalled by Henry Hexham in the dedication to Lady Vere of his translation of Polyander's 'A Disputation Against the Adoration of the Reliques of Saints Departed' (1611). 
After her marriage to Sir Horace, Lady Vere developed a reputation as a patron of godly ministers and she corresponded with William Ames, John Burgess, John Davenport, John Dod, John Preston, Peter Senthill, Obadiah Sedgewick, and James Ussher. Ames, one of the Veres' chaplains, thanked her for 'your kindness toward me and mine [and] your respect unto my poor ministry' and Dod, vicar of Fawsley, wrote 'I make mention of you daily in my prayers'. Dod also noted in 1642 that Lady Vere was 'naturally addicted unto melancholy'. In 1624 Lady Vere used her influence with her sister Dorothy's husband, secretary of state Sir Edward Conway, to promote James Ussher as bishop of Meath. Ussher subsequently thanked Lady Vere for the 'effectual means', which she had used and asked her to thank Conway for his 'extraordinary kindness', although the two men had never met (BL, Add. MS 4275, fols. 8'r', 182'v', 184'r', 32'r'). Lady Vere also successfully lobbied Conway to have John Davenport appointed vicar of St Stephen, Coleman Street, London, despite accusations that Davenport's support came only from a puritan faction. Nicholas Byfield, Thomas Gataker, and Richard Sibbes all dedicated religious works to Lady Vere and Sir Horace. In his 'Directions for the Private Reading of the Scriptures' (1618) Byfield particularly thanked them for the 'many favours I have received, but especially for all the incouragements wherewith I have been refreshed in observing your love to my ministerie' (A2'r'). 
Lady Vere spent some time accompanying her husband in the Netherlands and two of their five daughters, Elizabeth and Mary, were born at The Hague and were naturalized by act of parliament in 1624. Through the marriages of her daughters and of her niece, Brilliana Conway (Brilliana Harley), Lady Vere was brought into close contact with the puritan opposition to the crown. Her eldest daughter, Elizabeth (died 1683), married, in 1626, John Holles, from 1637 second earl of Clare; Mary ('c'.1611-1669) married Sir Roger Townshend and then Mildmay Fane, from 1638 second earl of Westmorland; Catharine ('b'. 1612/13) married, in 1634, Oliver St John of Lidiard Tregose, and then, in 1641, John Poulett, from 1649 Lord Paulet; Anne ['see 'Fairfax, Anne (1617/-1665)] married, in 1637, Thomas Fairfax (from 1648 Lord Fairfax); and Dorothy married John Wolstenholme. Lady Vere also acted as matchmaker in the marriage between Brilliana Conway and the Herefordshire puritan gentleman, Sir Robert Harley. Lady Vere acquainted Secretary Conway with Sir Robert's affection for his daughter and outlined his 'parentage, the abilities of his mind, his ripe discretion, his well-grounded religion', and last but not least the value of the Harley estates (BL, Add. MS 61989, fol. 81'r'). In 1642 the Harleys sent their eldest daughter, Brilliana, to live with Lady Vere at her home in Hackney and Lady Harley reminded her daughter of the respect in which they held Lady Vere -- 'believe it, there is not a wiser and better woman' (BL, Add. MS 70003, fol. 260'r'). In 1643 Lady Vere was briefly entrusted by parliament with the care of two of the king's children and in 1645 parliament granted her $1000 as part of the arrears of the sum of $2500 owed to her husband from the state. In January 1649 John Geree addressed the dedication of his 'Might Overcoming Right' to Lady Vere and her daughter Anne Fairfax in the hope that they could persuade Sir Thomas Fairfax to save the king. 
William Gurnall's funeral sermon for Lady Vere shows her life as an aged and pious widow. Twice daily she and her household worshipped God and on Sundays, after public worship, the sermon was repeated to her family. The servants were then called before her to give an account of the morning service and after supper she would join them in singing psalms. Twice a day Lady Vere would spend some hours alone in her closet reading the scriptures and other works of practical divinity, and every night she prayed with her female servants before retiring. She was renowned for her charity to the poor and sick, and Gurnall described her as 'a Protestant Dorcas, full of good works, and alms-deeds'. 'Few ever exceeded her, in loving and honouring' the 'faithful ministers of Christ' and he described her zeal in finding 'able and faithful ministers for those livings she had in her dispose'. On her deathbed in her 'acutest pains and greatest agonies' she continued in 'admiring and blessing God for his mercies' (Gurnall, 130, 138, 141, 145). She died on 25 December 1671 and was buried on 10 January 1672. Her funeral sermon was published with a series of epitaphs by Charles Darby, rector of Kediton in Suffolk, Edward Thomas, Simon Ford, Anthony Withers, and Richard Howlett. 


@@@@@


doc= 40535


Pierson, Thomas (c.1573-1633), Church of England clergyman, was born in the parish of Weaverham, Cheshire; his parents are unknown. He was educated at the free school in Northwich and admitted in 1590 as a pensioner to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, a centre of puritanism. He graduated BA in 1594 and proceeded MA in 1597. 
In 1599 Pierson took holy orders and, having returned to his native county, served as lecturer at Northwich for about two years and then as lecturer at Weaverham for a similar time. At Northwich he was involved in the case of Thomas Harrison, a young boy believed to be possessed or bewitched. Soon afterwards he married Helen Harvey, the widow of Christopher Harvey (died 1601), the town preacher at Bunbury, and mother of Christopher Harvey (1597-1663). In 1603 Pierson returned to Cambridge to prepare some of the publications of the famed puritan divine William Perkins for the press. During this time Pierson was also employed as household chaplain to Oliver St John, Baron St John of Bletso (Bletsoe) in Bedfordshire, and he dedicated some of the resulting publications to Lord St John and his son Oliver, the future earl of Bolingbroke. 
In 1612 Pierson was appointed rector of Brampton Bryan, Herefordshire, by the staunch puritan and future parliamentarian Sir Robert Harley. Here Pierson took the lead in evangelizing an area that had not yet been touched by puritan clerical zeal. He also acted as a local agent for the London-based feoffees for impropriations, to whom Harley had sold the advowson and tithes of Presteigne. Pierson's career at Brampton illustrates the tensions inherent in translating moderate puritanism from the academic setting of the university to the practical arena of the parish. Although he was a nonconformist, and undoubtedly had some misgivings about the nature of the Stuart episcopacy, Pierson was unwilling to separate formally from the established church. His nonconformity was initially opposed by his patron's father, Thomas Harley, and he was repeatedly reported to the diocesan authorities over the next decade for a variety of puritan practices including not wearing the surplice, not using the sign of the cross in baptism, administering communion to parishioners who were standing, and adapting the 'Book of Common Prayer' to his own use. Successive bishops of Hereford treated Pierson relatively leniently, partly because of the power of his patron. 
The main source for Pierson's life is a manuscript biography, which was written about 1699-1700 and describes among other things his religious observances. At Brampton, Pierson preached twice on the sabbath as well as lecturing there and elsewhere on weekdays. He habitually rose at four to study for an hour and then summoned his servants for religious instruction. After dinner and supper a chapter was read from the 'New Testament' and on one evening a week Pierson catechized his household. Under his aegis the Harleys observed the official ember-day fasts as well as regular private days of fasting and thanksgiving. Pierson was also concerned at the lack of able preachers in the region and set up a combination lecture as a form of clerical training at Leintwardine, where Harley was the patron. Lectures were also set up by Pierson at Knighton and at Bromfield. 
Pierson died on 16 October 1633 and in his will he appointed his stepson, Christopher Harvey, as his literary executor. Two works by Pierson were subsequently published: a sermon, 'The Cure of Hurtfull Cares and Feares' (1636), and an exposition of four psalms, 'Excellent Encouragements Against Afflictions' (1647). Both books are anti-Catholic in tone and demonstrate Pierson's belief in predestination and his fears about Arminianism. Pierson also left an important library of 441 theological books to the care of Harley, Harvey, and two other Shropshire gentlemen: Richard More of More and Humphrey Walcot of Walcot. This was an unusually large collection for a parish minister, and the books were to be maintained as a circulating library for the use of thirteen named local clerics. In 1680 some of the books were amalgamated into the parish library at St Peter's Church in More, which survived into the twenty-first century. Pierson's ministry reveals some of the links that were forged between puritan groups in Cheshire and the Welsh marches with puritans in London and Cambridge. His religious influence in the border region around Brampton was recalled at Sir Robert Harley's funeral in 1656, when Pierson was described as a 'blessed servant of God... whose exemplary graces and ministery shed a rich influence abroad the country' (Froysell, 100). 


@@@@@


doc= 40538


Curtis, Dame Myra (1886-1971), civil servant and college head, was born on 2 October 1886 at 11 Belle Vue Road, Sunderland, co. Durham, one of three daughters of George Curtis, a telegraphist in the Post Office, and his wife, Annie Johnson, an elementary school teacher. Her forebears were north-country working-class, and she was brought up in a hard-working, close-knit family, which valued education. As a young girl she attended Dame Allan's endowed school at Newcastle upon Tyne until the family moved to Winchester, where she attended Winchester School for Girls. In 1904, with the assistance of a Charlotte Yonge scholarship from her school and a county scholarship, she entered Newnham College, Cambridge. At Newnham she formed enduring friendships and found the college 'a place of liberation and intellectual stimulus' (M. E. G., 54). She read for the classical tripos, being ranked in the first division of the second class in 1907. After leaving Cambridge she spent seven years as an assistant editor for the 'Victoria History of the Counties of England' and also undertook private teaching. 
In 1915 Curtis became a temporary civil servant in the war trade intelligence department, moving in 1917 to the Ministry of Food, where she remained until 1922. She attained permanent status in 1923 after completing the necessary special examination for the administrative class and worked in the Ministry of Pensions. From 1928 to 1937 she was superintendent at the savings bank department of the Post Office, where she introduced a machine accounting system to remove the drudgery of compiling the manuscript ledgers used for bookkeeping since the savings bank had been instituted in 1861. Although she had no business training -- she endorsed the generalist ethos of the British civil service that 'if you can do one thing you can do anything' (M. E. G., 54) -- her system was regarded as a model of its kind. In 1937 she moved to the Treasury as assistant secretary and director of women's establishments, where she was known as a 'firm disciplinarian' (ibid.). 
Following her retirement from the civil service in 1941 Curtis, who had retained her links with Cambridge as a member of the university's women's appointments board (from 1938), was elected principal of Newnham College, taking office in January 1942. She continued to undertake public work as commissioner in the War Damage Commission (1943-50), a member of the Central Land Board (1947-59), and a member of the General Medical Council (1955-66). 
In November 1944 Curtis was appointed by Herbert Morrison, the home secretary, a member of a committee chaired by Sir Godfrey Russell Vick to investigate conditions in remand homes administered by the London county council, following critical comments by John Watson, a juvenile court magistrate. The inquiry began her interest in addressing the needs of the nation's problem children. Although the report on remand homes (published in February 1945) was regarded by some critics as a whitewash, she was appointed in March 1945, also at Morrison's recommendation, to head an interdepartmental committee to inquire into the care of deprived children. The setting up of the Curtis committee reflected an acknowledgement by the government of shortcomings in its treatment of orphans and other children in need of state care. Government departments were already considering the problem of children left homeless when wartime evacuation schemes were wound up, and were aware that the abolition of the poor law recommended by the Beveridge report in 1942 required new arrangements for the thousands of children currently looked after by public assistance authorities. But the decisive intervention was made by Lady Allen of Hurtwood (Marjory Allen), who had investigated the plight of children in local authority homes and found that there was no single government department with responsibility for the care of such children. Allen's letter to 'The Times', published on 15 July 1944, exposing the isolation, neglect, and lack of affection suffered by children in care, caused a sensation and public opinion forced the government to institute an inquiry. The decision was reinforced by the outcry following the death in January 1945 of Dennis O'Neill, a twelve-year-old boy in local authority care, from abuse and beatings by his foster parents. 
The Curtis committee undertook 'the first enquiry in this country directed specifically to the care of children deprived of a normal home life, and covering all groups of such children' ('Report of the care of children committee', 'Parl. papers', 1945-6, 10.5, Cmd 6922). When it published its final report, in September 1946, the committee had heard over 200 witnesses and visited more than 400 institutions, bringing to light the extent of 'the physical, emotional and intellectual deprivation suffered by some of the children in public care' (Cretney, 218). Its inquiries showed that the existing divided responsibilities assumed by several government agencies were not working to the benefit of the children in the state's care. The Curtis committee insisted on the need to establish personal links in the care of children, and recommended the appointment by local authorities of children's officers: qualified women who would specialize in childcare and take a personal interest in each individual child. A single central department would have responsibility for maintaining standards in homes run by both local authorities and voluntary organizations. The latter issue gave rise to an exchange of letters in 'The Times', in October and November 1946, between Lady Allen and Curtis. Allen complained that the committee had insufficiently addressed the shortcomings of the voluntary sector, which she disliked as carrying the stigma of charity. While there was an ideological basis to the exchange, since Allen preferred centralized state control of childcare, it also stemmed from her resentment at not being invited to chair the inquiry which her campaigning had brought about. 
The recommendations of the Curtis committee were embodied in the path-breaking 'Children's Act' of 1948, which vested in the Home Office responsibility for overseeing the care of homeless or deprived children, though provision of care and inspection of homes rested with local authorities. Its provisions for trained professionals to staff institutions and to ensure that children received the most appropriate care were important in opening and securing the status of a new vocation for educated women. In recognition of her work on the inquiry, Curtis, who had been made CBE in 1942, was appointed DBE in 1949. 
As principal of Newnham, Curtis enabled the college to carry on in the face of wartime and immediate post-war restrictions, and 'injected business efficiency into the academic habits of 'laissez-faire', not without some passive resistance' (M. E. G., 55). She continued, however, to be frustrated and at times exasperated by what she regarded as the 'indecisiveness' of academic administration. Nevertheless, at the request of the fellows, she postponed her retirement for two years, until 1954. She played an important part in the negotiations on behalf of the women's colleges which resulted in women being admitted as full members of Cambridge University in 1948. In 1952 she was the first woman elected to the council of the senate at Cambridge, and she chaired the women's appointments board. She also chaired a committee which promoted a third foundation (in addition to Newnham and Girton) to accommodate the growing number of women at Cambridge; New Hall was granted recognition by the university and opened in October 1954. 
Curtis's outlook was primarily that of an administrator, with an overwhelming urge 'to get things done and to jog the inefficient' (M. E. G., 57). Her 'impelling impetus was ethical, not religious', avoiding sentimentality ('The Times', 29 June 1971). She enjoyed cookery and gardening. In retirement she lived in Cranbrook, Kent, sharing her home for a short period with her friend the Irish historian Constantia Maxwell, and latterly at Chichester, Sussex. Curtis died in a nursing home at Bognor Regis, Sussex, on 27 June 1971. 


@@@@@


doc= 40540


Dickinson, Henry Douglas (1899-1969), economist, was born at 31 Parma Crescent, Battersea, London, on 25 March 1899, the only son of Henry Winram Dickinson (1870-1952), historian of engineering and technology, who was at that time assistant keeper at the Department of Science and Art, South Kensington, and his wife, Edith Emerson (died 1937). From King's College School, Wimbledon, he went to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he took the part two tripos in economics (1921) and history (1922). In 1924, after two years' research at the London School of Economics, he was appointed to an assistant lectureship in economics at Leeds University. On 27 March 1925 he married Sylvia Sworn (1899/1900-1965), a medical student, the daughter of Henry George Sworn, a doctor of medicine; they had two daughters. 
Dickinson taught economics and economic history at Leeds until 1947. He was an enthusiastic teacher for the Workers' Educational Association, and the book for which he was best known, 'The Economics of Socialism' (1939), was based on his extension lectures to a WEA class in north Yorkshire. As an intellectual of the left he argued, in the 1930s, that rational socialism could be implemented using actual market mechanisms. He and his writings were well known to other left-wing intellectuals, including G. D. H. Cole, Hugh Dalton, Evan Durbin, and Harold Laski. He played an important part in the discussions of 'market socialism' that arose from Ludwig von Mises's view that rational allocation under socialism was impossible; socialist planners could not, von Mises had argued, make the huge number of ever-changing computations required to calculate prices scientifically. In two key articles, 'The economic basis of socialism' ('Political Quarterly', 1, 1930) and 'Price formation in a socialist community' ('Economic Journal', 43, 1933), Dickinson asserted, paradoxically, that planners would not need to make such calculations since socialism could best be effected via the market mechanism itself. 'The beautiful systems of economic equilibrium described by Bohm-Bawerk, Wieser, Marshall and Cassel are not descriptions of society as it is but prophetic visions of a socialist economy of the future' ('Economic Journal', 1933, 247). It was not necessary for the planner to compute prices; this could be left to the market once the distribution of income had been settled. Most importantly for Dickinson, in this system consumers and workers would retain their freedom of choice. But would not market wage and interest rates reintroduce capitalist inequalities? To minimize inequality essential services would be provided free under a system of progressive taxation. 
It can now be seen that Dickinson had prepared his ground well in his book 'Institutional Revenue' (1932), which had been developed while he was researching at the London School of Economics under Cannan. That book, whose preface acknowledged help from Dalton and Dobb, showed how a theory of surplus value could be restated in modern marginalist terms. Dickinson had also argued that, since incomes under capitalism were largely a matter of capturing 'rents', the distribution of income was an institutional matter, that is, factor prices played a less decisive role in resource allocation than had been thought. Dickinson had thereby tried to block an obvious line of attack on his version of market socialism. 
In 1947 Dickinson was appointed senior lecturer in economics at the University of Bristol, where he was promoted to professor in 1951, holding the chair until his retirement in 1964. His article in the 'Review of Economic Studies' (22, 1954-5), 'A note on economic dynamics', pioneered the constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production function and anticipated some of the neo-classical growth results of Robert Solow and Trevor Swan. The elasticity of substitution measures the degree to which capital is substituted for labour as the real wage rises relative to the price of capital. The assumption of a constant elasticity simplified complex technical problems in growth theory while avoiding over-simplification, and is still widely used. Dickinson also worked out at the time, but never published, 'a simple way of fitting the [CES] equation... statistically, to the time series, by using evidence on factor shares' (Whitaker, 166-7). In this paper he accepted that technical progress was a more powerful tool than redistribution for raising living standards: 'Technical progress is a necessary condition for a permanent and continuous increase in real wages. Even if we assume that the State has an unlimited power to redistribute real income, we cannot escape the conclusions reached here' (ibid., 179). 
Dick, as Dickinson was almost universally known, was an impressively versatile economist, being an accomplished theorist and historian of economic ideas as well as an expert numismatist. His colleagues regarded this unworldly, eccentric figure with great affection. He died at Southmead Hospital, Bristol, on 11 July 1969 and was cremated at Canford crematorium, Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 40541


Mills, Frederick Percival (1919-1965), boxer, was born on 26 June 1919 at 7 Terrace Road, the poorest street in Bournemouth, the youngest of the four children of Thomas James Mills, totter and marine store dealer, and his wife, Lottie Hilda ('nee' Gray). At the age of eleven he received a pair of boxing gloves and would regularly spar with his brother Charlie. He left St Michael's School, Poole Hill, Bournemouth, at the age of fourteen and began work as an apprentice milkman. On 26 February 1936 he had his first match at Bournemouth's Westover ice rink. He won by a knockout in the first round. Shortly afterwards he was signed up by Bob Turner and began boxing full-time in fairground booths and at south coast venues. 
By the end of 1940 (excluding fairground matches) Mills had fought fifty-eight professional fights, of which forty-six were wins. Although he never developed a great boxing style in these early fights, his two-fisted aggression, powerful left hooks, ability to take punishment, tenacity in pressing forward, and an exceptional courage became his well-established fistic characteristics. He was called up to the Royal Air Force in 1939 and spent the majority of his war years at various camps in England, first as a corporal and then as a sergeant instructor (physical training). He was allowed some time during his service to box professionally and on 7 August 1940 hitch-hiked to Liverpool (from Netheravon camp, Wiltshire) to fight, on the next day, the British middleweight champion, Jack McAvoy (1908-1971). The match went its full ten rounds and, although McAvoy was not at his best, Mills boxed fluently and achieved a clear victory. The fight was not a title bout but its significance lay in its putting Mills firmly into the big league. Shortly afterwards Ted Broadribb, an ex-boxer and well-known boxing promoter, became his manager. 
After important victories over Jack London ('b'. 1913) and again McAvoy, Mills was matched for a British and empire light heavyweight match against Len Harvey (1907-1976) at White Hart Lane, Tottenham, on 20 June 1942. Although wartime restrictions were in force, a crowd of 40,000 assembled in north London for the afternoon fight. It proved, however, a short affair. During the second round Mills, with a withering left hook, floored Harvey for a count of nine, which he then followed with a left uppercut and a knockout. Throughout his career it was as a light heavyweight boxer that Mills proved his excellence. On the important occasions that he fought above his weight for major titles he either lost bravely or achieved unsatisfactory victories. 
Towards the end of 1944 Mills was posted to India as part of the Inter-Services Sports and Entertainments Control Committee (ISSECC). Here he proved a popular light entertainer -- a career he subsequently continued, most notably, with BBC television. When he returned to Britain, he was not in condition to take on the world light heavyweight champion, the American Gus Lesnevich (1915-1964), but Broadribb and the promoter Jack Solomons none the less arranged a match for 14 May 1946 at the Harringay arena. The beating Mills took was the worst he was ever to suffer and, although he went on to win the light heavyweight crown, he never fully recovered from it. In the second round, Lesnevich, with a right to the chin, knocked the contender down for a count of six. To general astonishment Mills came back in the third and punch for punch could claim the round. There ensued a fierce battle for the next six rounds with Mills probably ahead on points. However, in the tenth round the punishment of the second and Mills's unpreparedness for the fight showed. Lesnevich, brought down Mills twice with flurries of powerful blows to the head and body and the referee was forced to stop the fight. (In the September of the following year Mills beat the Belgian Pol Goffaux in four rounds for the vacant European light heavyweight title.) 
If the first Lesnevich fight was the worst night of Mills's boxing career, the return bout was to be the best. When he stepped in the ring at the White City stadium on 26 July 1948 after a regime of hard training he looked in excellent physical shape. The fight went the full fifteen rounds and Mills, his chin often (characteristically) tucked in well behind his left shoulder, fought and won the coolest and best-judged fight of his career. Later that year, on 30 September 1948, he married Chrissie Marie McCorkindale (1914-1994), daughter of his manager, Ted Broadribb, and the ex-wife of the boxer Donald McCorkindale. Mills had two natural children (daughters) with Chrissie, and a stepson from her previous marriage. 
Mills defended his world light heavyweight title against the American Joey Maxim ('b'. 1922) at Earls Court on 24 January 1950. He dominated Maxim during the first three rounds, but during the next six the contender began to take the measure of the champion, and in the tenth floored Mills with a quick-fire round of blows to the head. Some weeks later, at the prompting of his wife, he retired from the ring. 
In retirement Freddie Mills occupied himself with business interests, some boxing promotion, charity work, and frequent BBC television appearances as a light entertainer and celebrity guest (for which his craggy good looks well suited him). He was a keen family man and enjoyed spending time at the family home, Joggi Villa, 186 Denmark Hill, Camberwell, London. His business ventures, most notably a Charing Cross Road Chinese restaurant which later became a nightclub, after initial success began to fail. Mills was not the first boxer, nor has he been the last, to be taken advantage of by the unscrupulous fraternity that can sometimes be found close to the fight game. He died in the Middlesex Hospital, London, on 25 July 1965 after sustaining a gunshot wound to the head in Goslett Yard, behind his nightclub, the previous night. He was buried in St Giles's churchyard, Camberwell. The inquest verdict on his death was suicide, a finding that has been strongly contested. Whether he committed suicide or was murdered cannot be established, but what can be averred is that police corruption and gangland protection rackets were rife in the West End of the time. 


@@@@@


doc= 40543


Averell, William (bap. 1556, d. 1605), pamphleteer, was baptized on 12 February 1556, the son of John Averell (died 1569), joiner, and his wife, Margaret (died 1578). Nothing is known of his youth and education but he was a member of the Merchant Taylors' and Vintners' companies and supported himself as parish clerk and schoolmaster in the London parish of St Peter's Cornhill, where he lived at Corbetes Court. He married Gyllian (1556-1596), daughter of Robert Goodale, baker, and his wife, Ann, on 2 November 1578. Somewhat ironically, given the moralism of some of his pamphlets, the couple's first child, Annes, was born on 2 February 1579, three months after the wedding. His wife died after the birth of the last of their seventeen children. In addition to adorning the parish register with drawings and poems, Averell published several works showing literary versatility and a keen desire to acquire the patronage of the London civic elite. Averell's first known publication, the 1581 'An excellent historie, both pithy and pleasant, on the life and death of Charles and Julia, two Brittish, or rather Welsh lovers', a verse tale of star-crossed lovers set in the period of British mythology dating from the Trojan settlement, was dedicated to the mercer and brewer Henry Campyon. Not a distinguished piece of literature, it was one of the few romantic poems of the period that employed a British rather than an Italian setting. It was followed in 1583 by a prodigy pamphlet, 'A wonderfull and straunge newes, which happened in the county of Suffolke, and Essex, the first of February, being Friday, where in rayned wheat, the space of vi or vii miles compass', which took a zealously protestant stand, arguing that the wonder presaged the end of the world. 
Averell's 1584 collection of three moral narratives on divine punishment for sin and reward for virtue, 'A Dyall for Dainty Darlings', was dedicated to William Wrathe, warden of the Mercers' Company, and identified Averell on its title-page as 'Student in Divinitie and Schoolmaister'. It was issued again in an expanded edition as 'Four Notable Histories' in 1590, this time dedicated to the London alderman, leatherworker, and Marian exile Hugh Ofley. Averell's 1588 'A Mervalious Combat of Contrarieties' began as a dialogue between the parts of the body in which the tongue, urging a revolt of the body against the belly and back on the grounds of their greed and pride, was eventually unmasked as a traitor. Abandoning the dialogue format, it concluded with an exhortation for loyalty to the queen. Published in the Armada crisis, it was dedicated to the lord mayor of London, Sir George Bonde, and included fierce attacks on Roman Catholics and Jesuits. 'A Mervalious Combat' was the principal source for William Shakespeare's use of the parable of the revolt of the members against the belly in 'Coriolanus'. It was later reprinted in 'Four Notable Histories'. 
Averell's prose is Euphuistic and his writings draw on classical knowledge, but he is not recorded as a graduate of Oxford or Cambridge. A second marriage to an unknown bride produced another child, Elizabeth, born on 28 November 1597. Averell was buried at St Peter's Cornhill on 23 September 1605. 


@@@@@


doc= 40544


Somerset, Mary, duchess of Beaufort (bap. 1630, d. 1715), gardener and botanist, was baptized on 16 December 1630 at Hadham Parva, Hertfordshire, the eldest daughter of Arthur Capel, first Baron Capel of Hadham (1604-1649), and Elizabeth (died 1661), daughter and heir of Sir Charles Morrison and his wife, Mary Hicks. 
On 28 June 1648 Mary married Henry Seymour, Lord Beauchamp ('c'.1626-1654), which short but happy union produced a son and a daughter. Like Mary's father, who died for his royalist sympathies, Lord Beauchamp spent time in the Tower for his support of Charles I. 
The young widow married again, on 17 August 1657, opting for a 'republican' marriage in front of a justice of the peace. Her groom, Henry Somerset (1629-1700), then styled Lord Herbert, proved a second loving husband. They had many children: five sons, three of whom survived to adulthood, and four daughters, three of whom also survived, including the fourth, Anne Coventry. On 2 December 1682 Somerset was created duke of Beaufort. 
About 1660 Henry Somerset inherited the Badminton estate from a female cousin and beginning in 1664 embarked on a major building project there. Mary, meanwhile, focused her attention on the gardens and by 1678 had installed conservatories, the fashion for which is sometimes credited to her brother Sir Henry Capel (died 1696). The duchess also built almshouses and the Badminton School. In 1681 the Somersets bought a home in Chelsea, which they remodelled, and Mary once again took charge of the gardens. 
From early 1699, for eighteen months, William Sherard (1659-1728) was at Badminton as tutor to Mary's grandson. While there, through his correspondence with John Ray (1627-1705), James Petiver (1664-1718), Hans Sloane (1660-1753), and others, he added 1500 plants to her collection. He believed that 'no place raises or preserves plants better' (BL, Sloane MS 4063, fol. 44), making Badminton a natural destination for exotic seeds, many of which were unknown elsewhere in Britain. After her husband's death in 1700 Mary redoubled her attentions to gardening and amassed thousands of exotic plants from around the globe. These rare specimens brought the duchess into correspondence with the foremost botanists of her time, linking her to a network of foreign suppliers and ensuring that her plants were identified and published. During this period she also collected insects. 
Two illustrated albums of plants in Mary Somerset's gardens were produced by Kychique and Daniel Frankcom, who had visited Badminton between 1703 and 1705. Frankcom also viewed her Chelsea garden. These albums, in addition to the images, contain information about provenances and the treatment of particular plants in the dowager duchess's care. 
In 1709 a suit was filed in chancery against Mary Somerset by her children, demanding the distribution of the balance of the late duke's personal estate. The initial ruling against her was overturned on appeal in 1710. The dowager duchess died on 7 January 1715 at Beaufort House in Chelsea, and was buried in St Michael and All Angels' Church, Badminton. She bequeathed her twelve-album herbarium to Sloane and it is now in the Natural History Museum. About twenty-five years after Mary's death, Sloane also bought Beaufort House, which he demolished. The duchess of Beaufort is commemorated in the genus 'Beaufortia' of the myrtle family, several species of which are grown as ornamentals. 


@@@@@


doc= 40545


Macfarquhar, Colin (1744/5-1793), printer and publisher, was born in Edinburgh, the son of James Macfarquhar, a wigmaker, and his wife, Margaret. On 13 December 1767 he married Jane, daughter of James Scruton, an accountant in Glasgow; they had one son and four daughters. 
After an apprenticeship Macfarquhar probably became a master printer about 1767. Besides printing books he also published a number of titles, including Jean Frederic Osterwald's English edition of the 'Bible' ('c'.1770); 'The Psalms of David in Meter' (1771); 'Letters Written by the Earl of Chesterfield to his Son' (1774-5), in association with the paper merchant George Douglas and his friend and sometime partner the bookseller Charles Elliot; and several volumes of the 'Edinburgh Magazine, or, Literary Miscellany' (1785-1803), again with Elliot. Two of these publications resulted in litigation. Alexander Kincaid, in his capacity as the king's printer in Scotland, sued Macfarquhar for infringing on his alleged monopoly of printing bibles in Scotland but withdrew his complaint. On the other hand, the London bookseller James Dodsley, who had paid for a copyright on Chesterfield's 'Letters to his Son', persevered in his suit against Macfarquhar and other Scottish publishers in the court of session. It ruled against Macfarquhar, who had to destroy hundreds of copies of his press run. Like many other British publishers Macfarquhar tested the shadowy line between legal publishing and literary piracy. 
Macfarquhar proved to be not only an aggressive businessman but also an exceptionally creative and able one. This can be seen from a history of his most important publication, the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', the first alphabetically arranged general encyclopaedia published in Scotland. The earliest edition appeared in instalments from 1768 to 1771 and as a three-volume set in 1771. Macfarquhar and his co-publisher, the engraver Andrew Bell, knew how to market their reference book: they were the first eighteenth-century British publishers to entitle their work an encyclopaedia, a word with selling power thanks to the reputation of the 'Encyclopedie' edited by Denis Diderot and Jean Le Rond d'Alembert from 1751 to 1772; also they distinguished the 'Britannica' from its competitors by publishing it in quarto rather than in octavo or folio and by featuring long synthesizing articles as well as short ones. In addition they kept costs down by printing the 'Britannica' in Macfarquhar's printing shop and by assigning Bell the engraving of all the copperplates. The two lightened their task by choosing not to edit it themselves and instead selected William Smellie. He copied and abridged so much from other sources that this edition of the 'Britannica' turned out to be undistinguished. 
Macfarquhar and Bell then decided on an expanded second edition. In order to raise the capital they formed a syndicate with eight other Scottish publishers. This edition was published in instalments from 1777 to 1784 and in ten quarto volumes with imprints from 1778 to 1783. Bell remained responsible for the engravings and Macfarquhar for at least part of the printing. They named a new editor, James Tytler, who greatly improved the work by including biographies and by providing more depth on many subjects. The wholesale copying from earlier publications continued and caused threatened and actual lawsuits. Macfarquhar and Bell settled these by awarding sets to the aggrieved parties, Samuel Foart Simmons, John Murray, and George Robinson. 
The third edition marks the high point of the eighteenth-century editions of the 'Britannica'. Published by Macfarquhar and Bell alone and issued in instalments from 1788 to 1797, and then in eighteen quarto volumes in 1797, it was the first encyclopaedia published in Great Britain to be compiled by more than a handful of contributors. Bell kept on furnishing the engravings and Macfarquhar did some of the printing but this time Macfarquhar, a man of extensive learning despite his limited formal schooling, chose to edit the work himself. Before his death he had completed the first twelve volumes up to the article 'Mysteries'. George Gleig, who took over after that, recruited such eminent contributors as John Robison and probably John Barclay but Macfarquhar deserves recognition for helping to make this edition an exemplar of the Scottish Enlightenment, the most informative general encyclopaedia in eighteenth-century Britain, and a best-seller with a press run reaching perhaps 13,000 sets. Still the publication of the third edition was not without difficulties. Like the second edition it resulted in a lawsuit; the farrier James Clark claimed that the sixty-one-page article 'Farriery' had been copied from two of his books. The case was dismissed on a technicality in 1804, long after Macfarquhar's death on 2 April 1793, at the age of forty-eight. He was survived by his wife. Macfarquhar's estate included the eight-room house in Buccleuch Place, near Edinburgh, in which he died and probably $12,500 or more, much of it from sales of the 'Britannica'. 


@@@@@


doc= 40547


Sackville, Sir William (1569/70-1592), soldier, was born in London, the third son of the poet Thomas Sackville, earl of Dorset (c.1536-1608), and Cicely Baker (died 1615). Like his elder brothers Robert Sackville and Henry, he entered Hart Hall, Oxford, and graduated BA in 1585, aged fifteen. He followed Robert to the Inner Temple, as did their younger brother Thomas. In June 1589 his father urged Henri of Navarre to accept William into his service, 'though he is inexperienced and has only just left school, as it were' ('CSP for.', '1589', 300). William went with Lord Willoughby's expedition to Normandy in support of the now declared Henri IV, and arrived from Dover in September 1589. In October, having been knighted by the French king, Sackville (described as 'Buckhurst') was with a group of gentleman-adventurers who distinguished themselves serving under Francois de La Noue in an attack near Paris. In July 1590 he suffered wounds and lost his horse at the siege of Paris; later that month he fought under the king in a skirmish at Meaux, and was present in August at Lagny when Parma forced Henri's troops to retreat. In the summer of 1591 he was ambassador to Prince Christian of Anhalt at a time when Queen Elizabeth was negotiating for an alliance with the German protestant princes. 
On 8 February 1592 Sir Henry Unton, ambassador to Henri IV, recorded Sackville's loss that day during an attack on the village of Bures or Bure; his death and burial in a mass grave were confirmed five days later. Although Unton claimed that he was 'as towardlie a gentleman as ever came out of England', whose loss the king especially lamented, Burghley replied that Sir William's 'over great courage and forwardnesse wrought his owne destruction' (Unton, 327, 338). A fellow Inner Templar, John Ross, eulogized him in a long manuscript poem, mentioning his service at Rouen and a tournament victory fought in the king's presence. 


@@@@@


doc= 40548


Hastings, Henry, fifth earl of Huntingdon (1586-1643), nobleman and landowner, was born on 24 April 1586 at Exton, Rutland, the eldest son of Francis Hastings, Lord Hastings (1560-1595), heir apparent to the earldom of Huntingdon, and Sarah, daughter of Sir James Harrington, of Exton. As a boy he was described as 'low in stature, but of comely countenance and lively wit' ('CSP dom.', '1595-7', 164). He was educated under the direction of his great-uncle, the third earl, by a 'learned and godly schoolmaster', probably Nathaniel Gilby, the earl's chaplain. His Latin exercises suggest a curriculum parallel to that established by the third earl for Leicester grammar school. Later he was entered at Gray's Inn and at Queens' College, Cambridge, matriculating in 1601. This education endowed the fifth earl with sense of his lineage, the importance of honour, and a deep-seated religious conviction. Although his uncle the puritan Sir Francis Hastings congratulated the new earl for 'resolving religiously' on 'the godly government' ('Letters', 98) of his household, and although religiosity shapes his patronage (he continued to support Arthur Hildersham into the 1620s), Huntingdon's own religious attitudes were moderately protestant. 
From 1595 to 1604 Hastings was styled Lord Hastings, inheriting the earldom from his grandfather George Hastings, fourth earl of Huntingdon, in 1604. As a minor he succeeded to some local family offices such as keeper of the royal forest of Leicester, but not to the lord lieutenancy of Leicestershire which he regained in 1607, retaining the office until his death; he was lord lieutenant of Rutland from 1614 to 1642. He married Lady Elizabeth Hastings, nee Stanley (bap. 1587, d. 1633), one of the coheirs of Ferdinando Stanley, fifth earl of Derby, on 15 January 1601 at Stoneleigh, Warwickshire. The couple had four children: Alice ('b'. 1606), Ferdinando ('b'. 1608), Henry Hastings, Baron Loughborough (1610-1667), and Elizabeth ('b'. 1612). 
Huntingdon inherited an impoverished estate which curtailed his activities and he lamented how 'without meanes honour look[s] as naked as Trees that are cropped' (Hunt. L., Hastings papers, HAP 15/8). Even with his wife's $4000 dowry he faced catastrophe. It was estimated that the third earl had sold lands worth $90,000 and the fourth earl alienated further lands, reducing his annual income in 1604 to just over $37. The estate, encumbered with two dowagers, was so bereft of cash that no money existed in 1604 to cover immediate expenses and creditors, including the exchequer, threatened land seizures. Further land sales commenced and the countess's jointure was renegotiated. By 1622 the deficit had fallen to $11,662 and Huntingdon's income stabilized at about $2032 although after his costs and repayments the remaining $900 failed to match his annual expenditure of about $1400. Vigorous measures such as the collection of arrears, deforestation, coalmining, personal borrowing, the dowry from his future daughter-in-law, and even payments from lawsuits (he gained $2506 from the Fawnt case in 1639) barely kept the earl afloat. 
Impoverishment appears to have limited Huntingdon's participation in national politics, although he was associated with the earls of Southampton and Pembroke and supported the Bohemian war as part of the pro war patriot faction on his occasional parliamentary appearances. A portrait even existed of him holding the petition of right. Interestingly, he did remain involved with the Virginia Company, and was elected to its council for his efforts in finding settlers, although he was perhaps motivated by the hope of riches as his letters to his agent, Captain Martiau, illustrate. His most distinctive contribution lay in local governance and as lord lieutenant and 'custos rotulorum' Huntingdon used his expanded powers to dominate the local elite and, in general, even ensured the collection of extra-parliamentary levies. Much of this local power was directed towards sustaining his familial position and the continued feud with the Greys of Groby. His two famous lawsuits, against Shirley and Fawnt, are both products of this feud, although in the late 1630s Huntingdon found himself employed by central government, perhaps precisely because of his 'quasi-feudal paternalism' and rigorous county governance. Thus, although of little significance in national politics, Huntingdon's career has been studied for the detailed information it provides about aristocratic attitudes and the interaction of local politics and central government in the 1620s and 1630s. Huntingdon wrote extensively, including 'The directions' (a compendium of his views for his son Ferdinando), household ordinances, directions on the etiquette of gift-giving, travel journals, and numerous notes on honour, his family history, religion, and aristocratic precedent and privilege. It is precisely the lack of originality of these works that renders them a valuable source. 
Within his financial limits Huntingdon patronized the arts, and was interested in gardening and architecture. His most singular act of literary patronage was the performance of John Marston's 'Entertainment at Ashby' (August 1607, with additions by Sir William Skipwith), celebrating the arrival of his mother-in-law, the dowager countess of Derby, and Huntingdon's own coming of age. During his lifetime eight books were dedicated to him, largely by authors associated with his family estates, or recipients of his family's educational and clerical patronage, although he also amassed a substantial library. Significantly, these books from Leicestershire authors were often printed by Samuel Macham, a printer from Ashby who worked from the Bull's Head (the Huntingdon device) in St Paul's Churchyard and who acted as Huntingdon's agent in London. 
Faced with a limited material patrimony and an extensive spiritual and aristocratic lineage, Huntingdon fostered his local roots in order to sustain his dignity. He relied on the rigorous exercise of local and hereditary offices, extensive hospitality, the cultivation of county and familial networks, and the judicious use of ecclesiastical, educational, and other notably cost-effective means of patronage to represent his status and views. Until the 1630s he cultivated a deliberately non-court oriented position and an ascetic protestantism that translated poverty into virtue. Indeed, Huntingdon is summed up by his motto 'Honorantes me honorabo' which, according to his grandson, showed his 'true sense of religion', the motto 'intimating that those only should be esteemed by him who did faithfully honour God' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 78, fol. 410). He died at Ashby-de-la-Zouch on 14 November 1643 and was buried there on 16 December. Ferdinando succeeded to the title as sixth earl of Huntingdon. 


@@@@@


doc= 40549


Hastings, Elizabeth, countess of Huntingdon (bap. 1587, d. 1633), noblewoman, was baptized at Knowsley, Lancashire, on 6 January 1587, the third and youngest daughter of Ferdinando Stanley (1559?-1594), fifth earl of Derby, and Alice Spencer (1559-1637), later dowager countess of Derby (her second husband was Sir Thomas Egerton). Elizabeth Stanley married Henry Hastings, later fifth earl of Huntingdon (1586-1643), on 15 January 1601, and bore him four children. Educated with her two sisters, Anne (later Lady Chandos) and Frances (later first countess of Bridgewater), in the households of the Stanley and Egerton families, Elizabeth was widely recognized as highly educated and deeply religious. Lucius Cary described her as '
Born learneder than Hippatia 

And might be called the philosophos truer than she. 
(Weber, 287)' Her only extant writings, a series of devotions drawn largely from the works of Joseph Hall and Arthur Hildersham, show her piety, and she and her sister, the countess of Bridgewater, shared theological books. As she spoke French she may also have shared her sister's passion for French theology and romances. From the musical associations of both the Egerton and the Hastings families it is likely she also had some musical education, and she danced in at least one court masque, as an unidentified queen in 'The Masque of Queens' (1609). 
The importance of her sisters and mother in the countess of Huntingdon's patronage cannot be overstated. Writing in 1610 Gainsford described mother and daughters as moving 'together like fair planets in conspicuous orbs' ('History of Trebizond', sig. L4'r'). The dowager countess had literary connections with Spenser, and potentially to Shakespeare (she took over patronage of her husband's players), and she was later celebrated by Milton. Her daughters wrote religious works, exchanged books, and employed poets and writers, augmenting their husband's intellectual and political networks. The countess of Huntingdon is no exception, and it seems that she continued this tradition of female learning and patronage through the education of her son Ferdinando's wife, Lady Lucy Davies. 
In 1607 John Marston represented the countess as Selas, the 'grace of the Muses', in his 'Entertainment' (Hunt., EL 34 B9), a masque designed to mark her husband's coming of age but which also celebrated the joint dynastic inheritance of the couple. (The masque's central image combines the Stanley eagle with symbols of Huntingdon's royal forestry offices.) This event, typically, brought together such local poets and gentry as Sir William Skipwith and the family's national literary connections. Donne addressed two verse epistles (of uncertain date) to her, and Thomas Pestell (perhaps when serving as household chaplain) sent her poetic tributes comparing her to Elizabeth I and Elizabeth of Bohemia. John Fletcher (who dedicated his 'Faithful Shepherdess' to members of her Leicestershire circle) complimented Ashby's Edenic hospitality and the countess as having 'the apple still to know what 'tis' (Hastings MSS, HA 13333). Indeed, Fletcher's envoy alludes to books to be sent from London, suggesting her national links, and Sir Henry Goodyer, an important figure in the circulation of literary and political texts, seems to have facilitated her patronage of Donne. Perhaps because of shared support for Elizabeth of Bohemia (strengthened by the links of the fifth earl's aunt and uncle to the princess) the countess established correspondence with Sir Thomas Roe. Roe wrote to her from Adsmere in India celebrating her 'goodness' and 'virtue' and looking forward to Christmas and conversation at Ashby (Hastings MSS, HA 10561). 
The evidence suggests that Lady Huntingdon was a significant patroness even within her limited means, respected by writers and intellectuals for her 'judicious conceit and masculine understanding' (Hastings MSS, HA 5515). Her funeral sermon praises her 'understanding' and 'perspicacity', notably in 'occasions and affairs' (I. F., 'A Sermon', sig. E3'v'). She was used as an intermediary by the Leicester councillors during their quarrel with her husband in 1607 and she was heavily involved in the management of her husband's estates and finances. Furthermore, during the 1630s she engaged in an extensive lobbying campaign, persuading the earls of Bridgewater, Manchester, and Worcester to support her husband, and single-handed she re-established the Huntingdon links with Whitehall 'to advantage and sustain the estate of her house' (ibid.). The fifth earl's re-engagement with Whitehall affairs in the 1630s was her crowning political achievement. She died, probably of uterine cancer, at Whitefriars, London, on 20 January 1633 and was buried at Ashby-de-la-Zouch on 9 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 40550


Skipwith, Sir William (c.1564-1610), politician and poet, was born at Tugby, Leicestershire, the eldest surviving son of Henry Skipwith (died 1588) of Cotes and Keythorpe, Leicestershire, and his wife, Jane (died 1598), daughter of Francis Hall of Grantham, Lincolnshire, and widow of Francis Nele of Prestwold and Cotes, Leicestershire. He was educated at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1580, and was knighted on 30 April 1603. 
Sir William was descended from a long line of Lincolnshire gentry. His family became established in Leicestershire when his father, a younger son and equerry to Queen Elizabeth, married the widow of Francis Nele of Prestwold and Tugby and also purchased the manor of Cotes. William served as a volunteer with the earl of Leicester in the Netherlands in 1586, but after his father's death in 1588 settled down to life in the shire, becoming an influential figure in local politics. He was appointed to the county bench in 1592, served as sheriff (1597-8), was one of the commissioners to deal with the midland revolt and problems of depopulation in 1607, and served as knight of the shire in 1601 and MP for Leicester in the parliament of 1604-10. He also played host to Queen Anne and Prince Henry when they stayed in Leicester on their progress south in June 1603. 
Skipwith's role in Leicestershire politics was largely determined by his ambiguous relationship with the Hastings family which dominated the local scene. During the late 1590s he was said to be 'out of frendship' with the fourth earl of Huntingdon, the head of the family (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 78, fol. 319) and this probably cost him a seat for the county in the parliament of 1597. By 1601 he had to some extent been reconciled with the family and his election for the county that year was probably with Huntingdon's blessing; however, at hearings during the parliament Skipwith sided with George Belgrave who had snubbed the earl during the election for Leicester. Skipwith was on much friendlier terms with George's grandson Henry, who succeeded to the earldom in 1605; however, in local politics he continued to take an independent line. He voiced loud criticisms of abuses by the local purveyor which reflected badly on the earl's management of the service; he also sided with the Greys and the Beaumonts in quarrels with the earl's great-uncle, Walter Hastings. Perhaps as a result of this Huntingdon never promoted him to the prestigious local office of deputy lieutenant. As an MP Skipwith was not a prominent speaker, confining himself mainly to interventions on local issues. None the less he established a reputation, both in Leicestershire and at Westminster, as an exemplary 'parliament man'. 
Skipwith's standing was also enhanced by his religious and literary activities. There is little evidence for his personal piety, but he showed his support for local puritans when the opportunity arose and was regarded as one of their chief allies. In May 1603 he arrested trouble-makers in Leicester who had set up a maypole in defiance of the town's godly ministers; then in January 1605 he joined other leading justices to sign a petition to Viscount Cranborne on behalf of puritan clergy who had been deprived of their livings. He was also a prominent member of a literary circle gathered under the patronage of Sir Henry Goodyer and the fifth earl of Huntingdon. Copies of his poems survive in a commonplace book which belonged to his family and also included works by other members of the network, notably Francis and John Beaumont, John Donne, and Thomas Pestell. Skipwith's verses dwelt on the themes of beauty, romantic love, and the author's obligations to his patron. The lines he composed for the earl's entertainment at Ashby, on the occasion of a visit from his mother-in-law, Alice, countess of Derby, in 1607, included a mock 'chancery bill' indicting the countess and other gentlewomen present for 'stealing the hearts of his Majesty's loving subjects' (BL, Add. MS 25707, fol. 134). In his 'Worthies of England', Thomas Fuller described Skipwith as 'a person of much valour, judgement, learning and wisdom, dexterous at the making fit and acute epigrams, poesies, mottoes and devices, but chiefly at impresses neither so apparent that every rustic might understand them, nor so obscure that they needed an Oedipus to interpret them. (Fuller, 'Worthies', 2.258)' Sir William was married twice, first, to Margaret (died 1594), daughter of Roger Cave of Stanford, Northamptonshire, with whom he had four sons and four daughters, and second, to Jane (died 1630), daughter of John Roberts and widow of John Markham of Sidebrook. He died in London on 3 May 1610 and was buried at Prestwold church where his second wife erected a large monument to him. The verses inscribed on this, written by his friend John Beaumont, present him as the ideal of the contemporary gentleman: nobly born, hospitable, learned, and the true servant of his country (Nichols, 3.359). 


@@@@@


doc= 40559


Lehmann, Elizabeth Nina Mary Frederica (1862-1918), composer and singer, was born on 11 July 1862 at 139 Westbourne Terrace, London, the daughter of the painter (Wilhelm Augustus) Rudolf Lehmann (1819-1905) and his wife, the composer Amelia Lehmann ('A. L.'), 'nee' Chambers (1820-1903). Always known as Liza, she spent the first five years of her life in Italy before her parents returned to England and settled in London. Apart from a year spent at a day school she was privately educated, and her first music teacher was her mother. She also studied singing with Alberto Randegger and Jenny Lind and composition with Niels Ravnkilde and Wilhelm Freudenberg. Encouraged by both her parents to embark on a career as a professional musician, Lehmann made her formal debut as a lyric soprano at a Monday Popular Concert in London in 1885 at the age of twenty-three. Over the next nine years she was in great demand as a concert singer, and she performed at both private and public venues throughout Britain. Her repertory included both her own songs, which started appearing in print in 1888, and various seventeenth- and eighteenth-century English songs which she discovered in the British Museum. 
On 10 October 1894 Lehmann married the amateur composer Herbert Bedford (1867-1945), son of John Thomas Bedford, and retired from the public stage. She turned instead to composition, and in 1896 she wrote her best-known work, the song cycle 'In a Persian Garden', for four voices and piano. Lehmann saw this as her 'first serious composition' (Lehmann, 70), and one critic described it as 'one of the most impressive works ever penned by a female composer' ('MT', 38, 1897, 20). A setting of a selection of verses from 'Umar Khayyam's 'Rubaiyat' in the translation by Edward FitzGerald, 'In a Persian Garden' captured the 'fin de siecle' fascination with the Orient and philosophy of living for the moment. It is still sometimes performed today, and at the end of the twentieth century was widely heard throughout Britain and the United States. 
The song cycle was not commonly used by British composers in the late nineteenth century, and Lehmann can be credited with establishing the genre in Britain. Further cycles included the intense and moving 'In Memoriam' (1899), for baritone or mezzo-soprano and piano, to sections from Tennyson's poem of the same name. The births of her two sons, Rudolf ('b'. 1897) and Leslie (1900-1989), inspired several works either written for children or reflecting childhood. Among these were the much-loved cycles 'The Daisy-Chain' (1900), for four voices and piano, to poems by Robert Louis Stevenson and others, and its sequel 'More Daisies' (1902). Humour also became an important element of Lehmann's work, as in the cycles 'Nonsense Songs', incorporating 'The Songs that Came out Wrong from Alice in Wonderland (Lewis Carroll)' (1908), for four voices and piano, and 'Four Cautionary Tales and a Moral' (1909), to poems by Hilaire Belloc, for two voices and piano. Always well crafted and using compelling melodies, such light-hearted works were in great demand from both the public and Lehmann's publishers. In addition they provided a vital source of income when Bedford fell into financial difficulties. Lehmann found it harder to gain a hearing for what she described as her 'more ambitious work' (Lehmann, 117) and, as her more popular music became widely known, faced growing disapproval from critics previously enthusiastic. 
In 1904 Lehmann was the first woman to be commissioned to compose the music for a musical comedy. 'Sergeant Brue', with a libretto by Owen Hall and lyrics by J. Hickory Wood, was an undoubted success, playing in London for 290 performances between 1904 and 1905. Other stage works were the light opera 'The Vicar of Wakefield' (1906), to a libretto by Laurence Housman after Oliver Goldsmith, and an operatic version of the morality play 'Everyman' (1915). 
While cultivating an acceptably ladylike image as devoted mother and wife (clearly reflected in her published memoirs 'The Life of Liza Lehmann', which appeared posthumously in 1919), Lehmann always remained fiercely professional. Towards the end of her life she toured the United States, took up a post at the Guildhall School of Music, and served as the first president of the Society of Women Musicians (established in 1911). In 1916 she was devastated by the death of her beloved son Rudolph during military training and could not continue with many of these activities. She died at her home at Hatch End, Pinner, on 19 September 1918. 


@@@@@


doc= 40560


Holbrooke, Joseph Charles (1878-1958), composer and pianist, was born on 5 July 1878 at Waddon, Croydon, one of the five children (two sons and three daughters) of Joseph Charles Holbrooke ('fl'. 1860-1900), a music-hall musician and piano teacher from Bristol, and his wife, Alice Scotland (died 1880), of Newport, Paisley, Fife. Holbrooke studied at the Royal Academy of Music (1893-5), winning various prizes. During 1896-9 he eked out a living as pantomime band conductor, music teacher, and composer of many salon pieces. He subsequently adopted the forename Josef professionally, to avoid confusion with his father. In June 1896 Holbrooke made his debut as a solo pianist at St James's Hall, London; his repertory included piano concertos by Rakhmaninov and Tchaikovsky. He married Dorothy Elizabeth, daughter of T. Hadfield of Morthen. They had two sons and three daughters. 
In 1900 Holbrooke began to achieve success and recognition as a composer. In that year his tone-poem 'The Raven' was accepted by Sir August Manns for premiere at a Crystal Palace concert on 3 March. His Proms premiere came later that year when his variations for orchestra, 'Three Blind Mice', was played at a Prom on 3 November; it was later a great favourite with audiences at the Proms. Holbrooke briefly taught at the Birmingham and Midland Institute, but the popularity of his works at chamber and orchestral concerts in London encouraged him to concentrate on composing; and commissions from the major music festivals began to arrive. His orchestral piece 'Queen Mab' was given at the Leeds festival in 1904, and 'Ulalume' at the Queen's Hall, London, under Sir Henry Wood later the same year. Other festival premieres of his works took place at Norwich, Bristol, and Birmingham. 
A significant event of these years was Holbrooke's introduction to the poet Herbert Trench. The latter commissioned a setting of his poem 'Apollo and the Seaman' from Holbrooke, who produced a seventy-minute symphony, premiered at the Queen's Hall in 1908. This featured a large orchestra and chorus behind a screen on which a magic lantern projected text and images. The slides were unfortunately out of sequence with the music, and the event became the quarry from which a number of writers on music subsequently extracted humorous anecdotes. 
An important boost to Holbrooke's career followed from a meeting with the wealthy Lord Howard de Walden, who became his benefactor. He transformed Holbrooke's existence with major commissions, as well as other kinds of subsidy: gifts, a cottage in Harlech, holidays (he went on de Walden's honeymoon cruise of the Mediterranean in 1912). Unfortunately, all this largess came to an end with de Walden's death in 1946. However, de Walden wrote a triptych of three poetic plays, collectively known as 'The Cauldron of Annwn' and based on the 'Mabinogion'; and Holbrooke was commissioned to set all three. He conceived them as Wagnerian music dramas, rather than operas; they appeared as 'Dylan' (1910), 'The Children of Don' (1912), and 'Bronwen' (1920). The first two were performed under Artur Nikisch and Thomas Beecham respectively. Because of the First World War 'Bronwen' did not receive its premiere until 1929. By that time, the first two works had been put on in Vienna and Salzburg, 'which indicates the wide performance that Holbrooke's music received in the first quarter of the century' (Pirie, 642). 
Already by the end of the First World War, however, there were signs that Holbrooke's reputation was beginning to wane. There were still occasional BBC broadcasts of his works, as well as chamber concerts and performances by provincial orchestras; but it was clear that musical tastes had moved on. His chances of performance were not helped by the fact that 'Many of his works are scored for a very large orchestra and are of long duration -- for a composer of less than first rank this makes a formidable barrier' (Pirie, 642). Although he attempted to write foxtrots, and was associated with the dance band music of the 1920s, he made little impression. Holbrooke was handicapped, from the late 1920s, by profound deafness. 
A vigorous and articulate advocate of British music, Holbrooke included not only his own works but the music of many others in the chamber music concerts he organized (1903-35). His book 'Contemporary British Composers' was published in 1925. As late as 1946, the year of his benefactor's death, the London Symphony Orchestra played his works at two concerts in the Kingsway Hall, London. 
Holbrooke's reputation is that of a composer of large, outdated works in a sub-Wagnerian idiom; not just overblown, but musically uninspired. 'His enormous oeuvre is very uneven, and his music is sometimes clumsy and tasteless' (Pirie, 642). Yet the 'New Grove' article goes on to add that 'there is much that is lively and original, and his scoring was always vivid' (ibid.). Indeed, although the music dramas are large-scale, the effects and imagination at work are often fresh and challenging. In addition, many of the orchestral pieces are quite short and are scored for orchestras of standard proportions. The music is always tonal, and in the chamber music (of which there are two sextets, six string quartets, three violin sonatas, and much else) a distinctly French exoticism, intriguingly tangled with music-hall vulgarity and vigour, is to the fore. Works which are still praised include his second clarinet quintet, the sextet for piano and wind op. 33a, and the piano quintet op. 44. Holbrooke also wrote eight symphonies, although a number of the later scores seem to be lost. The material for the early orchestral tone-poems is accessible, and during the 1990s several commercial recordings were made. A number of tone-poems were inspired by the prose and poetry of Edgar Allan Poe, including 'The Raven'. 
Holbrooke died at his home, 55 Alexandra Road, St John's Wood, London, on 5 August 1958, survived by his wife. The bassoonist Gwydion Brooke ('b'. 1912) was his son. Although his reputation is clearly ripe for reassessment, the judgement of Holbrooke's 'Times' obituarist is unlikely to be wide of the mark: 'Holbrooke's was an exuberant, versatile talent, and his output, particularly of chamber music, was large. Though widely performed, his music has never become widely familiar.' 


@@@@@


doc= 40562


Shiel, Matthew Phipps (1865-1947), novelist, was born on 20 July 1865 in Plymouth, Montserrat, West Indies, the ninth child and only son of Matthew Dowdy Shiell (1825-1888), a shipowner and Methodist lay preacher of Irish descent, and Priscilla Ann Blake (1830-1910), who was of mixed race. A precocious juvenile, he wrote newspaper columns and an unpublished novel. At fifteen he was ceremoniously crowned by his father as king of Redonda, a rocky islet near Monserrat, and he allowed his fictitious title to be perpetuated. He was educated at Harrison College, a boarding-school in Barbados. In London after 1883, he matriculated at London University, briefly studied medicine, and became a schoolmaster. By the early nineties he was contributing stories to penny weeklies and associating with such writers as W. T. Stead and Arthur Machen. 
In 1895 Shiel (as he thereafter spelled his name), published 'Prince Zaleski', describing mysteries solved by an eccentric Russian. 'The Rajah's Sapphire' and 'Shapes in the Fire' appeared the next year. On 3 November 1898 he married Carolina Garcia Gomez (1879/80-1903), daughter of Miguel Garcia Gomez, a Seville merchant. They had one child, a daughter. That year 'The Yellow Danger' introduced the menace of Chinese domination of the world. 'Contraband of War' (1899), an adventure of rival naval innovators, was followed by two historical romances, 'Cold Steel' (1899) and 'The Man Stealers' (1900). Popularity came with two visionary tales in 1901. In 'The Lord of the Sea' an English farmer gains control of the world's seaways, discovers he is a Jew, and seeks to solve the 'Jewish problem' in England and Palestine. In 'The Purple Cloud' the sole survivor of universal volcanic asphyxiation wanders Europe burning its dead cities until he finds a second survivor, a young woman, and is redeemed by love. What made these novels literary sensations was their grandiose sweep of imagination, the vigour and inventiveness of their prose, and Shiel's surreal images of obsession, hysteria, and horror. 
By 1913 Shiel had published eleven more books, including 'The Yellow Wave' (1905), inspired by the Russo-Japanese War, a story of interracial romance and intercontinental warfare, and 'The Last Miracle' (1906), about a plot to undermine the church by creating and then exposing false miracles. In December 1914 Shiel was briefly imprisoned in Wormwood Scrubs for reasons undetermined. During the war years he wrote plays that were never published. On 31 January 1919 he married Esther Lydia Furley (1872/3-1943). His second creative period began in 1923 with 'Children of the Wind', an African adventure, followed by 'How the Old Woman Got Home' (1927), 'Here Comes the Lady' (1928), and 'Dr Krasinski's Secret' (1929). Republication of four of his novels by Gollancz in 1929 helped revive Shiel's earlier reputation. His wife divorced him in 1929, and after occupying dozens of lodgings in London, Shiel settled in 1930 at L'Abri, a cottage near Horsham, Sussex. His last five books include a murder mystery ('The Black Box', 1930), short stories ('The Invisible Voices', 1935), and a science-fiction fantasy ('The Young Men are Coming', 1937). 
Shiel's thirty books varied greatly in theme and quality. The purple prose and frenzied emotion of the 1901 fantasies were never quite equalled, though 'frenetic vigour' remained the hallmark of Shiel's style (Morse, 'Works of M. P. Shiel', 480). His books embodied preoccupations of his time -- imperialism, the yellow peril, spiritualism, scientism, evolution -- and encompassed many genres -- adventure, romance, mystery, horror, fantasy, science fiction. At his best reminiscent of Poe and Wells, he could descend to potboilers and juvenilia. Misanthropy, racism, and antisemitism pervade his writing, as does fascination with a masterful, aspiring hero. 
Shiel's only autobiographical essay, written when he was thirty-five, is brief and unreliable, and many facts about his life remain obscure. A semi-recluse, he wrote his last five books, received a civil-list pension through the efforts of his first bibliographer, John Gawsworth, and worked on a life of Jesus. Shiel died on 17 February 1947 at St Richard's Hospital, Chichester, and was cremated on 24 February at Golders Green, London. After his death he became a cult figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 40563


Sime, Sidney Herbert (1864x7-1941), illustrator and caricaturist, was born between 1864 and 1867 in the Hulme district of Manchester, the second of six children of David and Helen Sime, who were both Scottish. His marriage register entry (1898) gave his age as 31, meaning he would have been born in 1866 or 1867; however, in the letter of administration taken out by his widow in 1941 his age was put at 76, suggesting that he was born in 1864 or 1865. According to his nephew John Sime it was probably the latter. Nothing is known about his parents beyond the fact that when he was an infant they moved to Liverpool, where his father was employed in a furniture warehouse. 
Sime probably received little formal education before going to work underground in a Yorkshire colliery. His five years as a pit boy left him with memories of pushing trolleys down tunnels only 2-3 feet high and nearly being buried alive by a roof-fall. He then worked for a linen draper, a shoemaker, and a baker before becoming successful as a signwriter. This enabled him to attend Liverpool School of Art, where he won prizes for drawing in 1885 and 1888 and decided on a career as an illustrator. He moved to London, probably in 1893. 
Sime's first illustrations were made for the halfpenny comic papers. His breakthrough came in 1895 when the magazine 'Pick-Me-Up', which employed distinguished artists, started to publish his cartoons about the afterlife. Treating the netherworld with ominous humour (perhaps connected with his experience down the mine), his cartoons upset the devout and created something of a sensation. Soon his sombre fantasies were appearing in many magazines, notably 'The Idler', 'The Sketch', 'The Butterfly', and the 'Pall Mall Magazine'. Between autumn 1897 and February 1898 he edited the short-lived magazine 'Eureka', in which post he took a nonchalant view of his duties. At the end of 1897 Sime was being talked of as one of the country's leading artists in black and white, influenced like most of his contemporaries by Beardsley and Japanese prints but a pioneer of the comic-grotesque style ('Windsor Magazine', December 1897). 
Another side of Sime's talent was seen in the theatrical caricatures published in 'Pick-Me-Up' in 1896-8 and 'The Tatler' in 1902-4. Sir David Low praised Sime for these, describing him as 'the most notable' of the theatrical caricaturists of the nineties, 'a beautifully imaginative artist with a mordant fancy which sometimes overlaid his observation of character but whose studies of people nevertheless are full of fine and well-balanced caricature' (Low, 38). As well as cartooning, Sime also painted allegories, portraits, and landscapes in oil, some of which were exhibited at the Royal Society of British Artists between 1896 and 1903. 
Sime's uncle, William Sime, who had been a prosperous solicitor in Edinburgh, died in 1898, leaving him about $14,000 and a house with a small estate at Aberfoyle, Perthshire. In the same year on 14 July he married in Edinburgh Mary Susan Pickett, a miniature painter and illustrator. For the next few years they spent half their time at Aberfoyle, where Sime painted landscapes. 
With some of his new wealth, Sime bought 'The Idler' and installed himself as co-editor in 1899. Partly through his own neglect it proved a disastrous investment, with Sime selling the goodwill in 1901 for $5. After 1900 he had a diminishing appetite for magazine illustration, but in 1905 he was tempted to visit the United States by William Randolph Hearst. Despite being offered a handsome retainer he stayed only six months. 
From the magazines which he called 'those God-forsaken sponge-cakes of the suburban soul' (letter to Josef Holbrooke, 18 Aug 1910, priv. coll.) Sime turned to illustrating books, predominantly the fantasies of Edward Plunkett, eighteenth baron of Dunsany. Starting in 1905 with 'The Gods of Pegana', Dunsany's tales of wonder, set in other worlds and written in prose-poetry, gave Sime, in Rossetti's phrase, a perfect opportunity for 'allegorizing on one's own hook'. While illustrating ten books (some with only a frontispiece) he went to stay with Dunsany at his castle in Ireland, where he proved a highly entertaining guest. 
Another noble collaborator and generous friend was Thomas Scott-Ellis, eighth Baron Howard de Walden. Like Dunsany he had a preoccupation with myth and a conviction that Sime was a genius. Sime designed sets and costumes for the trilogy of operas based on the 'Mabinogion', staged in 1912, 1914, and 1929, for which Holbrooke wrote the music and Howard de Walden the libretto. 
In 1903 Sime had bought Crown Cottage, Worplesdon, Surrey, which he converted from a public house. After selling his house in Scotland he lived there for the rest of his life, increasingly withdrawn from the art world. Given a measure of independence by his inheritance and supported by his noble patrons, he painted when he felt inclined. Walter Emanuel wrote, 'one of the most acute individualities in the world of black-and-white is Mr. S. H. Sime -- that he produces so little nowadays is a calamity'. He called Sime 'a great master of the grotesque' ('Strand Magazine', November 1915, 592). In July 1918 Sime was conscripted into the Army Service Corps, and on 11 November, armistice day, he was invalided out. His 'Bogey Beasts' with music by Josef Holbrooke was published in 1923, and reasonably successful exhibitions of his work were held at the St George's Gallery, London, in 1924 and 1927; otherwise he spurned dealers, read voraciously (acquiring a deep knowledge of William Blake and other visionary writers), backed horses, and spent every evening at the local public house. 
Sime's strong personality and powers of conversation could astonish his audience. During his youth his appearance was as outre as his art: Max Beerbohm's caricature published in 'The Idler' of August 1900 made him look like a Buddha in a bearskin. The novelist Desmond Coke called his presence 'overwhelming, as of a chunky Chinese idol' and his conversation 'shattering' (Coke, 225). 
Sime's originality in appearance, conversation, and darkly imaginative art, coupled with his rise from pit boy to magazine proprietor, was such as to make him a 'man of the nineties', the friend of Max Beerbohm and Frank Harris, and one of the creators of the 'fin de siecle' mood. His decline after the turn of the century was due partly to his contemptuous rejection of the art market and partly to the change in taste whereby the public came to see humour and weird fantasy as incompatible. Apart from a small coterie, the hyperbole evaporated, but Sime continued to have admirers: Dr Gordon N. Ray wrote in 1976, 'of all the English black-and-white artists more or less in the Beardsley tradition he was the most original' (Ray, 201). 
Sime died on 21 May 1941 at the Royal Surrey County Hospital, Guildford, Surrey, and was buried nearby in the graveyard of Worplesdon parish church. His widow died in 1949, leaving his remaining pictures, with an endowment, to the trustees of the Worplesdon Memorial Hall to form the Sime Gallery. The couple had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 40565


Bononcini, Giovanni (1670-1747), composer, was born on 8 July (18 July NS) 1670 at Modena, the fifth of the eight children of Giovanni Maria Bononcini ('bap'. 1642, died 1678), composer and chapel master at the cathedral, and his first wife, Anna Maria Prezii (1641/2-1677), whom he married in 1662. Anna Maria died after giving birth to Antonio Maria (1677-1726), and Giovanni Maria died a year later. Giovanni and Antonio Maria studied in Bologna with Giovanni Paolo Colonna, chapel master at San Petronio. In 1685-91 Giovanni published six instrumental and two vocal collections, was elected to the Accademia Filarmonica, played violoncello at San Petronio, was appointed chapel master at San Giovanni in Monte, and composed three oratorios. In 1692-8 he lived in Rome, where he served Filippo and Lorenza Colonna, joined the Accademia di Santa Cecilia and the 'chorus' in the Arcadian Academy, and composed six serenatas, five operas, and one oratorio, all to texts by the Roman librettist Silvio Stampiglia. 'Il trionfo di Camilla' (Naples, 1696) had the greatest success; in 1698-1710 it was adapted for productions in nineteen other Italian cities, and in 1706-28 it was performed 111 times in London, where an attempt was made in 1707 to attract Bononcini himself. 'Camilla' is a touchstone of Italian taste between 1696 and 1710 because its captivating melodies serve as a postscript to the seventeenth-century 'bel canto' and a prelude to the eighteenth-century 'galant' styles. Greater complexities are found in Bononcini's 300 cantatas, which exemplify 'no little 'bizzaria', beauty, harmony, artful study, and fanciful invention' (F. Gasparini, 'L'armonico pratico al cimbalo', 1708, 110; trans. F. S. Stillings, 1963, 94). Complexities abound in his 'Duetti da camera', op. 8 (1691), which are dedicated to Emperor Leopold I. From 1698 to 1712 he served Leopold I (died 1705) and Joseph I (died 1711) in Vienna, and he was clearly Joseph's favourite composer. After Joseph's death he served Johann Wenzel, Count Gallas, Charles VI's ambassador to Rome (died 1719). 
In the summer of 1719 Bononcini was invited to compose for the new Royal Academy of Music in London. The fifty-year-old arrived in mid-October 1720, and his first two seasons were outstandingly successful. Five of his operas (including one for which he set only act II) accounted for 82 of the 120 performances given by the academy, and he profited from engraved editions of his 'Cantate e duetti' (which had 238 subscribers) and 'Divertimenti da camera'. In 1721-2 his operas led the academy to its only profitable season. He then received commissions from Francis Atterbury, dean of Westminster, to write the anthem for the duke of Marlborough's funeral and from Katharine Sheffield, duchess of Buckingham, to set the choruses in 'Marcus Brutus', written by her late husband. 
The duchess was a notorious Jacobite, and Atterbury was imprisoned for treasonous Jacobite activities in August 1722. By October the academy had terminated its employment of both Bononcini and the librettist Rolli, who were Italian Catholics, were associated with Jacobites, and would not accept significantly reduced salaries. During the 1722-3 season their 'Erminia' was nevertheless produced, presumably as a rehearsal for its scheduled performance at Paris in July 1723. Bononcini had long been regarded in Paris as the sole 'modele pour le gracieux' (F. Raguenet, 'Defense du parallele des Italiens et des Francais', 1705, 44). One negotiator for the July production was Luigi Riccoboni, the director of the Italian comedians in Paris and the husband of Elena Balletti, whose sister Margherita ('b'. 'c'.1685, died after 1738) had married Bononcini, perhaps by 1706. Although the July production was cancelled, Bononcini performed at Paris with various singers during the summers of 1723-4 and was offered employment there by the marquise de Prie, mistress of the duke of Bourbon, first minister of France. But he instead accepted a lifelong stipend of $500 per annum, offered by Henrietta Godolphin, duchess of Marlborough, on 14 May 1724. In return for this sum he organized her private concerts. In 1727 he did compose one more opera for the Royal Academy, but its performances were increasingly marred by catcalls blown by partisans of the rival prima donnas. 
Bononcini and Handel likewise had their partisans, and in May 1725 John Byrom wittily ridiculed them at the end of a six-line epigram: '
Strange all this Difference should be 

'Twixt Tweedle-dum and Tweedle-dee! 
(Deutsch, 180)' Bononcini's best friend in London was Giuseppe Riva, the secretary for Modena (1718-29), with whom he often resided in Suffolk Street. Riva's pamphlet, 'Advice to the Composers and Performers of Vocal Musick' (1727), offers 'advice' to Handel. Bononcini's recitative, clearly superior to Handel's, was 'marked with great exactness and propriety' (J. Hawkins, 'A General History of the Science and Practice of Music', 5 vols., 1776, 5.281), and, 'both in writing and utterance, was universally allowed to be the best of the time, and in the true genius of the Italian language' (C. Burney, 'Bononcini', in Rees, 'Cyclopaedia', 1819, vol. 4). Hawkins aptly noted that 'Bononcini's genius was adapted to the expression of tender and pathetic sentiments. His melodies, the richest and sweetest that we know of, are in a style peculiarly his own; his harmonies are original, and at the same time natural'. But Bononcini's arias rarely convey the power that typifies those by Handel. As Burney noted, 'his melody was, perhaps, more polished and vocal, though not so new as that of his powerful Saxon rival;... as a correct, powerful, and inventive composer, he was an infant compared with Handel'. Bononcini's are instead 'agreeable and easie' (J. E. Galliard, 'Six English Cantatas after the Italian Manner', 1716, preface). They served from 1690 onwards as a 'modele pour le gracieux', but by 1730 their 'too great Simplicity' troubled many listeners ('The Craftsman', 10 June 1727). 
Beginning in 1726 Bononcini was an active member of the newly formed Academy of (Ancient) Vocal Music. About 1728 his friend Maurice Greene introduced an unsigned manuscript of a madrigal, which Bononcini reportedly claimed to have composed. In 1731 Bernard Gates presented the same work, drawn from a 1705 publication by Antonio Lotti. A flagrant example of someone's unacknowledged borrowing had been uncovered, and several academicians vengefully discredited Bononcini and Greene by obtaining and publishing attestations from Lotti and his Venetian associates. Bononcini then ended his dozen years in London unwisely, in that he cast his lot with the infamous Count Ughi (a disguised Discalced Carmelite), left his generous patroness, and dedicated a work of 1732 to her chief antagonist, her own mother, Sarah, dowager duchess of Marlborough. 
By November 1732 Bononcini had departed for Paris, where he composed and published works in 1733. He was in Madrid in December 1733 and in Lisbon by August 1735. In mid-1736 he returned to Vienna, where he composed two operas and an oratorio for productions of 1737. He was presumably unaware that Handel's 'Serse' (London, 1738) revivifies much from his Roman 'Xerse' of 1694 and thus contains flagrant examples of unacknowledged borrowing. He presented Empress Maria Theresa with a 'Te Deum' in 1741, and in 1742 she increased his small pension to an amount that allowed him to spend his final five years in comfortable frugality. It is not known if his wife was with him after 1733, but their 22-year-old daughter, Theresia, died at Vienna on 10 May 1743; Bononcini died there, at a house called Al Luccio Azzurro in the rione Wieden, on 9 July 1747. 


@@@@@


doc= 40567


Giardini, Felice (1716-1796), violinist and composer, was born in Turin, Italy, on 12 April 1716, the son of a French musician named Jardin, who introduced him to the violin. After time spent in Milan as a cathedral chorister and student of singing, composition, and harpsichord playing (under Paladini), he returned to Turin and studied the violin with G. B. Somis, a pupil of the great Italian violinist Arcangelo Corelli. Giardini quickly advanced through the ranks of various orchestras in Rome and Naples, and in 1748 embarked on a concert tour of Europe as a violin soloist. He arrived in England, via Berlin and Paris, probably in 1750 and possibly at the invitation of Frederick, prince of Wales. 
Giardini's presence continued the influence of the Corellian school of violin playing in England, as epitomized formerly by Francesco Geminiani and characterized by tasteful and refined performance rather than virtuosic display. He appeared at first in private circles, enjoying immediate success and easily eclipsing the abilities of native violinists. His first public performance in London (a benefit for Francesca Cuzzoni on 27 April 1751) was a triumph. Involvement from 1762 with the concerts of Harriet Fox-Lane, Lady Bingley, his principal patron, followed, and he gained a number of gentlemen violin pupils and taught singing and harpsichord to ladies in addition to those with higher aspirations. He later taught and enjoyed the patronage of Caroline Russell, duchess of Marlborough, as well as that of William, duke of Gloucester, and Henry, duke of Cumberland, brothers of George III. 
Some of Giardini's most innovative instrumental works were published during this period, including the 'Sei sonate di cembalo con violino o flauto traverso', op. 3 (1751). With the instruments treated with greater equality, these are the earliest examples of the accompanied sonata in England and are important early examples of the 'galant' style in English chamber music. 
Within a few years of his arrival Giardini established a morning 'accademia' at his house, which provided opportunities for his students to perform. It survived until at least 1768. During the early 1750s (probably 1753 or 1754) Giardini married the Italian singer and dancer Maria Caterina Violante Vestris ('c'.1732-1791), although the marriage appears to have been short-lived. 
Giardini published his own music in partnership with John Cox (until 1755) and performed widely as leader and soloist for various subscription series and benefits. After 1754 he concentrated mainly on opera and oratorio, as leader bringing higher standards to the orchestra of the Italian Opera at the King's Opera House in the Haymarket and, unusually, contributing his own operas and arias to various pasticcio productions. His connection with the Italian Opera lasted for forty years. An occasional role as impresario left him with a $602 9's'. 11died overdraft in 1764. He enjoyed greater success with the promotion of subscription series. 
Giardini continued his association with high-profile musical events and influential figures during the following decades. He was involved with numerous summer or autumn festivals all round England and took responsibility for the orchestra for the Three Choirs festival (1770-76). In London he led the orchestra at the Pantheon Concerts in Oxford Street (1774-5, 1778-9), and returned to the King's Opera House as leader and music director (1776-7 and 1782-3, and possibly 1772-3). A governor of the Lock Hospital, he was associated over a long period with the numerous oratorio performances given there. 'Ruth', an oratorio originally by Giardini and Charles Avison, was performed at the hospital in 1763, and a version scored by Giardini alone appeared in most years from 1768 to 1780, making it one of the most successful oratorios apart from those by Handel. He also ran many of the concerts at the Foundling Hospital (including performances of the 'Messiah'), where he was a governor (from 1770) and where the ill-fated music academy he had planned with Burney in 1774 was to have been established. 
Giardini sold music and sold and repaired instruments from his Italian Musick Warehouse in the Haymarket, near Panton Street, from 1767 until 1769, in partnership with the cellist Emanuel Siprutini. Following the demise of this enterprise, Giardini's works were issued by Peter Welcker. 
About this time Giardini's dominance as a violinist was seriously challenged by the German Wilhelm Cramer, who made his London debut in 1773. Cramer's success may have been behind Giardini's plans to leave the country, but he stayed, playing alongside Cramer on many occasions and often performing on the viola in public. However, he performed little in public after 1779, and deliberately avoided the Handel commemoration of 1784. By this time Cramer reigned supreme and J. P. Salomon was establishing himself. 
Giardini was employed as singing teacher and leader by George, prince of Wales, from about 1782 until his departure for Italy in the summer of 1784. He travelled, via Paris, to Naples and the home of Sir William Hamilton, British envoy to the court of Naples, who had been one of his first violin pupils in London. 
On 7 January 1790 Giardini made an unsuccessful return to opera in England, with Cimarosa's 'Ninetta', which he directed from the harpsichord with Cramer leading. Giardini was by this stage very much in the German's shadow and his poor physical health impaired his dexterity. He was also snubbed by the prince of Wales following an attempt to cheat him over the sale of a violin. 
Giardini's last London appearance took place on 22 May 1792, in 'Ruth' at Ranelagh Gardens, after which little is known of his travels. He appears to have left for Russia, possibly arriving first in St Petersburg. He certainly gave two concerts in Moscow in 1796, where he died, in poverty, of 'a neglected erysipelas of the leg' (McVeigh, 'Violinist', 193) on 8 June the same year. 
Giardini was a colourful and often controversial character. He combined charm, wit, and generosity with occasional arrogance, ill temper, and even dishonesty. The anti-German feeling he often displayed was perhaps related to the success of German violinists at his expense, and even extended to Haydn. Thomas Gainsborough was a close friend of Giardini and a competent violinist, and his portrait of the Italian, bought by John Frederick Sackville, third duke of Dorset, in 1778, suggests an imposing stature. 
Although a far more significant violinist than composer, Giardini's numerous chamber works, Italian arias, English songs, and glees display a particular gift for melody. Various London publishers were involved after Welcker's death. His tune 'Trinity' (now 'Moscow') can still be found in English hymnals, although his frequent association with the Russian 'Hymn to the Tsar' is inaccurate. 


@@@@@


doc= 40568


Walsh, John (1665/6-1736), music publisher and musical instrument maker, was probably of Irish ancestry. He appears to have been established in London in the early 1690s, and on 24 June 1692 was made musical instrument-maker-in-ordinary to William III, succeeding John Shaw in that post. He married Mary Allen on 28 January 1692 at St James Duke's Place, London; they had fifteen children, of which three survived infancy. His first child was baptized at St Mary-le-Strand on 26 January 1693. His son 
John Walsh senior began publishing in 1695, and his business soon flourished owing to the vacuum created in the market by the demise of John Playford's business. Walsh's earliest publications often come with highly ornamental engraved titles and frontispieces, some of which were reused for different works. From the 1710s, after apparently establishing a link with Etienne Roger of Amsterdam, Walsh's publications occasionally utilize Roger's original plates along with his own imprints. His own publications eventually saw the replacement of copper plates by cheaper pewter plates, and the replacement of engraving by the use of punches. Up to 1730 most of Walsh's publications include the name of John Hare of Cornhill, who provided city premises for his business. In addition to this association, Walsh appears, in October 1708, to have become a partner of Peter Randall, who presumably married Walsh's sister. Randall evidently gave up his own shop in 1709 and apparently remained with him until 1710. The Randalls' involvement in the Walsh family business continued through William Randall ('c'.1728-1776), who was either Peter Randall's son or his grandson. Upon the death of his cousin John Walsh junior in 1766, William, along with John Abell, eventually took over Walsh's business, in which they had presumably already been employed. 
As a businessman Walsh was unquestionably progressive. He advertised extensively and often used subscription issues and free copies to entice prospective purchasers. His innovations as an advertiser included sponsoring the first publication of music by a periodical, in the 'British Apollo''s quarterly supplements in August and November 1709. His generally uncontested pre-eminence in Italian and English opera, as well as in songs and instrumental music, was obviously noticed by Handel, who on his first visit to England in 1710 sought to engage Walsh as the publisher of 'Rinaldo'. In the event Walsh published the work in 1711 and is said (erroneously) to have made $1500 from the deal. When Handel received a fourteen-year monopoly for the publication of his own works in 1720, Walsh was one of the publishers allowed to issue Handel's music on his behalf, and by the early 1730s was handling the greater proportion of the composer's printed music. Despite apparent discrepancies in his estate's true value, Walsh's finances were obviously in good order at the end of his life. He is reported in the 'London Daily Post and General Advertiser' as having left $20,000 and in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' as having left $30,000. His finances did not extend, it would seem, to paying what he believed to be inappropriate taxes. In 1726 he was gaoled for non-payment of the government stamp duty, and he was released the following year. This same recalcitrance was observed by Sir John Hawkins, who claims that Walsh and his partner John Hare were illiterate men, 'unable to compose a title-page according to the rules of grammar and too penurious to employ others for the purpose' (Kidson, 443). Hawkins also writes of their publications as 'being, in numberless instances, a disgrace to the science [of music] and its professors' (ibid.), a statement which is surely unfair, but perhaps reflects the resentment some composers felt towards unscrupulous publishers in the early eighteenth century. Walsh died in London on 12 or 13 March 1736. According to an obituary notice for John Walsh the younger in the 'Gazetteer and New Daily Advertiser' for 23 January 1766, Walsh was buried originally in St Mary-le-Strand in March 1736, only to be moved along with his wife (who had evidently predeceased him) to a new vault prepared in the churchyard. 
John Walsh the younger took over the business about 1730, upon the demise of the Walshes' relationship with the Hare family. On 8 May 1731 he became instrument maker to George II, and around this time also began to number his firm's publications. In May 1736 he began publishing Handel's operas by subscription. Walsh excelled in promoting the works of Handel to such an extent that in 1739 he was given a monopoly of his music for fourteen years. Handel's op. 4 concertos are supposedly dedicated to Walsh. Walsh's commercial acumen extended to his role as Handel's editor: he sometimes added extra movements to Handel's work before publication in order to meet the expectations of a fashionable mid-century audience. In 1748 he was elected a governor of the Foundling Hospital, a connection which may have brought about Handel's first benefit concert for the hospital the next year. Walsh consolidated the business by selling the works of other publishers as well as snapping up smaller businesses that had ceased publishing. The excellence of Walsh's engravings of this period is evidenced in the fact that many of the company's apprentice engravers continued in business on their own, including John Caulfield, Thomas Straight, and Thomas Skillern. Walsh died in London on 15 January 1766, and was buried in St Mary-le-Strand. According to Kidson there is no evidence of a memorial there. The business was valued upon his death at $40,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 40569


John Walsh (1709-1766), born in London on 23 December 1709, eventually assumed control of the family businesses. Although the elder John Walsh's address in 1692 seems to be unknown, from 1695 to 1736 his residence is noted as being the Golden Harp and Hautboy, Catherine Street, Strand. Works published at this address from 1730 onwards generally carry the imprint 'Printed for and sold by John Walsh Musick Printer and Instrument maker to his Majesty at the Harp and Hoboy in Catherine-street in the Strand'. Later this was shortened slightly, and by the time his son took over the business the usual form was 'Printed for J. Walsh in Catherine Street in the Strand'. 


@@@@@


doc= 40570


Bathurst, Ann (b. c.1638, d. in or before 1704), diarist and prophet, is of unknown parentage. What little is known of her origins is found in the eight-page autobiography that begins her two-volume diary, 'Rhapsodical Meditations and Visions', a manuscript that covers the period 17 March 1679 to 21 October 1696 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D 1262, 1263). Her parents were pious and taught their daughter by 'their precept and example' to cultivate a religious disposition (Bathurst, 'Meditations', 1.2). As a girl she enjoyed listening to sermons, reading the 'Bible', and praying with her sister Elizabeth, but she also developed an acute sense of her own sinfulness. About 1659, when she was eighteen, she fell into a dangerous illness and for six months suffered from extreme religious turmoil, out of which began her lifelong regime of spiritual enquiry. 
It is not known when Bathurst began to associate with the prophet Jane Lead and her circle, but like Lead's diary 'Fountain of Gardens' (1697), Bathurst's diary resonates with ideas, adapted from Jakob Boehme, regarding the transformative role which the Virgin Wisdom was to play in the coming of the New Jerusalem. On 26 May 1684, Bathurst writes: 'This morning I found such a sweet overshadowing from sweet Sophia, the Virgin Spouse of the Soul, as if she were come to cohabite with me' (Bathurst, 'Meditations', 1.216). By 1697, when the Philadelphian Society was founded by Jane Lead and her spiritual son Francis Lee, Bathurst was considered one of its prophets, and its meetings were first held every Sunday at Bathurst's house in Baldwins Gardens, London. The Philadelphians developed millennial prophecies based on the promise in 'Revelation' 12 that a woman clothed with the sun would appear as a great wonder in the heavens, labouring to be delivered of a child. Bathurst's diary documents her daily study of the great mystery of spiritual impregnation and her ongoing labour to give birth to a new reality. On 3 July 1693, she writes typically: 'I am as if some strange thing had happened unto me to be held many hours in that travel [travail] since the inconceivable conception that has been upon me twelve hours, first as I said in the womb, then in the heart, then in the head. I have felt for some time since some moving of travel between my breasts as some new manifestation. (Bathurst, 'Another volume')' For Bathurst, the production of a glorified body was to be a collective, as well as an individual, labour. She meditated with a small community of spiritual sisters, identified in the diary only by initials and feminine pronouns, but who certainly included Mrs Joanna Openbridge with whom Bathurst lived at Baldwins Gardens. The women not only enjoyed singing and praying together, but on occasion, collaborated in vision production. That Bathurst's visions served to inspire others is indicated by the fact that entries from her diaries, dating from 11 June to 19 September 1679, were copied by several hands, into a large journal, still extant in the Bodleian Library (MS Rawl. D 1338). 
During the period 1697-1700, as the Philadelphian movement expanded, its meetings became crowded and were frequently disrupted by disagreements. Owing to Mrs Bathurst's frail health, the meeting at Baldwins Gardens was the first to revert to being a small gathering of the spiritually initiated. The Philadelphian movement eventually petered out after Jane Lead's death in 1704. In a vision recorded by Richard Roach at the time, Lead descends from heaven to tell him that he should take her place as the leader of the Philadelphian movement, 'that upon the death of Mrs. Bathurst it being needful somebody should strike in her Place for the Support of the Meeting at B.G. [Baldwins Gardens]' (Roach, 2.117; Thune, 136). Roach's vision suggests that Lead may have considered Bathurst as her successor, and that Bathurst may have died just before or about the same time as Lead. 


@@@@@


doc= 40591


Mann, Dame Ida Caroline (1893-1983), ophthalmologist, was born on 6 February 1893 at 67 Fordwych Road, West Hampstead, London, the second child and only daughter of Frederick William Mann (1854?-1935), an official in the Post Office, and Ellen Packham (1851?-1936). Her father's family came originally from Norfolk, her mother's from Cuckfield in Sussex, of which rural connection Mann was always proud. As a child she developed a love of reading and especially of writing poetry which lasted throughout her long life. She was educated at Wycombe House School, Hampstead and then, guided by her ultra-cautious father, she began work at sixteen in the safe but stultifying atmosphere of the Post Office Savings Bank. Soon, however, influenced largely by a chance visit to a hospital open day, she developed a strong desire to study medicine, and eventually was able to enter the London School of Medicine for Women in 1914. Her schooling had been interrupted by many childhood illnesses, but from this point her health became robust and thenceforward she showed a daunting capacity for work. With further periods of training at the Royal Free and St Mary's hospitals, she qualified MB BS in 1920. During the period at St Mary's she assisted Professor J. E. S. Frazer in embryological research; her developmental studies were presented as a dissertation for the DSc (London, 1924), and formed the basis of her notable first textbook, 'The Development of the Human Eye' (1928), still in print forty years later. 
This training in research methods opened up a new world to Mann. She later wrote in 'The Chase' (1986), her autobiography, that the greatest joy she ever experienced was when seated alone at her microscope: 'Just the thrill of knowing I had seen something no one else had ever seen before kept me happy for days' ('The Chase', ed. Golding, 77). No matter what other duties were laid on her (and she was extraordinarily hard-working in her daily clinical activities), Mann was driven to pursue original knowledge in this way. Her exposure during midwifery training as a medical student to the perils of birth and motherhood convinced her that she herself had no desire for marriage or children, and she thereby gained extra time in which to apply her driving curiosity to exploring the complexities of ocular development. Often this involved overturning long-standing but erroneous beliefs. This latter aspect indeed characterized both halves of Mann's professional career: as well as fighting her way into clinical positions hitherto largely closed to women, she revelled also in sweeping away facile and poorly thought out 'conventional wisdom' by finding out the facts and forcing them on the notice of the often reluctant authorities. 
After qualifying Mann decided to specialize in ophthalmology, and took her first post under Leslie Paton at St Mary's, becoming FRCS in 1924. She also held several teaching appointments while she progressed up the ladder towards consultant ophthalmologist status, reaching the highest point in 1927 with appointment as senior surgeon on the staff of Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, the first woman ever to do so. At the same time she established a Harley Street practice and consolidated herself as a leading clinical ophthalmologist in London, but still carried on her developmental studies and teaching (including the diploma course in Oxford). In this period up to the Second World War she learned and promoted the then new technique of slit-lamp microscopy of the eye, applying it both to patients and to animals in the London Zoo. She was also instrumental in bringing to London in 1938 Josef Dallos, the Hungarian pioneer of glass contact lenses, just ahead of the Nazi take-over of Hungary, and with him she established the first contact lens centre in the United Kingdom. 
With the outbreak of war it became necessary to evacuate Moorfields. At the instigation of Sir Hugh Cairns Mann moved to Oxford in 1941 to undertake the clinical training of medical students diverted from London, and there she was appointed to Margaret Ogilvy's readership in ophthalmology, as well as a personal chair, the first woman ever to hold the title of professor in the University of Oxford, and a professorial fellowship in St Hugh's College. Despite this time-consuming work she still travelled to London to perform surgery, carried out important research on the ocular effects of war gases, and kept up a staggering number of other activities, including the vigorous reorganization of Oxford Eye Hospital. In this period she was the first to use penicillin to treat ocular infection. The Nuffield Laboratory of Ophthalmology was established in Oxford, aided by a donation from Lord Nuffield, to provide Mann with research facilities and room to treat her private patients separately from her clinical commitments in the neighbouring Oxford Eye Hospital. Here she appointed the biochemist Antoinette Pirie (later her successor as reader) as her research assistant. Together they wrote the influential book, 'The Science of Seeing' (1946), in part to refute Aldous Huxley's 'pernicious psychotic book' 'The Art of Seeing'. 
On 30 December 1944 Mann married the pathologist Professor William Ewart Gye (1884-1952), the son of Charles Bullock, an agricultural worker, and his wife, Ellen Elizabeth Prosser. Gye was the director of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund. Mann retained her maiden name to avoid having two Professor Gyes in the same house. They had no children, but she helped and supported her three stepchildren throughout her life, as well as taking responsibility for her brother's children after his and his wife's early deaths. 
At the end of the war Mann returned to London as Oxford still resisted the idea of making ophthalmology an academic discipline. But she was unhappy with the changes in medicine following establishment of the National Health Service in 1948, feeling that the old autonomy and the trust between doctor and patient had been compromised. This, together with her husband's poor health, exacerbated by the post-war restrictions on food and fuel in bitter winter weather, decided them to overwinter in warmer conditions, and they sailed for Australia in 1949. Their intention may have been to return, but they had presciently taken their household goods with them, and once settled in Perth they decided to stay. She resigned her Moorfields appointment in 1950 (and was apparently never forgiven by them for doing so). 
Once settled, Mann and her husband used their combined experience to establish pure-bred strains of laboratory animals in Australia for research and pathological purposes. After her husband's death in 1952 Mann felt free to undertake, in addition to a private ophthalmic practice, a long series of journeys throughout Australia and Oceania to study ocular health and the incidence of disease in many lands, races, and cultures; in particular she studied the incidence of trachoma in the Aboriginal communities of Western Australia and Northern Territory. While she described many of her adventures in lighter books, including 'The Cockney and the Crocodile' (1962), under the 'nom de plume' (although her own name) of Caroline Gye, the serious outcome was the classic 'Culture, Race, Climate and Eye Disease' (1966). Sometimes as a representative of the World Health Organization, or the Australian government, and sometimes just to satisfy her own curiosity, she continued these explorations to a considerable age, and at the same time worked tirelessly for the improvement of ocular health throughout Australia, especially through her own ophthalmic practice and by improvements in medical training. In recognition of Mann's many contributions to research, teaching, and clinical practice, she was appointed CBE (1950) and DBE (1980), as well as receiving honorary degrees, prizes, and medals from many countries. 
Mann lived at 56 Hobbs Avenue, Nedlands, Perth, where she died on 18 November 1983. She was cremated at Karrakatta cemetery crematorium in Perth. A distinguished ophthalmologist, Mann was equally well known for her pioneering research work on embryology and development of the eye, and on the influences of genetic and social factors on the incidence and severity of eye disease throughout the world. 


@@@@@


doc= 40594


Pirie, Sir George (1863-1946), animal painter, was born in Campbeltown, Argyll, on 5 December 1863, the son of Dr John Pirie and Jane Harvey. As a small child he moved to Glasgow with his family where his father became one of the most popular and best-known physicians. Pirie attended Glasgow Academy, Glasgow University, where he graduated MA in 1882, and the Glasgow School of Art. 
Pirie was expected to follow his father's profession but his interest in art led him to continue his art studies at the Slade School of Fine Art, London, and subsequently at the Academie Julian in Paris under Gustave Boulanger and Jules Lefebvre. His specialist interest was painting animals, in particular dogs, horses, and especially cattle which he used to sketch in the Glasgow cattle market. In the 1880s Pirie was associated with the group of painters known as the Glasgow Boys, but he was never much in sympathy with the theories held by most of those artists. He was included in David Martin's 'The Glasgow School of Painting' (1897) where his technique was described as 'always being of a thorough character, even to the extent of being almost over-conscientious', although his later works displayed 'a better method of brush work' (Martin, 56), an advance that resulted in a finer sense of design and colour. 
Pirie was a regular contributor to the Glasgow Institute of the Fine Arts from 1884 until his death, and also exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy, Royal Academy, Royal Scottish Society of Painters in Watercolour, Glasgow Art Club, and the 1888 and 1901 international exhibitions in Glasgow. He was one of the Glasgow artists featured in the famous exhibition at the Grosvenor Gallery, London, in 1890. His paintings were also shown in Munich and Dresden. Pirie visited America in 1891 and travelled as far west as Texas. This, and subsequent travels to Spain and Morocco, provided subject matter that especially appealed to him for paintings such as 'The Lariat'. His work was exhibited alongside other Glasgow artists at the Albright Art Gallery in Buffalo, New York, in 1905, and purchased for its collection. Pirie also received private commissions, and painted hounds belonging to the duke of Rutland and Sir John Stirling Maxwell. He was considered to be an excellent draughtsman, with a confident and fluid line. Glasgow Art Gallery owns 'Birds of a Feather' and 'Hill Ewes' (1924), two typical works, and his 'Mother Duck' (Tate collection) was purchased by the Chantrey Bequest in 1940. Pirie's work is also owned by the Hunterian Art Gallery, Glasgow, the Royal Scottish Academy, Edinburgh, the city of Edinburgh collection, Paisley Art Gallery, and Perth Museum and Art Gallery. 
Pirie spent most of his life in and around Glasgow. For a short period he stayed in Midhurst, Sussex, but his main residence was Wardend at Torrance, Stirlingshire, which he built in the early 1900s and included a large studio. Adjacent to this was: 'another building, chiefly occupied by the painter's models -- a pony, dogs of various breeds, pigeons, poultry, and rabbits... Mr. Pirie spends much time working with them... He is a lover of animals and knows their ways, ailments, preferences, moods and tantrums. (Pinnington, 365)' Contemporary photographs (ibid., reproduced 364-5) of Pirie in his studio with a magnificent highland bull, and seated there beside the fire reading with one foot resting on the back of his sleeping dog lying beside his chair, bear affectionate witness to the mutual harmony between himself and the subjects of his works. 'Painting animals as they live, Mr. Pirie's work may be said, in pathos and detail, to approach 'genre' painting -- the peasant life of Wilkie and Allan, the toilers of Millet... more nearly than portraiture' (ibid., 366). During the First World War he served in the Royal Army Medical Corps. He was a member of the Glasgow Art Club and served as its president from 1928 to 1930. One of his rare figure works, 'Impressions', illustrates the club's 'Souvenir of the Grand Costume Ball' ([1889]). Pirie was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1913, and became its president as well as honorary Royal Academician in 1933. He was knighted four years later, and had the distinction of being the first president to receive his knighthood at the academy as opposed to the palace of Holyrood. Pirie lectured on animal painting at Glasgow School of Art and served as a governor, representing the Royal Scottish Academy. In 1943 he was made an honorary LLD of Glasgow University. 
Pirie married Jean Smith, 'nee' Wingate, with whom he had two sons, the younger of whom was the biochemist Norman Wingate Pirie, and a daughter. He died on 17 February 1946 at Wardend, Torrance, Stirlingshire, and his funeral was at the crematorium, western necropolis, Glasgow, on 21 February. His obituarist commented that it was: 'impossible to consider Sir George's painting without thinking of the man. In his work there is a tenderness that reflected the character of an artist who revealed himself in his complete avoidance of forcible tones -- which led to an unassertive transparency of colour, a modesty of statement, that may have made the unobservant underestimate the sensitive and delicate unity that was achieved. Within a limited range of subjects he was always individual, and, never derivative, he created a style that was the man. ('Glasgow Herald', 18 Feb 1946)' 



@@@@@


doc= 40595


Pirie, Antoinette (1905-1991), biochemist, was born on 4 October 1905 in Bond Street, London, the daughter of William James Patey (died 1941), who owned a pharmacist's shop in Bond Street, and his wife, Florence, 'nee' Keen. She was educated at Wycombe Abbey School, to 1924, and Newnham College, Cambridge, where she achieved, in 1932, first-class honours in natural sciences (biochemistry). She then remained at the biochemical laboratory in Cambridge under the professorship of Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, where she completed her PhD. On 11 March 1931 she married Norman Wingate Pirie (1907-1997), son of the painter Sir George Pirie, and himself a distinguished biochemist. They had a son, John, and a daughter, Jane. 
At the outbreak of war in 1939 Pirie joined a team at the Imperial Cancer Research Fund's Mill Hill laboratories, set up to investigate the effect of poison gases on the cornea and how to protect it from injury. The leader of the team was Ida Mann, an ophthalmologist with exceptionally wide interests and enthusiasms; Pirie (who was always known as Tony) was dedicated to the study of the eye for the rest of her life. In 1942 she accompanied Ida Mann to Oxford as her assistant and in 1947 she succeeded her as Margaret Ogilvie's reader in ophthalmology and head of the Nuffield Laboratory of Ophthalmology. This was a dramatic appointment of a non-clinician to the Oxford medical school. 
In the laboratory Pirie and her collaborators were interested in discovering the causes of major diseases of the eye, usually using biochemical techniques. In 1956 she co-authored with Ruth van Heyningen 'Biochemistry of the Eye', which contained an account of almost all the research published anywhere up to that date; the book proved to be a great stimulus to the avalanche of research on the eye that followed in Europe and America. 
Studies on many tissues of the eye were performed in the laboratory, but it was the lens and cataract that were Pirie's main preoccupations during her readership. Cataract, the largest cause of blindness in the world, is the loss of transparency of the lens. Much of her earlier work involved the production of cataract by experimental means in animals (rabbits and rats). Later, advances in analytical techniques made it possible to study human cataractous lenses removed at operation. 
A thread running through Pirie's scientific work was vitamin A and its importance to the proper functioning of the eye. In 1946 she had shown that damage to the cornea, brought about in rabbits by withholding the vitamin from the diet, was rapidly reversed by its restoration. As she neared retirement she became increasingly concerned that much worldwide blindness in the young was due to easily preventable vitamin A deficiency. In India at least 100,000 children became blind each year from xerophthalmia due to vitamin A deficiency. 
Pirie made long visits to Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India, where she set up and helped to run a nutrition centre. Here mothers brought their children and were taught to supplement their food with enough vitamin A, as carotene in dark green leafy vegetables, to prevent them going blind. 
In 1972 Pirie established and was editor and secretary of the 'Xerophthalmia Bulletin'. This was published three or four times a year from her home; it comprised extracts from current scientific journals and original articles and comments. It involved an immense amount of work. When she relinquished the editorship in 1985 more than a thousand copies were being distributed worldwide. 
Pirie was tall and good-looking, dignified yet friendly, with wit and charm. Jacquetta Hawkes, who knew her at Cambridge, described her as 'a handsome undergraduate with strong yet sensitive features; it was the face of a caring person before that term came to be abused' ('The Independent', 2 Dec 1991). She was a person of strong convictions, with the determination and ability to further the causes in which she believed. 
In the 1950s Pirie was a passionate supporter of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. She made herself an expert on the radioactive hazards of nuclear explosions and in 1957 edited 'Fallout' to publicize the dangers which at that time the government was tending to minimize or conceal. It was a collaboration of nine working scientists -- physicists, geneticists, physicians, and biologists. Pirie's scrupulous accuracy ensured that no criticism could be levelled at the book; Canon Collins of St Paul's Cathedral, a close colleague in the cause, called her 'A Rock of Academic Integrity' ('The Guardian', 25 Oct 1991). The book made a considerable impact at the time. 
Pirie's interests and those of her husband were always close and usually directed towards furthering the welfare of mankind. They were both atheists. Towards the end of their lives there was an interesting coalescence of their research commitments. N. W. Pirie had campaigned fervently for several decades to promote the extraction of proteins from otherwise unused leaves as a beneficial and cheap source of food in underdeveloped parts of the world. It turned out that the leaf extract was also an excellent source of greekLetterbeta-carotene, the precursor of vitamin A; this may be an even more important ingredient than the protein. 
Antoinette Pirie died at Oakenholt House, Farmoor, Oxford, on 11 October 1991, and was cremated at Oxford crematorium on 22 October. She was survived by her husband, their daughter, and their son, who continued the family's humanitarian concerns, first as managing director of OXFAM Trading, and subsequently as director of the Artisan Trust. 


@@@@@


doc= 40597


Macleane, Lauchlin (1728/9-1778), political agent and speculator, was born some time between 30 May 1728 and 29 May 1729, at either Ballymoney or Rasharkin, both in co. Antrim, Ireland. He was the eldest of four children of the Revd John McLean (1699-1765), Church of Ireland vicar of Billy in co. Antrim, and of his wife, Elizabeth ('fl'. 1708-77), daughter of the Revd Philip Matthews ('c'.1665-1740). In his early years he was known as Laughlin (the Irish version of his first name) McLean, but he consistently styled himself Lauchlin Macleane from 1764. These and other recorded variations are indicative of the mixing of Scottish and Irish elements in his background. His forebears were the Macleans of Girishpool on the island of Coll in the Hebrides. His paternal grandfather had left Scotland after 1689 for northern Ireland, where he was ordained into the Church of Ireland. McLean's father followed into the church. Laughlin McLean spent the early years of his life in Ireland, going to John Dennison's school near Belfast, and then studying medicine at Trinity College, Dublin, from 1746 to 1752, from which he graduated MB. Later in life he described himself as an Irishman and it is assumed that he spoke with an Irish brogue (Maclean, 'Reward is Secondary', 21, 46). 
From 1752 to 1756 McLean lived for the only time in his life in Scotland, the land of his paternal ancestors. From 1752 to 1755 he studied at Edinburgh University, gaining his MD. During his time in Edinburgh he formed close friendships with a number of Scots, including members of the Maclean clan, who were to link their fortunes with his in later life. Some of them had Jacobite sympathies, to which McLean himself may have been attracted. In Edinburgh on 30 March 1755 McLean married Elizabeth Hewitt (died 1791), daughter of Dr John Hewitt, physician in the service of the Russian tsar. 
In 1756, like many young doctors with the highly esteemed Edinburgh degree, McLean sought his fortune in the British possessions overseas. For the rest of his life he was to play for very high stakes indeed in the world of new opportunities that was being opened up by British success in the Seven Years' War. 
McLean began his career abroad by setting up a successful medical practice in Philadelphia. He was then appointed surgeon in 1757 to the force that was to capture Fort Duquesne (later Pittsburgh) from the French. In 1760 he served with an expedition into Canada to take Montreal. Through his military service McLean was able to ingratiate himself with his first important patron, Major-General Robert Monckton, a very gallant officer with a sharp and not notably discriminating eye for personal enrichment. Monckton appointed him in 1761 to the potentially lucrative post of commissary of provisions and supplies for the army being assembled in North America to attack the French West Indies. In February 1762 the British captured the rich island of Martinique and Monckton appointed McLean to be the receiver and collector-general of revenues in the new British administration. Britain relinquished Martinique at the peace in 1763, but by then McLean was well placed to speculate in and to acquire lands in two of the so-called Ceded Islands that Britain retained, Grenada and Dominica. He seems to have acted as agent for a syndicate of speculators, who, as one of the most of prominent of them later put it, hoped to 'take advantage of the madness of people to become purchasers' in the new islands by buying up large tracts to be resold (Colebrooke, 1.82). It was believed that he had been given credit of up to $200,000 (Maclean, 'Reward is Secondary', 82). He also acquired land for himself in both Grenada and Dominica as part of a joint venture in which he and a partner were entitled to a share nominally worth $20,000 (ibid., 83-5). In 1763 McLean returned to Britain where he began to develop political connections. He was a close friend of Edmund Burke, another Irishman making his way in British public life, and he acted as an intermediary between British political figures and John Wilkes, who was living in exile in Paris. In 1766 he obtained the appointment of governor of St Vincent, another of the Ceded Islands, and presumably an advantageous post for managing his landed interests elsewhere. 
Macleane (as he now called himself) did not, however, take up his appointment or return to the Caribbean. Political interests kept him in London. He had been introduced to William Petty, second earl of Shelburne, who, when he became secretary of state for the southern department, 'in an evil moment for himself' (Sutherland, 'East India Company', 154) appointed Macleane as his under-secretary in October 1766. Macleane's relations with his principal were extremely close. In addition to his official duties in the secretary of state's office, he had 'a free hand' in managing Shelburne's personal finances (ibid., 208) and did political work for him, notably in establishing an interest in the politics of the East India Company. 
The company had been transformed into a great territorial power by the grant of authority over the rich province of Bengal made to it in 1765. The huge potential wealth to be derived from its new acquisitions drove up the price of the company's stock and made it an object of great interest to speculators. Macleane was quickly to the fore among them. As with West Indian land, he acted as agent for rich and ambitious men hoping for quick killings. Money was borrowed with which to buy stock on the assumption that good news from India would boost its price still further, enabling the loans to be paid back with a healthy margin of profit. A killing was duly made in 1766; Macleane's share of the profits may have been in the order of $24,000 (Maclean, 'Reward is Secondary', 168). Macleane's involvement with East India Company affairs led him to be elected to the Commons in March 1768 as a member for Arundel in the interest of Sir George Colebrooke, at that time a rising power in the company and the other MP for the two-member seat. Macleane continued his speculative operations, culminating in what was called the 'great scheme' of 1769 that was to ruin him and lose large sums for those who had entrusted their money to him. $100,000 of stock was borrowed at an already high price. Far from going still higher, the price collapsed on the receipt of bad news from India. Macleane 'admitted that he owed $90,000 (certainly a gross under estimate)' (Sutherland and Woods, 330; Maclean, 'Reward is Secondary', 503n.). Among the casualties were Monckton and Shelburne, who, in addition to other sums lent to him, had advanced Macleane $30,000 in a futile attempt to stave off disaster. 
For the next few years Macleane, out of office after Shelburne resigned in June 1768, cast around for new lucrative openings that might enable him to accumulate funds with which to pay his debts. The years 1769 to January 1773, in which Macleane was living in London, coincided with the years in which British politics were shaken and fascinated by a series of anonymous letters that attracted a huge amount of public attention. The letters, denouncing ministers and ultimately the king himself, were published anonymously in the newspaper the 'Public Advertiser' under the name of Junius. The identity of Junius has never been conclusively established. Some contemporaries quickly concluded that it might be Macleane. Horace Walpole thought in April 1769 that 'opinions are divided' between 'Mclean' and two other contenders (H. Walpole to Sir E. Walpole, 28 April 1769, Walpole, 'Corr.', 36. 52). The possibility of Macleane's being Junius was periodically canvassed by subsequent investigators, but the fullest case was made in his biography published in 1963. James Maclean there argued that 'By first discussing Junius's career, and then comparing it with the contemporary career of Macleane, the salient features of both have been found to match, just as the negative of a film matches its positive print' (Maclean, 'Reward is Secondary', 418). In fact, he believed that the Junius letters were a team effort in which Macleane was assisted by some of his Scottish associates, whose friendship dated back to his student days in Edinburgh, and by his younger brother Henry. Other scholars have either found the case unconvincing or have been convinced by the claims of other contenders, Philip Francis usually being regarded as the strongest. 
With Shelburne's loss of office and estrangement following the collapse of the 'great scheme', Macleane shifted his loyalty to the administration which, from 1770, was being consolidated under Lord North, whom he supported in parliament. In return for his services, he was given sinecure offices with a sizeable income attached, as superintendent of lazarettos (quarantine hospitals) in 1771 (upon which appointment he resigned his seat in the Commons), and then as non-resident collector of the Philadelphia customs in 1772. He angled for the governorship of Grenada, but he was set on India as the most promising avenue to a quick fortune. He had valuable allies in his quest. Colebrooke and another very powerful East India Company director, Laurence Sulivan, were both in desperate financial straits and were both owed money by Macleane. They had an obvious incentive to get him well placed in India in a position to pay his debts. His first bid was an appointment in July 1772 as a member of a commission of supervisors. When the commission was annulled he was appointed commissary of the army in Bengal, with the rank of colonel and the salary of a member of council and the right to trade on his own behalf. 'The absolute necessity of retrenching the excessive military charges' of Bengal was the official rationale for the appointment (Datta, 7.16); Laurence Sulivan, however, described the manoeuvrings among the directors to ensure Macleane's welfare, his own scheme for payment by commission being rejected when it was alleged that it would give Macleane $50,000 a year (Sulivan to W. Hastings, BL, Add. MS 29194, fol. 97). 
Domestic tragedy struck Macleane just before he left for India. He had separated from his wife, Elizabeth, in 1769 and taken up with a rich widow, Penelope Agnew (1736-1773), known as Penelope Forrester or as Mrs Macleane, with whom he had had two children. Penelope died on 2 May 1773 giving birth to the second of them, a daughter. In June 1773 Macleane set out for Calcutta. He found that the governor of Bengal, Warren Hastings, readily co-operated in plans for enlarging the scope and rewards of his office. Hastings, for his part, was charmed and impressed by Macleane and, like politicians in Britain, was willing to use him for confidential business. Macleane's prospects for lucrative service in Bengal were, however, blasted by the arrival of members appointed in Britain to make up a new supreme council. They quickly quarrelled with Hastings and took it on themselves to investigate maladministration and corruption. They found Macleane's activities a prime example of the 'irregular manner in which the Company's money affairs have been conducted' (minute of J. Clavering, G. Monson, and P. Francis, 14 Jan 1775, BL OIOC, H/118, p. 154). Macleane beat a retreat from Bengal, taking ship to Britain in January 1775. 
Macleane hoped to be reinstated in his office in Bengal, but he also had other opportunities of employment and enrichment in his sights. In the first place, he was to act in Britain as agent for Warren Hastings and to sustain his cause against his new enemies. He was paid $10,000 from Hastings's funds in Britain. He successfully organized resistance to an attempt by the directors of the company to recall Hastings, but in the face of the ministry's determination to force Hastings out, by parliamentary action if need be, he thought it prudent to negotiate terms on which he handed in Hastings's resignation in September 1776. Although he had authorized Macleane to resign on his behalf if certain conditions were not met, Hastings subsequently disavowed his resignation and continued in office. By then, however, Macleane was concentrating on what he hoped would be a far more lucrative London agency, that of the nawab of Arcot. 
Muhammad Ali Khan Walahjah had been supported by the British as claimant to the throne of the southern province of the Carnatic during the Seven Years' War. After the war he became increasingly uneasy at the protectorate which the company exercised over him and cast around for ways in which he could win effective independence from it. Establishing direct relations with the king of Great Britain instead of the company was one of his favourite strategies. On a short visit to Madras in March 1774 Macleane began to envisage a role for himself in forwarding the nawab's ambitions. He would represent the nawab in Britain and would negotiate a settlement on his behalf with the British government. When Macleane pointed out that he was allowed to trade in Bengal, the nawab replied that 'the best trade you can follow is my trade' (Macleane, 'Reasons', 13 Feb 1776, BL OIOC, H/286, p. 46). In January 1775 Macleane was empowered to act as the nawab's British agent. He was promised a salary of 12,000 pagodas (about $1800) a year and expected generous gratuities. 
In Britain Macleane lobbied for the nawab with ministers and with the company's directors and publicized his cause in the press. A petition to parliament was drafted but never presented. The nawab had, however, very ambitious expectations which even an adept and pertinacious agent had no hope of achieving. Nor was Macleane able to reap the advantages that he hoped for from his appointment. To pay off some of his creditors he drew bills on the nawab, including one of $14,000 for Lord Shelburne (Shelburne MSS, film 2019). The nawab failed to honour all such bills. 
In desperation Macleane made a quick return visit to Madras in 1777, 'leaving behind two pregnant mistresses' in London (Maclean, 'Reward is Secondary', 434). He embarked again for Britain on a naval ship the 'Swallow', which foundered, probably in the Bay of Biscay, in February 1778. Such expectations as his creditors might still have entertained were drowned with him. 
Macleane's career was ultimately a disaster: he died insolvent, having dragged down many others in failed projects. Nevertheless, for a person without wealth or connections from a small village in co. Antrim, he had flown very high indeed for a time. His successes were no doubt due to ruthless determination, a willingness to take every sort of risk, together with a total lack of scruple. In addition, he was highly intelligent, had a ready pen, and was an adept negotiator. He also, however, had personal qualities that impressed many. Laurence Sulivan, by no means naive in the ways of the world, considered that 'his abilities are of the first magnitude, his fortitude superior to the most trying of disappointments and he has a heart replete with gratitude, and ever ready to support his friends and attachments to the hazard of life and fortune' (Sulivan to W. Hastings, BL, Add. MS 29194, fol. 97). In spite of a serious stammer and 'uncommon ugliness' (Maclean, 'Reward is Secondary', 20), he had a beguiling manner. 'No man living was ever so much of my confidence in so short an acquaintance', Warren Hastings wrote of him (ibid., 320). 


@@@@@


doc= 40598


Lochee, Lewis (d. 1791), military educationist, was born in Brussels, the son of John Lochee and his wife, Theresa. It is unknown when or why he moved to England, though he was living in Camberwell, Surrey, in 1767. He was possibly a political exile from Austrian rule and certainly a protestant. In 1770 he set up a military academy in a large rented house in Little Chelsea, London. By 1776 he had extended the house and in 1781 he bought the freehold. The academy, with its grounds laid out as a fortification, became an object for sightseers. By 1777 Lochee described it as the 'Royal Military Academy', Little Chelsea, doubtless because George III had granted him an annual pension to encourage his work. On 8 May 1780 he was naturalized a British subject. 
No military education was needed to become a British infantry or cavalry officer and none was officially provided, although a few private academies offered some teaching. Despite initial difficulties in attracting pupils, Lochee succeeded during the 1770s and 1780s in building up a notable clientele who could afford his fees. The military authorities recognized the value of his academy in providing a military education and training both for boys too young to be commissioned and for youngsters whose commissions had already been purchased. Lochee was exceptional in providing a carefully conceived combination of theoretical and practical instruction, and set out his ideas in 'An Essay on Military Education' (1773). He was ahead of his time in involving the pupils in running the academy and in attention to practical work such as manoeuvres and digging fortifications. For the pupils the months in his care must have been an earnest experience, since Lochee objected to holidays -- claiming that the curriculum offered sufficient diversion -- was critical of sports, and expelled even the well-connected for bad conduct. Although his alumni, of whom the most distinguished was probably Lieutenant-General Sir Thomas Picton, were few compared with the number of officers entering the army, they had learned something of military value. 
Lochee, who had a keen intellect, published clear and practical books on mathematics (1776), castrametation (1778), and fortification (1780 and 1783). He achieved educational, social, and financial success. He married on 26 August 1767 Elizabeth Dubourg (1749?-1801) and had a son, John (1776-1815). The academy probably closed in 1788 or 1789, since Mrs Lochee was the ratepayer on the property from 1789. On 17 December 1789 Lochee changed abruptly from military educationist to soldier, undertaking, as Lieutenant-Colonel Lochee, to raise at his own expense the 'Belgic Legion' to take part in the Belgian revolt against Austrian rule. But his patriotic idealism ended in failure, and on 29 May 1790 he was forced to resign from the defeated Belgian army. He moved to Lille in France, where Belgian refugees gathered and exchanged recriminations, in which he joined as the author of several pamphlets. He died at Lille, the circumstances unknown, on 8 June 1791. 


@@@@@


doc= 40599


Rust, William Charles (1903-1949), political activist and journalist, was born on 24 April 1903 at 5 Eastdene Street, St George's Road, Camberwell, London, the son of Frederick George Rust, journeyman bookbinder, and his wife, Eliza Rogers. He left school at fourteen and worked as an office boy at Hulton's press agency, from where he was sacked for exposing the trade union leader J. T. Brownlie as one of Hulton's labour correspondents. Rust also worked briefly at Sylvia Pankhurst's 'Workers' Dreadnought' and shortly after its formation in 1920 he joined the British Communist Party. 
Unlike most of that first generation of communist leaders Rust never really experienced life as anything other than a party functionary. Initially active as an unemployed organizer in Camberwell, he joined the party's executive as early as 1923 as representative of the Young Communist League, and its political bureau two years later. In the same capacity he made the first of his many trips to Moscow to attend the Fifth Congress of the Communist International. Though he was in many respects a model party bureaucrat, that did not necessarily make for comfortable office routines. In 1925 Rust was among twelve communist leaders imprisoned for sedition, in his case for twelve months, and several times before the war he had to uproot himself to perform party duties both at home and abroad. What his dependence on the apparatus did mean, however, is that he was to be noted even among his fellow communists for his quite exceptional devotion to Moscow. 
That may in part have been a matter of ambition. In 1928-9 Stalin made much use of communist youth movements to undermine the older or less tractable elements still prominent in several communist parties. Rust, then working in Moscow for the secretariat of the Young Communist International, could scarcely have been better placed for such a role. One lasting result was an intense rivalry and distrust between Rust and Harry Pollitt, the latter then emerging as the party's secretary, while Rust was installed as editor of the party newspaper launched in 1930, the 'Daily Worker'. There is much anecdotal evidence from his second spell as editor, from 1939 to 1949, that Rust regarded the paper not least as a vehicle for his own leadership ambitions. 
By this time Rust had a formidable record as a party organizer. Ending his first stint at the 'Worker' in 1932, he then put in spells as a party representative in Moscow, a district organizer in Lancashire, and a base commissar (technically the 'Daily Worker''s correspondent), with the International Brigades in Spain. The occasion for his resuming the paper's editorship was a fierce controversy within the party leadership over Moscow's instructions that it oppose the war with Germany. As always Rust kept close to the Moscow line, and for the twenty months in which the communists maintained an anti-war stance he was one of a three-man secretariat which replaced Pollitt. After the Russians entered the war in June 1941 Rust retained his editorship of the 'Worker', and on the lifting of its temporary wartime ban in September 1942 he embarked on what many regarded as a quixotic project: the establishment of his communist news-sheet as a fully professional, mass circulation daily. 
Rust himself was to recount these events in his 'Story of the Daily Worker' (1949). Harnessing the goodwill the communists then enjoyed, both within the labour movement and on Fleet Street, the paper recruited a team of impressively talented young journalists, transferred ownership to a non-party co-operative society, and equipped itself with a new printing press and premises. To great fanfares and a torchlight procession, the 'new' 'Daily Worker', was, after considerable delays, finally launched on 1 May 1948. Briefly it held a six-figure circulation, but in truth its moment of opportunity had passed. With the onset of the cold war not only did many of its erstwhile friends desert it, but the paper itself was now subjected to the tighter political disciplines that the continuing reality of communist control allowed. The paper's long decline had already begun by the time of Rust's sudden death. He was taken ill at an executive meeting of the Communist Party and died from a haemorrhage at Charing Cross Hospital, London, on 3 February 1949. 
Even among fellow communists Rust was not widely liked. Of deceptively Pickwickian countenance, he lacked nothing in self-regard and yet displayed a sedulous deference to the Moscow overlords who alone could further his considerable ambitions. Colleagues at the 'Worker', several of them indebted to him for their start in journalism, remembered him more positively. Certainly there was no doubt as to the energy and ability with which, not even a journalist by training, he took on the might of Fleet Street. As to his hidden complexities, these may never be fully revealed. 
Rust's first marriage, to Kathleen Taylor (originally O'Shaughnessy), produced a daughter, Rosa, born in the USSR in 1925 and remaining there after her parents returned home. Caught up in the wartime deportation of the Volga Germans before coming to Britain in 1944, Rosa's very existence was unsuspected by most of her father's colleagues. Rust, meanwhile, had met his second wife, Tamara Kravets (1913-2008), a Soviet citizen and daughter of a Russian architect who, like so many others, came under suspicion during the terror. The circumstances in which Tamara was allowed to leave the USSR, herself to become a leading member of the British Communist Party, have since prompted considerable speculation among former associates. Rust's career, even more than those of most of his colleagues, may yet be further illuminated by materials from the Russian archives. 


@@@@@


doc= 40600


Le Macon, Robert (1534/5-1611), Reformed minister and diplomat, was born at Illiers, near Chartres, in the Orleanais, France; his parents' names are unknown. In 1557 he was one of the founding ministers of the important Reformed church in Orleans, which became the capital of the Huguenot movement during the first war of religion in France in 1562. There he also probably met and married, about 1557, his first wife, Anne (died 1605), who, according to the 1593 census of aliens in London, originally came from that city. 
La Fontaine (as he was usually known, being sieur de la Fontaine) fled to England at the time of the St Bartholomew's day massacre in 1572, and in October 1574 was appointed minister of the French and Walloon refugee church in London. Throughout his long pastorate he worked diligently to establish and maintain Calvinist orthodoxy among this congregation. In 1578 he revised the church's written 'discipline', the first revision since the church had been re-established under Elizabeth I in 1560. He also composed a Calvinist catechism for the members of his own flock, translated into English and published in 1580 as 'A catechisme and playne instruction for children which prepare themselves to communicate in the holy supper', and published in French in 1602 as 'Catechisme et instruction familiere pour les enfans qui se preparent a communiquer a la saincte cene'. 
La Fontaine also maintained a correspondence with protestant leaders throughout Europe, such as Theodore Beza in Geneva and Philippe Du Plessis-Mornay in France. In 1578 he helped Du Plessis compose his protestant manifesto, 'Traite de l'eglise'. During Henry IV's wars against the Catholic League and Spain in the 1590s, Du Plessis arranged to have La Fontaine appointed the French king's unofficial representative in England. La Fontaine was most heavily involved in the complex political and military negotiations between Henry IV and Elizabeth I during their mutual war against Spain from 1595 to 1598. He was in direct communication with both monarchs, and maintained a wide correspondence with influential royal councillors, such as Villeroy in France and Burghley and Robert Cecil in England, and with nobles such as the duc de Bouillon and the earl of Essex. He was one of the few French negotiators who took part in drawing up the treaty of Greenwich in 1596, chosen because, as the chief French negotiator, De Sancy, wrote to him, 'we did not think that we could employ anyone more trustworthy than you, nor one who would be more acceptable to them [the English negotiators]' (Kermaingant, 46-7). By this time La Fontaine was sixty-one (preface to 'Les funerailles de Sodome', 2nd edn, 1610), and after Henry's peace with Spain in 1598 he withdrew himself from active diplomacy, but throughout the following years he continued to maintain contact with Du Plessis and remained an important link between the Huguenots in France and the English church and government. In 1601, at the French Reformed church's national synod at Gergeau, he even presented a proposal to unite the English and French churches, with little success. 
The previous year La Fontaine had published the first edition of a series of sermons on the story of Lot, 'Les funerailles de Sodome et de ses filles'. In August 1605 his wife, Anne, died, and six months later, on 25 February 1606, he married, as his second wife, Maturine Doute 
(or Doubts; died 1621)
, also a native of Orleans. By the end of his life, La Fontaine had spent almost exactly half of his years in France and half in England. He died in 1611, and was buried in his parish of St Anne Blackfriars, London, on 6 November, his death even attracting the notice of John Chamberlain ('The Chamberlain Letters', ed. E. M. Thomson, 1966, 319) and Isaac Casaubon. His widow died on 15 February 1621. His family maintained a foot in both countries. His son, Louis, a king's councillor who had assisted his father in his diplomatic activities, maintained the family name in France, as the sieur de la Fontaine et d'Ancreville. Meanwhile his three daughters -- Anne, Rachel, and Sara -- all married male members of the Harderet family, another prominent refugee family, and remained in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 40606


Hollis, Sir (Alfred) Claud (1874-1961), colonial governor, was born on 12 May 1874 at Cumberland Villa, Highgate Road, London, the second son of George Hollis (1843-1919), a barrister of the Inner Temple, and his wife, Susannah Smith (1843-1921). A pioneer of British administration in east Africa from the 1890s, he also served in Sierra Leone (1913-16) and Trinidad (1930-36). He was educated privately at St Leonards (to 1890) and in Switzerland (1891) and Germany (1892). In March 1897, after working for a commercial company in German East Africa (1893-6), he was appointed assistant collector in the British East Africa Protectorate. He quickly made his mark, through his energetic work as a district officer at the coast, his linguistic ability -- he became government examiner in Swahili in 1901 -- and his publications on local history and anthropology. Invited to join the staff of the commissioner and consul-general, Sir Arthur Hardinge, he was subsequently appointed private secretary to Hardinge's successor, Sir Charles Eliot, and to the new post of secretary to the protectorate administration. 
Hollis took part in the expeditions to Jubaland (1900-01) and against the Nandi (1905), receiving the Africa general service medal. His real concern, however, was the protection of African interests, especially from the demands for land and labour from incoming European settlers. Official recognition came in 1907 with his appointment as secretary for native affairs and membership of the legislative council. His pioneering and authoritative works on the Maasai (1905) and the Nandi (1908) -- to both of which Eliot contributed introductions -- received wide acclaim. Eliot's successor, Sir Donald Stewart, had little time for studious officials. He nevertheless appreciated Hollis's skills at shooting and cricket. Hollis's work continued to be commended by successive governors, Sir James Hayes-Sadler and Sir Percy Girouard. In 1911 he was appointed CMG, receiving congratulations from, among others, Winston Churchill, who had strongly supported Hollis in his defence of African interests when he visited the protectorate as under-secretary of state for the colonies in 1907. 
Promotion came in January 1913, when Hollis took up the post of colonial secretary, Sierra Leone. Initially he was not accompanied by his wife, Enid Mabel Longman (1888-1939), whom he had married on 17 September 1910 at St Michael's Church, Highgate. She followed later, leaving their small daughter, Christian Ainslie ('b'. 29 June 1911), with grandparents at Worthing. Enid was to prove a constant support, spending the majority of time with her husband overseas, while also caring for the family, first at Highgate and then at Bishops, Widdington, near Saffron Walden, Essex. Mark William was born on 25 April 1914 and Prunella on 8 April 1923. 
Following the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, Freetown, the capital of Sierra Leone, became a port of call for troopships from the south, as a result of which Hollis's responsibilities were greatly increased. But the tide of war in east Africa, following the defeat of German forces near Kilimanjaro, led to Hollis's recall. He became secretary to the administrator of the occupied territory of German East Africa and in 1920, chief secretary in the newly created Tanganyika territory, and was made CBE in 1919. Further promotion came in 1924 when he became British resident in Zanzibar. These years proved enjoyable and constructive. He developed cordial relations with the sultan and with leaders of the local community, concentrating on road and harbour improvements and also assisting schools, dispensaries, and the local clove farmers. In January 1927 he was appointed KCMG (promoted GCMG in 1934). 
In 1930 Hollis was made governor of Trinidad, a post he held until his retirement in 1936. In addition to dispensing generous hospitality to numerous guests, he concentrated on improving Trinidad's lot in the years following the great depression. Major public works, installing a central water supply scheme, an electricity scheme, and work on a deep water harbour all contributed significantly to economic recovery. 'In spite of... difficulties', wrote a historian of Trinidad, 'Sir Claud Hollis appears to have been one of the Colony's most popular Governors' (Craig, 48). 
Hollis's early years of retirement, though fully occupied with a range of activities including membership of the imperial communications advisory committee, were marked with sadness. His devoted wife Enid died in 1939 at the early age of fifty-one and his only son, Mark, was killed in action in 1941. He nevertheless remained active for many years, serving as a JP and as master of the Leathersellers' Company (1945-6), and enjoying English country life. He died, aged eighty-seven, on 22 November 1961, at the Evelyn Nursing Home in Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 40609


Manners, Roger (c.1536-1607), courtier and landowner, was the third son of Thomas Manners, first earl of Rutland and thirteenth Baron Ros (c.1497-1543), soldier, administrator, and his second wife, Eleanor (died 1551), daughter of Sir William Paston of Paston, Norfolk. He went to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1550 and was sent to sea in 1554 and 1555, promising to apply himself to learning maritime skills. He served in the army at St Quentin in Aisne in 1557 and Coquet in Brittany. Fighting did not suit him. He later wrote, 'Hunting and hawking is good sport but deling in warlyek causes is trublesom' ('Rutland MSS', 1.182). His position as esquire of the body to Mary I and Elizabeth I was probably due to his family's long service to the Tudors. He seems to have been a man who made and kept friends as he was little inclined to faction, widely connected, and trusted. Many, including those in strife with his family, endorsed the praise of his brother, Sir Thomas Manners: 'so honest a man... and so wise and kind a man [with] most natural and loyal love to the head of his house' (ibid., 1.214). He stressed to his niece Bridget Manners when she entered Elizabeth's service as a maid of honour in 1589 that the courtier's role was to be 'diligent, secret and faithful and to be no meddler in the cause of others' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 3.9). 
Although Manners was MP for Grantham in 1563 and constable of Nottingham Castle during the minority of his nephew Edward Manners, third earl of Rutland, he had no ambitions beyond the court. Perhaps he was, as he constantly said, lazy. When parliament was in session he evidently attended only to keep an eye on Rutland's interests. Although he had good relations with many women, in 1575 was thought to be 'wooing' and in 1582 to be interested in Elizabeth Howard, he never married, assisting instead with the education of various wards who were committed to him and some of his nephews and nieces, as well as his spendthrift brother Thomas Manners. His position enabled him to obtain various crown grants and leases from about 1567 on and by careful management, lending, and borrowing, he amassed a comfortable estate. 
Manners was always in high favour with Elizabeth, on good terms with the Cecils and Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, and the linchpin of the Manners family's relations with the court and central government, the conduit for public and private news and advice. More clandestinely, he was linked to Sir Francis Walsingham, principal secretary, and Sir Thomas Heneage, but how far that made him a part of the spy network is unclear. He was a strongly committed protestant by the 1570s who found sincere comfort in its faith. This did not prevent his being a cynic where court and society were concerned, and increasingly often he wrote of his wish to 'leave the Court to younger folk and learn to keep your plough' ('Rutland MSS', 1.94). From the mid-1570s he spent several months a year at his country estate at Uffington, Rutland, where he offered unstinting hospitality to family and friends and enjoyed hunting and hawking. 
Although in 1583 he was permitted to withdraw from the routine service of an esquire of the body to act as a supernumerary, writing: 'I shall tak my ese and wayt when I list or when her Majestie herself shall command me' ('Rutland MSS', 1.151), Manners remained in frequent attendance at court until Elizabeth's death, interceding remarkably successfully for family and friends and easing the approach to court of prominent men such as Gilbert Talbot, seventh earl of Shrewsbury, when they were out of favour. He was able to propitiate Elizabeth for friends and family. He defended his friends vocally when he felt they had been wronged but remained aloof from the problems following the deaths of the third earl in 1587 and John Manners, fourth earl of Rutland, in 1588. Manners was critical of Roger Manners, fifth earl of Rutland, writing: 'They say it is a thankles office to tell youth of their faultes yet is it the office of there best frendes' (ibid., 1.296). 
As the political situation became more difficult because of court faction during the 1590s, Manners's letters became cryptic, advising conversation with trusted confidants in his garden, where the servants could not hear. He felt 'it is not good to write of these perylus causes' ('Rutland MSS', 1.204). He felt relatively secure as long as he remained on good terms with the queen, helped by his access as a courtier, and as long as he continued to be regarded by the government as completely loyal. Rutland's involvement in the rebellion of Robert Devereux, earl of Essex, in 1601 appalled him. Elizabeth sent Sir John Stanhope to comfort him and by using all the credit he had with his friends, including Sir Robert Cecil, principal secretary, he was able to prevent Rutland's execution for treason. Instead, the earl was fined $30,000. In 1603 when Elizabeth was dying Manners would not involve himself in any intrigue regarding the succession, writing 'I will not go about to make kings, nor seek to pull down any; only will obey such as be chosen and crowned' (ibid., 1.387). 
Manners lived in retirement in London under James I, becoming steadily more frail, his condition aggravated by jaundice, so that he was unable to ride. He died on 11 December 1607 and was buried with little pomp in Uffington church in a tomb he had had erected for himself and his long-deceased younger brother Oliver Manners. He had given a dowry to at least one niece in his lifetime, and his property was left so that dowries could be provided for the rest and lands for his nephews. He gave generously to the building and upkeep of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. Perhaps his greatest legacy was the collection of letters he left, which give wonderful insights into the Elizabethan court. 


@@@@@


doc= 40610


Wilford, Elizabeth (d. 1559), merchant, was probably born in the parish of St George, Botolph Lane, London, the only surviving child of Thomas Gale (died 1540), a freeman of the Haberdashers' Company of London, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1546), the daughter of William Wilkinson, of the parish of St Dionis Backchurch, and his wife, Elizabeth. Her father was active in Iberian commerce, and possessed connections to the prominent London merchants William Locke and Sir George Barnes. She married on or around 1 September 1529 Nicholas Wilford (died 1551), a freeman of the Merchant Taylors' Company, the fifth son of James Wilford, a merchant taylor, sheriff, and alderman of London, and was identified in her marriage indentures as the principal beneficiary of her father's substantial estate. Her husband began his career as a merchant in Bilboa, Spain, in the 1520s, became a substantial English cloth exporter, served as auditor of the City of London (1545-7), represented London in the 1542 parliament, and became a governor of St Bartholomew's Hospital. Following her marriage Elizabeth resided first in the parish of St Bartholomew-the-Less and later, after her mother's death, in her parents' capital tenement and shops in Botolph Lane. She and her husband were also parishioners and property holders of Wandsworth, Surrey. They had four sons and seven daughters: Thomas, who in 1560 married Elizabeth, the daughter of Sir James Hawes; William, who died childless; Robert, who in 1575 married Mary Watson; Edmond, who died in infancy; Elizabeth, who married, first, John Kidderminster and, second, Robert Gage; Anne, who married, first, John Webbe, alias Killiho, and, second, Gabriel White; Parnell, who 'c'.1565-6 married William Towerson; another Elizabeth; Grace; Martha, who married Francis Cressett; and Joyce. Several of the children and their spouses became nationally prominent. The eldest son, Thomas, a freeman of the Merchant Taylors' Company, was a common councilman (1561-99) and chamberlain of the City (1591-1603). William Towerson (died 1584) was the noted developer of commerce with equatorial west Africa whose exploits were described by Richard Hakluyt in his 'Principal Navigations'; Gabriel Towerson (1576-1623), a grandson of Elizabeth Wilford, was the chief factor of the East India Company executed by the Dutch at Amboyna. 
Elizabeth Wilford was active as a cloth exporter in her widowhood following her husband's death in the London outbreak of the sweating sickness of 1551. She was one of only two women to appear among the 201 founding members of the Muscovy or Russia Company in 1555, and the only one to invest in her own right, without a spouse. In the absence of business or family papers, she can rarely be viewed outside the circumstances of her domestic life during marriage and widowhood. Her last will of 1559 is typical of her position and sex for this period in its elaborate disposal of possessions within her extended family. Although she moved in socially prominent circles (one nephew was Sir James Wilford MP, and a distinguished mid-Tudor soldier; her brothers-in-law included Sir John (later Lord) Mordaunt; and among her husband's business associates were three lord mayors of London), her first known public act was as executrix for the estate of her deceased husband. Under the terms of Nicholas Wilford's will she probably received in excess of $1000, besides a life interest in all the property in Surrey and the London family residence. In view of the Wilford family's close association with the two innovative long-distance trading destinations of the 1550s, Russia and west Africa, investment in the Russia voyages was a logical move in her widowhood. 
Wilford dated her will 31 March 1559; she must have died shortly afterwards, as it was proved on the following 19 April. She was buried beside her husband in the parish church of St George, Botolph Lane. She was evidently raised by Catholic parents and died in the old faith, requesting prayers for the health of her soul. 


@@@@@


doc= 40611


Argall, Thomas (1499/1500-1563), administrator, was probably born at Lambeth, the only son of John Argall and his wife, Emme. His date of birth is derived from the fact that in July 1540 he gave his age as forty. Both parents were deceased by 1522, when Argall inherited their home and close on the archbishop of Canterbury's Lambeth estate. Argall's first known employment was as private clerk to John Barret, registrar of the prerogative court of Canterbury. Following Barret's death in 1526, Argall served under John Cockes, master and commissioner of the prerogative, dean of the arches, auditor of causes, and vicar-general in spirituals, and also entered practice as a notary public. He was drawn into the annulment proceedings of Henry VIII's marriage to Katherine of Aragon in 1533, when identified as a servant of the royal chaplain and councillor Thomas Bedell. In 1534 Argall received his first important office when Thomas Cranmer appointed him registrar of the prerogative court of Canterbury, a post he held until his death. Between 1536 and 1540 he was concurrently registrar of testimonial matters to William Petre, Thomas Cromwell's deputy as royal vicar-general and vicegerent in spirituals. 
By December 1536 Argall was occupied with clerical duties for the dissolution of the monasteries, employed directly under Thomas Cromwell. Upon the creation of the court of first-fruits and tenths in 1540 Argall secured appointment as keeper of the records from his long-time acquaintance Sir John Baker, the formal grant of office being delayed until 10 March 1542. Argall emerged as one of the court's most active officials, a prominent administrator and important revenue receiver. This activity was recognized in 1554 when the functions of the dissolved court were transferred to the exchequer and Argall and Thomas Godfrey, the clerk, became joint remembrancers of first-fruits and tenths for life. Other administrative tasks continued to occupy his attention: under Edward VI, Argall produced the particular accounts for all colleges, chantries, and free chapels; and in Mary I's reign he aided in the sale of former monastic lands, and served under Baker and Petre in assessing fines arising from Wyatt's rebellion. In summary, between 1540 and 1563 Argall was one of the most prominent royal administrators of clerical revenue and accounts. With a career spanning the reigns of four sovereigns, he helped create administrative stability within a period of flux, providing unity between church and state and fostering an important element of continuity with the past. 
Argall's marriage, friendships, and purchase of a landed estate reflected his ties to the archbishop of Canterbury's London administration and Sir John Baker, Argall's principal patron in his later career. By 1544 Argall had married Margaret (died 1592), a daughter of John Tallakarne, of Camrose, Cornwall, a proctor of the court of arches and Argall's neighbour in the parish of St Faith's under St Paul's. The marriage produced six sons and one daughter: Richard (died 1588), Laurence (died 1585), John Argall (d. 1606), Rowland, Gabriel, Edmund, and Anne. Margaret outlived her husband, married Sir Giles Alington of Horseheath, Cambridgeshire, and died in 1592. Argall purchased considerable property, and by 1563 he held lands in Sussex, Kent, Essex, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Hampshire, and Dorset. His greatest acquisitions were in west Kent, beginning in 1544 with the purchase of land in Tenterden formerly owned by Thomas Cromwell, for $433, and followed by the purchase of the manors of East Sutton and Densted in 1546. 
Argall's introduction into the county gentry of Kent was marked by the marriage of his eldest son and heir, Richard, of the Inner Temple, to Mary, a daughter of Sir Reginald Scott of Scot Hall. That marriage produced five sons and six daughters, including Sir Samuel Argall, deputy governor of Virginia, and Elizabeth, mother of Sir Robert Filmer. Argall was a learned layman in religious subjects and a theological conservative whose beliefs reflected pre-Reformation orthodoxy; his 1563 will used a traditional formula. He died on 15 August 1563 at his home in Ivy Lane, London, and was buried within the church of St Faith's under St Paul's. 


