@@@@@


doc= 40612


Danyell, Thomas (b. after 1488, d. 1566), administrator, probably was born in Suffolk shortly after 1488, the third of five sons of Edmund Danyell, esquire, of Stoke by Nayland, Suffolk (died 1497x1504), and his wife, Grace (died 1509), daughter and heir of Sir Richard Baynard of Messing, Essex. In the will of his mother, dated 6 December 1508, Danyell and his younger brothers were each assigned the annual sum of $5 until they attained the age of twenty on condition that they continue their 'learning'. No information on Danyell's education survives, and his early life is obscure before he entered the service of Thomas Howard (1443-1524), earl of Surrey, duke of Norfolk, and lord treasurer of England. Danyell's paternal grandparents were Sir Thomas Danyell of Rathwire, Ireland, constable of Dublin Castle, and Margaret, sister to John Howard, first duke of Norfolk (died 1485). In 1494 his father was named executor for the duke's widow. 
As clients of the Howards, the Danyell family rose within East Anglia and at court. On 16 July 1517 Thomas Danyell was admitted for life by Norfolk to the recently vacated position of writer of the tallies in the receipt of the exchequer. There he joined his cousin Henry Everard, esquire, of Deverston, Suffolk, secretary to the lord treasurer in 1514 and subsequently a teller of the exchequer (1514-40), and other members of the Howard entourage. Danyell's eldest surviving brother, John, esquire, of Messing, had already married a daughter of Edmund Denny (died 1519/20), lord treasurer's remembrancer and baron of the exchequer. Another cousin, John Danyell, gentleman, of Felsted, Essex (died 1518), was in the service of John de Vere, earl of Oxford. Thomas Danyell continued to be active in the private affairs of the Howard family until at least 1540. 
The writer of the tallies emerged under the early Tudors as the senior administrative officer in the receipt of the exchequer, below the under-treasurer who was increasingly a non-resident supervisor. Danyell's active tenure of the office for almost thirty-three years before his resignation in May 1550 was highly influential in the development of the administrative structure of the department, and he was the first to be called by the new, at first informal, title of auditor of the receipt, in recognition of the enhanced responsibilities. The auditor supervised the four tellers, composed -- in the name of the under-treasurer -- the annual declaration of the state of the treasury for presentation to the royal council, and managed the disbursement of crown money. It was Danyell who received Henry VIII's last will, and numerous leagues and treaties, for safe keeping in the treasury of the receipt. And Danyell was the first to establish a gentry family from his substantial profits of office in the department. He had inherited no property from his parents. However, following modest land purchases in the vicinity of his residence in Sudbury, Suffolk, during the 1520s and at Downhall, Essex, in 1530, he purchased five manors in Suffolk and Essex in the 1540s, establishing his seat at Acton Place, Suffolk, about 1546. Danyell's retirement marked the end of significant acquisitions, and at his death in 1566 the landed estate was worth approximately $165 per annum. He was regularly appointed to the Suffolk commission of the peace from 1537 until 1564, and served on commissions for taxation and for oyer and terminer. He was reputed to be a religious conservative who resisted the Edwardian and Elizabethan reforms. 
Danyell married first, at an unknown date, Anne, daughter of Sir Edmund Lucy of Suffolk. This marriage produced his only surviving child and heir, Edmund, who married Margaret, daughter and heir of Edmund West, esquire, of Cornard, Suffolk. Danyell married second, by 1550, Frances, daughter of John Butler, recorder of Coventry, and widow of Edmund Felton of Pentlow, Essex (died 1542). Danyell had long been associated with Felton, and in 1550 he resigned his exchequer post in favour of Felton's relative, Thomas Felton of Clerkenwell, Middlesex, who had served as clerk to the writer of the tallies from 1535. 
Danyell died at Acton Place in late 1566; his wife survived him. The elder branch of the family at Messing remained better connected after the fall of the Howards, retaining close ties to Sir Anthony Denny and later Sir Francis Walsingham, but it was Thomas Danyell who through a painstaking bureaucratic career helped to alter irrevocably the ancient course of the exchequer and established a prominent gentry family in his native Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 40614


Smith, Sir Clement (d. 1552), administrator, was the second son of Thomas Smith, gentleman, of Rivenhall, Essex, and Isabel, daughter and heir of William Foster of Little Baddow, Essex. He began his career as the dependant of his prosperous elder brother, John (died 1545), of Cressing Temple, Essex, and Wootton Wawen, Warwickshire, who in 1513 became lord treasurer's remembrancer in the exchequer through the intervention of the incumbent, Edmund Denny. On 4 December 1539 John Smith was advanced to second baron of the exchequer, and subsequently knighted. Clement Smith was granted the office of lord treasurer's remembrancer for life in survivorship with his brother on 2 December 1539. He occupied the office until his death on 26 August 1552. The remembrancer headed one of the principal divisions of the exchequer of audit, responsible for important aspects of accounting and debt collection. Smith had already been active in the exchequer from at least 1531 as a clerk and attorney in the exchequer of pleas. 
At some time before 1536, probably during the first half of the decade, Smith married Dorothy Seymour, the youngest daughter of Sir John Seymour (died 1536) of Wolf Hall, Wiltshire. The marriage of his sister-in-law, Jane Seymour, to Henry VIII on 30 May 1536 thrust Smith towards the centre of court life. The circumstances that produced Smith's marriage are obscure, but his connection to Sir Edward Seymour, Jane's eldest brother, dated back to 1531, if not earlier, and Smith remembered his long-deceased father-in-law fondly in his will of 1552. The marriage produced three sons and four daughters, including his son and heir Sir John Smythe (1533/4-1607) of Little Baddow, the diplomat and military writer. 
In 1536 Smith began the acquisition of a landed estate in Essex through a combination of private purchases, crown leases, and, in 1544, the purchase of Bourchiers Hall, Coggeshall, Essex, from the court of augmentations. By 1543 he had attained the standing of esquire and was on the Essex commission of the peace. Smith was assessed for the subsidy of 1545 on lands and fees in London valued at $100 per annum (of which two-thirds was his exchequer salary) and another $50 per annum in Essex properties. He continued making purchases in Essex up to 1550, mostly from private individuals but including a favourable exchange of lands with the crown in August 1547. He was knighted by Edward VI on 22 February 1547. Smith sat in the parliaments of 1545 and 1547 for Maldon, Essex; no record of his activity survives. His likely patron for these elections was the Parr family. Smith leased Bradwell Manor from Queen Katherine Parr and was her farmer for the profits of Great Baddow, Essex; his cousin John Smith was a receiver of the queen's lands. 
Smith's Roman Catholicism was evident both in his lifetime and in the devout personal language of his last will and testament. In 1550-51, as part of the government's attack on Princess Mary's religion, several prominent court Catholics were singled out for official displeasure, Smith included. He suffered a brief imprisonment in the Fleet in 1550, and was 'chidden' by the king on 24 March 1551. He appears to have been protected earlier by the regime of Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset, and Smith remained a supporter of the disgraced lord protector. In April 1550 he exploited his exchequer office to issue legal proceedings against John Dudley, earl of Warwick, for substantial unpaid taxes. Dudley brought the issue to the privy council and Smith was reprimanded for excess zeal, in what had clearly been a partisan manoeuvre. 
Smith wrote his will on 13 July 1551, with a codicil of 10 August 1552. He died at Little Baddow on 26 August 1552. His two younger sons, Bennet and Clement, were assigned life annuities and were to be apprenticed to learned auditors or other officers of the law courts. His heir, John Smith, began immediately in 1553 to sell portions of his inheritance to finance his voluntary exile abroad as a Catholic soldier of fortune. His widow, Dame Dorothy, had already been the recipient of royal munificence, including a lease of the site of the monastery of Coggeshall, Essex, in 1550. She married Thomas Leventhorpe in 1553. On 8 February 1553 she was awarded an annuity of $66 13's'. 4died to raise her niece Lady Elizabeth Seymour, one of Protector Somerset's four daughters. In his lifetime Smith had been well connected among the mercantile and legal elites of London, and counted two lord mayors -- Sir William Bowyer and Sir Thomas White -- among his close friends. His executors included the court Catholics John Ryther, cofferer of the household, and Robert Rochester, comptroller of Princess Mary's household. 


@@@@@


doc= 40619


Ady, Cecilia Mary (1881-1958), historian, was born on 28 November 1881 at Edgcote, Northamptonshire, the only child of the Revd (William) Henry Ady (died 1915), rector of Edgcote and later of Charing, Kent, and Ockham, Surrey, and his wife, Julia Mary Cartwright (1851-1924), who was a brilliant amateur historian who enjoyed a reputation as an art critic and biographer of such historical figures as Beatrice d'Este and Castiglione. Ady was privately educated at home at the rectory of Charing, under the tutelage of her mother, before entering Oxford in 1900 as a scholar at what was then St Hugh's Hall. She obtained a first in the honours school of modern history in 1903. At Oxford she was a pupil of Edward Armstrong, who fostered her interests in Italian studies and included her first book, 'History of Milan under the Sforza' (1907), in his series, 'The States of Italy'. 
After travel in Italy and an interval at home, Ady became tutor in modern history at St Hugh's in 1909. From the beginning she took an active role in the governance of her college, being elected to the council for the first time in 1913 and becoming vice-principal for a term of three years in 1915. Her rise to positions of authority in her college derived, in part, from her position as protegee and confidante of its principal, Eleanor Jourdain, who addressed her in private letters with such terms of endearment as 'Baby Don' and 'mia cara Cecilia'. Ady's popularity with her pupils and leadership in the senior common room eventually led Miss Jourdain to perceive her as a rival. The clash of these two strong and ambitious personalities resulted in a 'row', that led to Ady's being dismissed from her tutorship in November 1923 with less than a week's notice. The prestige of St Hugh's was badly shaken by this dispute, which was the subject of an inquiry by Lord Curzon, the university chancellor. Ady was vindicated and subsequent constitutional changes brought self-government to the women's colleges at Oxford, placing women tutors in a position of independence comparable to that of their male counterparts. Refusing an offer from the University of Birmingham in 1924 Ady accepted the post of tutor to the Society of Home Students, returning to her college as research fellow in 1929. On her retirement in 1951 she was elected to an honorary fellowship. Her portrait, on the viewer's far right, in Henry Lamb's 'Conversation Piece', an oil of six St Hugh's fellows painted in 1936, captures at once Ady's commanding presence and her famous affability. 
Throughout her long career at Oxford, Ady remained devoted to the study of the personalities and politics of the Italian Renaissance. The second book, 'Pius II (Aeneas Silvius Piccolomini): the Humanist Pope' (1913), dedicated to 'My Mother', was a standard 'life and times' account which emulated her mother's method in its complete mastery of and copious quotation from literary sources. Ady's skill at broad synthesis was evidenced in 'Italy, 1250-1527', her chapter in the collection of essays, mainly by women history dons, 'Italy, Mediaeval and Modern' (1917). In 1929 she published 'A History of Modern Italy, 1871-1915', a translation of the work by Benedetto Croce, and, ever loyal to her friend and mentor, edited a posthumous collection of Edward Armstrong's 'Italian Studies' (1934). Her capacity for clear summary was shown in the chapter entitled 'Florence and north Italy, 1414-1492', in volume 8 of the 'Cambridge Medieval History' (1936). During the early 1930s Ady spent much of her leisure time conducting archival and manuscript research in Italy, especially Bologna, which resulted in her only solid historical monograph, 'The Bentivoglio of Bologna: a Study in Despotism' (1937). The publication of this distinguished work caused Oxford University to confer on her the degree of DLitt in 1938. Perhaps most revealing of her approach to the Italian Renaissance was her Annual Italian Lecture read before the British Academy, 'Morals and manners of the Quattrocento', which celebrated the great 'opportunity for self-expression' of the Italian ruling families as comparable to England's country gentry before the first 'Reform Bill' (see 'PBA', 28, 1942, 179). 
After leaving St Hugh's College in 1923, Ady established her home in Oxford at 40 St Margaret's Road, where she kept an open door for friends, fellow dons, and old pupils. The product of a devout home, she was a moderate Anglo-Catholic churchwoman, took an active role in the affairs of her diocese, and wrote on the role of women in the church as well as historical studies on church organization. In post-war Oxford she regularly offered 'The Italian Renaissance' as a special subject, while she continued her work of popularization with 'Lorenzo Dei Medici and Renaissance Italy' (1955), published in the 'Teach Yourself History' series. In her mature years she supervised the theses of a number of postgraduates, men and women, several of whom became leading historians of the Italian Renaissance in the second half of the twentieth century. These pupils, along with fellow dons, contributed a brilliant collection of essays, 'Italian Renaissance Studies' (1960), which had been planned in her honour and was dedicated to her memory after her death at St Luke's Nursing Home, 20 Linton Road, Oxford, on 27 March 1958. Her most immediate legacy was a bequest of $10,000 for the salary of the chaplain at St Hugh's. But her larger influence was as one of the founders of the school of Italian Renaissance studies that flourished in the United Kingdom in the decades after her death. 


@@@@@


doc= 40620


Cartwright, Julia Mary (1851-1924), art historian and biographer, was born at the family home, Edgcote House, Edgcote, Northamptonshire, on 7 November 1851, one of the ten children of Richard Aubrey Cartwright and his wife, Mary Fremantle (died 1885). She was educated privately at home; the Cartwright family were highly cultured and learned languages, music, and dancing as well as attending concerts and lectures in London, Oxford, and Leamington Spa. Julia had nine siblings but was closest to her younger brother Chauncy, who later joined the Foreign Office and helped her career through his diplomatic contacts. Her uncle William Cornwallis Cartwright was an art collector and a fervent supporter of the Italian 'Risorgimento': both his passions influenced his niece, who had the run of his library and gallery at Aynhoe. In 1868 the family toured France, Austria, and Italy: Julia kept a journal of the voyage. Soon after, she 'came out', by which time her literary ambitions were alarming her parents. 
In 1871 Julia Cartwright published a piece in 'Aunt Judy's Magazine'; shortly afterwards she became a regular contributor to C. M. Yonge's 'Monthly Packet', another publication for young people, to which she was invited to contribute a series, 'The lives of the saints'. To the concern of her mother, who felt that literary pursuits distracted her from looking for a husband, Julia Cartwright became increasingly interested in Renaissance Italy and its culture, reading the works of Anna Jameson, John Ruskin, Charles Eastlake, Walter Pater, J. A. Crowe, and Giovanni Battista Cavalcaselle, as well as the poetry of Robert Browning. In 1873 she submitted an article on Giotto to 'Macmillan's Magazine': it was her first fully referenced and researched piece of work. It was rejected, but eventually appeared in the 'New Quarterly' in 1877. She retained an interest in many other fields, including contemporary art: an early fondness for Maclise, Turner, and Landseer gave way to an appreciation of Whistler. 
In the 1870s Julia Cartwright also wrote novels for the SPCK -- the first of which was 'Madelaine' (1872) -- and visited Italy three times, becoming increasingly interested in matters of patronage and the life of the religious reformer Savonarola. In 1877 she sent a review of Margaret Oliphant's 'Makers of Florence' (1876) to 'The Academy', an arts journal edited by Charles Appleton, who became a supportive critic of her work. In the late 1870s and early 1880s she became involved in artistic and literary circles in London; she met Oscar Browning and the architect T. P. Jackson and became a good friend of Lady Knightley, with whom she visited the British Museum print room to view drawings by Botticelli. She visited the studios of leading artists such as Watts and Burne-Jones, and attended exhibitions at the Grosvenor Gallery. 
Despite her growing commitments, by the late 1870s Julia Cartwright was becoming lonely, as many of her female friends married. In 1878, however, (William) Henry Ady (died 1915), the son of William Ady, the rector of Little Baddow in Essex, became rector of Edgcote: he had high-church sympathies, like Julia herself, and had been a friend of her beloved uncle Stephen Fremantle (died 1874). Julia married him on 24 August 1880 at Edgcote, and he proved to be a supportive husband who encouraged her to continue her work. Their only daughter, Cecilia Mary Ady, was born in November 1881. Julia successfully funded her daughter's education through her literary earnings and Cecilia later became a tutor in Renaissance history at St Hugh's College, Oxford. In 1881 Julia Ady published her first art book, 'Mantegna and Francia'; it was the first of a series of publications on Mantegna in the later nineteenth century. She was becoming a significant figure in the expanding world of art criticism, writing for journals such as 'Portfolio', the 'Magazine of Art', and (later) the 'Art Journal'. In 1882 her earnings from her publications totalled $139. 
In the 1880s and 1890s Julia Ady combined her duties as a vicar's wife (first at Edgcote and later at Charing, Kent) with visits to London and her writing career, producing a wide range of articles on the Renaissance art world. She also became increasingly interested in modern art, particularly the work of landscapists and aesthetic and symbolist painters. She was impressed with the work of Rossetti, Burne-Jones (the subject of a full-length monograph in 1894), and Watts (on whose work she published a monograph in 1896). She was also interested in the work of the Italian landscapist Giovanni Costa (on whom she wrote an article for the 'Magazine of Art'), and French artists including Millet, Bastien-Lepage, and Puvis de Chavannes (on all of whom she eventually wrote in the 1890s). 
During the 1880s and 1890s Julia Ady read most of the major new works of art criticism, ranging from Pater's impressionistic essays on the Renaissance to the more scholarly publications of Giovanni Morelli. She became firm friends with Vernon Lee, an expert on eighteenth-century Italian culture, and in 1894 she met the critic Bernard Berenson. Both became friendly critics of her work as she developed from an amateur writer into a professional art historian. The impact of new art-critical methods was apparent in three works published on Raphael in 1905. Similarly, her monograph on Sandro Botticelli (1903; rev. edn, 1904) showed a full awareness of both Berenson's and Herbert Horne's work on this artist. 
In 1893 Julia Cartwright published 'Sacharissa', a biography of Dorothy Sidney, Edmund Waller's muse; it was followed in 1894 by 'Madame', a biography of Charles II's sister Henriette, duchess of Orleans. Both were based on extensive archival research, and represented an important new direction in her work: biographies of women who had played a role in the cultural politics of their age. In 1899 she published 'Beatrice D'Este', an appetizer for her comprehensive biography 'Isabella D'Este' (1903), on the Renaissance art patron. This was an extensively researched work, for which she had been preparing for some fifteen years. While presenting a sanitized portrait of Isabella as an ideal Victorian domestic heroine, it also revealed her extensive cultural activities and (more tangentially) her significant role in Renaissance politics. Unfortunately, 'Isabella' led to a publishing controversy: two Italian scholars, Alessandro Luzio and Rodolpho Renier, who had long been working on the life of the marchioness and had published groups of her letters upon which Julia Cartwright had drawn (with acknowledgement) charged her with a copyright violation. A settlement was reached, but not without considerable distress to Cartwright. 
Working on the Este sisters provided Julia Cartwright with much of the material for her next publication, a biography of Baldassare Castiglione, published in 1908. Extensively researched (she spent long hours in the British Museum and visited Italian libraries in 1904 and 1906), it remains the best biography in English of 'The Courtier''s author, despite her idealization of the poet-courtier: Cartwright was determined to redress the British perception of the Italian Renaissance as an age of treachery, Machiavellian politics, and debauchery. 

'Castiglione' was Cartwright's last major work. In 1914 she published 'The Italian Gardens of the Renaissance and other Studies', a compilation of articles which had been previously published in 'Nineteenth Century'. She also edited the journals of Lady Knightley (1915) and wrote a biography of Christina of Denmark (1913), the subject of a full-length portrait by Holbein. It was not a success: hagiographical biographies were losing their appeal even before Lytton Strachey's reinvention of the genre. She travelled with her daughter (who, to her horror, declared her intention of remaining single) and met Cecilia's Oxford friends, including the art historian Joan Evans. This exposure to independently minded women of learning -- as well as her admiration for Renaissance women such as Isabella -- may well have influenced her changing view on women's suffrage, as she now became a cautious supporter of votes for women. 
In 1915, when her husband died, Julia Cartwright moved to Oxford to be closer to her daughter. During the First World War she became involved in the foundation of the Italian League, which was intended to further Anglo-Italian understanding. Her ability to appreciate modern art was by now declining: she had been horrified by the post-impressionist exhibition of 1912. In 1919 she ceased to keep a diary, and little is known of her last years. She died at her Oxford home, 40 St Margaret's Road, on 28 April 1924. Her daughter, Cecilia, was the sole beneficiary of her will. 
Julia Cartwright's career reflects the transition of the historical disciplines from the amateur and antiquarian enthusiasms of the nineteenth century to the more academic and professional approaches of the early twentieth century. As a historian of women she helped to rediscover figures such as Isabella D'Este, who had played significant roles as the inspiration, patrons, and mediators of cultural production. As a cultural historian she contributed to developing modern Renaissance studies through her research into the works, lives, and interactions of leading figures. As John Hale memorably put it, 'she stands for that pre-academic relish for Renaissance Italy which placed, as it were, an archival filling within the truffles of near-adoration' ('Bright Remembrance', x). But although she was essentially a late Victorian in her perspective on culture and cultural history, she responded to new art-critical methods and new research in her field, a field in which her own professionally trained daughter was to succeed her. 


@@@@@


doc= 40621


Weiss, Roberto (1906-1969), Italian scholar and author, was born in Milan on 22 January 1906, the only son of Eugenio Natale Weiss and of Rita Fattori; his family was of Austrian origin and had settled in Italy. He received a classical education in Rome at the 'Liceo' E. Q. Visconti and the 'Liceo' Umberto I. After his final school examinations, he went, on the advice of his father, to England to read law and prepare himself for a diplomatic career; in 1928 he matriculated at Oxford as a non-collegiate student (later St Catherine's Society) and was awarded an honours degree in jurisprudence in 1932. But the study of law had not appealed to him, and, having worked as temporary assistant in the department of Western manuscripts of the Bodleian Library in 1932-3, he began in 1934 postgraduate studies in the faculty of modern history. His DPhil thesis, submitted in 1938, was published in 1941 ('Humanism in England during the Fifteenth Century'; rev. edns, 1955, 1967). Sometimes styled count (probably of the Holy Roman empire), he was naturalized a British subject on 30 May 1934; on 18 July 1936 he married at St Aloysius Roman Catholic Church, Oxford, Eve ('b'. 1907), daughter of William Raymond Cecil, with whom he had four children. 
In 1938, Weiss joined the Italian department of University College, London, as assistant lecturer, and apart from his military service in the Royal Artillery from 1942 to 1945 he taught at University College until his death. From 1946 he was professor of Italian and head of department. Through his teaching and his many contacts with British and Italian scholars, he made his department a leading centre of Italian studies. In 1969 the British Academy awarded him the Serena medal for Italian studies. 
When Weiss wrote his book on humanism in England, aspects of the subject had been dealt with by historians of fifteenth-century England, and a comprehensive survey based on printed sources had recently been published. Weiss, however, not only used a wealth of manuscript material, but also broke new ground by studying early English humanism in the context of the classical revival in Italy and by examining both the influence of Italian humanists on English intellectual life, and the careers of English students at Italian universities, who thus participated in the humanist movement in Italy. 
It was this movement which after Weiss's return to London in 1945 came to occupy the centre of his scholarly work, but with a shift back to the early fourteenth century. His pioneering inaugural lecture, 'The Dawn of Humanism in Italy', mapped out in 1947 a new direction of his studies, which was again to prove innovating. Only scant attention had hitherto been paid to what came to be called Italian prehumanism, and his studies on Lovato Lovati, Geremia da Montagnone, Geri d'Arezzo, and Albertino Mussato opened new perspectives; but he also published in 1950 an unknown version of a chapter of Petrarch's 'Trionfo della fama' which he had discovered in the British Museum. It was the most spectacular of his innumerable discoveries in the manuscript collections of British and Italian libraries, the former in the footsteps of his mentor Cesare Foligno. He told the author of this biography that many of his discoveries went back to his systematic reading, on the train journeys between Henley-on-Thames, where he lived, and London, of Mazzatinti's massive inventories of manuscripts in Italian libraries. But it was only his vast and profound knowledge of the contemporary literature which made these discoveries possible. At the same time, Weiss became increasingly interested in a hitherto little explored field, the knowledge of Greek and the translations from Greek in fourteenth-century Italy, as well as in France and England; his essays on this subject, mainly from the years 1951 to 1953, were republished in 1977 under the title 'Medieval and Humanist Greek', which also included a bibliography of his publications. 
Ever since his schooldays, Weiss had collected ancient coins and medals; by the time of his death, his Renaissance medals formed a scholarly private collection unrivalled in Britain, which he used for his pioneering studies of Renaissance collectors and collections. While studying the life and writings of humanists, he had taken notes on the humanists' interest in classical antiquities and their survival in Renaissance Italy; during the last years of his life, he drew on the vast amount of material he had gathered for yet another groundbreaking work. Completed in 1968, 'The Renaissance Discovery of Classical Antiquity' (1969; 2nd edn 1988) constitutes a unique synthesis. While earlier studies of this subject, many of them by Weiss, had concentrated on a few towns, foremost among them Rome, and on single humanists, the book embraces the whole of Italy within a span of time which stretches from the early fourteenth to the sixteenth century. Combining consummate scholarship with economy of exposition, it discusses the rise of classical archaeology and epigraphy, the development of the topography of ancient Rome, the collections of Roman and later also of Greek antiquities, and other aspects of the new and enthusiastic interest in the surviving remains of classical antiquity. 
Like his other writings, this book testifies to one of the pervasive traits of Weiss's scholarship, his insistence on the absolute priority of contemporary sources. Another was his reluctance to attack other scholars. This absence of polemic in his writings, together with his endless generosity in sharing his knowledge, were among Weiss's most striking and endearing characteristics. He writes of Pope Pius II, the humanist Enea Silvio Piccolomini, that 'he bore lightly his massive erudition'. The same judgement could also be applied to him. 
Notwithstanding his complete integration into English ways of life and his absorption of the cultural traditions of his adopted country, Weiss remained mindful of his intellectual roots in Italy, cemented by his many friendships with Italian scholars -- a dual bond which he chose to indicate, in his lapidary style, by alternatively signing, in his publications in England, his name as Roberto, in those in Italy, as Robert. He died on 10 August 1969 at his home, 44 St Andrews Road, Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, of a heart attack. He left his papers and offprints to the Warburg Institute, University of London; his collection of Renaissance medals is on long loan to the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 40622


Black, Sir John Paul (1895-1965), motor vehicle manufacturer, was born on 10 February 1895 at Kingston upon Thames, the fourth son of John George Black (died 1922), an official at the Public Record Office, and Ellen Elizabeth Marion, 'nee' Smith (died 1930). Black was educated locally and studied law, which brought out an aptitude for clear-cut decisions that was further developed in the First World War, during which he attained the rank of captain. In 1919 Black was recruited by the Hillman motor car marque in Coventry. He soon became joint managing director, with Spencer Wilks. Their success led to Hillman's being taken over by Rootes Ltd, a move which prompted both to resign in 1929. 
Black joined the Standard Motor Company the same year, at the invitation of its founder, Reginald Maudslay. The marque was in dire financial straits and Black, who became general manager in 1930, set about restoring the company's fortunes. He ended the costly in-house manufacture of components and started to introduce mass production techniques. Black also brought in Edward Grinham from Humber as chief engineer; he was able to interpret Black's ideas for stylish and competitively priced models, especially in the Flying Standard series. By 1939 total car production had reached 50,000 units a year, making Standard Coventry's largest motor car manufacturer and earning the marque a place in the 'Big Six' league of leading British-based producers. Although Black did not officially become managing director until Maudslay's death in December 1934, he was effectively in command from the start. 
In 1936 Standard was invited to join the Baldwin government's 'shadow' rearmament scheme, in which Black was an enthusiastic participant. He took charge of two aero-engine 'shadow' factories, the second of which, at Banner Lane, was the largest in Coventry. Black also succeeded Lord Austin, in 1940, in the chairmanship of the overseeing 'shadow' joint aero-engine committee. Standard's substantial contribution to the war effort totalled 20,000 Bristol Hercules aero-engines, 54,000 aero-carburettors, 417,000 cylinders, 1066 De Havilland Mosquito fighter-bombers (14 per cent of the total built), and numerous Oxford trainer aircraft. Black was rewarded with a knighthood in 1943. 
Black was astute enough to recognize that Standard could benefit from its wartime activities. He successfully negotiated with the authorities to take over the two aero-engine 'shadow' factories. The Banner Lane facility provided an ideal venue for tractor production, with Black succeeding in his bid to link up with Harry Ferguson. The other component of Black's post-war strategy was the Vanguard motor car, which was a major contributor to the Attlee government's 'export or die' strategy between 1949 and 1951. But, as foreign competition intensified, the Vanguard's limitations in overseas conditions led to falling sales. 
Black took Standard in another direction when, in 1944, at his urging, the bankrupt Triumph Motor Company was acquired. Seeking a more glamorous image in keeping with his personality, Black was behind the development of the TR sports car range, though he had left Standard before its success came. In many ways Black lost his touch after 1945. Before the war, he had adopted a vigorous anti-trade union stance, but after the war he completely reversed his labour policy by paying higher wages than was the norm in Coventry and handing greater influence to shop stewards. The inevitable outcome adversely affected Standard's competitive position and profits -- the year before Black's resignation profits per unit were down to $13, under one-third of the amount made by Ford at Dagenham. 
In fact, it was the tractor division which sustained Standard-Triumph. In 1948 more tractors were being produced than cars and by the early 1950s about 70 per cent of the profits were derived from Banner Lane. 
But all was not well between Black and Ferguson; Black resented Ferguson's relegation of Standard-Triumph to contractor status rather than seeing the marque as an equal partner. At the heart of the bickering lay Black's jealousy at the huge personal rewards accruing to Ferguson. The latter tried to redress the balance by offering Black some shares in his company, but withdrew his proposal when Black insisted on a 50 per cent holding. 
Black's decisions grew increasingly questionable and he eventually lost the confidence of the Standard-Triumph board. Black let Fisher and Ludlow, his company's main body suppliers, fall into the hands of the British Motor Corporation. Then, after the board agreed that the tractor contract would not be renewed following Ferguson's shock merger with the Canadian firm, Massey-Harris, Black concluded a twelve-year deal with the new Massey-Ferguson organization. 
At Christmas 1953 Black became chairman of Standard-Triumph, but his position was far from secure. After he threatened to fire the revered Grinham, the board used the excuse of an accident Black was involved in as a passenger in a Swallow Doretti prototype as a convenient public excuse to force his resignation. 
Outside his work, Black led the life of a playboy, being a keen golfer, yachtsman, and skier. In the 1930s he ordered a luxury company bungalow to be constructed at Harlech Bay in Wales, which was part of his resignation settlement. He bought a nearby farm and retired there to raise sheep and cattle. He was married twice, first in 1921, to Margaret Verena (Daisy) Hillman (1887-1978), daughter of William Hillman, owner of the Hillman Company. This marriage was dissolved after his wife left him and on 25 June 1943 he married again, his bride being Alicia Joan Pears (1912-2002), daughter of James Henry Linton, a bishop in Persia and later rector of Handsworth. This second union produced three sons. 
Black died suddenly on Christmas eve 1965 in Cheadle Royal Hospital in Cheshire. A memorial service in Coventry Cathedral was well attended by industrialists and shop-floor workers. Despite being reputedly the second highest paid executive in the motor industry when he resigned, Black left only $33,825, a sum which reflected his colourful and extravagant lifestyle. 


@@@@@


doc= 40625


Chandler, (Arthur) Bertram (1912-1984), writer, was born in the Louisa Margaret Hospital, Aldershot, Hampshire, on 28 March 1912, the son of Arthur Robert Chandler, a private in the 1st Bedford regiment, and his wife, Ida Florence Calver. He grew up in the small town of Beccles, Suffolk, and was educated at the Peddar's Lane council school and the Sir John Leman secondary school, Beccles. He also attended various nautical schools, and at the age of sixteen went to sea as an apprentice with the Sun Shipping Company of London, where he rose to third officer (1928-35). He served with other small shipping companies, and was in the merchant navy during the Second World War. After that he worked for the Shaw Savill Line, London, rising from fourth officer to chief officer (1936-55), and took up residence in Sydney, Australia. He then joined the Union Steamship Company of New Zealand, Wellington, where he started as a third officer and became shipmaster (1956-75). After his retirement, he was often called on by this company to 'babysit' ships that were forced to stay in port, because regulations required that there be an officer kept on board. This gave him the opportunity to write more fiction. 
Chandler used his own naval experience to prompt his writing of science fiction. His main protagonist was John Grimes, who worked in space ships, usually among what he called the 'Rim Worlds'. Faster-than-light travel was essential in Chandler's fiction and he coined the 'Mannschenn drive' to provide it. This writing began when in the 1940s he visited John W. Campbell, the editor of his favourite magazine, 'Astounding'. Campbell printed 'This Means War' and most of Chandler's early stories in 'Astounding'. Chandler published under his own name and under several pseudonyms, including George Whitely. In the United States, Ace publishers produced his books in the 1960s and then DAW in the 1970s; these were paperbacks, and some were reprinted in Britain by Herbert Jenkins and Robert Hale in limited hardback editions, before Sphere Books began publishing paperbacks in the 1980s. Chandler also published some work in Australia, including 'The Bitter Pill', 'The Wild Ones', and 'Kelly Country'. The last of these novels features Ned Kelly, the Australian bushranger, and Chandler's research on this work included a visit to the USA to the Library of Congress in Washington, as well as a railway journey from Melbourne to Sydney, taken in order to retrace Kelly's journeying. 
Widely travelled as he was, Chandler became very popular in Japan, where he had fan clubs devoted to his writing, and where he was awarded the Seiun Sho award in 1975. His work was published in translation in several languages, including Japanese, German, French, Italian, Spanish, Swedish, and Hebrew. He was given numerous science-fiction awards, including four Ditmars from Australia (1969, 1971, 1974, 1976) and the Invisible Little Man award (1975), and he was guest of honour at the 1982 World Science Fiction Convention in Chicago. He was twice married. He and his first wife, Joan, had a son and two daughters. One of these daughters, Jenny, married the horror-fiction writer Ramsey Campbell. His second wife, Susan Schlenker, survived him. She found him in their flat in a coma on 6 June 1984, but he died the same day in a Sydney hospital and was cremated at Sydney in a small private ceremony on 8 June. 
Chandler was known as a great conversationalist, although he had a slight speech impediment, and he enjoyed navigation, ship handling, and cookery as well as writing. He produced forty novels, six collections, and about 200 short stories; the exact number is hard to determine because of cuts and expansions of some shorter works. He joined with his wife Susan in producing two short stories, 'The Long Way' ('Worlds of Tomorrow', Nov 1964) and 'The Proper Gander' ('Analog', Jan 1970). Almost all of his writing was science fiction. 


@@@@@


doc= 40627


Cavendish, Henry, second duke of Newcastle upon Tyne (1630-1691), politician, was born on 24 June 1630, the fourth but second surviving son of William Cavendish, first duke of Newcastle upon Tyne (bap. 1593, d. 1676), and his first wife, Elizabeth (died 1643), daughter of William Bassett of Blore, Staffordshire, and widow of Henry Howard. He was educated at home, and the principles that were to govern his life were instilled at an early age by his father. Before the battle of Marston Moor in 1644, Newcastle refused to send Lord Henry and his elder brother Charles Cavendish, Viscount Mansfield (1620-1659), to safety, for they 'should show their loyalty and duty to his Majesty in venturing their lives as well as himself' (Cavendish, 93). Lord Henry went into exile with his father, but returned in the autumn of 1647 to assist in the recovery of the family's estates. Over the next decade this was his main concern, but he was only able to make a financial contribution following the conclusion in May 1653 of the settlement on his marriage to Frances (1629/30-1695), eldest daughter of William Pierrepont (1607/8-1678) and his wife, Elizabeth Harris. On the death of his elder brother in June 1659, he became Viscount Mansfield, and from March 1665 was styled earl of Ogle. 
Before the elections for the Convention Parliament, Mansfield belatedly approached the earl of Clare, but finding him already committed to candidates for Nottinghamshire, sought a Derbyshire seat. His first election was declared void because of a trick in returning the writs. He arrived at a second poll to defend himself against any attacks by Anabaptists and was successfully returned. Elected the following year for Northumberland to the Cavalier Parliament, his most notable contributions were to defend the first charter to enfranchise Newark and to introduce a bill for the enfranchisement of Durham. Master of the robes at the coronation, he served from May 1660 until his resignation in March 1663, when he was appointed gentleman of the king's bedchamber, a post he retained until the end of the reign. Listed by his friend Danby among the court's supporters in the Commons, he became, as earl of Ogle and then, after the death of his father in December 1676, duke of Newcastle, a strong opponent of exclusion. In the Lords he argued 'it was not fitting to bee debated it is to Alter the succession' (Beer, 34). 
It was as joint lieutenant (1670-77) and lieutenant of Northumberland (1677-88), as well as governor of Berwick (1675-86) and lieutenant of Nottinghamshire (1677-88), that Newcastle gave effective service to the crown. In Northumberland he attempted to govern by correspondence and the aid of the local elites. In Nottinghamshire, where he had previously served as a deputy lieutenant and which he claimed was the 'most factious' county in the kingdom ('CSP dom.', 'February-December 1685', 105), Newcastle took an active role. After the defeat of his candidate (his brother-in-law Gervase Pierrepont) at the Nottinghamshire election in September 1679 it was not until the summer of 1681 that Newcastle began to promote petitions supporting the king's policies. He became the patron of the Nottingham townsmen who supported the surrender of its charter and their link with the crown. After the defeat of a determined opposition led by the Nottinghamshire whigs, the first elections under the new charter in September 1682 led to riots. Newcastle, by now recorder, was ordered to reside at the castle and to collect evidence to be used against the rioters and their whig supporters. He used news of the Rye House plot to attack the leading Nottinghamshire whigs and to search their houses. He attended the poll at the contested Nottingham parliamentary election of 1685, when for the first time tories were successful as they were in all the Nottinghamshire constituencies. 
Reappointed by James II to his lieutenancies in 1685, Newcastle resolved to be loyal, even though he was concerned at the pace of the king's policies in favour of Roman Catholics. Rebuked for the slow return of answers to the three questions posed to lieutenants in February 1686, he sent his resignation with the replies. Pleas to his loyalty persuaded him to resume his duties and when in October 1686 he was appointed lieutenant of the three ridings of Yorkshire, the duke was in effect responsible for the security of the north-east. In September 1688 he was ordered to raise a regiment to secure Newcastle upon Tyne. After the prince of Orange landed at Torbay, Newcastle considered his regiment unnecessary, but his request to be 'employed where there is action' was refused ('Seventh Report', HMC, 348). The support of the militias was essential, and Newcastle believed that the Yorkshire militia would accept a declaration of loyalty to James. When on 19 November he found a petition in favour of a freely elected parliament in circulation he refused to be affronted or overruled by deputies he had appointed, and to show his displeasure left York. He failed -- though asked by Reresby, the governor of York -- to dismiss the militias and this gave Danby an opportunity to take control. Danby and the earl of Devonshire, who seized Nottingham, had falsely assured Newcastle of their loyalty. When Newcastle decided to take action the militias ignored his orders and he became a prisoner at Welbeck. James accepted that Newcastle's loyalty had left him isolated, and that without troops it was impossible 'to dissipate' the rebels. The duke's failure to take decisive action at York was censured and has been seen as a confirmation of his weak, often petulant, character, while his previously effective service has been ignored. In defeat Newcastle insisted he would 'always be loyall to the king, firm to his religion and act always according to lawe': consequently, he refused the oaths of allegiance to William and Mary and to hold office under them (ibid., 350; 'Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', 545). 
Meanwhile Newcastle, whose thoughts were concentrated 'upon making his family great', had been dealt a sudden grievous blow when, on 1 November 1680, his only son, Henry Cavendish, Lord Ogle ('b'. 1663), died ('Life and Letters of Sir George Savile', 244). The finding of suitable husbands and dowries for his five daughters had become a major concern. It was the cause of disputes and a separation from his wife who 'had had soe great a share of government in that family that she expected that everything should goe as she pleased' ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', 437, 472). Sir John Reresby, who acted as an intermediary in a failed marriage negotiation, had an angry dispute with Newcastle, whom he considered was of an 'unsteady fickle humour' in these matters ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby'). The provision of dowries made a substantial contribution to Newcastle's debts, which at his death exceeded $72,000 (U. Nott. L., PW I 655). He died at Welbeck on 26 July 1691, and was buried on 12 August at Bolsover. In his will of 26 May that year he tried to preserve the family name and estate. His estates were left to Lady Margaret Cavendish, his third surviving and favourite daughter, who had married in February 1690 John Holles, fourth earl of Clare (1662-1711). The conditions were that the son or daughter of the marriage must, in honour of the first duke of Newcastle, retain the name of Cavendish, and the estate must pass undivided. The earl of Clare was to take the liabilities of the estate. Attempts made by his brothers-in-law the earls of Thanet and Montague to invalidate the will on the grounds that Newcastle was insane when it was made failed. Newcastle's wife survived her husband, and died in London on 23 September 1695. 


@@@@@


doc= 40628


Barriffe, William (1599/1600-1643), military writer and parliamentarian army officer, was probably born in London, the son of William Barriffe, cordwainer in the city, and his wife, Florence, 'nee' Pope. On 14 January 1621 at St Gregory by Paul, London, he married Anne Rundell, with whom he had seven children. In his early years Barriffe worked, like his father, as a cordwainer; he was a member of the livery company, and lived in Wood Street in the City of London. 
After being admitted to the artillery company of London on 13 March 1627 Barriffe quickly gained a reputation for military expertise, while the fame of his notes on practice led to the publication of 'Military Discipline, or, The Yong Artillery Man' (1635). The latter was not a student of gunnery but a habitue of the artillery garden, where he learned how to become a competent infantry soldier. Barriffe's book, tailored to this clientele, eschewed ''fine phrases'' and historical and foreign examples; his prose was plain and clear, his diagrams numerous, and his instructions detailed as he 'set forth the 'exact grounds' of this our 'moderne discipline', for the exercising of a 'foot Company'' (Barriffe, 'Military Discipline', 1635, 'To... Sir Ralph Bosvile'). His aim was to help the young officer to educate himself in the practicalities of war, and help him to educate others. 
In 1639 a second edition of 'Military Discipline' added a chapter on 'the Swedish brigade' (title-page) which incorporated contemporary European practice in handling larger bodies of men. With it Barriffe published 'Mars, his Triumph' (1639), a stirring account of a mock battle between Christians and Saracens involving eighty members of the artillery company, in which Christianity and the latest military practice ultimately triumphed. Here, as in 'Military Discipline', Barriffe expressed his belief that ''the' Souldier 'and the' Citizen' should ''Make but' one man' (Barriffe, 'Mars, his Triumph', 7). Four more authorized editions of 'Military Discipline' appeared between 1643 and 1661, as well as four pirated ones. A manual published in Boston in 1701 still saluted Barriffe as one of 'the Authors of best Note, upon this Subject... and... most in use among us' (N. Boone, 'Military Discipline. The Compleat Souldier'). 
Barriffe's military training, unlike that of many of his contemporaries, was entirely home grown. He was proudly the product of the artillery company, though he was also active from about 1628 in a secondary company at Cripplegate. With the outbreak of war he rose rapidly in the parliamentarian army. He was a major in Hampden's regiment in 1642, and by 1643 he was a lieutenant-colonel; he served with Hampden at the siege of Reading in April of that year, and in July received a sizeable payment for his military service. Barriffe died on 28 July 1643 and was buried at St Alban's, Wood Street, London. He was survived by his wife, who probably died in 1652, and by six of their children. His will was proved in February 1644. 
Barriffe appears to have been gregarious, and the friendships represented by the laudatory verses prefacing 'Military Discipline', and the number of soldiers named in his work, reveal the degree of military interest in pre-civil war London. Later editions provide valuable evidence of the dispersal of these citizen officers into civil war armies. Above all he had, as the frontispiece to 'Military Discipline' claimed, 'a Soldiers minde'. 


@@@@@


doc= 40630


Neville, Anne (1605-1689), abbess of Pontoise, whose baptismal name was Mary, was the third daughter of Sir Henry Neville ('b'. before 1580, died 1641), later Lord Abergavenny, and his first wife, Lady Mary Sackville (died before 1616). Mary Vavasour, the abbess of the Benedictine convent in Brussels, said that Anne Neville had her education from her mother, described as a fervent Catholic who instructed her daughter in her own religion. Little is known of Anne Neville's life before she joined the Benedictines. She professed at the Ghent house in 1634 and subsequently was given a number of important offices including novice mistress, dean, and councillor. 
Anne Neville's personal qualities and her family connections led the abbess, Mary Knatchbull, to take her to England to try to secure the repayment of royal debts to the convent incurred when Charles II was in exile. Anne Neville was in England with two other nuns in June 1663 and was able to use family connections at court to secure the payment of the annuity of $500 that Mary Knatchbull had negotiated earlier. During her stay she spent time when she could with her family including her sister-in-law, the dowager Lady Abergavenny, and Frances Neville, described as her sister. She remained in England for four years during which time she was able to resolve some problems related to dowry payments and develop personal contacts with Catholic families. 
On her return to the order in 1667 Anne Neville's exact future was still undecided. The abbess of the English convent in Dunkirk, where she had stopped on her way to Ghent, invited her to remain, but there was another invitation from Abbess Eugenia Poulton at the new foundation at Pontoise. With the consent of Mary Knatchbull, the superior of the order, Anne Neville went to Pontoise and after Abbess Poulton's death in December 1667 she was elected abbess by a unanimous vote. Such was her modesty that she commented on the favourable reaction to her election: 'Though I blush and hold this and severall things of this nature improper for me to wright' (Rumsey, 60). She explained her limited response by writing that she could find no one willing to take on the task of annalist and was herself unwilling to comment on the praise she had received. 
Like several others at the time Pontoise was a convent with financial difficulties. The nuns had moved from Boulogne but had kept their property in the town. This had increased the borrowings needed to buy suitable premises in Pontoise. Anne Neville's 'Annals' and her other manuscripts reveal real understanding of the problems facing superiors and a sensible pragmatic approach to finding solutions. Pontoise was a convent with friends in high places in both the English and French courts. However, this did not prevent the non-payment of dowries, the main source of income. Some significant gifts of precious items were received but while these indicated the favour with which the convent was regarded by Catholic exiles, they did not meet bills. It took some negotiating before the abbess was able, in 1669, to recover money that was still tied up in property in Boulogne, the site of the initial foundation. However, with her careful management the existence of the Pontoise house continued, although finances remained precarious. 
As abbess Anne Neville took her responsibilities very seriously. She wrote a lengthy 'Instructions for superiors' completed in 1676, outlining the duties and obligations of all officials in the convent for the purpose of sound management. In it she offered practical advice particularly on how the young girls entering the convent should be treated, and the importance of keeping accounts. The register of members giving details of both choir nuns and lay sisters was kept largely in her hand, with each nun having her obituary carefully recorded. 
Abbess Anne Neville's 'Annals', which end abruptly in 1685, are an essential source for the history of the Benedictine communities in Flanders. She wrote for an audience, and her writing shows awareness of her role as a reporter, selecting material, drawing together information from a number of sources, and interpreting motives and actions of key figures, male and female. This can be seen strongly in her analysis of the reasons for the difficulties following the convent's foundation at Ypres in 1665. She argued that it should be treated as a time of trial; she failed to find weaknesses in the sisters who opened the new house, but concluded that in such circumstances good intentions were not enough for success. As annalist she acknowledged her sources carefully, quoting extensively from Abbess Mary Vavasour in Brussels and including a letter from Charles II in her account. 
Pontoise remained a small house, but through her writing, her travelling, and her connections, Abbess Anne Neville extended her influence outside its walls. Her extensive writings reveal the love she had for her community, her understanding of management issues, and her qualities of leadership. In her own obituary her nuns recorded the qualities they particularly admired in her, focusing on her care for the individual, her ability to comfort and advise, giving each of them her undivided attention, as well as her religious zeal. Anne Neville died on 15 December 1689 having governed her convent for twenty-two years. 


@@@@@


doc= 40631


Alcock, Mary (1741?-1798), writer, was the youngest of four children of Bishop Denison Cumberland (1705/6-1774) and Joanna Bentley (1704/5-1775), daughter of Dr Richard Bentley, classical scholar and master of Trinity College, Cambridge. The third of three daughters, and the sister of Richard Cumberland (1732-1811), playwright and novelist, she was raised with her family at her father's rural rectory in Stanwick, near Higham Ferrars, Northamptonshire, until 1757, and thereafter in Fulham. In 1761 Denison Cumberland was appointed chaplain to Lord Halifax, lord lieutenant of Ireland, and her brother was made Ulster secretary. In 1763 her father was appointed by Halifax to the Church of Ireland see of Clonfert, Galway, where he was joined by his wife and Mary, and in 1772 translated to the more comfortable bishopric of Kilmore. About 1770 Mary Cumberland married, in Ireland, a man described by her brother as 'Mr Alcock, a young gentleman of good family, fortune and preferment', who quickly gave signs of being in precarious mental health, 'arising from a violent nervous affection on his spirits' ('Letters', 68). At her death, she was described as the widow of Archdeacon Alcock, but her husband's identity has not been traced (he was not, as is sometimes reported, John Alcock, archdeacon of Raphoe, 'c'.1733-1817). The marriage was probably unhappy: Richard Cumberland wrote to Garrick on 2 October 1771 that he had 'at length closed the uneasy transaction of my Sister's marriage, much to my satisfaction and to that of my family' (ibid., 84). During the period of her father's Irish residence, Mary Alcock also spent extended periods with her parents at her brother's house at Tyringham, on the banks of the River Ouse, near Newport Pagnell, Buckinghamshire. Alcock nursed her parents through long illness in Clonfert and later in Kilmore, until her father died in 1774 and mother soon after in 1775. After the bishop's death, Richard Cumberland lobbied for the recovery, for his sister's use, of arrears and money spent on improvements beneficial to the new bishop. 
Evidence in her later poetry suggests Mary Alcock was resident in Bath from at least May 1783. There she announced to her relatives that she had 'turn'd out a poet' ('Poems', 146), through her participation in the celebrated literary salon of Lady Anne Miller (1741-1781) at her villa in Batheaston, 2 miles outside Bath. The poetical compositions of Miller's friends were deposited anonymously in a large Roman vase, to be read out in front of the assembled company. Perhaps through this encouragement, Alcock permitted the anonymous publication in 1784 of a seven-page poem, 'The Air Balloon, or, Flying Mortal', which reflected the public enthusiasm for ballooning in England initiated by Lunardi's ascent from Moorfields, London, on 15 September 1784. Little is known of her later life, although it is apparent that Alcock engaged herself in charitable and benevolent schemes, and cared for the seven dependent orphans of her sister Elizabeth Hughes (died 1770). Among her good works was a poem, 'The Confined Debtor: a Fragment from a Prison', written for the relief of the debtors confined in the county gaol at Ilchester, Somerset. Through the proceeds of the poem, which describes the miseries of the prison, 'many debtors were liberated out of their confinement at Ilchester, and fourteen out of Newgate'. As noted by her niece Joanna Hughes, Mary Alcock was a physically frail woman with 'a corporeal frame... extremely feeble and defenceless', and visited by 'afflictions' of 'a very peculiar nature' (Hughes, iv-vi). Mary Alcock died on 28 May 1798, in her fifty-seventh year, at the home of her cousin, George Ashby, at Haselbeach Hall, Northamptonshire (6 miles south of Market Harborough), having fallen ill while on a journey from Yorkshire to Bath. She was buried in the parish church of that village. Her brother Richard Cumberland remembered her as 'the best and most benevolent of human beings' (Cumberland, 'Memoirs', 191). 
Mary Alcock's works were collected after her death and published as 'Poems... by the Late Mrs Mary Alcock' in 1799. The volume was edited by her niece Joanna Hughes, whose preface records most of the available biographical information. The 183-page book comprised her extant poetry, published and unpublished, together with some pious essays on marital conduct, and a short series of Scriblerian-inspired satirical essays criticizing the debased taste of novel readers. Her niece relates that: 'She never held herself up as a writer: when she resorted to her pen it was either to amuse a leisure hour, to gratify an absent friend, or for the sublimer purpose of pouring out her heart in praises and thanksgivings to her God. (Hughes, iii)' The poems are not without merit, assaying sentimental piety and gentle satire in a variety of metrical forms, and on occasion treat serious political issues (such as civil discord in Ireland or the debate on the suspension of habeas corpus in the House of Lords). The volume met with no critical notice, but attracted 652 subscribers, among them royalty and many literary and artistic figures, including Charles Burney, Elizabeth Carter, William Cowper, Thomas Day, George Foote, Hannah More, George Romney, Samuel Rogers, and William Stockdale. 


@@@@@


doc= 40632


Cavanagh, John (d. 1819), fives player, was born in Ireland but moved to London and earned his living as a house painter. Ireland was the home of handball, the game from which fives originates; it was established in England by the mid-eighteenth century as a working-class sport played for wagers or rewards. According to William Hazlitt, his sole memorialist, Cavanagh was incomparably the most skilful player of his time: 'His eye was certain, his hand fatal, his presence of mind complete' (Hazlitt, 'Death', 94). His service was prodigious: in a match against two top-class English players, Woodward and Meredith, he once scored twenty-seven successive aces. On court he was remarkable for his coolness and economy of effort. In his 'Table Talk' Hazlitt calls him 'the best 'up-hill' player in the world' (Hazlitt, 'Indian jugglers', 87) because of his capacity to recover from a position of disadvantage. A peculiarity of his style of play was that he never volleyed the ball, but he was unerring on the half-volley. 
Cavanagh lived in Buckbridge Street (now part of New Oxford Street) in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, then a predominantly Irish community. He usually played at the fives court in St Martin's Street, Leicester Fields, where crowds would pay to watch him, or at the Copenhagen House, a public house in Islington. Hazlitt records one occasion when Cavanagh went, smartly dressed, to another tavern, the Rosemary Branch at Peckham, merely 'for an afternoon's pleasure', but was persuaded by a stranger to play for a wager of half a crown and a bottle of cider. Cavanagh won eleven games in a row, but in the middle of the twelfth, while the other player was leading, his identity was revealed by chance; at this point his opponent refused to go on, saying 'What! have I been breaking my heart all this time to beat Cavanagh?' Cavanagh, repeating this story, swore that he played all through with his fist clenched (Hazlitt, 'Death', 95). 
Cavanagh was described by Hazlitt as 'a young fellow of sense, humour, and courage', and portrayed as a zealous Roman Catholic, open in manner and upright in character. Two or three years before his death a burst blood vessel stopped him from playing. He was recovering well until he suffered another stroke and died at home on a Friday, 5 February 1819 or earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 40633


Ingram, Anne, Viscountess Irwin (c.1696-1764), poet, was born probably in Naworth, the second daughter and third child of Charles Howard, third earl of Carlisle (1669-1738), and his wife, Anne (1675-1752), daughter of Arthur Capel, first earl of Essex, and Elizabeth Percy, daughter of Algernon Percy, tenth earl of Northumberland. 
As her parents' separation by 1712 assumed permanence, Anne's sharing of her father's interests in politics, literature, and landscaping acquired a vigour that is evident in her letters to him (those less personal, more objective, printed in 'Carlisle MSS'). In December 1717 she married Rich Ingram, fifth Viscount Irwin 
(Irvine; 1688-1721)
, an army officer commonly known as Lord Irwin. Their financial distress, worsened by the collapse of the South Sea venture, was promised relief through his appointment in 1720 as governor of Barbados. Yet before they could sail he died of smallpox on 10 April 1721, leaving Anne childless to settle with the creditors. 
In 1730 a trip through the Low Countries and France further developed Irwin's independence. In 1732, back in England, she published the anonymous 'Castle-Howard', a poem in heroic couplets that honoured Carlisle's character, his retirement from court, and creative management of the architecture, landscaping, and staff of their family seat. She saluted what she considered his English sensitivity to natural energies in the landscape. Admiration for Pope's verse prompted her response to his 'Epistle to a Lady: on the Characters of Women'; her 'Epistle to Mr Pope. By a Lady' presumably first appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for December 1736. Certainly later (if not already) an acquaintance of Pope, she attempted to tease him away from notions of innate gender differences: '
In 'Education' all the 'Diff'rence' lies: 

... A 'Female Mind' like a rude 'Fallow' lies, 


'Thorns' there -- & 'Thistles' -- all spontaneous rise. 

... 'Culture' improves all 'Soils'. 
(BL, Add. MS 28101, fol. 100'v'; the manuscript version of the text differs importantly from the version printed in 'GM')' Where Pope had focused on feminine caprice a male perspective shifting between fawning and scorn, Irwin distinguished the genders mainly by differing styles of a drive to power. 
When Queen Caroline in 1736 sent Irwin to fetch Augusta of Saxe-Gotha to marry her son Frederick, prince of Wales, Irwin wrote, 'she desired me in the strongest terms to recommend to the Princess to avoid jealousy, and to be easy in regard to amours, which she said had been her conduct, and had consequently procured her the happy state she had enjoyed for so many years. ('Carlisle MSS', 167)' Irwin continued to attend Princess Augusta as lady of the bedchamber through the 1750s. On 11 June 1737 Irwin married a member of the prince's household, Colonel William Douglas, briefly piquing her father and siblings. Together they weathered the royal family's intergenerational feuds. Douglas rose to brigadier-general, serving on the continent with the allied army from 1742 until his death from a fever in August 1747. Irwin had his body returned for burial on 25 January 1748 in the chapel near their home at Kew where she herself was buried after her own death on 2 December 1764. 
Beyond her shorter verse, and letters like her own reliving narrow escapes from highwaymen or seeking her father's blessing on her second marriage, Lady Irwin's characteristic high spirits are chronicled in the correspondence of Carlisle's architect Sir John Vanbrugh, one of John Nichols's subjects, and Horace Walpole. 


@@@@@


doc= 40634


Lewis, Joseph (fl. 1750-1774), poet and ivory-turner, was born of untraced parentage, at an unknown date, possibly in Wales. By 1750 he was already living in London, but lines he wrote in praise of Sir John Philipps suggest that he may have spent his childhood in the neighbourhood of the Philipps family estate in Carmarthenshire. The poem acknowledges 'How good he's been to me in Infant Years' ('An Acrostick', Lewis, 'Lucubrations', 25), which might mean that Sir John, who was well known for his support of local schools, saw to Lewis's elementary education. Lewis worked throughout his career as an artisan; he was described in 1754 as 'an illiterate raw Lad... a mechanic' (Rizzo, 'Bulletin of Research in the Humanities', 83), later as 'a poor ivory-turner' ('GM', 1758), and his poems frequently reflect the vicissitudes of a working man's life. Lewis's first traceable activity in London, however, is in 1750-51 as editor of the 'Westminster Magazine', under the pseudonym Lancelot Poverty-Struck. Most of its articles were reprinted from contemporary periodicals, but several poems can be identified as the work of Lewis himself. 
Lewis's pseudonym represents both his public persona and his chronic condition. He lamented in 1773 that 'Poverty has stuck so close to me all my Life time: that Providence never trusted me with more Than Six Guineas at one period of Time' (Rizzo, 'Found: Joseph Lewis', 286). By 1752 he was married and living in the parish of Covent Garden, notorious then as a squalid, crime-ridden district. A son Joseph was baptized there on 17 December 1752. Lewis published two books of verse. The first, 'Mother Midnight's Comical Pocket-Book' ([1753?]), appeared under the pseudonym Humphrey Humdrum, esq., but his authorship is attested by 'The Author's Epitaph', an acrostic spelling out the name 'Joseph Lewis', and confirmed by Ralph Griffiths in a handwritten note in the 'Monthly Review'. His authorship of the second, 'The Miscellaneous and Whimsical Lucubrations of Lancelot Poverty-Struck' (1758), follows from his assertion in it that he was author of the 'Pocket-Book'. The second collection is said to have originated when, 'not having sufficient employment at his business to supply his family with bread', he thought of earning money by writing begging letters in verse. His success encouraged him to write other poems, until he had accumulated so many that 'he was advised and enabled by some of his friends to print them' ('GM', 1758). Lewis's own account is somewhat different. He identifies himself in both books as 'Mother Midnight's merry grandson', alluding to the pseudonym Mrs Midnight adopted by Christopher Smart in 'The Midwife' and for 'Mrs Midnight's Oratory', and he was apparently involved with Smart's ventures in the 1750s, but claims that he was 'abandoned by his antient and venerable Grandmother' for some misdemeanour, and was therefore 'oblig'd to commence Author for a small Livelihood' (Lewis, 'Lucubrations', 93). 
While the 'Pocket-Book' consists largely of 'Oratory' material, Lewis's 'lucubrations' comment satirically on topical events and personalities, and depict with pungent realism and comic inventiveness the daily life of lower-class London. The struggles and humiliations of the author himself as he battles to keep his family from starvation are recounted with unquenchable humour. 'The Humble Petition of Lancelot Poverty-Struck' to David Garrick is typical: trade is bad, creditors are pressing, his wife Sarah is pregnant with a third child, while '
Cold and Hunger closely pinches, 

And kills his Family by Inches. 

' An effusive 'Acrostick' to Garrick which follows indicates that Lewis's plea was successful (Lewis, 'Lucubrations', 10-15). Although 'Lucubrations' earned the commendation that there was 'in almost all of the pieces a strain of natural genius' ('GM', 1758), the struggle against poverty continued. A street ballad of the 1760s shows 'Lancelot' desperate again but still clowning: '
By my friends turn'd adrift, 

I am at my last shift 
('A Song on myself, by Lancelot Poverty-Struck', Madden Ballads, 3, CUL)' In 1768 Lewis tried a new method of soliciting help: he inserted a series of advertisements in the 'Public Advertiser' (April-May) under the heading 'Real Calamity', describing in doggerel verse the hardships of 'the poor Poet' (now lame) and his 'distressed Family', and inviting donations. At that time he was living in Holborn, 'at Mr Jones's, a Baker in Field Lane' (Rizzo, 'Bulletin of Research in the Humanities', 81.86). He amassed over $10 in a few weeks by this device, but his troubles were not over. In a real letter sent in 1773 to Oliver Goldsmith from St Bride's workhouse, Hoxton, he explains how he and his family had been forced to take refuge in the workhouse. He had thirteen children by then but was unable to work because of swelling in his legs and lack of money to buy tools: 'I have got a Galloping consumption in my Pocket in this distressed Hotel: and have nothing to cheer my heart: or raise a Smile on the Countenance of my Wife and Children'. He was seeking money also to print a tract on the 'Oppressor of the poor', and planning to write a description of workhouse life, 'all Tragi Comic from Morning till Night' (Rizzo, 'Found: Joseph Lewis', 285-6). Apart from an acrostic by him praising a Dr Wolf Joseph Yonker, dated 1774 but sent to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' by an anonymous contributor in 1785, that is the last heard of Lewis. 


@@@@@


doc= 40635


Little, Janet (1759-1813), poet, was born in Nether Bogside, Dumfriesshire, the daughter of George Little; though her exact birth date is unknown, she was baptized on 13 August 1759. Very little is known about her childhood, although her earliest biographer stated -- possibly on the evidence of her later career as a poet -- that 'she was early distinguished for her superior capacity and love of reading' (Paterson, 79). She went into service when still very young, perhaps acquiring some education while with an early employer, the Revd Mr Johnstone. In 1788 she sought a place with Frances Dunlop of Dunlop, one of the patrons and correspondents of Robert Burns. Little was sent to Loudoun Castle, which had been rented in 1789 by Susan Henrie, one of Mrs Dunlop's daughters, where she was responsible for supervising the dairy. She had presumably become interested in the work of Burns while with Mrs Dunlop and, in 1789, she sent him some of her poems. Burns was slow and cool in his response, apparently choosing to send his reply to Mrs Dunlop rather than Little herself. (If he did write directly to Little, the letter has been lost.) Hilton Brown has explained this coolness by suggesting that Burns might have found Little's writing a somewhat 'disquieting imitation' of his own work (Brown, 15); certainly Little herself saw Burns as both a model and an inspiration. She apparently called on him in January 1791 -- unluckily arriving just before Burns was brought home with a broken arm following a riding accident -- and then commemorated the occasion in a rather breathless poem: '
Is't true? or does some magic spell 

My wondr'ing eyes beguile? 

Is this the place where deigns to dwell 

The honour of our isle? 
(Little, 111)' There is no independent reference to Little's presence in Burns's household on that day, however, and at least one critic has 'speculate[d that] the encounter may be imagined' (Bold, 25). 
Little published a collection of her poems in 1792, describing herself in the title as the Scotch Milkmaid. Dedicated to the eleven-year-old countess of Loudoun, the volume was published by subscription and seems to have been moderately successful, reportedly earning the author $50. According to the subscription list Little sold nearly 800 copies to just over 650 subscribers, among whom were Burns and James Boswell. In a poetic dedication Little described herself as '[a] rustic damsel' who hopes that 'public candour' will rescue her work from the attacks of 'snarling critic[s]' (Little, 25-6). She experimented with a variety of poetic forms and wrote in both Scots and standard English; she tended to adhere rather more closely to conventional eighteenth-century subjects ('To Hope', 'To Happiness') in her English verse than she did when writing in Scots. The volume also gives some evidence of her reading; in addition to the tributes to Burns there is a poem on the letters of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu and Elizabeth Rowe, in which Little imagines 'MONTAGUE bright' praising Rowe for transcending her in 'virtue and wit' (Little, 154). In another, 'To a Lady', on the works of David Sillars, a working-class poet for whom Little had nothing but contempt, she writes: '
[L]est with such dunces as these I be number'd, 

Tho' pen, ink and paper, are by me in store 

O madam excuse, for I ne'er shall write more. 
(Little, 207)' Despite this proclamation, in the last lines of Little's only published collection of verse, she did write more; in 1840 James Paterson concluded his brief account of her life by reprinting some poems which had remained in manuscript until then. 
After Mrs Henrie left Loudoun Castle, Little stayed on, continuing to run the dairy; on 14 December 1792 she married John Richmond ('c'.1741-1819), a widower with five children. Paterson describes Richmond as a labourer on the Loudoun estate; little else is known about either Richmond or the marriage, except that Little is said to have been a kind stepmother. Paterson preserves a few anecdotes about her later life, related by a Mr Blackwood, the dissenting minister whose church she attended. According to Blackwood, Little's memory was so remarkable that she was able to point out a skipped sentence when she heard, for the second time, a sermon which he had read at another church a few weeks earlier. More generally, he remembered her as being 'greatly beloved in the neighbourhood, and enjoy[ing] a high character for piety and rectitude of conduct' (Paterson, 88). Little remained at Loudoun Castle until her death from 'a cramp in the stomach' on 15 March 1813; she was buried in the cemetery at Loudoun kirk (Paterson, 89). Her association with Burns has prevented her work from being forgotten as completely as that of some of her contemporaries, such as the Aberdeen poet Christian Milne, but she was rarely seen as anything more than a footnote in Burns studies during the nineteenth, and most of the twentieth, centuries. Hilton Brown, for example, writing about her in 1950, thought the best that could be said of her writing was that it 'could have been... much worse' (Brown, 17). In the 1990s, however, renewed interest in working-class writing led to some re-evaluations of her work; in addition, one critic has argued strongly that reading Little only through Burns obscures the range of her work and that she ought to be read in the larger Scots 'vernacular tradition of Ramsay and Ferguson' (Bold, 21). 


@@@@@


doc= 40637


Sherratt, John (bap. 1718, d. 1788), entrepreneur and social reformer, was baptized on 20 June 1718 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, the son of William Sherratt and Mary, 'nee' Trusler. Sherratt (who also spelled his name Sherrott) had a varied and eventful career as a businessman, through which he became involved in politics, foreign affairs, and social reform. He was twice married: first to Catherine (died 1759), and, second, to Sarah, who survived him; further details of his marriages are unknown. He had numerous children, of whom his eldest surviving son, John, acted as an executor for his will. 
Sherratt began life as a London hatter, feltmaker, and broker. He continued his work as a broker and auctioneer throughout his career, dealing in a variety of goods and advertising his business in the London newspapers. It was typical of Sherratt's spirit and ingenuity that his bankruptcy (25 January 1746) did not hinder him from exploiting new business opportunities. In partnership with his uncle, John Trusler, he now became a manager of London's Marylebone Gardens, which he undertook alongside his broker business in Soho. In the long term, however, both ventures failed to bring the rewards which Sherratt sought, and he filed individually as a Soho bankrupt in April 1754, and jointly with Trusler as a result of financial difficulties with the Gardens three months later. 
By this date Sherratt had his eyes on another prize, the privateer 'Antigallican'. Sherratt was an active member of an antigallican association, and foiled his creditors once more by secretly investing his assets in the ship. As the probable author of the pamphlet 'The Antigallican Privateer' (1757) Sherratt described the fate of this first privateer of the Seven Years' War. Having sailed from Deptford on 17 September 1756 the 'Antigallican' captured two French ships before seizing the booty-laden French East Indiaman the 'Duc de Penthievre' off the coast of Spain. But disaster then struck, as the Spanish took possession of both the 'Antigallican' and its prize at Cadiz in February 1757. Sherratt's account reveals obvious anger and disappointment. Despite a personal visit to Cadiz, as well as further publications and petitions by the association and attempts to involve the prime minister, William Pitt, the goods of the 'Antigallican' were never restored. 
Yet another of Sherratt's business schemes had ended unsuccessfully. However, his interests in English liberties now took him in a new direction -- the reform of private madhouses -- which benefited others as well as himself. On 22 May 1766 Sherratt, describing himself as a notary public, gave an affidavit to the court of king's bench about his recent rescue of Hannah MacKenzie from a private madhouse in Paddington where she had been wrongfully imprisoned by her husband. He claimed that his help was sought by MacKenzie's friends because they knew he had 'caused several cases to be delivered at the door of the Honourable House of Commons... complaining of the cruel acts which have been committed in private Mad houses in this Kingdom to the great oppression, injury, and unlawful confinement of many of His Majesty's Subjects. (TNA: PRO, KB 1/16/4)' Sherratt was probably alluding to the pamphlet (of which he is the likely author) 'A Case Humbly Offered to the Consideration of Parliament' (1763), which contained a letter from MacKenzie thanking Sherratt for his services in the second edition (1766). Sherratt was well aware that many would doubt the honesty of his intentions in such cases. He told the king's bench that he acted 'from principles of humanity and compassion and for the public good', and that 'he hath had no gratuity or reward for such his good offices'. Yet in view of Sherratt's character, it seems unlikely that he let a potentially profitable business opportunity pass him by. Certainly, he had already obtained a reputation as the rescuer of the wrongfully detained, a celebrity recorded by the poet Christopher Smart, whose 'An Epistle to John Sherratt, Esquire' (1763?) was published after he had been liberated by Sherratt from Mr Potter's madhouse at Bethnal Green. While it remains unclear how many people Sherratt helped to free, or how much he stood to profit, he should be credited for bringing the abuses of the private asylums to public notice. But his public works were not enough to impress the writer on music Sir John Hawkins, who was appalled when Sherratt sought to become a Middlesex justice of the peace in 1769. Given that he had twice been declared bankrupt, Hawkins believed that Sherratt's name would be a 'disgrace' to the magistracy (Davis, 226). Sherratt was never sworn in as a Middlesex justice, though he remained on the Westminster Commission until 1775. 
On 8 November of that year Sherratt was appointed consul for Cartagena, Spain. This was his final change of occupation but, like so many of the other careers, it also ended in disaster. On arriving in Cartagena in May 1776 he quarrelled first with his Spanish vice-consul and then with John Burrows, who had accompanied him to Spain. His disagreement with Burrows resulted in a fight in a public tavern, upon which Sherratt was arrested and imprisoned. Having brought disgrace upon the consulate Sherratt returned to England in early 1777. In 1780-81 he was advertising his auction business once again. His petitions to the government, stating that in Cartagena he had been used as a political tool and pleading for financial recompense, evidently fell upon deaf ears. His will, in which he described himself as 'his Majesty's late Consul at Cartagena', left just 1's'. to his wife. None the less he directed his executors to 'countenance and assist all my daughters in their several trades or businesses if they... should be deemed worthy of favour' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1165/213). His mixed fortunes as an entrepreneur had apparently not diminished Sherratt's desire that his daughters should follow in his footsteps. He died on 5 January 1788 at Hammersmith, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 40638


Swinney, Sidney (1721-1783), Church of England clergyman and author, was born at Pontefract, Yorkshire, one of the five children of the Irish soldier Major Matthew Swinney ('b'. 1681) and Mary Kitchingham. Little is known of his family history and early life. He was educated at Eton College and at Clare College, Cambridge, where he received a BA in 1744, an MA in 1749, and a DD in 1763. Drawn towards a religious life, he was ordained a priest of the Church of England on 22 September 1745 and became curate of Swillington, Yorkshire, in the same year. Matthew Swinney had enjoyed a distinguished military career, and as a reward for his services his son Sidney was granted a chaplaincy in the British army. Swinney served as chaplain during the Seven Years' War (1756-63), participating in the British army's campaigns in Germany. 
Swinney was an accomplished classical scholar, with a keen interest in ancient art and archaeology, which inspired him to travel widely in Europe and the Near East. He lived in Constantinople for several years, serving as chaplain to the British embassy. During his travels and residence in Constantinople, Swinney gathered an impressive collection of classical coins and other artefacts. In 1769 he published an account of an expedition through Asia Minor to examine the sites of the earliest Christian churches, 'A Tour through some Parts of the Levant', which combined his archaeological and religious interests. In recognition of his contribution to the study of classical culture, he was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1764 and fellow of the Antiquarian Society in 1767. 
During his lifetime Swinney acquired a respected reputation as a poet, publishing translations of classical poetry, occasional verse, songs, and epigrams in periodicals and newspapers. In 1767 he published an imitation of Horace's ninth satire. Many of Swinney's miscellaneous works were collected and reprinted as 'Fugitive Pieces' (3rd edn, 1768). His most ambitious work was an epic poem celebrating the British victory over the French at the battle of Minden (1759) during the Seven Years' War. Although the first two books of the projected three-book epic were printed in 1769 and 1772 respectively, it appears that Swinney never finished the work. In the preface to the 1772 edition of 'The Battle of Minden', he explained that a four-year illness had delayed the composition of the second book, and perhaps recurring ill health prevented the poem's completion. Of little literary originality or merit, 'The Battle of Minden' nevertheless represents a historically valuable firsthand account of the war in Germany written by an experienced, astute observer. Swinney was also a gifted preacher and published two sermons. He became rector of Barton-le-Street about 1775. 
Swinney died at Scarborough, Yorkshire, on 12 November 1783. Reflecting upon his character and conscientiousness as a pastor, a correspondent in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' praised him as a 'gentleman of uncommon generosity and benevolence'. 


@@@@@


doc= 40639


Dawkins, Rowland (1618-1691), parliamentarian army officer and deputy major-general, was born at Kilvrough (or Cil-frwch), Pennard, Glamorgan, the eldest son of George Dawkins ('fl'. 1600-1640), a minor gentleman, and Elizabeth, the daughter of the serjeant-at-law William Glyn of Clynnog Fawr, Caernarvonshire. In September 1643, a year after the civil war had broken out, Dawkins suffered the attentions of royalist sequestrators; and he became active on behalf of parliament when Philip Jones became governor of Swansea in 1645. Later that year Dawkins joined the Glamorgan county committee, with the rank of major-general of the garrison troops commanded by Jones. He was present at the battle of St Fagans on 8 May 1648, and became governor of Carmarthen and Tenby the same year. He was unpopular in Haverfordwest for attempting to billet troops there instead of Tenby, which had successfully claimed relief on grounds of its poverty. In 1649 and 1650 Dawkins was added to the Carmarthenshire and Pembrokeshire committees, and he was a commissioner under the 'Act for the Propagation of the Gospel' from February 1650. In this body he was very active in letting tithes to laymen to fund the itinerant ministry of Walter Cradock, Vavasor Powell, and other separatist ministers, and he himself rented the tithes of Bishopston, in the Gower, in 1651. He was also, with others in a joint purchase, able to buy crown lands in Pembrokeshire, Monmouthshire, and Carmarthenshire. These had been made available to Philip Jones's garrison regiment, of which Dawkins was a prominent member. 
In June 1651 Dawkins ended a royalist revolt in Cardiganshire, and was appointed a commissioner of the high court of justice to try the rebels. As governor of Carmarthen he was a natural choice as MP for the county in 1654, and shortly after his election he became a commissioner for scandalous ministers in south Wales. Dawkins, Philip Jones, Bussy Mansel, and John Price -- all from Glamorgan -- in effect ran south Wales for the Commonwealth (and later for the protectorate), by virtue of dominating the various committees appointed to provide governance. 
With a high profile in local administration, and a county military background, Dawkins was again naturally chosen for leadership of the militia in March 1655, when the government sought to put in place a higher level of security against royalist insurgency. As commander of its militia, Dawkins was 'de facto' major-general for south Wales when in October 1655 no commission was issued specifically for the region. In January 1656, with the rank of colonel, he was confirmed as one of two deputy major-generals under James Berry, whose territory included all Wales and border English counties. Unsurprisingly, in view of the extent of Berry's responsibilities, Dawkins retained his leadership of the military, and was active in supervising the new round of sequestrations and in curbing disorderly meetings in south Wales. 
Elected again for Carmarthenshire in 1656, Dawkins proved in parliament a loyal supporter of the protector, but the non-renewal of commissions to the major-generals reduced his power. In 1659 he failed to achieve re-election to parliament at Carmarthen, but sat for Cardigan Boroughs instead. After the collapse of the Protectorate of Richard Cromwell, Dawkins lost his command of the South Wales militia, was temporarily omitted from county committees, and failed to secure a parliamentary seat. After the Restoration he was removed from the corporation of Swansea, where he had been senior alderman from 1656, and was summoned to the consistory court of St David's for not having his children baptized. Unlike some other former 'propagators' such as Philip Jones, Dawkins did not conform to the Church of England after 1660. He had been active in approving ministers for the state church during the interregnum, but was hostile to Quakers and was never, either before or after 1660, a member of the celebrated Baptist congregation at Ilston, Gower, near his home. In 1677 he was listed by Sir Edward Mansel as one who had 'raised his fortune in the late time', worth $250 a year (TNA: PRO, SP 29/398, 283-4). During the 1680s he recovered his place on the Glamorgan bench of magistrates, but was detained at Chepstow as a suspect during Monmouth's rising in 1685. The duke of Beaufort, who employed Dawkins as his steward, noted him in 1687 as still a protestant dissenter. He died on 7 May 1691 and was buried at Pennard church. The date of his marriage to Mary Bowen is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 40640


Hatsell, Henry (d. 1667), naval official and politician, was probably born in Plymouth of a commercial family. He married at Barnstaple on 6 February 1637 Margaret Dawe, with whom he had at least one son, Sir Henry Hatsell (bap. 1641, d. 1714), later baron of the exchequer. He became a freeman of Plymouth in 1641, and after the outbreak of civil war was commissioned as an army officer on the side of parliament. By April 1645 he was a captain in the Plymouth garrison, and lent the committee of safety $50 to help sustain the defence against the besieging royalists. After the victories of Sir Thomas Fairfax in the south-west in 1646 Hatsell was able to act on a wider stage for the parliamentary cause, beginning work for the navy in a variety of locations. He was imprisoned by the royalists in Jersey and the Isles of Scilly in 1649, and on his release became pressmaster at Minehead. After moving to Plymouth he first made a significant impression in April 1651 when his promptness and efficiency in assembling men and boats helped General Robert Blake embark nine companies of foot for a successful campaign in the Isles of Scilly against the desperate royalists. Hatsell gave a personal account of the campaign to the House of Commons, which he delivered on 13 June. 
In 1652 Hatsell was appointed naval agent at Plymouth, a position he held with that of check of customs there. This gave him an unrivalled authority in maritime affairs in the south-west, with a degree of initiative more appropriate to the post of navy commissioner. His routine problems of recruiting for the navy over far-flung territory and providing it with 'materiel', often from unsympathetic or self-interested suppliers, were punctuated by consultations with the generals-at-sea, who evidently valued his expertise and godly commitment to the republic. He nominated men for naval captaincies, often with comments on their godly qualities. After the dismissal of the Rump Parliament, Hatsell retained his post and his importance was enhanced with a place on the bench of magistrates in Devon. He survived the transition to the protectorate, and in 1654 became a commissioner for ejecting 'scandalous' ministers. 
Fierce hostility to the drink trade and other vested interests in Plymouth made Hatsell a natural ally of John Disbrowe in his tour of duty as major-general for the south-western counties in 1655-6. Hatsell was appointed commissioner under him, given command of a militia troop, and helped manage the trials of the Penruddock rebels. He was responsible for arranging the transportation to Barbados of a number of people implicated in these disturbances. His religious outlook accorded with that of the regime, although his antipathy to Quakers, including James Nayler, indicates that his tolerance was not unlimited. 
From 1651 Hatsell sought to recover sums he had laid out in the service of parliament by acquiring the properties of sequestered royalists and, when available, crown estates. The most important of these was Saltram House, Plympton St Mary, home of the royalist Bagge family, which Hatsell occupied by 1656. With his new estate went status of another kind: he was elected to sit for Devon in the 1654 parliament and in 1658 for Plympton and Tavistock, choosing the former. In the House of Commons he was named to a wide range of committees, with matters of trade, revenue, and religious provision in the south-west being dominant among them. In March 1657 he was among those attending Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell on the details of 'The humble petition and advice'. He spoke frequently, took an interest in procedural matters, and resisted moves to allow the 'other house' to resume the title and privileges of the House of Lords lest it allowed the king to return. Hatsell was active in resisting moves towards monarchy in 1659, and ordered part of the western squadron to Chester Water to prevent help reaching Sir George Booth by sea. When the Restoration did come, he was slow to recognize the implications for his career. He lost all local government office, but stayed for the time as navy agent. Imprisoned at Exeter early in 1661, he returned to his post in February until he was dismissed in September. He may have married, on 17 June 1661, Susanna Evanse. Throughout the 1660s until his death he was identified by the government as one who might cause trouble, but in fact he retired to Saltram. He died there in 1667 and was buried at Plympton St Mary on 19 March. The family lost Saltram at his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 40641


Mansell, Bussy (1623-1699), soldier and politician, was born at Briton Ferry, Glamorgan, on 22 November 1623, the second son of Arthur Mansell (died in or before 1628), himself a second son, and his wife, Jane Price (died 1638), heir of a Briton Ferry family. The main branch of the Mansell family in south Wales was seated at Margam and was descended from the Somersets, earls of Worcester. Mansell's forename was an acknowledgement of his paternal grandfather's second marriage to the widow of John Bussy of Lincolnshire. Nothing is known of his formative years or education, but it was natural that the Mansell family, within the sphere of influence of the royalist fifth earl of Worcester, should have been mobilized on behalf of the king during the civil war. At the age of twenty-one Mansell was active in the western hundreds of Glamorgan in raising taxes for the royalist war effort and in sequestrating the few parliamentarian activists in the county. When the Glamorgan 'peaceable army' was formed in 1645 as a reaction against the depredations of the royalist commanders he became a prominent member of it, having recently been appointed colonel-general of the king's forces in south Wales. When his disloyalty was discovered he confessed his move had been a misjudgement, and promised on 13 September to prove his allegiance to Charles I. Four days later, however, Mansell was one of those in the peace army to whom the royalists surrendered Cardiff Castle. By 28 October he had espoused the parliamentarian cause at Cardiff, and by 17 November was being recommended for the post of commander-in-chief of parliament's forces in south Wales. The recommendation, by the most committed parliamentarians of Glamorgan, was later accepted by the House of Commons. Mansell was still only twenty-two years old, and although these moves have been taken as evidence of his military prowess and political adroitness, it is also possible to see him at this time as something of a 'roi faineant', pushed forward in the interests of social respectability by men like Philip Jones, who provided the real steer for winning the political war in south Wales for parliament. On occasions of military crisis in the region -- when the royalist gentry rose in February 1646 and June 1647 and when the disaffected Rowland Laugharne turned against his former parliamentary masters in May 1648 -- Mansell played supporting roles to other commanders. 
On 17 April 1646 Mansell married Catherine (died in or before 1678), widow of Sir Edward Stradling of St Donats, a leading Glamorgan royalist, at a time when the resolve of parliamentarians in the county was hardening. The marriage proved no obstacle to his continuing good standing in the eyes of the king's opponents. Between 1648 and 1653 he was part of the circle of committeemen around Philip Jones, and sat on the commission for the propagation of the gospel in Wales (February 1650) and the high court of justice against royalist insurgents in the principality in 1651. The names of Jones and Mansell were inseparable in south Wales public affairs during the rule of the Rump Parliament, and it was surely Jones's patronage that secured Mansell a place in the nominated assembly of July to December 1653. On this new stage Mansell was able to find some independence from Jones, and it was perhaps as an expression of this freedom that Mansell supported the radical minority in the assembly that sought the abolition of tithes. This was opposed to the pro-Cromwellian line taken by Jones, and Mansell on no other occasion expressed support for the demands of the millenarians. He never again held a parliamentary seat until the Restoration, although he continued to hold local office, proof that his relations with the all-powerful Jones remained amicable. 
The Mansell family name and his earlier loyalties made Mansell an attractive target for agents recruiting support for the future Charles II in what had been such a royalist region. On the eclipse of Philip Jones during the revived Rump Parliament he became the leading military figure in Glamorgan and Monmouthshire; at the same time Edward Hyde considered him an ally. By late September 1659 Hyde had to write off Mansell, who initially stuck to the republican cause before using his local offices to move with George Monck towards the Restoration. He was double returned for Cardiff Boroughs in the Convention of 1660, and had to wait until 27 June to be declared victor. He conformed easily to the restored monarchy, and became a leading figure in Glamorgan local administration, although his sympathies were decidedly whig: he was a patron of dissenting congregations. At some point before May 1678 he married, after the death of his first wife, a woman whose forename alone, Anne, is known. When he returned to parliament to sit for Glamorgan in March 1679 he was sympathetic to the exclusionists, but was not particularly active in that assembly or the succeeding one of October. He did not stand for the county in the 1681 elections, but instead took Cardiff Boroughs. Mansell was imprisoned briefly during Monmouth's rising, and supported the 1688 revolution without reservation. His reputation as a political weathervane persisted: in 1687 he was lampooned as '
Hospitable Bush, who cares not a rush 

What hurries, so himself be secure, 

With his friends and his glass, 

Now and then a private lass, 

Can all these adventures endure. 
(J. P. Jenkins, 'Two poems on the Glamorgan gentry in the reign of James II', 'National Library of Wales Journal', 21, 1979-80, 171)' From 1689 Mansell sat once more for Glamorgan and was listed by Robert Harley as a member of the country opposition, but from 1694 he was given leave of absence from the House of Commons, probably on grounds of age and ill health. In 1696, following the attempt on the life of William III, Mansell readily signed the Association for the king's defence. He died at Briton Ferry on 5 May 1699 and was buried there on 25 May. His property passed to his only grandson, his son, Thomas, having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 40643


Osborne, Sir Cyril (1898-1969), politician, was born on 19 June 1898 in Hucknall Lane, Bulwell, Nottingham, the son of Thomas Osborne, a coalminer, and his wife, Ann, formerly Bonser ('nee' Carnell). Brought up in what he recalled was 'a very stern puritan home' ('Hansard 5C', 632, 12 Dec 1960, 66), he was educated at the local elementary school, began work at the age of fourteen, and undertook a variety of arduous manual jobs before enlisting as a private with the Royal Field Artillery. He served in France, Belgium, Italy, and Egypt. Thereafter, as a former serviceman, he was able to read economics at University College, Nottingham. He then became a successful businessman and stockbroker, and eventually a director of a number of textile and wholesale grocery companies. Following the death of his first wife (whose name is not known), he married on 4 December 1935 Joyce Lawrence ('b'. 1908/9), daughter of Ernest Louis Feibusch, a solicitor, of Wolverhampton. They had two sons and two daughters. During the Second World War he was a welfare adviser in the midlands and assisted the Ministry of Information. In 1945 he was elected Conservative MP for the Louth division of Lincolnshire, a seat he held until his death. 
Osborne is chiefly associated with the campaign to limit immigration into Britain from the new Commonwealth. He first raised the issue in 1950, asking for separate figures for non-white immigration, and in 1952 he began a campaign for controls. While insisting that he was not racially prejudiced, he called for restrictions on entry on several grounds: the sheer volume of actual or potential immigrants; the abuse of the welfare state ('the honey pot'); overcrowding; crime, especially drug trafficking and prostitution; unemployment; and health, especially tuberculosis and leprosy. Inclined to lose his temper, and to reveal openly his wish to keep Britain white, he was sometimes an embarrassment in the Commons. Several MPs judged that his extreme, provocative manner did a disservice to the cause he was advocating. 
In many ways, however, Osborne's campaign was successful. In 1958, for instance, the Conservative Party conference called for restrictions on entry, and the 1959 general election saw the return of many more MPs, including twelve from Birmingham, who wished to abandon the 'open door' policy. He distributed to delegates at the 1961 conference copies of a letter he had written to the 'Daily Telegraph', in which he urged immediate restrictions, warning that in time there would be more non-white than white people in Britain: 'We shall cease to be a European nation and become a mixed Afro-Asian society' ('Daily Telegraph', 11 Oct 1961). Shortly afterwards R. A. Butler, the home secretary, introduced the 'Commonwealth Immigrants Bill' into the Commons, and Osborne was dubbed by 'The Times' 'the spirit, if not the architect, of the Bill' ('The Times', 17 Nov 1961). Symbolically, it was in 1961 that he was knighted. Thereafter he maintained better relations with the party. In March 1965 he was persuaded by the shadow home secretary to moderate a motion about to be put to the Commons: instead of calling for a ban on all future immigration, except for those whose parents or grandparents had been born in Britain, he called instead for 'periodic and precise limits' to be fixed -- and he was supported by the votes of the whole shadow cabinet. His demand for assisted repatriation also found its way into official Conservative policy. In many ways Osborne's views prefigured those which Enoch Powell articulated in 1968, though Osborne had none of Powell's subtlety. 
Osborne was also noted for his opposition to generally progressive causes. E. M. Forster, a fellow member of the Reform Club, remembered him as always 'denouncing something' (Williams, 129). He was opposed to extending the licensing laws, to the creation of football pools and premium bonds, to the abolition of corporal punishment and of the death penalty, and to the decriminalization of homosexuality. Leo Abse judged that the driving force in him was a rigid puritanism, consequent upon an unusually repressed childhood (Abse, 148-9). Certainly he often referred to his stern Victorian upbringing. He was the only MP to oppose the pay rise which the House of Commons voted itself in 1964, and, characteristically, the politician for whom he professed the most complete admiration was Stafford Cripps. Osborne had genuine fears of a world population explosion, of economic collapse, and of decadence in the West. He was chairman of the Anglo-Soviet parliamentary group, a justice of the peace in Leicester, a governor of Leicester Royal Infirmary, and, for twenty years, chairman of the Leicester chamber of commerce. He died of natural causes at the Royal Infirmary, Leicester, on 31 August 1969, having lived in his later years at Kinchley House, Rothley, Leicestershire. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 40644


Vicious, Sid (1957-1979), rock musician, was born on 10 May 1957 at Lewisham Hospital, London, the only child of John George Ritchie, a publisher's representative, and his wife, Anne Jeannette, 'nee' McDonald. His parents divorced, and his mother then married Chris Beverley; after the death of her second husband Anne retained his surname, as did her son. 
Simon Beverley's childhood was dominated by frequent house moves around London, prompted by his mother's unstable personality. Poverty was a constant problem, but adversity strengthened their relationship. Acquaintances likened them to co-conspirators rather than parent and child. By his teenage years Simon was borrowing his mother's syringe to take amphetamine sulphate ('speed'). His heavily disrupted secondary education ended at a special-needs school in Stoke Newington when he was fifteen. A job in a textile factory followed, before he enrolled at Hackney technical college in 1973 to take a course in photography. He was a fan of David Bowie, whom he emulated by dressing in an outlandish manner. The look drew him closer to his fellow student and old school friend John Lydon, and they lived together in various squats in London. The nickname Sid originated from this time, in homage to Lydon's pet hamster. Money was scarce, prompting Beverley to dabble in prostitution as a rent boy. 
In 1976 Beverley became a leading figure in the punk rock scene that developed in London under the influence of Malcolm McLaren, proprietor of the clothes shop Sex in the King's Road, Chelsea. The pre-eminent punk band was the Sex Pistols, formed by McLaren in 1975 from customers of his shop; Lydon -- renamed Johnny Rotten -- was the group's lead singer. Punk music was basically structured and roughly produced, with lyrics detailing society's ills (rather than the traditional theme of love) and sung in an angry, shouting manner. Unable to play any musical instruments, Beverley became the group's most notorious fan and invented the 'pogo' dance -- so-called because it involved jumping up and down. Encouraged by McLaren's desire for publicity, he called himself Sid Vicious and lived up to the name. At a Sex Pistols show in April 1976 he attacked a music journalist with a bicycle chain. In September he threw a glass during a concert and injured several people. He was subsequently found guilty of possessing an illegal weapon (a knife) and sentenced to a short spell at Ashford remand centre. 
Sid Vicious's lasting imprisonment, however, was his new name: the naive, fashion-obsessed teenager had assumed a new identity. The image consisted of spiked black hair, a snarling upper lip, and torn clothes held together by safety pins and 'bondage' straps. He also wore swastika T-shirts and armbands. The context for this deployment of Nazi insignia was mounting racial tension in Britain, exacerbated by rising unemployment. Vicious, however, was apathetic about politics: his aim was simply to shock. He was led by the clothes available in McLaren's shop, which in turn had been influenced by the popularity of the film 'Cabaret' (1972). The film's depiction of Weimar decadence seemed apposite to disaffected youth during Britain's own crisis of governability in the mid-1970s. This 'Zeitgeist' was subsequently captured by the Sex Pistols' first single, 'Anarchy in the UK', released in November 1976. 
Punk's do-it-yourself ethic and contempt for traditional notions of musicianship encouraged Vicious to try to learn bass guitar. He played along to the first album by the Ramones but found even their three-chord structures difficult to master. His stage debut was as a drummer for Suzie (later Siouxsie) and the Banshees on 20 September 1976. The performance consisted of a twenty-minute version of the Lord's prayer; they had rehearsed only once, as the intention was to make as horrible a racket as possible. That autumn he practised with a pool of punk musicians calling themselves the Flowers of Romance. He also tried writing lyrics. The results were either doom-laden or simply offensive -- as in 'Belsen was a gas'. 
In February 1977 a split occurred between the main songwriters in the Sex Pistols. Rotten, the lyricist, disliked the melodic inclinations of the bass guitarist, Glen Matlock, and so replaced him with Sid Vicious. During the course of the next year Vicious lived out punk's nihilistic inner core to the full but the band's output of new songs dried up; subsequent releases had mainly been written and recorded during the Matlock era. With pop stardom came groupies. Vicious was pursued by Nancy Spungen (1958-1978), daughter of a Philadelphia businessman, who came to Britain in early 1977. The two became inseparable, in large part because she introduced him to heroin. The relationship alienated Vicious from the other members of the band. None of them visited him when he was in hospital with hepatitis in April and May of that year. 
The peak of the Sex Pistols' notoriety came in June 1977 with the release of 'God Save the Queen', timed to coincide with Elizabeth II's silver jubilee. Originally entitled 'No future' (after its refrain), the song equated deference to Britain's ruling institutions with being moronic. It reached number two in the charts and would have been number one but for the machinations of an embarrassed music industry. A chart-topping album, 'Never Mind the Bollocks, Here's the Sex Pistols', came out in October. Vicious helped to write two of the album's twelve tracks ('Holidays in the sun' and 'Bodies') but his rudimentary bass contributions were overdubbed by other members of the band. Nevertheless, his surly swagger in film footage from jubilee week helped define the group -- and that summer -- for posterity. 
The band's notoriety made it difficult for them to play live dates, but Vicious relished the attention when they did (even though his guitar was usually unplugged from the amplifiers). Off stage his heroin addiction made him increasingly difficult to handle; it also made him a liability when the band toured America in January 1978. During shows he gashed himself to draw blood and in Texas he clubbed a member of the audience with his instrument, nearly causing a riot. At the end of the tour (17 January) Rotten left the band and Vicious became the Sex Pistols' front man. McLaren, meanwhile, was preoccupied with documenting the creation of the band on celluloid. The fictionalized account, 'The Great Rock 'n' Roll Swindle', was filmed mainly in 1978. Vicious sang three cover songs, Eddie Cochran's 'Something else' and 'C'mon everybody', plus Sinatra's 'My way' (a top ten single in June 1978). He also resurrected his own compositions. 
Heroin abuse, meanwhile, began to take its toll. In August 1978 Vicious was jolted when a friend died of an overdose while sharing a bed with himself and Spungen -- it was hours before they realized that he was dead. A month later the pair flew to New York to make a fresh start. They stayed at the Chelsea Hotel on West 23rd Street, a renowned residence for artists. To earn money, Vicious performed at local venues. On the morning of 11 October he woke to find Spungen dead in the bathroom with a knife wound to the stomach. He was arrested and, while in a confused state, admitted to stabbing her. Bail of $50,000 was put up by his record label on the 17th, allowing for his release. On 22 October he was admitted to Bellevue Hospital after a suicide attempt. After being discharged a few days later, he acquired a new girlfriend, Michelle Robinson. A nightclub fight in December resulted in his returning to custody until 1 February 1979. His mother flew to America on his release and they stayed the night with Robinson at her Greenwich Village apartment. In the early hours of 2 February, while the others were sleeping, Vicious took some heroin from his mother's purse and injected himself with what proved to be a lethal dose. He was cremated in New York on 7 February. His mother later scattered the ashes over Spungen's grave at the King David cemetery in Bensalem, Philadelphia. 
Sid Vicious's death at twenty-one was worldwide news and instantly elevated him to the 'live fast, die young' hall of fame. Iconic status was ensured. At the Sex Pistols' peak, elements of the establishment regarded the band as a treasonous threat -- best seen in Julian Temple's documentary film 'The Filth and the Fury' (2000). But even then Vicious's contribution owed more to the fantasy of rock martyrdom than to any serious questioning of society's values. His drawn-out drug-induced demise turned punk rebellion into a revolt against the self. By 1979 punk was just another product and his death prompted one last surge of hype. The soundtrack to the 'Swindle' film was rush-released that same month, though its cinema opening did not occur until May 1980. A single, 'Something else', came out at the end of February and sold nearly twice as many copies as 'God Save the Queen', but when the record company released the live album 'Sid Sings' in December, few bought it. Vicious's obsessive relationship with Spungen proved a more enduring story and was the subject of the feature film 'Sid and Nancy' (1986). 


@@@@@


doc= 40649


Dinnie, Donald (1837-1916), athlete, was born on 8 July 1837 at Balnacraig, near Aboyne, Aberdeenshire, the eldest of ten children of Robert Dinnie (1808-1892), a stonemason, and Christine Hay. He left school at fifteen and won his first prize for wrestling one year later in 1853, when he turned professional. During the Victorian period the issue of professionalism was handled in a variety of ways by different sports, and Dinnie was earning money from athletics several years before the matter had been resolved in rugby, cricket, or football. By 1867 he had decided to make athletics his full-time employment. That same year he recorded nine firsts and one second at the inaugural Aboyne highland games. He was the undefeated highland games heavyweight champion from 1856 to 1869 and then again from 1871 to 1876. During his first year as a full-time professional athlete Dinnie's records included throwing the heavy hammer 81 feet 6 inches, throwing the heavy stone 35 feet 5 inches, throwing the light stone 45 feet 7 inches, and clearing 5 feet 1 inch in the high jump. By 1868 he had also advanced the records at the Braemar Royal Highland Gathering to: 92 feet 4 inches for the 16 lb hammer, 84 feet 9 inches for the 22 lb hammer, and 5 feet 4 inches for the high jump. Promoters were prepared to pay him between $25 and $100 to appear at Scottish highland games events. 
In 1870 Dinnie was invited by the Caledonia Clubs to tour America, and the New York Caledonian Club paid $130 towards his passage. He acted as a judge at the New York Caledonian games of 1872 where his attendance helped to attract a crowd of 25,000 spectators, and by 1877 he was able to earn as much as $700 a day. At Plainfield, New Jersey, he won the mixed styles wrestling championship of America in 1882. At one San Francisco highland games his winnings totalled $350 plus half of the gate money. Dinnie moved to Australia in 1844 and then on to New Zealand. Still reluctant to perform without payment he earned $85 for defeating the Maori wrestling champion of fifteen consecutive years. In 1888 he toured South Africa, returning home a year later. 
As an athlete, Dinnie was an all-rounder, equally proficient at putting the stone, tossing the caber, leaping, jumping, or running. Proud and independent of character, he stood 6 feet 1 inch high, and weighed 15 stone; his chest measured 48 inches, his biceps 15 inches, and his thighs 261/2 inches. During his professional career (1853- 'c'.1912) he won more than 11,000 contests: these included 2000 prizes for throwing the hammer, 1800 prizes for putting the stone, more than 2000 prizes for wrestling, 300 prizes for throwing weights, 1400 prizes for tossing the caber, 1800 prizes for jumping, and about 500 prizes for running and hurdles races. Dinnie sincerely believed that the athlete, like the labourer, should be paid for his work, and his estimated cash winnings from athletics, excluding displays from strength promotions and displays, were in excess of $25,000. 
Dinnie's first wife died in the 1870s while he was on tour. His son Edwin Dinnie was born in June 1877, and won over a hundred prizes in light and field events. Dinnie married for a second time, in 1885, in Melbourne, where his daughter Eva was born. 
Dinnie continued to compete as a professional athlete until well into his seventies. In 1907 he asked the Aboyne highland games committee to arrange two events for veterans of over sixty years. At the age of seventy-five he competed in a health and strength show in London. Best remembered as one of Scotland's chief professional athletes, Dinnie died at his home, 144 Portland Road, Kensington, London, on 2 April 1916. His second wife, Eleanor, survived him. The Donald Dinnie trophy remains one of the most sought-after Scottish athletic awards. 


@@@@@


doc= 40650


Cameron, Alexander Anthony (1877-1951), athlete, was born at Lochtreig Head, Kilmonivaig, in the district of Lochaber, Inverness-shire, on 1 April 1877, the son of Donald Cameron, shepherd, and his wife, Mary McMillan. His father was quite a small man, but his mother's McMillan line were famous for their physique, and Alexander grew to a weight of 17 stone, standing 6 feet 1 inch. Renowned later for his devoted attachment to his native Lochaber, he was for a time in youth a policeman in Partick (Glasgow), but he found a more distinguished way of alleviating rural indigence when he became a star of the highland games circuit. A product of nineteenth-century 'invention of tradition', the highland games developed as centres where local landowners (increasingly, non-Scottish) flaunted their kilts, their tartan-clad retinues, and their noteworthy acquaintance while hard-headed, thick-thewed men of the people earned useful prize money. The first great games star was Donald Dinnie, who was still winning prizes in special competitions as late as 1910, when he was aged over seventy. 
In the early twentieth century Cameron was firmly installed as successor to Dinnie and G. H. Johnstone as 'Champion Heavy of Scotland'. He set new records in such events as hammer throwing, weightlifting, caber tossing, putting the stone, and the distinctive highland 'standing jump', where his record of 4 feet 11 inches still stood at the time of his death. He was undisputed champion from 1903 to 1914. By this time the games had standardized forms and rules and were regulated by judges and stewards. In 1910 51,000 spectators attended the Cowal gathering, so that prize money on offer of $160 might seem meagre -- and indeed, Cameron himself led an athletes' strike for higher prizes at the Turriff games. 
English impresarios were greatly interested in 'strong men', and Cameron accepted the lure of high wages. He toured as far as Australia (1904) and Russia. But unlike Dinnie he could not settle for footlights and 'gee-whiz' promotions. It is part of Cameron's legend that when George Hackenschmidt, 'the Russian Lion' -- who thought him, after a wrestling match, the strongest man he had ever handled -- made him an especially good offer to tour with his team, Cameron took time to think it over. Pressing him again, Hackenschmidt said, 'You'll be going, I take it?' 'Aye, I'll be going', replied Cameron, adjusting (it is said) his bowler hat, 'back to Lochaber' (Webster, 88). 
Cameron, who remained unmarried, was nicknamed the Mighty Muccomber (or Mucomir) after the name of his home farm. After the First World War had cut his dominance short, he displayed his disinterested love of the games as a popular judge. Not long before he died, he was chatting happily in Gaelic to athletes at the Glenfinnan games. He collapsed fatally on 18 September 1951, while cutting grass in front of his cottage on the Letterfinlay estate at Spean Bridge, Inverness-shire. In his heyday, he had rarely trained, except by swinging a scythe day after day. He was buried at Blarour cemetery, Spean Bridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 40651


Crichton, William (1733-1782), merchant and politician, was the son of Patrick Crichton, a saddler and merchant of Edinburgh. Details of Crichton's early life and career cannot be established with any great certainty but it is likely that he was the William Crichton who entered an apprenticeship as a goldsmith with Dougal Ged of Edinburgh in 1752. In the 1750s and 1760s several Crichtons, most notably David Crichton, a merchant and insurer of Heydon Square, Minories, were active in trade in London and this no doubt assisted in the establishment of William Crichton in business in the capital by 1765. At first he was located at Nag's Head Court, but by 1774 he had moved to Brabant Court, Philpot Lane. 
Crichton's main line of business was the West Indies trade but he diversified his activities to include the purchase of property in Edinburgh and London, marine insurance broking, lending on mortgage, and investment in stocks and securities. The last activity provided him with an entry into City politics, for the purchase of $500 of East India Company stock in September 1767 allowed him to take a leading part in company affairs during a critical phase in the development of British India. In the four years before the passage of Lord North's 'Regulating Act' of 1773, Crichton made more recorded speeches than any other stockholder at the company's general court of proprietors. This earned him the nickname Orator Crichton from one observer, but others complained that his repeated and lengthy interventions served only to test the patience of those who were trying to steer the company through difficult times. As a self-appointed watchdog over the company's affairs, Crichton played a leading part in exposing financial malpractice among the directors of the company in 1773. 
Of much wider significance, however, was the fact that Crichton suggested in January 1773 that the company might look to Europe and North America for a market where it could dispose of the ever-increasing stockpiles of tea that were being stored in its London warehouses. Crichton's specific proposal for the removal of the duty on tea imported into North America prompted lengthy debate within the company and the House of Commons but it was not endorsed by the North ministry for political reasons. In the event, the alternative arrangements that were put in place by the government alongside the highly unpopular Townshend duty served only to increase tension in the colonies. The colonists believed that taxed tea was to be forced upon them by the British and consequently a consignment of company tea was dumped into Boston harbour during the course of the events known as the Boston Tea Party. This set in motion the chain of events that eventually led to the outbreak of hostilities between Britain and her American colonies in 1775. 
Although he never became a director of the East India Company, Crichton continued to play a leading role in company affairs until the time of his death in 1782. At the same time, he broadened the range of his public activities. He served on several charitable committees, helped to promote the interests of West Indies merchants as they attempted to overcome the difficulties caused by the American War of Independence, and he was appointed to office in a number of different institutions. This kept him in the public eye and he was able to develop a broad base of political support in the City where, as a member of the Company of Fishmongers, he was made a freeman in January 1775. In September 1780, following the death of John Kirkman, Crichton was elected alderman of Cheap ward and shortly afterwards he became one of the two sheriffs of the City of London. His one-year term of office was eventful because it coincided with the Gordon riots, and Crichton found himself with responsibility for the control of public order. He was widely praised for his handling of a difficult situation, and this served to raise his political stock even higher in the City. Indeed, had it not been for the fact that as sheriff he was electoral returning officer and thus debarred from declaring himself as a candidate, Crichton would have stood for election as member of parliament for the City following the death of George Hayley in August 1781. 
Crichton's personal life appears to have been as colourful as his public life. By the time he wrote his will in July 1774, his relationship with Ann Jeffries had produced a son (Robert Crichton), while Esther Stokes had given birth to two daughters (Anna and Henrietta Crichton) and was expecting a third child. In spite of this, Crichton's will stated that he was about to marry Priscilla, whose surname was probably Warriner, a widow of Great Baddow in Essex. A codicil added to the will indicates that he did indeed marry Mrs Warriner because her son, John, was granted income from a trust fund as part of a legacy of $1000 destined to be left to him by Crichton. Crichton died as a widower on 30 July 1782 at Chillingham Barns, Northumberland, having become ill during a journey on horseback to London from Edinburgh where his brother, Alexander, lived and worked as a coachmaker. 


@@@@@


doc= 40654


Duncan (III) Macduff, eighth earl of Fife (c.1262-1289). In the latter's minority the wardship of the earldom was held by Alexander, the son of Alexander III, and Duncan received authority over the earldom only when the king's son died in 1284. Two years later, in an assembly at Scone in April 1286, Earl Duncan was among the six guardians chosen to carry on the government of Scotland following the death of Alexander III on 19 March. In the light of Duncan's youth and inexperience, the assembly was probably paying homage to the senior position of his earldom, but the earl may also have been a supporter of Robert (V) de Brus (died 1295) in his claim to the throne. He is known to have been in England in 1286-7, and also to have married Joan, the daughter of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester (died 1295). Earl Duncan was inexplicably murdered at Pitpollok near Brechin in early September 1289 by Sir Patrick Abernethy (a descendant of Aedh mac Duff) and Sir Walter Percy, and was buried at Coupar Angus Abbey. One chronicler attributes the murder to his cruelty and greed, but a more reasonable explanation is that his death was a result of the growing unrest in Scotland as tensions between the Brus and Balliol factions began to boil over into open conflict. 



@@@@@


doc= 40655


Grice, (Herbert) Paul (1913-1988), philosopher, was born on 15 March 1913 in Birmingham, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Herbert Grice, businessman and musician, and his wife, Mabel Felton, schoolmistress. He was educated at Clifton College, Bristol, where he was head boy and also distinguished himself in music and sports, and at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he was awarded first-class honours in classical honour moderations (1933) and 'literae humaniores' (1935), and of which he later became an honorary fellow (1988). After a year as assistant master at Rossall School, Lancashire, and then two years as Harmsworth senior scholar at Merton College, Oxford, he was appointed lecturer and in 1939 fellow and tutor in philosophy at St John's College, Oxford, and university lecturer in the sub-faculty of philosophy. 
During the Second World War Grice served in the Royal Navy in the Atlantic theatre and then in Admiralty intelligence from 1940 to 1945. In 1942 he married Kathleen, daughter of George Watson, naval architect. They had a daughter and a son. By the mid-1950s he was widely recognized as one of the most original and independent philosophers in Oxford. At one time or another he taught an extraordinarily high number of those who were to become leading philosophers of the period, including Peter Strawson. He held visiting appointments at Harvard, Brandeis, Stanford, and Cornell universities, and was invited again to Harvard to deliver the William James lectures in 1967. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1966. He became an honorary fellow of St John's in 1980. 
In 1967 Grice left Oxford for a new life in the United States, as professor of philosophy at the University of California, Berkeley. There he continued through teaching and informal discussion to influence and challenge a steadily growing group of devoted students and colleagues. He gave many distinguished lectures, seminars, and symposia at universities, conferences, and professional associations all across the country. He was elected president of the Pacific division of the American Philosophical Association in 1975, and was invited to give their Carus lectures in 1983. Near the end of his life he carefully prepared for publication 'Studies in the Way of Words' (1989), which contains most of his major essays, the William James lectures, some previously unpublished papers, and a retrospective assessment. His Carus lectures and related material on the metaphysics of value appeared as 'The Conception of Value' in 1991. 
Grice's most important and most influential work was in the philosophy of language, in particular the analysis of meaning. He proposed to define what a speaker means in saying something on a particular occasion in terms of the speaker's intentions to bring about certain effects in his audience through their recognition of those very intentions. He devised tests to reveal that many aspects of successful communication are due to the 'conversational implicatures' carried by a speaker's utterance rather than to logical implications carried by the meaning of the expression he uses or by what, strictly speaking, he says. He endeavoured thereby to show how the meanings or semantics of many expressions in natural language are more adequately represented by the familiar structures of mathematical logic than had been widely supposed. By means of this enterprise he sought to draw clearer limits to what can be concluded about meaning, necessity, and possibility from facts about linguistic usage. In these respects his work was a major factor in the fruitful 'rapprochement' between Oxford philosophy of the 1960s and the more logically oriented philosophy then flourishing in the United States. His defence of the previously discredited causal theory of perception came to serve as prototype for an analytical strategy widely deployed elsewhere. In later years he concentrated on moral philosophy and, with characteristic imagination and metaphysical boldness, on the question of the objectivity of value, which, he held, required a realistic conception of finality or teleology in nature. 
Though Grice thought continually about philosophy and wrote in manuscript a great deal, he published very little. This might have been thought attributable to practical inefficiency. His habits of life were in a way recklessly disorderly; the floor of his room in St John's was a dreadful litter of ashtrays, old clothes, scattered books and papers, cricket bats and balls, and (always unanswered, often unopened) correspondence. This apparent chaos was, however, deceptive. He was a man of formidable intellectual gifts, enormous energy, brooding temperament, and fiercely competitive spirit. His talents were well suited to his passions for chess, bridge, which he played for Oxfordshire for some years, and above all cricket, to which he largely devoted most of his summers while living in England. His musical talent was a more private, personal matter. His piano-playing was -- like his considerable prowess as a batsman -- fluent and forceful rather than elegant. It was understood by his friends that he was also a quite serious composer; but here, as in philosophy, he could not bring himself to think that any piece was ever really finished, and his works, it appeared, were permanently awaiting revision. That he published so little philosophy was due to this fixed idea that publication implied a claim to have got matters completely right, but a few months' further thought would always show this claim to be ill-founded. 
In some ways the practices of teaching in Oxford did not suit Grice. In philosophy he throve on the stimulus of dialogue and debate, question and answer, thrust and counter-thrust; a silent, respectful, note-taking lecture audience bored and depressed him. Also, in private tutorials, he could be gloomily unforthcoming with pupils whose offerings were too feeble to be challenging. The seminar was his preferred habitat. He was a shrewd master of strategy, with the capacity to hold elaborate schemes or lines of argument in his mind and to unfold them slowly and deliberately, revealing the next step only when it was needed. His methodical, increasingly gleeful demolition of opposing philosophical theories, and occasionally of his own, was a minor art form for the connoisseur. He was highly prolific in thought; he had more ideas, questions, and projects than he could ever have worked out in a dozen lifetimes. A man of strong appetites and impressive girth, he could be, when engaged, a deviously witty and highly convivial companion of fearsome endurance. Grice died in Berkeley on 28 August 1988. 
Barry Stroud G. J. Warnock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40656


Graham, (William) Sydney (1918-1986), poet, was born in Greenock, Renfrewshire, on 19 November 1918, the elder child and elder son of Alexander Graham (1884-1954), marine engineer, of Greenock, and his wife, Margaret McDermid (1882-1940), shopkeeper. After leaving Greenock high school at fourteen, he completed an apprenticeship in engineering. In 1938-9 he attended Newbattle Abbey Adult Education Residential College, near Edinburgh, where he responded enthusiastically to the literature and philosophy courses. Early Scottish and Anglo-Saxon literature, modern writers including James Joyce, Ezra Pound, and T. S. Eliot, pre-Socratic philosophers, and Martin Heidegger were important influences, to which he later added Arthur Rimbaud, Marianne Moore, and Samuel Beckett. 
After casual jobs in Ireland, Graham became a munitions engineer in Glasgow for a time during the Second World War, when he wrote 'The Seven Journeys' (published later in 1944). David Archer, a publisher and philanthropist, provided him with practical support, publishing 'Cage without Grievance' (1942) and facilitating lively friendships in Glasgow and London with, among others, Jankel Adler, Robert Colquhoun, Robert MacBryde, Dylan Thomas, and (F.) John Minton. Bohemian life promoted both Graham's development and heavy drinking. Published in 1945, '2ND Poems' (a play on the words 'To Nessie Dunsmuir') continued the intense, romantic, semi-surreal language which both he and Dylan Thomas had derived in part from Joyce. Graham valued his early work (omissions from the 'Collected Poems, 1942-1977', 1979, arose from misunderstandings about available space), which was intelligently evaluated by the critic Vivienne Koch in American journals. She became a close friend. His Atlantic award for literature in 1947 and his teaching at New York University in 1947-8 increased his circle of friends. He also visited Greece in 1964 and 1977 and Iceland in the 1960s; some of his poems drew on those experiences. 
Faber and Faber accepted 'The White Threshold' (1949) and became Graham's principal publishers. T. S. Eliot, a director there, admired his excellent knowledge and craftsmanship and said at one of their meetings that Graham's poetry was difficult and would sell slowly because people did not like to think. His work certainly required the reader's full attention, which he gained at his impressive public readings in Britain and abroad, by the moving dramatic art and clarity of his definitive delivery. 'The Nightfishing' (1955), 'Malcolm Mooney's Land' (1970), and 'Implements in their Places' (1977), the last two both Poetry Book Society choices, deployed a language increasingly transparent and exactly tuned to explore the essential separateness of each human experience in a world of flux. They displayed the desperate need to communicate, and the obdurate strangeness of language itself as medium and metaphor. Graham's themes were developed through sharply observed images, highly personal and presented with urgency through a musical poetry rich in structure and feeling. The work, like his own voice, had a Scottish timbre. The originality with which he enlivened and disturbed language was that of a thoroughly radical, modern, international tradition. This work, taken together with his simpler, lyrical pieces, made his achievement outstanding and of permanent importance. 
Graham's poems, which did not fit any of the prevailing fashions, but nevertheless attracted a constant interest among serious readers, were published by several magazines in Britain, North America, and Europe, and were broadcast by the BBC. After 1944 Graham lived chiefly in Cornwall, often writing during the night after evenings spent with friends or literary visitors in his local pub. His work's excellence, together with his own professional integrity, inspired support from a number of friends, poets, and painters who gave practical help or bought manuscripts. His remarkable letters, mostly in private hands, run parallel to his poetry, showing his loneliness, need to communicate, and deep feeling for his many friends. They throw light on his working methods, often containing verse and detailed criticism. Full of word play, they are startling, honest, sharp, and deeply humorous. He concentrated on poetry almost exclusively, having worked only very briefly on the land, as a copywriter, fisherman, or auxiliary coastguard when living at Gurnard's Head in Cornwall. Small grants from the Arts Council helped and a civil-list pension of $500 a year was granted him in 1974. 
Graham had curly dark hair, very piercing blue eyes, and was 5 feet 8 inches in height with a slim physique. He loved music and had a good singing voice. Proud to be Scottish, he was witty, positive, and assertive, dominating conversations and demanding patience from his friends, which was usually freely given. His generosity of spirit inspired much affection and respect. In October 1954 he married Agnes (Nessie) Kilpatrick (1909-1999), daughter of David Dunsmuir, miner, of Blantyre. They had no children, but Graham acknowledged a daughter, Rosalind, born in 1944 to Mary Harris. Agnes had been a fellow student at Newbattle. During their close relationship they lived in distinctly spartan conditions; she provided material as well as moral support and always steadfast encouragement. From 1967 they lived at 4 Mountview Cottages, Madron, Cornwall, where Graham died from cancer, after a long illness, on 9 January 1986. He was cremated at Truro crematorium, Cornwall, and his ashes were scattered on the River Clyde, Scotland. 
Michael Seward Snow', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40657


Hewitt, John Harold (1907-1987), poet, was born in Belfast on 28 October 1907, the younger child and only son of Robert Telford Hewitt, principal of Agnes Street national school, and his wife, Elinor Robinson. He was educated at his father's school ('c'.1912-1919), the Royal Belfast Academical Institution (1919-20), and the Methodist college, Belfast (1920-24). In 1924 he entered the Queen's University, Belfast, to read English and graduated in 1930 with a BA degree, having also (in 1927-9) taken a teacher training course at Stranmillis College, Belfast. Hewitt's lifelong engagement with literature, art, and politics was fostered from the start by his parents, particularly by his father, a dedicated socialist. It was on his father's bookshelves that he discovered the English dissenting tradition which decisively influenced his political and literary development, as well as the magazines which stimulated his love of art. He wrote his first poems in 1924 and his earliest to appear in print were contributed (in 1928-9) to a wide variety of left-wing newspapers. 
In November 1930 Hewitt was appointed art assistant at the Belfast Museum and Art Gallery. During an exhibition there (probably in the autumn of 1932) he met Roberta Black (born in Larne, co. Antrim, on 30 October 1904, the daughter of Robert Black, watchmaker); they were married in Belfast on 7 May 1934. Hewitt's energies found expression throughout the 1930s in a range of cultural activities. In 1934, for example, he helped to form the Ulster Unit, a progressive art group, and in 1937 he was involved in the founding of the 'Irish Democrat' newspaper, acting as literary editor and occasional contributor. In 1936 he finished 'The Bloody brae: a Dramatic Poem', his first extended treatment of the troubled relationship between English and Scottish planters and native Irish in the north of Ireland, thereafter a major theme in his writings. 
During the Second World War, Hewitt's work in the Belfast Museum and Art Gallery significantly broadened what he later described as his 'local imaginative mythology', in particular inspiring a lasting enthusiasm for the radical strain in Ulster Presbyterianism of the later eighteenth century. Hewitt's discovery of his own region, especially the Glens of co. Antrim, made him acutely receptive to the 'regionalist' idea he encountered at this time in the works of Lewis Mumford and others. Throughout the 1930s and 1940s Hewitt wrote numerous poems, publishing many in periodicals, and transcribing many more in his notebooks. He issued his first pamphlet of poems, 'Conacre', in 1943 and his second, 'Compass: Two Poems', in 1944, both privately published; and his first book-length collection, 'No Rebel Word', was published in 1948. Another key work of the period was the long autobiographical, 'regionalist' poem 'Freehold', which appeared in the literary magazine 'Lagan' in 1946. In this and other poems he emerges as the liberal Ulsterman of planter stock searching for equilibrium and an abiding place in a province where his forebears were originally interlopers, and as the city-dweller whose spiritual home is the country, however marginalized he may sometimes feel there. 
Having been promoted, in 1950, to deputy director and keeper of art at the Belfast Museum and Art Gallery, Hewitt had high hopes of being appointed director when the incumbent retired, but in 1953 he failed to gain this appointment, almost certainly because his radical and socialist ideals were unacceptable to the Belfast Unionist establishment. He remained as deputy director for four more years, then applied successfully for the directorship of the Herbert Art Gallery and Museum in Coventry, a post he held from 1957 to 1972. Coventry, recovering from the devastating air raids of 1940 and 1941, offered an exciting challenge to a man of his energies and ideals, though he maintained close contact with the north of Ireland. He travelled extensively during this period, and shortly before his retirement his 'Collected Poems, 1932-1967' (1968) and 'The Day of the Corncrake: Poems of the Nine Glens' (1969) were published. 
Hewitt and his wife returned to Belfast in 1972 at a time of violent unrest but also unprecedented creativity in Ulster, especially in the field of poetry. He produced new work as poet and art historian, salvaged and revised several decades of verse from his notebooks, published books more frequently than at any other time in his life, and enjoyed a degree of recognition and homage previously denied him. The bearded, silver-haired poet, who wore glasses, smoked a pipe, and carried a walking-stick, became a familiar figure at cultural gatherings in Belfast. Roberta Hewitt died on 19 October 1975. In the following year Hewitt became the first writer-in-residence at the Queen's University, Belfast, serving until 1979, and in 1983 he was made a freeman of Belfast. He died on 27 June 1987 in the Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, and in 1988 the John Hewitt international summer school was established in his memory. 
Frank Ormsby', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40658


Cushing, Winifred Emma (1907-1990), author and poet, was born on 4 June 1907 in Catford, London, the younger daughter and second of three children of Alfred William May, postal worker at Mount Pleasant, London, and his wife, Nell Mason. She played the piano by ear at the age of four and began composing verses when very young. She was educated at the local school in Catford and then at Cusack's College, where she learned shorthand and typing. She worked in a patent agency and subsequently in a music publisher's office, which stimulated her interest in writing lyrics for popular music. She was nurtured by Lawrence Wright, an influential music publisher of the time, and among the lyrics she subsequently wrote were those for the well-known tango 'Jealousy', and the ballad 'The Dream of Olwen'. 
In August 1935, spurred by the success of the prose poem writer Wilhelmina Stitch, who wrote regularly for the 'Daily Sketch', she decided to try to perform a similar service for the rival 'Daily Mirror' and, 'with a poem in my pocket' -- the subsequent title of her autobiography -- she visited the paper's features editor with her proposal. He was impressed and invited her to return the following day with eighteen further poems, and a suitable pseudonym for a regular column. That evening a friend visited her with the gift of a book by an American author, Adeline D. T. Whitney, with the title 'Patience Strong' (1870). The next day she presented the editor with the further poems -- and her new name. 
Patience Strong continued to write a daily poem for the 'Daily Mirror', without interruption, from then onwards and throughout the Second World War, under the heading 'The Quiet Corner', which became synonymous with her work. Some critics derided her verse for its sentimentality, but readers responded warmly to her poems and to her philosophy, feeling that they knew her personally and could confide in her; she replied to each correspondent, and her office at her home became something of an adjunct to the local post office, when servicemen and women, and those left at home, wrote to thank her for her poems and support, explaining that she had been able, through her verses, to speak for them. An example of her work is: '
Give me a window with a view that flows to meet the sky. 

Give me a garden where the trees can feel the winds blow by... 

Give me good days and sleep-blessed nights when I have closed the door 

-- and anyone can have the world. I'll never ask for more. 
(P. Strong, 'Give me a Quiet Corner', 1972)' In the late 1940s Strong transferred from the 'Daily Mirror' to its sister Sunday newspaper, 'The Pictorial' (subsequently the 'Sunday Mirror'), and she also began contributing her poems to the weekly magazine 'Woman's Own'. Her sojourn with each was over forty years. Latterly her poems appeared in the quarterly journal 'This England'. 
In the late 1930s Strong's books of prose poems began publication, with 'Every Common Bush' (1937), and many titles followed, published by Frederick Muller, under which imprint her books appeared until her death, when posthumous compilations were issued. Her books, which numbered more than seventy, include 'Quiet Corner Reflections' (1938), 'A Christmas Garland' (1948), 'The Patience Strong Bedside Book' (1953), 'The Blessings of the Years' (1963), 'Come Happy Day' (1966), 'A Joy Forever' (1973), 'Poems from the Fighting Forties' (1982), and 'Fifty Golden Years' (1985, to commemorate her fiftieth anniversary as Patience Strong). She also wrote many booklets with a specifically religious basis for the Henry E. Walter Company. Her posthumous publications included 'Tapestries of Time' (1991) and many of her early titles were reissued by Grace Publishers. Patience Strong's poems appeared on calendars and greetings cards and similar publications for more than fifty years, and also continued to be published. Two gramophone records of the author reciting favourite poems were issued: 'The Quiet Hour' (1963) and 'The Quiet Corner' (1978). 
Patience Strong was attractive in personality and appearance, and her beauty could not better have complemented the nature of her work. She was a devout Christian who explored many churches -- Baptist, Methodist, Church of England, Christian Science, and, in later years, the British Israel movement. Her faith in God governed her life. She had a great gift for communication, and regarded this as her mission in life. She was a countrywoman, who found her inspiration in the changing seasons of the English countryside, in all its moods, as shown in her verse: '
This is what he dreamed about beneath the desert sky: 

brown earth breaking on the plough and white gulls wheeling by... 

This is what he fought for on a beach in Normandy: 

parish church and village green, his English legacy. 

These things did he know and love. He lived and died for them... 

Speak no word. The evening thrush will sing his requiem. 
(P. Strong, 'Magic Casements', 1950)' In 1931 Strong married the son of a master builder who was an alderman of the city of Liverpool, Frederick Arnold (Paddy) Williams, architect. He died in 1965, and in 1967 she married Guy Cushing, buyer, who had retired from the John Lewis Partnership, the son of William Isaac Cushing, draper, and his wife, Amanda, the great friend of the author who had given her the book 'Patience Strong' many years before. He predeceased her in 1979. There were no children of either marriage. Patience Strong was made a freeman of the City of London in 1970. She died on 28 August 1990 at her home, Sunnyside, The Street, Sedlescombe, Sussex. 
Doreen Montgomery', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40659


Baxter, (Mary) Kathleen (1901-1988), advocate of women's rights, was born on 30 May 1901 to a Roman Catholic family in Bradford, Yorkshire, the eighth child in the family of three daughters and five sons (one of whom died in infancy) of Richard Aloysius Young, woollen manufacturer, and his wife, (Mary) Ann Barker. Her father died during her infancy. She was educated at St Joseph's College, Bradford, and won an open scholarship to the Society of Oxford Home Students (later St Anne's College), Oxford, where she obtained a third class in modern history in 1922 and a second in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1923. 
Kathleen Young entered the Inland Revenue and was inspector of taxes in Bradford and Leeds until her marriage in Westminster Cathedral, London, on 12 September 1931 to Herbert James (H. J.) Baxter, a barrister who later became a county court judge. He was the son of James Baxter, whose career was in the army and civil service. There were two daughters of the marriage, and a son, who became a Roman Catholic priest. When she married she was obliged by the 'Income Tax Act' to resign from the Inland Revenue. She became a tax consultant to a London firm of chartered accountants. During the Second World War she worked in the Ministry of Supply at the wool control in Ilkley, Yorkshire. 
After the war the family moved from London to a house in Bessel's Green, Kent, which remained their home for forty years. Kathleen Baxter used her intellectual and analytical abilities to further causes she believed in. In her career she had experienced discrimination against women. She worked for equal rights, better education, and better job opportunities for women, to enable them to take their place in decision making and become an effective voice for the improvement of society. 
In 1951 Kathleen Baxter joined the National Council of Women, founded in 1895, a non-party-political organization affiliated to the International Council of Women. She held high office on many of the council's specialist committees. In the 1950s she led a campaign, with their education committee, which achieved improvement in the university grants system. She also founded the council's science and technology committee, which pressed for better education in science and mathematics for girls, and inaugurated a status-of-women committee, which submitted important points for incorporation into the 'Sex Equality Act' of 1975. She was elected vice-president (1961-4), and subsequently, as president (1964-6), she was involved with national and international issues. In 1966, as vice-chair of the European Centre of the International Council of Women, she led the British women's delegation to the international conference in Tehran, at which Britain's resolution on slavery was passed unanimously. She served on the United Kingdom human rights year national executive in 1968. As a governor of the British Institute of Human Rights she was asked by the United Nations' secretary-general to write a background paper on the advancement of women's rights for the 1968 international conference on human rights, and she gave evidence to the UN session on human rights in Geneva. At the time of Britain's application for membership of the European Economic Community, she successfully pressed the government to consult the major women's organizations and was largely responsible for the establishment of the Women's Consultative Council (renamed in 1969 the Women's National Commission): its first co-chairs were herself and a government minister. In late middle age she studied law, from both interest in her husband's profession and knowledge that it would further her own work; she was called to the bar (Inner Temple) in 1971 but ceased taking cases when her husband became gravely ill in 1974. After his death in that year, she was appointed honorary legal adviser to the National Council of Women, while still continuing to serve on the executive of the Women's National Commission. In her dual capacity she chaired working parties commenting on documents from the Law Commission and the Criminal Law Revision Committee relating to women, children, and the family. 
In 1978 Kathleen Baxter was awarded the papal cross 'pro ecclesia et pontifice' for outstanding service to the church. She was president of the National Board of Catholic Women (1974-7), a founder member of the Catholic bishops' conference legislation committee, and a member of their bioethical advisory committee on artificial insemination, 'in vitro' fertilization, and genetic engineering, helping to foster a broad social concern in these Catholic circles. In Kent she served on the hospital, maternity wing, and old people's home committees, and as a governor of four schools. She was devoted to her family and four grandsons, and greatly enjoyed music and tennis. 
Kathleen Baxter combined high intelligence with an affectionate nature. She was a good-looking woman with an appearance of natural dignity and authority; silver hair framed a broad forehead, beneath which strikingly blue eyes claimed attention, and a smile of warmth and charm promised interest and encouragement. She died on 25 October 1988 in hospital in Bromley, Kent. 
Diana Grantham Reid', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40660


Ramsey, (Mary) Dorothea Whiting (1904-1989), social worker, was born on 10 January 1904 in Kensington, London, the only child of Robert William Ramsey, solicitor, and his wife, Anna Whiting Brown, of Clarendon Road, in the Notting Hill area of London. Of well-to-do parents, she was educated at St Paul's Girls' School, London, and at Newnham College, Cambridge, where she obtained third classes in both parts of the classical tripos (1926 and 1928). She then taught Greek and Latin in London until the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939. It was as a voluntary worker with the Bristol Council of Social Service in the war emergency bureau that she became alerted to the social problems of elderly people, and, henceforward, her career concentrated on that area. 
In 1941 Dorothea Ramsey helped to form the Bristol Old People's Welfare Committee and became its secretary. Just as wartime threw into vivid perspective the needs of deprived children when they were evacuated, so was the distress of many old people made more apparent. Dorothea Ramsey was one of the first to stress the value of residential care for older people, especially compared with the isolation of living, often in a feeble condition, at home or floundering in the large dormitories of the workhouse or the chronic sick wards of the former poor-law and other hospitals. She was to the fore in establishing, in 1942, the West Town House residential care home in Bristol, a small, model facility, only the second of its kind in the country. 
Returning to London, in 1943 Dorothea Ramsey became a member of the advisory case subcommittee of social service, a body dealing with old people in distress and the mobilization of people likely to care for them. This had been set up not least as a consequence of the bombing, involving both injury and homelessness. This small-scale agency received 2000 requests for help each year, and was much pressed to find adequate residential and allied amenities for its needy elderly clients. As early as 1940 the National Council of Social Service, aware of the manifest difficulties of many older people, had convened a group of representatives of the major voluntary and statutory providers. Out of this initiative grew the National Old People's Welfare Committee, its remit the campaigning for and provision of decent social services for impoverished and sick old people. Soon it was to abandon its lengthy title, redolent of 1940s officialdom, in favour of the more user-friendly Age Concern. 
Dorothea Ramsey became secretary of this new charity in 1945, and she fought hard and vigorously to improve conditions for its elderly clientele. During her seven-year secretaryship -- she resigned in 1952 -- the number of groups grew rapidly from eight regional or county and eighty local committees to sixty-two regional or county and 831 local committees. Given her experience, it is not surprising that she concentrated on residential care, persuading both local old people's welfare groups and local authorities to build and sustain homes. She urged the value of professional training, successfully pressed for chiropody services, and sought for older people a reasonable degree of dignity and independence. Because of the work of men and women like Dorothea Ramsey during the post-war decades, a less negative attitude towards ageing began to develop. She was one of the first to take a more personal and less paternalist stand on social provision, insisting -- at a time when welfare was granted grudgingly in rather chilling vein -- that the criterion should be 'what you would like in similar circumstances'. Her pioneering work led to recognition overseas, particularly in the USA, which she toured with a Smith -- Mundt scholarship in 1952. 
On retirement to the Lake District, Dorothea Ramsey devoted herself to what had been a lifelong affection for music -- she had studied the flute under Gustav Holst as a girl -- and she applied her considerable administrative skills to the furtherance of orchestral and choral activity in Cumberland. She also played in and became chairman of the Cumberland Symphony Orchestra. Severe eye problems, arthritis, and diabetes constrained her life over thirty years, but she bore these handicaps with admirable fortitude. She was dark, of medium height, with intelligent, bright looks, and penetrating eyes. A woman of committed conscience, if somewhat shy, she never married. In retirement she lived with a friend, Frances M. Birkett. She had lived latterly at High Rigg Grange, Borrowdale, near Keswick, Cumberland, and died in Keswick on 27 September 1989. 
Eric Midwinter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40661


Harrison, Francis Llewelyn (1905-1987), music scholar, was born on 29 September 1905 in Dublin, the second son in the family of four sons and two daughters of Alfred Francis Harrison, an accountant with the Great Southern Railway and a talented amateur singer, and his wife, Florence May Nash, who was of Welsh descent on her mother's side, and, on her father's (William Nash, of Kilrush, co. Clare, craftsman in inlaid wood), of mixed English and Hiberno-Norman. Both sides of his family belonged to the protestant, urban tradition of Irish society. The young Harrison showed a precocious talent for music, and was educated at the choir school of St Patrick's Cathedral, from which he won one of the two annual cathedral scholarships to Mountjoy School. He continued studies part-time at the Royal Irish Academy of Music, where he won prizes for organ, piano, and composition, and later at Trinity College, Dublin (MusB 1926, MusD 1930). After a short spell as organist at Kilkenny Cathedral (1929) he emigrated to Canada in 1930. 
Harrison was to spend two decades on the other side of the Atlantic. His first posts were within the church music sphere in which he had established himself in Ireland. Alongside this he built up a flourishing career as a private music teacher, organist, and composer. In 1933 he studied with Marcel Dupre in France, and in 1943 he won the Canadian Performing Right Society's composers' award. But from 1935, when he was appointed resident musician to Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, his career was to be chiefly within academic institutions. In 1940 he opened the university's new music department. After spending 1945-6 as Bradley-Keeler fellow at Yale, studying with Paul Hindemith and Leo Schrade, and posts at Colgate University, New York (1946-7), and Washington University, St Louis (1947-50), he went to England in 1950 and settled in Oxford, as lecturer in music in 1952-6, senior lecturer in 1956-62, and reader in the history of music from 1962 to 1970. From 1965 to 1970 he was a senior research fellow of Jesus College. 
The decade in Canadian and North American universities was responsible for changing the focus of Harrison's musical interests. Composition seems to have been virtually abandoned after he went to Oxford, and his appearances as a performer became sporadic. For a highly imaginative man, the challenge of devising humanities curricula from scratch, in a climate suffused with left-wing cultural politics, had left an indelible mark. The need to understand how processes of artistic production, and those of music in particular, related to social structures and assumptions was to be the mainspring of his work for the rest of his life. In Oxford he immersed himself in a study of pre-Reformation insular liturgical music -- then an uncharted field -- and rapidly established himself as an expert of international repute. His 'Music in Medieval Britain' (1958) is a remarkable combination of both encyclopaedic positivism, using mainly manuscript sources alongside liturgical evidence then rarely admitted into musicology, and a rigorous concern to establish the music's comprehensibility in terms of its context. He was also involved with two major editorial projects: 'Polyphonic Music of the Fourteenth Century', published by Oiseau-Lyre, from 1962 to 1986, and the 'Early English Church Music' project initiated by the British Academy at his instigation (1961-72). Among his other publications was 'The Eton Choirbook' (3 vols., 1956-61). By nature restlessly inquisitive, Harrison was not content with ploughing a single furrow. During the 1960s, while consolidating his reputation as a medievalist (he was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1965), his interest in what he dubbed 'anthromusicology' led him to explore musical culture more widely, and he undertook important fieldwork in Latin America. This expansion of his activities led in 1970 to the offer of the chair in ethnomusicology at Amsterdam, which he held until 1976. In Amsterdam Harrison's formidable capacity for hard work was stretched in numerous directions. While establishing his department on a new footing and moulding it as a centre of international academic excellence, he also engaged in fieldwork on the music of Latin America and the Celtic peoples, as well as continuing research on medieval Europe. Throughout the 1970s he continued to accept visiting posts abroad, particularly in North America, where he was much in demand. On a return to Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, in 1974 he was awarded an honorary degree of LLD, and was present at the inauguration of the Harrison-Le Caine concert hall, named in his honour. 
Harrison was a stocky energetic figure, who spoke in tones that recalled both his homeland and his years in North America, and who always took great care with his appearance. A gregarious character, with personal as well as academic interest in people and their activities, he had a wide international circle of friends. As an emigre he carried with him a capacity to make a home almost anywhere, and he was an informed enthusiast for international cuisine. In 1927 he married Norah Lillian, daughter of William Thomas Drayton, antique dealer; they had two daughters. The marriage was not a happy one and there was a divorce in 1965. In 1966 he married Joan, daughter of Edmund Thomas Rimmer, schoolmaster. She had been since 1960 his companion in his exploration of the world's music. There were no children of the second marriage. Harrison died in Canterbury, Kent, where they retired, on 29 December 1987. 
David Chadd', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40662


Semprini, (Fernando Riccardo) Alberto (1908-1990), pianist and conductor, was born on 27 March 1908 in Bath, the second of three sons (there were no daughters) of Arturo Riccardo Fernando Semprini, musician, from Rimini, Italy, and his wife, Elizabeth Tilley, opera singer, from Dudley, Worcestershire. The family settled in Bath until Alberto was nine, when his father, a horn player, was appointed librarian to La Scala opera house, Milan. The boy was intensely musical and won a state scholarship to the Conservatorio Verdi to study piano, composition, and conducting. When he was only sixteen Arturo Toscanini, chief conductor of La Scala, auditioned him for the fiendishly difficult orchestral piano part in Igor Stravinsky's ballet 'Petrushka' and gave him the job. 
On his vacations Semprini played the piano on transatlantic liners, and while in New York was enthralled by jazz groups and the popular concert orchestra of Andre Kostelanetz. He discovered he could play this sort of repertoire far better than most classically trained pianists, and this seems to have proved a decisive influence in shaping his career. Another consideration was his marriage in Italy in 1931 to Brunilde Regarbagnati and the birth of three sons. 
Semprini left the Conservatorio in 1929 with a doctorate of music and, though he occasionally conducted at La Scala and elsewhere, the piano was his first love. In the 1930s he and another Italian pianist, Bormioli, toured Europe as a popular piano duo, and later he formed his own rhythm orchestra in Italy, with which he made records, broadcasted, and played in a number of musical films. The outbreak of war in 1939 halted his career. He had angered the fascist authorities by playing western music against their orders; and though he had dual Italian and British citizenship, both passports were confiscated, obliging the family to keep a low profile. When eventually the allies advanced into southern Italy he managed to get to Rome, where he volunteered for the Entertainments National Service Association (ENSA), and gave many front-line concerts, his piano on the back of an army truck. 
Among Semprini's troop audiences was the actor Michael Brennan, who offered to be his manager if he ever came to England. But immediately after the war he went to work and study in Spain, where he fell in love with a young Spanish dancer, Maria de la Concepcion Consuelo Garcia Cardoso, daughter of Generoso Jose Garcia Inglesias, house painter. Sadly his first marriage had not survived the stresses of a musician's peripatetic life. He took Consuelo to England in 1949 and after his divorce in 1952 married her in the same year. There were two sons of this happy and enduring union. 
When they arrived in England Brennan secured Semprini a BBC audition. He was immediately engaged to play in a series of fifteen-minute programmes in the style of the recently deceased Charlie Kunz, a popular pianist whose German name had caused public resentment. The style of Semprini quickly took over, pleased the listeners, and led to a short programme with orchestra, for which he chose, arranged, and orchestrated all the music. It was entitled 'Semprini Serenade', and was a subtle blend of classical pieces interspersed with selections from theatre and film music and the work of popular composers such as George Gershwin, impeccably performed and introduced quietly and economically from the piano. Soon the programme stretched to an hour; it remained on the air for twenty-five years. 
Semprini appeared rarely on television, but was a great favourite from 1952 in the surviving variety theatres, sharing the bill with rising stars such as Peter Sellers and Harry Secombe, and touring the country in a caravan, pulled by an ancient ambulance, that contained a piano and a long table on which he worked out his orchestrations. Later he gave many concerts with a more classical content both in Britain and abroad. Whenever possible he drove his beloved Jaguar home through the night to 'L'Esperance', a sailing ship converted into a houseboat at West Mersea, Essex, where the family lived happily for many years. 
Some critics regretted that Semprini did not pursue a more serious musical career. Certainly he could have performed at the very top of his profession, but he was master of his genre and millions of radio listeners and concert-goers loved his music. In 1972 he was made an officer of the order of St John and he was appointed OBE in 1983 -- both recognitions of his considerable efforts for charity. He was a tall, dark, dignified man with fine features, always immaculately dressed, but his gravity was often dispelled by a strong sense of humour and a charming smile. He looked Italian, but he was an Englishman at heart. He died in Brixham, Devon (where his home was 18 Windmill Close), from Alzheimer's disease, on 19 January 1990, and was survived by his second wife. His remains were cremated at Colchester, Essex, and his ashes were scattered in the sea off West Mersea. 
Ian Wallace', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40663


Cutner, Solomon (1902-1988), pianist, was born on 9 August 1902 at 39 Fournier Street, in the East End of London, the youngest in the family of four sons and three daughters of Harris Cutner (formerly Schneiderman), master tailor, the grandson of a Polish emigre from Cutnow, and his wife, Rose Piser. Showing exceptional musical talent from early childhood, at the age of seven he came to the attention of Mathilde Verne, a fashionable London piano teacher and former pupil of Clara Schumann. She persuaded Solomon's parents to sign a contract, relinquishing him into her care for five years, and within a year she had launched him successfully as a child prodigy, with a debut at the Queen's Hall in June 1911, playing Mozart's 'Little B[flat]' concerto, the slow movement of Tchaikovsky's first piano concerto, and a polacca by Alice Verne. The concert was conducted by Theodor Muller-Reuter, another of Clara Schumann's pupils. Billed from the outset as Solomon, sometimes wearing a sailor suit, sometimes in velvet knickerbockers and a lace collar, he captivated his audiences. He was invited to play at Buckingham Palace in 1912, and he made his Proms debut in 1914 playing Beethoven's second piano concerto. 
After Solomon had spent five miserable years with Mathilde Verne, forced to practise for many hours a day in a locked room, his parents refused to sign another contract, and for a year he gave concerts throughout England chaperoned by one of his brothers. In 1916 he decided to give up all public performances, and, after a farewell recital at the Wigmore Hall shortly before his fourteenth birthday, he began studying with Dr Simon Rumschisky in London, while attending King Alfred School in the North End Road in the mornings. His studies were financed through a fund set up by an American, Mrs Colson. He spent three years with Rumschisky, a medical doctor who had studied the physiological aspects of playing the piano. Solomon later claimed that he was one of the greatest teachers in the world, and had taught him all his technique. In 1919, financed by Mrs Colson, Solomon went to Paris, where his teachers included Lazare Levy, Marcel Dupre, and Alfred Cortot. 
Still only nineteen, Solomon returned to the concert platform with a Wigmore Hall recital in 1921. The 1920s were difficult years for him, for English audiences then preferred foreign pianists such as Artur Schnabel. Although he toured the USA in 1926 he remained relatively unknown outside England. Thanks to Sir Henry Wood he performed regularly at the Queen's Hall Promenade Concerts. Sir Arthur Bliss wrote his viola sonata (1933) for Solomon and Lionel Tertis, and when Solomon was asked by the British Council to represent Great Britain at the New York World Fair in 1939 he commissioned Bliss to write a piano concerto. During the Second World War Solomon joined the Entertainments National Service Association and gave many concerts, both for troops abroad and in army camps and hospitals at home, making many converts to classical music. Through his concerts on the wards at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, he came into contact with Sir Alexander Fleming, and was successfully treated for a septic thumb through the inhalation of penicillin in the very early days of its development as an antibiotic. 
After the war Solomon became an international celebrity, following an enthusiastic reception in the USA on his tour in 1949. He spent the next few years touring and recording, before a stroke ended his career in 1956. He was left with an active brain, but a speech impediment. Though he struggled to express himself, his playing days were over. In the remaining years of his life he could take no interest in his career, achievements, or recordings. 
Solomon was one of the three greatest English pianists of the twentieth century, with Dame Myra Hess and Sir Clifford Curzon, and possibly the greatest twentieth-century British interpreter of Schumann. During his early career he was best known for his performances of Chopin, but he later concentrated on Mozart, Beethoven, Schumann, and Brahms. Critics commented on the elegance and purity of his playing, its clarity and accuracy, and the controlled nature of his performances. Famous recordings from the early 1950s include those of the Brahms 'Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Handel', Beethoven's 'Moonlight' sonata, the two Brahms piano concertos, and Schumann's 'Carnaval'. He also played chamber music, recording the Beethoven cello sonatas with Gregor Piatigorsky, and he formed a trio with Zino Francescatti and Pierre Fournier for the 1955 Edinburgh festival. 
Solomon was short and stocky, almost completely bald from an early age, with short, thick fingers. He displayed none of the temperamental behaviour usually associated with great artists, and despite his years of adulation as a child prodigy he developed into a charming and modest person, nicknamed Solo by Walter Legge, manager for artists and repertory at the Gramophone Company. He had a passion for betting and gambling, possibly originating in his trips to the races with the elderly mother of his landlady while he was studying in Paris, and he loved to visit the casinos in Cannes and Monte Carlo. He enjoyed bridge and golf, and for years played tennis daily with his old friend Gerald Moore. 
Solomon was appointed CBE in 1946 for his wartime work. He had honorary degrees from Cambridge (MusD, 1974) and St Andrews (LLD, 1960). On 15 October 1970 he married, after a long relationship begun in 1927, a former pupil, Gwendoline Harriet ('b'. 1905/6), daughter of Patrick Byrne, an Irish doctor and surgeon. They had not married earlier because Solomon was an Orthodox Jew and Gwendoline a gentile. They had no children. Solomon died on 22 February 1988 in London. 
Anne Pimlott Baker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40664


MacColl, Ewan (1915-1989), songwriter, folk-singer, and playwright, was born James Henry Miller on 25 January 1915 at 4 Andrew Street, Broughton, Salford, Lancashire, the youngest and only surviving child in the family of three sons and one daughter (one of each sex was stillborn and one son died at the age of four) of William Miller, ironmoulder, of Salford, and his wife, Betsy, 'nee' Henry, charwoman. He was educated at Grecian Street School, Salford. He left school at the age of fourteen after an elementary education and was immediately unemployed. He joined the Young Communist League (he was not to leave the Communist Party until the early 1960s) and then found work as a motor mechanic, factory worker, and street singer. He first began writing for factory newspapers, composing satirical songs and political poems, while also taking a keen interest in amateur dramatics, in 1931 forming a political street theatre group, the Red Megaphones, which performed sketches on the streets of Salford and Manchester. Both his parents were fine traditional singers, and he had begun to sing and write songs while a teenager. One of his first and finest protest songs, 'The Manchester Rambler', dealt with the 'mass trespass' campaigns of the 1930s, in which hikers fought pitched battles with gamekeepers when they invaded privately owned grouse moors. 
It was two decades before he devoted his energies to music. He spent most of the 1930s involved in experimental theatre projects after joining forces with his future wife, (Maudie) Joan Littlewood (1914-2002), with whom he formed a 'workers' experimental theatre', the Theatre of Action, at Manchester in 1934. Miller wrote and co-produced a series of political satires and dance dramas, and was arrested and charged with disturbing the peace after the police stopped performances of his 'living newspaper', 'Last Edition'. In the Second World War he was called up, joined the army, and was arrested for desertion, although he claimed there had been a case of mistaken identity. He was discharged on medical grounds. He continued with his drama projects after the war, and he and Littlewood formed Theatre Workshop, for which he became art director and resident dramatist. He changed his name to Ewan MacColl in 1945. Between 1945 and 1952 he wrote eleven plays, including 'Uranium 235' (1952), a drama with music, and 'Landscape with Chimneys' (1951), which included one of his best-known songs, 'Dirty Old Town', written in a matter of hours on the opening night to cover a scene change. 
MacColl severed his professional links with Littlewood in 1952 and gradually withdrew from the Theatre Workshop. From 1952 onwards he worked to establish a folk-song revival in Britain. He saw folk music not as some quaint historical curiosity but as a political force, an expression of working-class culture, and he wanted to develop a style in which 'songs of struggle would be immediately acceptable to a lot of young people'. With help from American folklorist Alan Lomax and A. L. (Bert) Lloyd, he mixed politics, British and American folk music, and jazz in a radio series, 'Ballads and Blues' (1953). He founded the Ballads and Blues Club, later renamed the Singers' Club, in London, and by the mid-1950s was considered one of the leading folk-singers in the country. 
Initially, MacColl had encouraged the fashion for American folk and blues (he and Lomax had even started a skiffle group, which included another American singer and songwriter, Peggy Seeger, who was to become his third wife), but by the late 1950s he became concerned that British traditional music was being swamped by American styles. He therefore introduced his controversial 'policy rule' -- singers had to perform songs from their own tradition, depending on whether they were British or American. 
In 1957, when he claimed there were 1500 folk clubs around Britain, MacColl returned to experimental multi-media work, this time with a distinctively British flavour. The 'Radio Ballads', broadcast on the BBC Home Service from 1958 to 1964, dealt with the everyday lives of British workers, from railwaymen to boxers or fishermen, and used a montage of interviews and new songs written by MacColl. In collaboration with the radio producer Charles Parker, he began with 'The Ballad of John Axon', the story of an engine driver who had been killed at work and was awarded a posthumous George Cross. He wrote many of his best songs for this widely praised series, including 'Shoals of Herring' and 'Freeborn Man'. 
A fiery, authoritative, opinionated figure, MacColl never deviated from his staunch left-wing views. From 1965 to 1971 he trained young singers in folk-singing and theatre technique in his Critics Group, which performed an annual review of the year's news, the 'Festival of Fools'. He collected folk-songs, and co-wrote two books with Peggy Seeger ('Travellers' Songs from England and Scotland', 1977, which was praised for its scholarship, and 'Till Doomsday in the Afternoon, the Folklore of a Family of Scots Travellers', 1986). With her he founded Blackthorne Records, which specialized in their own recordings. In the 1980s, by which time his jet-black hair and red beard had turned white, he wrote songs to support the miners' strike and the anti-apartheid movement. Considering his enormous and varied output, it was ironic that his only financial success came from his song 'The first time ever I saw your face', a no. 1 hit in America for Roberta Flack in 1972. It won the Ivor Novello award in 1973. MacColl was awarded an honorary degree by Exeter University in 1986. 
On 2 November 1935 MacColl married Joan Maudie Littlewood (1914-2002), who did not know the identity of her father, but was brought up by a stepfather, Jimmy Morritt, asphalter. They were divorced in 1948 and in 1949 he married Jean, daughter of William Newlove, a wartime director of regional supplies and part-time artist. They had a son, Hamish, and a daughter, Kirsty Anna MacColl, a very successful singer-songwriter. They were divorced in 1974 and he married his third wife, the singer Peggy Seeger, with whom he had lived since the 1950s, in 1977. She was the daughter of Charles Seeger, musicologist, and sister of the singer Pete Seeger. MacColl died on 22 October 1989 in the Brompton Hospital, London, after complications following heart surgery, and his autobiography 'Journeyman' was published the following year. 
Robin Denselow', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40665


Wall, Max (1908-1990), comedian and actor, was born on 12 March 1908 at 37 Glenshaw Mansions, Brixton Road, Brixton, London, the second of the three children, all sons, of John Gillespie Lorimer (died 1922), music-hall artiste, formerly of Forres, Scotland, and his wife, Maud Clara, dancer and singer, daughter of William and Maud Mitchison of Newcastle upon Tyne, both music-hall entertainers. He had sporadic schooling of a disjointed kind, being brought up in the music-hall theatre by his parents, who were known as Jack Lorimer and Stella Stahl. He was first taken on stage, in a kilt, at the age of two. Later he changed his name to Max Wall by deed poll. 
After the break up of his parents' marriage and the death of his father, Max Wall began his long show-business career. At the age of fourteen he made his stage debut in 'Mother Goose' (1922), and, much encouraged by his stepfather, Harry Wallace -- from whom he took his stage surname -- he soon became a fully-fledged professional entertainer, concentrating on eccentric dance routines and funny walks. He made his first London appearance in 1925 at the London Lyceum in 'The London Revue'. Thereafter he appeared in several musical comedies and revues, including C. B. Cochran's 'One Dam Thing After Another' (1927), and he appeared in the 1930 and 1950 royal variety performances. He now established himself as a prominent music-hall artiste, variously billed as 'the boy with the obedient feet' or 'Max Wall and his independent legs'. He served in the Royal Air Force from 1941 to 1943, when he was invalided out on account of 'anxiety neurosis', and returned to the music hall stage. 
With his inventive patter, Wall also enjoyed radio success, notably in 'Hoopla!' (1944), 'Our Shed' (in which he popularized the character of Humphrey, 1946), and 'Petticoat Lane' (1949). He next had a major success as Hines in the musical 'The Pajama Game' (1955), and soon starred in his first television series, 'The Max Wall Show' (1956). He had also perfected his role as Professor Wallofski, a weird spidery figure of a musical clown, clad in black tights, straggling wig, a short dishevelled jacket, and monstrously huge boots. His idols were the clown Grock and Groucho Marx. 
By now the old variety theatre was in decline, and, with domestic problems also taking some toll, Wall had a lean period, during which he mainly played dates in northern clubland. In 1966 his mordant style found fresh opportunities on the legitimate stage, first as Pere Ubu in Ian Cuthbertson's adaptation of 'Ubu Roi' (1966), and then, 'inter alia', in Arnold Wesker's 'The Old Ones' (1972), as Archie Rice in John Osborne's 'The Entertainer' (1974), and in Samuel Beckett's 'Krapp's Last Tape' (1975) and 'Waiting for Godot' (1980). He also appeared, in 1973, in 'Cockie!', a musical version of C. B. Cochran's life, and the 'International Herald Tribune' said he was 'quite simply, the funniest comedian in the world'. He acted in several films, for instance as Flintwich in 'Little Dorrit' (1987). 
In 1974 Wall first produced what was to become a famous one-man show with songs, 'Aspects of Max Wall'. In his later years he became something of a cult entertainer and in 1975 published his autobiography, 'The Fool on the Hill'. He was a fluent mime, hilarious and eccentric dancer, competent musician, and an acidic stand-up comedian. His stage persona had an air of melancholy, even of cynicism, and his countenance was clown-like, with glaring eyes, a prominent nose, and leering mouth. 
Following an unstable upbringing, Wall married, in 1942, Marion Ethel (Pola) Pollachek, dancer, the divorced wife of Thomas Patrick Charles and daughter of Alexander Pollachek, mechanical engineer, who ran a sponge rubber business in Islington. They had four sons and one daughter. The marriage was dissolved, with colourful attendant publicity, in 1956, and Wall became estranged from his family. In the same year he married a beauty queen, Jennifer Chimes, of north Staffordshire, daughter of John William Schumacher, master plumber. That marriage was dissolved in 1969, and he had a third marriage, to Christine Clements, in 1970, which was dissolved in 1972. 
Max Wall rarely sought the camaraderie of show business in his later years, and, despite considerable wealth, lived almost as a recluse in a bedsitting room in south London. He fractured his skull in a fall in Simpson's in the Strand, a London restaurant, on 22 May 1990, and was pronounced dead on arrival at the Westminster Hospital. A celebration of his life was held at St Paul's, Covent Garden, London, on 9 August 1990. 
Eric Midwinter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40666


Collins, Cecil James Henry (1908-1989), painter, was born in Plymouth on 23 March 1908, the only child of Henry Collins, an engineer in a Plymouth laundry, and his wife, Mary Bowie. He won scholarships to the Plymouth School of Art (1924-7) and the Royal College of Art (RCA) (1927-31), where he was a favourite pupil of William Rothenstein. At the RCA he met a fellow student, Elisabeth Ward Ramsden ['see below'], whom he married on 3 April 1931. There were no children of the marriage: according to Elisabeth Collins, 'I could never have had children; Cecil 'was' a child' ('The Independent', 22 Feb 2000). 
The chief contemporary artistic influences on Collins at this time were Picasso and Klee; other strong influences were Byzantine art, the music of Igor Stravinsky's classical period, and contemporary scientific illustrations, both of cell biology and of astronomy. His early love of Shelley and Shakespeare was now augmented by his studies of Coleridge and Milton. When he and his wife went to live in a lonely cottage near Speen, Buckinghamshire, these influences, together with readings in the English mystics and the silence of the place, inspired him to do his first visionary paintings, which were successfully shown at his first London exhibition, at the Bloomsbury Gallery in 1935. Herbert Read, much impressed, included his work in the London International Surrealist Exhibition in 1936. Collins's association with the surrealists was short-lived, for he was accused of religious sympathies and excluded from the movement. 
In the late 1930s Collins and his wife went to live near Dartington Hall, Devon, where the American artist Mark Tobey was teaching. Tobey and Bernard Leach aroused his interest in Eastern thought and art. There he painted several great works, such as 'The Voice', 'The Quest', and the double portrait 'The Artist and his Wife' (1939; Tate collection). The artistic and intellectual stimuli at Dartington, together with the threat of war, inspired Collins to paint his most famous series of works, based on the image of the Fool, which he began in late 1939. To him the Fool signified 'purity of consciousness', and he gave to his many depictions of the image qualities that were threatened by the Second World War: charm, fun, compassion, and insight. Rejected for war service at a time when the Dartington community was depleted by the internment of many of its teachers, who had taken refuge there from Germany, Collins was asked to teach, and it was then that he discovered his great gifts as a teacher. 
Collins's exhibition at the Lefevre Gallery in 1944, even though cut short by a flying bomb, was an outstanding success. He and his wife had left Dartington by this time and lived variously in London, Yorkshire, Oxford, and Cambridge. In this period Collins produced his 'paradisal drawings' and experimented with print making. He also published in 1947 his essay 'The Vision of the Fool', a work that expresses his feelings about the role of the artist (the Fool) in the modern world of war and industrialization. This time of success was to be followed by a long period when some critics turned against him and others neglected him. He took up teaching again, at the Central School of Arts and Crafts from 1951 onwards, and leaned towards the traditional images of Christianity. He found a new freedom in painting large works, based on the principle of what he called the 'matrix': he would let the image come to him out of a preliminary working with his paints in a seemingly wild and chaotic manner. Thus he independently discovered something of what the American abstract expressionists had been doing for years. These new works were shown in a major retrospective of his work at the Whitechapel Gallery in 1959. The matrix period led him to explore in greater depth the three main images of his work: the Fool, the Lady or Anima, and the Angel. The matrix period was followed by a return to a calmer, more classical, style in which he continued to express the moods of the spiritual worlds these images conveyed to him. The Fool, the Lady, and the Angel all have access to the world of the Great Happiness, which is the true source of creativity. In his portrayals of the Lady, Collins gave new expression to the ancient tradition of Wisdom or Sapientia as a beautiful woman, and in his angels he showed creatures who are constantly and mysteriously always present and ready to give guidance. 
When in 1975 the Central School of Art tried to end Collins's teaching contract, his students arose in rebellion on his behalf. His contract was extended for a year, but the battle had to be fought again with each new generation of students marching and demonstrating, and with correspondence in national newspapers supporting his cause. The conflict, which arose from objections to the originality of his teaching methods and the metaphysical ideas on which they were founded, often debilitated him and distracted him from painting. Nevertheless he received support from other quarters, notably from his association with the Anthony d'Offay Gallery from 1976 onwards, an Arts Council film of his work in 1978, and a Tate Gallery exhibition of his prints in 1981, the year in which his poems 'In the Solitude of this Land' and a reprint of 'The Vision of the Fool' were published. These were followed by two full-length television documentaries in 1984 and 1988. 
In early manhood and into middle age Collins wore a beard. In later years the curvature of his spine, brought about by deprivations in his early life, became very pronounced, though it never affected his co-ordination. He had great physical calm, with long, fine, thin fingers with which he would seemingly shape his sentences in front of him as he spoke. He was very nervous of catching colds and would often be seen in the hottest weather wearing a tweed suit, a thick tweed greatcoat, and a hat. His eyes were expressive, witty, and sharply observant. 
Collins was present at the opening of the retrospective exhibition of his work at the Tate Gallery in May 1989 and died shortly afterwards in the London Clinic on 4 June 1989. He was buried in Highgate cemetery. He had been appointed MBE in 1979 and elected RA in 1988. A man of deep metaphysical interests, and with a scholar's analytical mind, he was regarded by some as Britain's greatest visionary artist since William Blake. 
Collins's wife, 
William Anderson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40667


Ede, Harold Stanley (1895-1990), museum curator and art collector, was born on 7 April 1895 in Penarth, Glamorgan, the younger son and second of three children of Edward Hornby Ede (1862-1940), solicitor, of Penarth, and his wife, Mildred Mary Furley (1866-1953), sometime schoolteacher, only daughter of Joseph Blanch, Methodist minister. At the Leys School, Cambridge (1909-12), where he began a lifelong friendship with Donald Winnicott, he developed an interest in early Italian art which had burgeoned on a trip to Paris as a fourteen-year-old. He retained this passion throughout his life, and in 1926 published 'Florentine Drawings of the Quattrocento'. 
Ede was a somewhat rebellious child who enjoyed reverie and nature rather than academic discipline. In his unpublished memoir he described himself as an effeminate young man. As he grew older he placed particular value on male friendships. However, he enjoyed the company of his maternal grandmother and of his aunt Maud, a painter whom he visited in Paris. He gained a passion for reading from his mother and his father was a bibliophile. 
Leaving the Leys early Ede began to train as a painter at Newlyn and then Edinburgh College of Art before war service interrupted his studies. In 1914 he joined the 6th battalion (pioneers) of the South Wales Borderers. He served as a lieutenant in France, was invalided back, and was posted to Cambridge (officer cadet battalion), and then India, where he suffered serious illness for several months. He returned via Alexandria, which he described as the first place in which he felt at home. Earlier generations of his family had lived around the Mediterranean. 
In 1919 Ede enrolled at the Slade School of Fine Art; he left in March 1921 to become the photographer's assistant at the National Gallery and then, in 1922, an assistant at the Tate Gallery. During his fourteen years at the Tate (1922-36) Ede established close contacts with avant-garde artists in Paris but served under a director, J. B. Manson, who was unable to recognize his talents. Had his friendships with Picasso, Braque, Chagall, Brancusi, Miro, and others been exploited, the Tate could have had an unrivalled collection of early twentieth-century art. Similarly his friendships with younger British artists such as Ben Nicholson and Winifred Nicholson, Barbara Hepworth, Henry Moore, David Jones, and Christopher Wood were also ignored. 
Ede met the Nicholsons in 1923, and it was they who kindled his interest in contemporary art. Others whom he acknowledged as important influences on his life were Gertrude Harris (widow of Frederick Leverton Harris), Lady Ottoline Morrell, Helen Sutherland, and T. E. Lawrence, with whom he regularly corresponded. Indeed, correspondence was a central activity in Ede's life. On 6 January 1921 Ede married Helen (1894-1977), daughter of Otto Schlapp, professor of German at the University of Edinburgh. Scottish by birth, Helen began to call him Jim, a name which he was to adopt for the remainder of his life. Together they had two daughters. Within two years Ede acquired 1 Elm Row, Hampstead, with the help of his father, and there he and his wife entertained relentlessly, creating something of a salon for artists, collectors, and dignitaries. Ede was a collector of people as much as of art. 
In 1926 Ede discovered the work of the sculptor Henri Gaudier-Brzeska (1819-1915), when his estate was offered to the Tate, but there was little enthusiasm for his work. After persuading a number of collectors to purchase sculptures and drawings, Ede was given permission to acquire the remainder. From that year onwards he championed the cause of Gaudier-Brzeska by publishing books -- 'A Life of Gaudier-Brzeska' (1930), republished as 'Savage Messiah' (1931) -- and making generous gifts to museums, notably the Tate Gallery, the Musee des Beaux-Arts in Orleans (1959), and the Musee National d'Art Moderne in Paris (1967). He was nominated chevalier (1959) and officer (1967) of the Legion d'honneur. 
In October 1936 Ede, a leading contender to be the next director, resigned from the Tate on grounds of ill health, unable to work further with Manson. Supporting himself by American lecture tours, and with financial aid from his father, he and his family moved to Tangier. He spent the Second World War years in Tangier, North America, and England. 
The Edes sold their house in 1952, and acquired a large, old farmhouse in the Loire valley. They returned to England in 1956, and in 1957 purchased a row of four derelict, seventeenth-century cottages in Cambridge. Ede converted them into a single dwelling and named it Kettle's Yard. Here he arranged his by then considerable collection of works of art, some given to him by his mother, who had purchased them on his advice, in a manner which would make modern art not merely approachable but alive, combining his twentieth-century enthusiasms with his love of artefacts and materials from the past. Works of art by Ben Nicholson and Brancusi would sit alongside antique country furniture, ancient stones, flints, and amphora. Old floorboards, tiles, and windows salvaged from demolished buildings found a natural home in a building which harmonized the modernist spirit of the 1930s with the experience of living in north Africa. A respect for light and space was the hub of Ede's vision. The house was infused with the spirituality which formed the core of his and his wife's life. They kept open house every afternoon and those fortunate to be there at closing time were invited to tea. In 1966 Ede gave Kettle's Yard to the University of Cambridge. He also endowed a student travel fund. Ede remained in residence until 1973, when he and his wife moved to Edinburgh. She died in 1977. He maintained links with the curators of Kettle's Yard and published a book on it, 'A Way of Life' (1984). 
Although Ede was confirmed in the Church of England in the 1960s, his belief in God was unbound by the strictures of any one denomination or by his early Methodist formation. He believed in God's all-pervasiveness and Kettle's Yard was for him a manifestation of God. Determination, obstinacy, and a sense of rightness, mixed with a twinkling charm, were important traits of his character. His own description of David Jones best encapsulates him: 'Someone with a strange force which comes, not out of the strength of his body, but from the strength of his intention.' He died in Edinburgh on 15 March 1990 and his ashes were interred at St Peter's Church, Cambridge. 
Jeremy Lewison', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40668


Fuller, Peter Michael (1947-1990), art critic and magazine editor, was born on 31 August 1947 in Damascus, the second child and elder son in the family of two sons and a daughter of Harold William Charles Fuller, general medical practitioner, and his wife, Marjorie Dale Noyes, midwife. His childhood was largely spent in Eastleigh, a Hampshire railway town, where the family attended the Union Baptist church on Sundays. Fuller was baptized by complete immersion in 1961, just before he went away to board at Epsom College, a public school closely connected with the medical profession. Although he liked the fact that both John Piper and Graham Sutherland went to Epsom College, Fuller was unhappy there. He doubted his religious convictions and felt bewildered by the loss of earlier certainties. 
The sense of confusion intensified while Fuller read English at Peterhouse, Cambridge, between 1965 and 1968. He obtained a second class (division two) in both parts of the English tripos (1967 and 1968). He later described his time at Cambridge as 'a period of personal crisis', and found his Baptist faith increasingly inadequate. Psychiatric problems aggravated his disquiet, and he consulted a psychoanalyst in his last year at Cambridge. By that time Fuller had fallen under the influence of Marxism and the far left. Revolution was in the air, and Marxist literature formed much of his reading. But he also staged an exhibition of his paintings at the Cambridge Union, and in 1967 met his future wife, Colette Marie Mejean, a French student whose father was a village postmaster. They married in 1971, and five years later their only child, Sylvia Leda, was born. After Cambridge, Fuller worked at first as a journalist on 'City Press', a City of London newspaper, whose motto was 'The voice of honest capitalism'. His interest in Marxism intensified, and he began writing for the underground press -- most notably, 'Black Dwarf' and 'Seven Days'. A visit to Argentina allowed him to witness a struggle for national liberation, and he became an avid reader of the 'New Left Review'. But his involvement with theoretical debate overlaid what he afterwards termed 'a deep sense of fragmentation'. Gambling and masochism grew into compulsive obsessions, and he began a five-year period of psychoanalysis in 1972. 
Apart from editing a book entitled 'The Psychology of Gambling' (1974), with Jon Halliday, Fuller became a regular contributor to 'Arts Review', 'Connoisseur', 'Art and Artists', 'Art Monthly', and 'Studio International'. Some of his most substantial reviews appeared in 'New Society', to which he had been introduced by the writer who influenced him most powerfully during the 1970s, John Berger. They became friends, and Fuller also got to know the American painter Robert Natkin, about whom he wrote articles, catalogues, and finally a book ('Robert Natkin', 1981). The most impressive outcome of his work during the 1970s was 'Art and Psychoanalysis' (1980). 
The advent of a new decade brought momentous changes. Colette left Fuller in 1981, and they were divorced four years later. John Berger's influence was superseded by that of John Ruskin, whose ideas dominated Fuller's book 'Theoria: Art, and the Absence of Grace' (1988). He repudiated Marxism, along with most of the friends he had made in the 1970s. Berger came under particularly virulent attack, and Fuller revised an earlier publication called 'Seeing Berger' (1980) under the new, caustic title 'Seeing through Berger' (1988). New friends, such as the philosopher Roger Scruton, now aligned him more with the right than the left. He became a fierce opponent of the avant-garde, calling instead for a return to the romantic and figurative tradition in British art. Marriage to the Australian sculptor Stephanie Jane Burns in 1985 brought him enormous happiness as well as a son, Laurence Ruskin Fuller, who was born in 1986. Stephanie was the daughter of Alan Robert Burns, company chairman and inventor. Two years later Fuller founded his own art magazine with the suitably Ruskinian title 'Modern Painters', as a pulpit for his views. It was an immediate success, not only because of Fuller's combative and controversial editorials, but also on account of his willingness to publish a lively range of views from novelists as well as critics. The attention attracted by the magazine helped to make Fuller more widely known, and his appointment as art critic of the 'Sunday Telegraph' in 1989 gave him another public platform. A regular column there enabled him to champion artists like the painter John Bellany and the sculptor Glynn Williams, both of whom Fuller saw upholding the values he cherished. 
Slight in build, and invariably pale, Fuller often looked as if he had just emerged from a long period incarcerated in his study. Behind spectacles, his eyes would often narrow as if to cope with the unaccustomed glare of daylight. Living in Bath, with a country cottage at Stowlangtoft in Suffolk, he enjoyed his greatest period of success and notoriety. But a motorway accident on 28 April 1990, when he was forty-two, cut everything short. His chauffeur-driven car crashed into a field off the M4 motorway, near Theale. Fuller died at the scene, of head and neck injuries. His wife, thirty-three weeks pregnant, broke a hip, damaged her spine, and lost her unborn child, Gabriel, as a result of the accident. Gabriel and Fuller were buried together at St George's Church, Stowlangtoft. A large sculpture called 'Opening Chestnut', by Glynn Williams, stands at the head of the grave. 
Richard Cork', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40669


Tinling, Cuthbert Collingwood (1910-1990), fashion designer, was born on 23 June 1910 in Eastbourne, Sussex, the youngest of the three sons of James Alexander Tinling, chartered accountant, and his wife, Florence Mary Elizabeth Buckland. He was christened Cuthbert after his great-grandfather Admiral Cuthbert (first Baron) Collingwood, but his parents changed his name to Teddy during the First World War because Cuthbert was the name given to conscientious objectors in cartoons in the 'Evening News'. Much later he shortened this to Ted, on the advice of his agent, when he became a popular guest on television chat shows in the United States. Because of his chronic asthma the family moved to the French riviera after the war, and he spent the rest of his childhood in Nice, on his own with his mother after his father had to return to England. He attended a Roman Catholic day school. 
As a schoolboy Tinling joined the Nice tennis club; he umpired a match for Suzanne Lenglen at the age of thirteen, and became a devoted member of her entourage. He mixed with high society on the French riviera while still in his teens, umpiring and refereeing matches and organizing tournaments. Suzanne Lenglen, with her flowing pure silk dresses and silk bandeau around her head, became his idol and inspiration. His first tennis dress was designed for her, in 1937, for her last world tour. 
In 1927 Tinling was sent to London to study dress designing, and when he set up his own business there in 1931 many of his clients were friends he had made in the south of France. Within a year he had expanded into premises in Mayfair and shown his first collection. He soon had a reputation in haute couture to rival that of Hardy Amies and Norman Hartnell, and in 1938 he made fourteen wedding dresses for society weddings at St Margaret's, Westminster. 
At the same time Tinling remained involved in the world of tennis, especially at Wimbledon, where he worked from 1927 to 1949 during the two weeks of the championships as the 'call boy', responsible for escorting players from their dressing-rooms to the centre court and court no. 1 for their matches. In 1928 he was also asked to act as a liaison between the Wimbledon committee and the players, and he did this until 1949. A keen amateur player himself, Tinling played on the amateur circuit from 1935 until 1950, captaining Sussex for many years, and he first played at Wimbledon in 1948. 
During the Second World War, Tinling served in the intelligence corps in Algiers and Germany, and he remained in the army until 1947. He reached the rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
Having resumed his career as a couturier in 1947, Tinling became known as a designer of tennis dresses. He believed that women tennis players should wear clothes that stressed their femininity. He designed his first Wimbledon tennis dress for Joy Gannon in 1947, and became famous in 1949 when 'Gorgeous Gussy' Moran asked him to design her tennis dresses for Wimbledon, and the underwear to go with them. The lace-trimmed panties he made for her caused a sensation, and, told he had put vulgarity and sin into tennis, he was barred from working at Wimbledon for many years. However, he continued to design tennis dresses for the leading women players. For ten successive years, from 1952 to 1961, he dressed the winner of the Wimbledon women's singles title, and in 1973 the five major championships in the world were won by players wearing his dresses. In 1970 he was appointed official designer to the Virginia Slims women's professional circuit, and in eight years he created more than 1000 different dresses, embroidered with sequins, woven with silver threads, and covered with frills and bows. However, in the late 1970s the top players were attracted by large sponsorship contracts to wear sportswear separates designed by large manufacturers, and Tinling gave up designing tennis dresses. He settled in Philadelphia in the USA in 1976. 
Tinling made fourteen wedding dresses for tennis stars, including a dress for 'Little Mo' Connolly for her wedding in California in 1955, and ones for Christine Truman and Chris Evert. In June 1986, as part of the celebration of the centenary of the Wimbledon championships, an exhibition of Tinling's tennis creations was mounted at the Victoria and Albert Museum. The exhibits included some of the coloured dresses he had designed during the war, when the all-white rule was suspended, such as Kay Stammers's pink dress of 1941. Also on display were Maria Bueno's dress with its 'Cleopatra' embroidery, Rosie Casals's black-sequinned dress, and Billie Jean King's rhinestone-studded dress of 1973. In the 1980s he admired the ice dancer Jayne Torville, and always said that the movements of a good tennis player were as beautiful and graceful as those of an ice skater or ballerina. In 1982 Tinling became assistant to the president of the International Tennis Federation in Paris, and shortly afterwards he was invited to become head of the Wimbledon liaison committee once again, a job he continued to do until his death. 
Very tall (6 feet 6 inches), with a shining bald head, shaved on the advice of Vidal Sassoon, Tinling wore a large diamond in one ear and several bracelets on his wrists. He was witty and outrageous, and was often compared with Oscar Wilde and Sir Noel Coward. Apart from tennis and fashion, his other enthusiasms included the music of Richard Wagner and tenpin bowling. Tinling died on 23 May 1990 in Cambridge. He was unmarried. Many tennis stars attended his memorial service at St James's, Piccadilly, London, on 24 June 1990, the eve of Wimbledon. 
Anne Pimlott Baker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40670


Willing, Victor James Arthur (1928-1988), artist, was born on 15 January 1928 in Alexandria, Egypt, the only child of George Willing, professional soldier (a captain), and his wife, Irene Cynthia Tomkins. He spent the first four years of his life in Egypt and, briefly, in Malta. Although he never consciously introduced the landscape of his childhood into his art, the paintings which made his reputation are notable for their sense of windless heat, bright light, vacant horizons, and undecorated enclosures. Through most of the 1930s Willing went to schools in various parts of southern England, including the Isle of Wight, but he enjoyed a more settled education during the Second World War at the Royal Grammar School, Guildford (1940-45), where he won the art prize. As a national serviceman (1946-8) he gained a commission in the Royal Artillery and, during this time, was confirmed in his ambition to be an artist by the Victoria and Albert Museum's pioneer showing in England of an exhibition of work by Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse (1946). The force of Picasso's work, which he subsequently compared to being 'trapped in a stall with a stallion', particularly impressed him. On demobilization he was for a year at Guildford Art School before being accepted by the Slade School of Art, London University, where he spent four years (1949-53). 
Willing had a rebellious streak and was admired by his contemporaries at the Slade -- an outstanding intake, which included Michael Andrews and Euan Uglow -- for his talent and intellectual zest, even being singled out by the influential critic David Sylvester as 'the spokesman for his generation'. He soon made friends in avant-garde circles, most influentially for his painting with (H. G.) Rodrigo Moynihan and Francis Bacon. In 1955 he had a well received first one-man show at Erica Brausen's Hanover Gallery, where Bacon exhibited. 
This bright start as a painter was consolidated by Willing's reputation as an intellectual. It is typical that his first, unpublished, article was preoccupied with the romantic and existential notion of the artist as hero, dandy, and gambler. It proved a false dawn. In 1951 he had married a girlfriend since schooldays, Hazel, daughter of Harold Norman Whittington, a fellow of the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors. By the mid-1950s the marriage was failing and in December 1956 he left for Portugal to live with the painter Paula Rego, whom he had met at the Slade. She was the daughter of Jose Figueira Rego, electrical engineer. They married in 1959, the year of Willing's divorce from Hazel Whittington. He continued to work but, by his own exacting standards, the results were not exhibitable and his loss to art seemed permanent when he took on the management of his father-in-law's business after the latter's death. 
This coincided with the diagnosis that Willing was suffering from multiple sclerosis, and when the Portuguese revolution of 1974 left the family affairs in chaos he settled in London with his wife and their children -- Caroline ('b'. 1956), Victoria ('b'. 1959), and Nicholas ('b'. 1961). He took a room in a condemned school in Stepney for a peppercorn rent and began to paint with renewed intensity, stimulated by the knowledge that time was short. Because he could only stand with the aid of a stick, for long periods he merely sat and stared. In states of reverie pictures would appear on the wall facing him. They were so vivid he called them 'visions'; and as soon as they were over he would draw them, later enlarging some into oil paintings. He exhibited the results in 1978 at the AIR (Artist Information Registry) Gallery. 
The visions were the first pictures Willing felt 'exclusive to himself' and met with immediate critical success. Even after they disappeared, their effect remained. His last decade was a professional triumph. In 1980 he received a Thorne scholarship and in 1982 was made university artist in residence at Cambridge. There followed public exhibitions at the Serpentine and Whitechapel galleries -- the latter a major retrospective in 1986; and his pictures entered several important collections, including those of the Arts Council and the Tate Gallery. Even when greatly paralysed he managed to complete a series of powerful imaginative portraits, entitled 'Heads', exhibited at the Karsten Schubert Gallery (1987). 
All Willing's paintings came from his large legacy of drawings, which he showed independently at the Hobson Gallery (1983), Bernard Jacobson Gallery (1983, 1984, and 1985), and the Hayward Gallery Annual, sponsored by the Arts Council (1985). His most celebrated paintings are imaginative representations of empty rooms or deserted locations, pregnant with the presence of humans but never showing people. As in the work of Bacon, there is often a sense of existential anguish played out on a stage; but in Willing the drama is usually one of suspense and expectation. 'Place with a Red Thing' (1980, Tate collection) is an explicit exception, a masterpiece of ambiguity because of its clarity. A strange red form dripping and burgeoning dominates a space. 'Cythere' (1983, priv. coll.) is also exceptional in showing a violently coloured plant simultaneously blooming and dying in front of a formal arrangement of cubic forms, apparently artificially lit against an indigo sky or backdrop. In pencil and brush Willing's handling is always expressive. His colours combine to enforce a sense of unease just as his geometry always avoids the right angle. His interest in stacked formal structures was realized in some sculptures towards the end of his life and he had unfulfilled plans to turn his fascination with the idea of the 'aedicula' or 'shelter', a place of refuge or retreat, into three dimensions. 
Willing was slightly built, but with wide shoulders, sleek, handsome, and, unlike most artists, neatly dressed. He had an air of danger which made him a magnetic presence. He was given to quick, sudden movements and was a skilful and energetic dancer, with a sense of rhythm he brought to his painting. He died at home in Hampstead, London, of multiple sclerosis, on 1 June 1988. His wife survived him. 
John McEwen', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40671


Blacking, John Anthony Randoll (1928-1990), social anthropologist and ethnomusicologist, was born on 22 October 1928 in Guildford, Surrey, the elder child and only son of William Henry Randoll Blacking, ecclesiastical architect, and his wife, (Josephine) Margaret Newcombe Waymouth. The family moved to 21 The Close, Salisbury, in 1930. Blacking attended Salisbury Cathedral school (1934-42) where, as a chorister and pianist, he showed early musical promise. Attendance at Sherborne School, Dorset (1942-7), was followed by a commission in the Coldstream Guards and active service in Malaya (1947-9). The plight of the aboriginal peoples caught up in the conflict moved him deeply, and on his release from national service he went to King's College, Cambridge, to read archaeology and anthropology. While there, he was active in artistic life as a pianist and actor, and as a performer and promoter of contemporary music. He obtained second classes (division one in part one and division two in part two) in his tripos (1952 and 1953). 
Blacking began to use his musical and anthropological talents in a variety of ways. For a time he considered becoming a professional pianist, he worked as a social worker in the East End of London, and he spent a summer studying ethnomusicology in Paris. In October 1953 he was invited by the Colonial Office to return to Malaya as assistant adviser on aboriginal peoples, which he did, only then to learn that his role was to provide the intelligence that would enable the forced removal of the forest peoples, all of whom were apparently suspected of being (or harbouring) terrorists. He refused, resigning after only six days. 
Blacking took a post as a musicologist at the International Library of African Music at Roodepoort, near Johannesburg, South Africa, in 1954. In this capacity he carried out field studies in Zululand and Mozambique, and among the Venda and Gwembe Tonga peoples. In 1955 he married Brenda Eleonora, daughter of Herman Wilhelm Friedrich Gebers, a farmer. They had a son and four daughters, two of whom died in childhood (1956 and 1963). In 1959 Blacking took up a lectureship in social anthropology and African government at the University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, becoming professor and head of the department in 1965. Witwatersrand awarded him a PhD in 1965 and a DLitt in 1972. His principal publications during this period included (as editor) 'Black Background: the Childhood of a South African Girl' (1964) and (as author) 'Venda Children's Songs: a Study in Ethnomusicological Analysis' (1967). A man of forceful personality and an enthusiastic evangelist in promoting understanding between people, and between people and the institutions they create, Blacking set up courses in African music and Asian studies, and took an increasingly outspoken role in anti-apartheid politics, which eventually led him to clash with the authorities. He was prosecuted under the notorious 'Immorality Act', which forbade sexual relations between people of different colours. 
In 1969 Blacking left South Africa with Zureena Rukshana Desai, a medical doctor, with whom he was later to have four daughters. She was the daughter of Suliman Mohamed Desai, a company director. After his divorce in 1975, he and Zureena were married in 1978. Offered a choice of chairs in Britain and the United States, he chose, after a short spell as professor of anthropology at Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, to take up in 1970 the first appointment to the chair of social anthropology at the Queen's University of Belfast. This was at the very height of the 'troubles' in Northern Ireland, in which he saw many parallels with Malaya and South Africa. It was with a sense of mission that he guided the department from modest beginnings in 1970 to become one of the largest in the British Isles and an internationally recognized centre of ethnomusicology. His most influential book, 'How Musical is Man?' (1974), stressed the importance of identifying the structural relationships between patterns of musical organization and those of social life. It argued that the human potential for musical creativity had been stifled in the West by an elitist conception of musical ability, whereas in pre-industrial societies everyone was an active musician. The book was soon published in paperback and was translated into several languages. It brought students of ethnomusicology to Belfast from all over the world. 
Blacking was a handsome man, tall and fair with clear blue eyes and the lean, broad-shouldered frame of a rugby player. He frequently wore his regiment of guards tie, which gave him a rather formal and military air that contrasted with the rebellious and iconoclastic things he often said. His impact upon an audience was both physical and intellectual. A gifted lecturer, always at his best playing to an audience, he could, and did, teach anything in the syllabus with authority and flair. He served in various capacities on the committees of the International Folk Music Council, the Royal Anthropological Institute, the Social Science Research Council, the Council for National Academic Awards, and the British Council, and gave dozens of guest lectures and addresses, but yet still found the time to do voluntary work for homeless, handicapped, and unemployed people as a council member in local charitable organizations. He regularly gave solo piano recitals at the university's lunchtime concerts. A man of great verve, wide interests, and an abiding belief in the creative genius of all humanity, he was constantly active. He believed that human beings were inherently musical and that music was an important means of communication across cultural boundaries. 
In 1984 Blacking was elected to the Royal Irish Academy. He was awarded the Rivers memorial medal of the Royal Anthropological Institute (1986) and the Koizumi Fumio prize in Tokyo (1989). His last works included a six-part series, 'Dancing', for Independent Television, and a book on the ethnomusicological work of the Australian composer Percy Grainger, 'A Commonsense View of All Music' (1987). Blacking died of cancer in Belfast on 24 January 1990. A posthumous collection of his essays on ethnomusicology, together with an extended biographical introduction and a full list of his works, was published in 1995. 
Reginald Byron', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40672


Burn, Duncan Lyall (1902-1988), economist, was born on 10 August 1902 at Holloway, London, the younger child and younger son of Archibald William Burn, engineer, and his wife, Margaret Anne Mead, who, prior to her marriage, worked as a nanny. He was taught history at Holloway county school by Arthur Bryant and won a scholarship to Christ's College, Cambridge, where he took a first class (division two) in both parts of the history tripos (1923 and 1924). On graduation he won a Wrenbury scholarship, which enabled him to spend a year (1924) as a bachelor research scholar at Christ's. After two years at Liverpool as a university lecturer in economic history (1925-6) he returned to Cambridge in 1927 in the same capacity. There he remained until the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, living out of Cambridge and with no college attachment. During that time he completed his authoritative study of the British steel industry, 'The Economic History of Steelmaking, 1867-1939' (1940). He was also a kindly and rigorous supervisor, some of whose students maintained a lifelong friendship with him. 
A self-taught economist, Burn never ceased to be an academic, pursuing research in industrial economics throughout his life. He was not much interested in macroeconomics, dismissing demand management after the war as 'penny-in-the-slot-economics'. Throughout the war he served with Robert Shone in the iron and steel control of the Ministry of Supply, taking part in the later stages in government planning for the post-war steel industry. In 1946 he did not return to Cambridge but joined 'The Times' as leader writer and industrial correspondent, continuing in that capacity for the next sixteen years, and displaying an impressive knowledge of industry in Britain and abroad. He won a high reputation in the main industrial countries and maintained close and frequent contact with Jean Monnet, the French economist and politician. He was a natural choice to edit a two-volume study of British industry ('The Structure of British Industry', 1958), and contributed to it chapters on oil and steel, as well as an analytical survey. He continued to write on the steel industry, producing in 1961 a sequel to his earlier book, 'The Steel Industry, 1939-59'. When re-nationalization was under debate he argued (in 'The Future of Steel', 1965) that the proposal misconceived the problems of the industry and misjudged the likely effects. 'More scope', he maintained, 'must be given to rebels in management', who backed far-sighted but unfashionable or unpopular projects. 
In 1962 Burn left 'The Times' and adopted a third career as an industrial consultant, acting for three years as director of the economic development office set up by four leading manufacturers of heavy electric generators. This increased his interest in nuclear energy, on which he wrote extensively over the next fifteen years, beginning with a lengthy study in 1965, after a visit to America, entitled 'The Significance of Oyster Creek', the first large boiling water reactor to be ordered. He also acted as consultant to firms in the aircraft and chemical industries, and wrote 'Chemicals under Free Trade' (1971). He served on a number of official and academic committees such as the economic committee of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (1963-5), and had two further spells of academic life as visiting professor at the University of Manchester (1967-9) and the University of Bombay (1971). At his death he had been working for a number of years on his book 'The Public Interest'. 
In 1967 Burn developed his criticisms of British plans for a programme of gas-cooled reactors (AGRs) in 'The Political Economy of Nuclear Energy', maintaining that the AGR was well behind light water reactors in performance and likely to fall further behind. By the time he published 'Nuclear Power and the Energy Crisis' in 1978 it was apparent that, instead of Britain leading the world in nuclear energy as ministers claimed even in the mid-1960s, no British nuclear reactors had ever been built abroad. Burn continued to interest himself in nuclear energy, acting from 1980 until his death as specialist adviser to the House of Commons select committee on energy. 
The distinguishing feature of Burn's work was his deep interest in what made for successful industrial and technological development. He stressed the contribution made by competition in encouraging a variety of approaches and allowing scope for differences of opinion. His research was meticulous and quantitative, and aimed to single out the key elements in competitive success. He had many contacts in industry and, as he was a good listener with a retentive memory, he came to have a rare knowledge of expert industrial opinion as well as its divisions and weaknesses. In expressing his own views he was never daunted by the authority or eminence of those from whom he differed. He could be scathing in his criticisms, but his views were well documented and carefully argued. 
Burn was short in stature and clean-shaven, with blue eyes and a slightly puckered face. He spoke slowly and quietly, but with assurance, and he enjoyed an argument. Normally serious-minded, he did not lack a sly humour and was given to an occasional quip and twinkle of the eye. On 30 December 1930 he married Jessie Mabel (Mollie), four years his senior and daughter of William Louis White, a chemist who worked in a retail pharmacy. It was an extremely happy marriage, producing two daughters and lasting for nearly sixty years until his death from heart failure on 9 January 1988 in the Royal Free Hospital, London. 
Alec Cairncross', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40673


Elias, Norbert (1897-1990), sociologist, was born on 22 June 1897 in Breslau, Germany (which later became WrocLaw, Poland), the only child of Hermann Elias, businessman, and his wife, Sophie Galevski. He attended the Johannesgymnasium, Breslau, and, after service in the German army during the First World War, read philosophy and medicine at Breslau University. As a teenager and young man, Elias was a leading figure in the Zionist youth movement Blau-Weiss, a fact which -- for whatever reason -- he took some trouble in later life to obscure. 
Elias was awarded a doctorate in philosophy at Breslau in January 1924 for a thesis entitled 'Idee und Individuum'. Financial difficulties caused by the great German inflation of 1922-3 interrupted his studies, but in 1925 he went to Heidelberg to work for his 'Habilitation' in sociology, at first with Alfred Weber (1868-1958). In 1930, when Karl Mannheim (1893-1947) moved to Frankfurt as professor, Elias accompanied him as academic assistant. His 'Habilitation' was rushed through early in 1933, after Adolf Hitler came to power, but shortly afterwards Elias, as a Jew, sought refuge first in Paris (1933-5), and then in London (from 1935), eventually becoming a British citizen in 1952. His father died in Breslau in 1940, and his mother died in Auschwitz about 1941. 
In Paris and London, Elias completed the two volumes of his 'magnum opus', 'Uber den Prozess der Zivilisation' (published in translation as 'The Civilizing Process' in two volumes in 1978 and 1982, and in a revised, single-volume translation in 2000); they were published in Basel in 1939, and received very little notice at that unpropitious moment. In 1939 Elias was awarded a senior research fellowship at the London School of Economics, interrupted by a period of internment as an enemy alien, and 'made himself useful' to the British security services. After the Second World War he made a meagre living by extramural lecturing in London, and helped Siegmund Foulkes found the Group Analytic Society. Only in 1954, aged fifty-seven, did he obtain a post in a British university -- at Leicester, from where he formally retired as reader in 1962. From 1962 to 1964 he was professor of sociology at the University of Ghana. 
Elias's international reputation was gained in his long and productive old age. 'Uber den Prozess der Zivilisation' was republished in 1969, to acclaim in Germany, the Netherlands, and France. His later books, in their English versions, include 'The Established and the Outsiders' (1965), 'What is Sociology?' (1978), 'The Court Society' (on the court of Louis XIV, 1983), 'The Loneliness of the Dying' (1985), 'Involvement and Detachment' (essays on the sociology of knowledge and the sciences, 1987), 'Quest for Excitement' (essays on the sociology of sport, 1986), 'The Symbol Theory' (1991), 'Time: an Essay' (1992), 'Mozart: Portrait of a Genius' (1993), and 'The Germans' (1995). A selection of his poems, 'Los der Menschen', appeared in 1987. 

'Uber den Prozess der Zivilisation' underlies all Elias's later work. It begins by examining how the word 'civilization', derived from 'civilite', denoting the manners of courtiers, came to be used by nineteenth-century Europeans to express their sense of superiority over lower ranks or other cultures. The characteristics taken as evidence of this superiority had come to seem innate, and the Europeans were unaware that their own ancestors had acquired them through a long 'process' of civilization. Through books about manners, from the middle ages to the nineteenth century, Elias traced the changing standards of good behaviour in matters such as spitting, nose-blowing, undressing, the toilet, and table manners. The threshold of repugnance had advanced, the expected standard of self-constraint had become more demanding, and many matters were hidden behind the scenes of social and mental life. Elias was, however, concerned not just with outward bodily propriety, but with violence and cruelty and changing feelings towards them. This provided a link to a long discussion of state-formation processes, including the 'taming of warriors'. The monopolization of violence by the state, and longer chains of social interdependence, were associated with gradual changes in typical personality make-up. 
Controversy about Elias's theory has concerned whether it is 'Eurocentric', whether twentieth-century 'permissive society' represents a reversal of the civilizing process, and whether his ideas are refuted by events such as the destruction of the Jews during the Second World War. Yet 'Uber den Prozess der Zivilisation' in part represents Elias's own attempt to grapple with unfolding events in Nazi Germany. The fact that his own mother died in Auschwitz was the cause of the major psychological trauma of Elias's life, and may possibly be one reason why he published little between 1939 and 1965. He could be quarrelsome, and in relation to his work was very sensitive. At the same time he was delightful company, immensely knowledgeable and stimulating, a fascinating conversationalist with a puckish interest in the trivial details of life. He was short in stature, stronger than he looked, and swam daily until his late eighties. Photographs can be found in 'Human Figurations', his Festschrift, edited by Peter Gleichmann and others (1977), and among his papers in the Deutsche Nationalliteraturarchiv at Marbach am Neckar, Germany. Busts of Elias by the Dutch sculptor Gerda Rubinstein can be found at the Zentrum fur Interdisziplinare Forschung, Bielefeld, at the University of Amsterdam, and in private collections. No paintings of Elias are believed to have been made. 
In 1971 Elias was given the title and pension of professor emeritus of the University of Frankfurt. He was the first recipient of the Theodor W. Adorno prize, conferred by the city of Frankfurt in 1977, and had honorary doctorates from the universities of Bielefeld and Strasbourg II. He was also awarded the German Grosskreuz des Bundesdienstordens (1986) and was a commander of the order of Orange-Nassau (1987). In his adopted country of citizenship he enjoyed only a 'succes d'estime'; from the mid-1970s he spent little time in Britain. Elias never married. He died peacefully in his study at J. J. Viottastraat 13, Amsterdam, on 1 August 1990. He was cremated at the Algemene Begraafplaats en Crematorium Westgaarde, Ookmeerweg, Amsterdam. 
Stephen Mennell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40674


Hicks, Sir John Richard (1904-1989), economist, was born in Warwick on 8 April 1904, the eldest of the three children and only son of Edward Hicks, editor and part proprietor of the 'Warwick and Leamington Spa Courier', of Leamington Spa, and his wife, Dorothy Catherine Stephens, who was one of five children of a nonconformist minister. There was an intellectual tradition on both sides of his family, particularly that of his mother, where there was a connection with the political scientist Graham Wallas. Hicks received much intellectual stimulus from the head of his preparatory school, Grey Friars, near Leamington Spa -- more stimulus, probably, than he received from his public school, Clifton College. None the less he acquitted himself perfectly adequately at Clifton, and in 1922 won a scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford, to study mathematics, in which he gained a first in moderations in 1923. His undergraduate contemporaries realized that his abilities were something out of the ordinary, as did his tutors. But he was not well taught, at least on the economics side of the new philosophy, politics, and economics school (to which he moved at the end of his first year). Something went seriously wrong with his performance in his final examinations, in which he obtained a second class (1925). His failure to get a first came as a serious set-back, and he was unsuccessful too in the All Souls fellowship examination. 
Hicks tried for some months to follow his father's profession as a journalist, on the 'Manchester Guardian'; but that was not congenial. In 1927 he obtained a BLitt (under the supervision, surprisingly, of G. D. H. Cole). He then made the decisive step in his life: in 1926 he moved to a teaching position at the London School of Economics (LSE), as a lecturer. His years there were the most important ones in his intellectual development. Hicks was the most eminent economic theorist of his generation in Britain. He was an economist's economist, much less well known to politicians and civil servants and to the general public than many other economists esteemed far less highly by their peers. Primarily, he was a conceptualizer. Concepts that he introduced were later used every day by economists who had almost forgotten their origin: income-effect / substitution-effect, 'Hicks-neutral' technical progress, the portfolio approach to the demand for money, 'fix-price / flex-price', and a host of others. He was not an ivory-tower economist: he believed the purpose of economic theory was to be useful. But he himself was more a toolmaker than a tool-user. His contribution did not lie in establishing specific empirical conclusions or policy recommendations. The book of his that came nearest to seeking to establish a definite conclusion was something of a 'jeu d'esprit', 'A Theory of Economic History' (1969). 
There is no school of Hicksian economics, although Hicks did have in his own mind a consistent system of thought, which evolved over the years, but which already by the time of the publication of 'Value and Capital' (1939) -- his most important book -- was reasonably comprehensive in its scope. Hicks might perhaps have found congenial the genre of an earlier epoch: the comprehensive treatise, revised through several editions. As it was, he was unusual among modern economic theorists in putting forward many of his chief ideas in books, nearly twenty of them, ranging over almost the whole of economic theory, rather than in articles, though his collected articles also amounted to three substantial volumes. Among his articles were 'Mr Keynes and the classic' ('Econometrica', 1937), which shaped economists' understanding of the Keynesian system for decades to come, and 'A suggestion for simplifying the theory of money' ('Economica', 1935), which anticipated part of that system. 
It may be conjectured that Hicks's approach was affected by the nearly complete 'tabula rasa' that he brought to the LSE as a result of the weakness of his economic education in Oxford. He felt that he had to work things out for himself, almost from first principles, into his own consistent system of thought. That is not to say that his system of thought did not owe much to the great economists of the past -- continental rather than British. The ideas of his contemporaries were also grist to his mill; but their status was no higher than that. 'I could not understand what others were doing,' he said, 'unless I could re-state it in my own terms.' His writings give an occasional impression of vanity. But the vanity was not for himself but on behalf of his work. 
Hicks's later work continued to attract very serious attention. But with the vast proliferation in the literature of the subject, it inevitably seemed less innovative than what he had done in the golden years at the LSE. In addition, although the contemporary development of economic theory took its impetus in no small part from value and capital, he was out of sympathy with much of it. He wrote, about his successors, largely American: 'I have disappointed them,... I have felt little sympathy with the theory for theory's sake, which has been characteristic of one strand of American economics; nor with the idealisation of the free market, which has been characteristic of another; and I have little faith in the econometrics on which they have largely relied to make their contact with reality.' At the LSE, but not later, Hicks worked in close association with others of his own age and standing -- R. G. D. Allen, Nicholas Kaldor, A. P. Lerner, and several others, as well as the more senior Friedrich von Hayek. In later years he gave encouragement and discerning help to his graduate students, relatively few in number. They came mainly from overseas, particularly Italy. Hicks left the LSE in 1935 to go to Cambridge as a university lecturer and fellow of Gonville and Caius College. In Cambridge Dennis Robertson became a good friend, and so remained until Robertson's death. But unfortunately the already powerful Keynesian school in the faculty made clear that it had room for only one god in the pantheon of economic theory: it was not interested in what Hicks was doing. So Hicks was glad to take the chair of political economy in Manchester in 1938, where he stayed until 1946. A fellowship in the newly established Nuffield College in Oxford then offered an attractive opportunity, with fewer administrative responsibilities; he held this post until 1958. The LSE may have been the place that left its strongest intellectual imprint, but Oxford was where by far the largest part of his long life was spent. He moved to All Souls as Drummond professor of political economy in 1952, a post he held until 1965. In all he was a fellow of All Souls for thirty-five years. He was greatly devoted to the college. He was a very active delegate of the Oxford University Press. 
Hicks received innumerable academic honours, in addition to his fellowship of the British Academy (1942) and his knighthood (1964). He was the first British scholar to win the Nobel prize in economics (1972); he gave the proceeds to the appeal then in progress for the new LSE library. He was an honorary fellow of the LSE (1969) and of Gonville and Caius (1971). 
In 1935 he married an assistant lecturer at the LSE, Ursula Kathleen, the daughter of William Fisher Webb, solicitor, of Dublin. For the rest of his life, until her death in 1985, they were seldom separated, even for a few days. Their marriage was unusual by conventional standards and there were no children. Their characters were entirely unalike: he was shy, she was outgoing; she was direct, he was subtle. But she protected him and organized their lives; and their loyalty to each other was unswerving. They were both obsessive travellers. Hicks died suddenly, of a heart attack, on 20 May 1989 in the house at Blockley, Gloucestershire, which had been his principal home for many years. 
R. C. O. Matthews', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40675


Lubetkin, Berthold Romanovich (1901-1990), architect, is believed to have been born on 14 December 1901 in Tiflis, Georgia, son of Roman (Rubin) Aronovich Lubetkin (died 'c'.1941), engineer, and his wife, Fenya (Hassya) Menin (died 1941?). A different place and year of birth -- Warsaw, 1903 -- are noted in several student certificates and in Lubetkin's British passport: these were explained by Lubetkin himself as false information to eliminate an early period of cadet service with the Red Army about 1919-20. An authenticated birth certificate has not been traced. He was educated at Tenishev Gymnasium in St Petersburg and the Medvednikov Gymnasium in Moscow. His family was of Jewish origin, moderately prosperous, and well-travelled; Lubetkin had visited France, Germany, England, and Scandinavia by 1914. 
Lubetkin's artistic education is believed to have begun with his early enrolment at the Stroganov Art School in Moscow about 1916. After the Russian Revolution he attended the SVOMAS (free art) studios in St Petersburg and Moscow, and the VkhUTEMAS (advanced state workshops of art and industrial art) in Moscow. He participated in several revolutionary groups, including Proletkult and ASNOVA, and came into contact with leading figures of the constructivist period, including Rodchenko, Tatlin, Malevich, Mayakovsky, Vesnin, Popova, and Gabo. This breadth of acquaintance was to be widened still further in Europe, where he would meet Klee, Grosz, Picasso, Braque, Leger, Gris, Soutine, Cocteau, Ernst May, Bruno Taut, and many others. 
Lubetkin accompanied the first Exhibition of Russian Art to Berlin in 1922, and thereafter attended the Bauschule at the Technische Hochschule, Charlottenburg, and the Hohere Fachschule fur Textil und Bekleidungsindustrie (1922-3). After a short study scholarship in Vienna, he moved to Poland and took his diploma in architecture at the Warsaw Polytechnic (1923-5). In 1925 he moved to Paris to continue his professional education and assisted in the construction of the Soviet pavilion at the Exposition des Arts Decoratifs, where he first met Le Corbusier. He attended the Ecole Speciale d'Architecture, the Institut d'Urbanisme, the Ecole Superieure de Beton Arme, and the Ecole des Beaux-Arts; he also participated in the independent atelier of Auguste Perret, to whom Lubetkin later acknowledged an enduring debt of design skill. 
Lubetkin maintained contact with the Russian avant-garde and entered several architectural competitions of the 1920s, including the Urals Polytechnic at Sverdlovsk and the Tsentrosoyus in Moscow. In the most important of these, for the Palace of Soviets in Moscow, Lubetkin and his team gained an award. He also worked for the USSR trades delegation in France curating a travelling exhibition of Russian goods in a demountable timber pavilion designed with the architect J. Volodko. 
Lubetkin's first significant building was a nine-storey apartment block in avenue de Versailles, Paris, undertaken with Jean Ginsberg and completed in 1931. Though both designers were still under thirty, it exhibited a mature grasp of the aesthetic and technical concepts of contemporary modernism. With little prospect of further work in Paris, Lubetkin made several exploratory trips to London, where, in 1931, he was offered a commission to design a private house in Hampstead for Ralph and Manya Harari. Although this was not realized, Lubetkin was attracted by English traditions of tolerance and scientific progress, and by the possibility of making his mark in a country where continental modern architecture had yet to arrive. In 1932 -- with six graduates of the Architectural Association -- he formed the Tecton partnership and set up a practice in London. This relocation to England, seemingly an unlikely choice for someone of Lubetkin's radical disposition, was not initially intended as permanent, but was consolidated with the rapid establishment of Tecton's reputation, and his growing misgivings over developments in the Soviet Union. 
Although nominally a group of equals, Tecton was dominated by Lubetkin with his rich European experience, charismatic personality, and clear sense of artistic direction -- attributes that also made him a figure of interest in contemporary English intellectual and society circles. His belief in building design as an instrument of social progress was underlaid by a profound appreciation of architecture's rational disciplines and emotive power. His Marxist convictions and his experience of the Russian Revolution implanted high expectations of architecture's role in transforming society, both through the provision of new and relevant building types -- 'social condensers' -- and through its aesthetic capacity to project the image of an oncoming better world. 
Lubetkin's buildings were characterized by clear geometric figures, technical ingenuity, and intensive functional resolution. He dissociated himself, however, from the contemporary doctrine of functionalism, and sought a deeper synthesis of human, architectural, and philosophical values. Formal composition and a lyrical playfulness differentiate his designs from much of the work associated with the international style; also unusual was Tecton's method of presentation whereby the rationale of a scheme was depicted in didactic analyses, witty cartoons, and slogans. 
Tecton's output included several private houses, a series of zoological pavilions and structures at London Zoo, Whipsnade, and Dudley, a pair of apartment blocks, Highpoint in Highgate, Middlesex, and a health centre and housing for Finsbury borough council. Many of these projects made innovative and expressive use of structural reinforced concrete through collaboration with the Danish engineer Ove Arup. The penguin pool at London Zoo (1934), with its interlocking spiral ramps, and Highpoint I (1935), an elegantly planned eight-storey apartment building, brought Lubetkin and his firm international recognition, including praise from Le Corbusier, who described Highpoint as 'an achievement of the first rank' ('The vertical garden city', 'Architectural Review', 79/470, January 1936, 10). The second Highpoint block (1938) employed a richer array of materials and controversially incorporated facsimile Greek caryatid figures to support the entrance canopy. The penthouse flat, designed by Lubetkin for his own occupation, achieved an interior sophistication unequalled in England at the time. Finsbury health centre -- the first commission by a metropolitan authority of a firm of modern architects -- was opened in 1938 and, in both its architectural and social programme, anticipated the National Health Service reforms of the post-war period. Tecton's works were well received when first built and have remained highly regarded; many are now protected by statutory listing, three at grade I. The zoo buildings were especially popular, with Dudley Zoo attracting crowds of 250,000 at its opening in 1937. 
Lubetkin was active in several radical professional associations of the 1930s, notably the Modern Architectural Research (MARS) Group and the Architects' and Technicians' Organisation. In both cases Lubetkin contributed to exhibition projects, but the Architects' and Technicians' Organisation was more politically engaged and involved him in campaigns against government housing policy. (In 1935 Tecton had won a competition for the design of an ideal scheme of working-class flats.) Tecton's work with Finsbury was due to continue with several housing projects but was halted in 1939. Meanwhile, following the Munich crisis, Lubetkin and his team, together with Ove Arup, were commissioned to plan a scheme of air-raid protection for the entire borough population. Their proposals, involving a series of deep bomb-proof shelters, were politically controversial and eventually rejected. Lubetkin's architectural activity ceased with the onset of the war, although in 1942, following the entry of the USSR on the allies' side, he designed a memorial to mark Lenin's association with Finsbury. 
In 1939 Lubetkin was naturalized and on 1 April of that year he married Margaret Louise Church (1917-1978), an assistant architect in Tecton and the youngest of three daughters of the barrister Harold Church. In the same year they moved from London to acquire and manage a farm in Upper Kilcott, Gloucestershire. This relocation is commonly misinterpreted as Lubetkin's retirement from architectural practice, but he resumed work on Finsbury's housing projects in 1943, when the council began to plan for reconstruction. Three large-flatted estates for Finsbury were completed by the 1950s, with a fourth being undertaken for Paddington borough council and completed by Denys Lasdun, a post-war partner in Tecton until the firm's dissolution in 1948. 
Peterlee New Town, to which Lubetkin was appointed architect-planner in 1947, should have been the crowning achievement of his career. Designated on a spectacular site near Durham, this project to build an urban centre for the local mining community presented Lubetkin with the ideal opportunity to apply the full range of his mature skills to a commensurate social programme. But the project was flawed by prior development restrictions and the considerable technical difficulties of building over the active coalfield. Although Lubetkin argued for co-ordinated over- and underground planning, thereby permitting the coherent civic development he desired, the necessary departmental support was lacking. He left Peterlee in 1950, having built nothing. In the same year he was interviewed for the master planning of Chandigarh, the new capital of Punjab, though the commission was subsequently awarded to Le Corbusier. 
These disappointments are often cited as marking the end of his career, but Lubetkin resumed private practice in partnership with Francis Skinner (formerly of Tecton) and Douglas Bailey, his deputy at Peterlee. The firm produced several housing schemes in Bethnal Green, London, details of which -- notably the public staircases -- display the sculptural vigour of Lubetkin in his prime. However, from the mid-1950s Lubetkin increasingly withdrew from professional attention and in 1957 considered emigrating to China. Margaret Lubetkin's deteriorating health caused them to give up the farm and move to Clifton, Bristol, in 1969. Following her death in 1978 Lubetkin began writing a personal memoir, which is still unpublished. He emerged from seclusion in 1982 to receive the award of the royal gold medal for architecture. This marked a renewal of interest in the man and his work and, in the following years, he re-entered the architectural arena and travelled extensively, giving lectures and interviews. He died at his home, 113 Princess Victoria Street, Clifton, Bristol, on 23 October 1990, survived by two daughters and a son; a second son had died in childhood following a tonsillectomy. He was cremated on 27 October. 
Berthold Lubetkin (Tolek to his friends) was a man of complex character, a maverick who none the less inspired devotion in his collaborators. He was a captivating conversationalist but described himself as a 'rootless journeyman' and could be elusive in personal relations. Many details of his early life and family background remain uncertain or uncorroborated by documentary record. He had strong left-wing political allegiances and a distinguished analytical mind that ranged widely over many subjects. His intermittent writings, invariably directed from a rationalist philosophical viewpoint, combined architectural critique, social polemic, and a sardonic humour enlivened by idiomatic polyglot wordplay. His tastes -- whether in art, literature, or food -- were discerning, cosmopolitan, and idiosyncratic. He was of short but powerful physique with handsome features and a pronounced 'foreign' accent, despite his long English domicile. He is widely regarded as the outstanding architect of his generation to have practised in England, his work encapsulating the early optimistic vision of modernism at its most poetic and poignant. 


@@@@@


doc= 40676


Russell, Dora Winifred (1894-1986), writer and campaigner for women's rights, was born on 3 April 1894 at 1 Mount Villas, Luna Road, Thornton Heath, Croydon, the second of three daughters and second of four children of Sir Frederick William Black (1863-1930), clerk in the Admiralty and later senior civil servant, and his wife, Sarah Isabella Davisson. She was educated at Sutton high school and Girton College, Cambridge, where she was awarded a first class in the medieval and modern languages tripos in 1915. She began research on eighteenth-century French philosophers at University College, London, but in 1917 went to the United States as personal assistant to her father, who was head of a special government mission to persuade the American government to re-route some of its oil tankers to Britain. She was appointed MBE for this in 1918. Shortly after her return she was elected to a fellowship by Girton, and returned to Cambridge in 1918. 
In 1916 Dora had met Bertrand Arthur William Russell (1872-1970), already famous as a mathematician and philosopher, and notorious as a pacifist. Bertrand Russell was the son of John Russell, Viscount Amberley (1842-1876), MP for Nottingham. He became third Earl Russell in 1931. They began an affair in 1919. She visited Russia in 1920, and on her return took to wearing peasant-style clothes. She remained an enthusiastic supporter of the Soviet Union all her life. In 1921 she wrote 'The soul of Russia and the body of America', which was finally incorporated in 'The Religion of the Machine Age' (1983). She resigned her Girton fellowship in 1920 in order to accompany Russell to Russia and China. 
Russell was married, although separated, and had no children. Although Dora disapproved of marriage she agreed to marry him when she became pregnant, as he was anxious to produce a legitimate heir. On their return from China he divorced his wife and married Dora in the same month, September 1921, two months before their son John (1921-1987), later fourth Earl Russell, was born. 
They bought a house in Chelsea, and Dora soon became aware of the difficulties involved in being married to a much older, famous man. Although Russell supported women's suffrage, he believed that women were less intelligent than men, and that their main function was to be wives and mothers. His friends adopted a patronizing attitude towards Dora, assuming that any ideas she might express came from him. She was determined to have an identity separate from that of her husband, and to escape from the shadow of his reputation. She joined the Labour Party, and stood unsuccessfully as Labour candidate for Chelsea in the autumn of 1924. She helped to form the Workers' Birth Control Group in 1924, and threw herself into the campaign for birth-control advice to be given to all women. In 1925 she published 'Hypatia, or, Women and Knowledge', followed by 'The Right to be Happy' in 1927. 
In 1927 Dora and Bertrand Russell started Beacon Hill School at Telegraph House, on the South Downs, in order to educate their own children in the company of others, because no existing school seemed satisfactory. The plan was to do away with excessive discipline, religious instruction, and the tyranny of adults. It was a joint venture, although Dora was responsible for the day-to-day organization, while Bertrand financed it through writing popular books and lecture tours in the United States. The school was ridiculed in the press, and Bertrand Russell later claimed it was a failure, but it embodied many progressive ideas. Dora published 'In Defence of Children' in 1932. 
Bertrand Russell left Dora, and the school, in 1932, after she had had two children with Griffin Barry, an American journalist. Although they had always insisted on their freedom to have affairs with other people, Russell could not accept her extending this to the freedom to have another man's child. They were divorced in 1935. She managed to carry on the school alone, moving several times after leaving Telegraph House in 1934. She had a brief affair with a communist, Paul Gillard, before he was murdered, and on 29 June 1940 married his friend, Gordon (Pat) Grace ('b'. 1909/10), a working-class Irish communist who was helping her to run the school. He was the son of Patrick Grace, clothier, and he died in 1949. 
Dora closed the school in 1943, and went to London to work at the Ministry of Information, moving to the Soviet relations division in 1944 to work on 'British Ally', a weekly paper published by the British government in Moscow. When the paper was closed down in 1950 she lost her job. Unable to find another, she devoted herself to feminist causes and the women's peace movement. She was a member of the Six Point Group (a discussion and political pressure organization) and the Married Women's Association. She attended peace conferences, and went to New York in 1954 to the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women, on behalf of the Women's International Democratic Federation. In 1958 she organized the Women's Caravan of Peace, a group of women who travelled across Europe to Moscow and back, protesting against nuclear weapons and calling for total disarmament, with the banner 'women of all lands want peace'. 
In 1962 Dora returned to Cornwall, to Carn Foel, Porthcurno, the house she and Russell had bought in 1922. She devoted most of her time to writing, and to the care of her son John, who had had a mental breakdown in 1954. She continued to campaign for peace, leading a London Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament rally in a wheelchair at the age of eighty-nine, and just before her death she took part in an anti-nuclear demonstration at the Royal Air Force base at St Mawgan, Cornwall. Dora Russell died on 31 May 1986 at home in Porthcurno. She was cremated at Penmount crematorium, Truro, on 9 June and her ashes were scattered in her garden at Carn Foel. She had four children, one son and one daughter from her first marriage, and one son and one daughter with Griffin Barry. The younger son was injured in a mining accident in 1952 and was an invalid until his death in 1983. 
Dora Russell loved campaigning, enjoying public speaking -- she had always wanted to be an actress -- and writing letters to the press. A chain-smoker, she was small, red-haired, and untidy, and claimed to have been one of the first women in England to wear shorts, in the 1920s. Throughout her life she campaigned for sexual freedom for women. She believed passionately that hope for the future lay in women. Many of her ideas anticipated those of the feminist movement of the 1970s and 1980s. 
Anne Pimlott Baker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40677


Skyrme, Tony Hilton Royle (1922-1987), theoretical physicist, was born on 5 December 1922 at 7 Blessington Road, Lewisham, London, the only child of John Hilton Royle Skyrme, bank clerk, and his wife, Muriel May Roberts. After attending a boarding-school in Lewisham he won a scholarship to Eton College, where he distinguished himself by outstanding work in mathematics, gaining a number of prizes. In 1940 he became a scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge, reading mathematics, and there he maintained the high standard shown at Eton. He passed part one of the mathematical tripos as a wrangler in 1942, and part three in 1943. 
On graduating he was directed by the wartime central register of scientists to Birmingham, where a group under Rudolf Peierls was working on the theoretical aspects of atomic energy, particularly atomic weapons. Here his great ability soon attracted attention. While capable of using abstract reasoning on difficult problems, he was prepared to look at experimental situations and at measurements which needed theoretical analysis. He wrote a number of useful reports, one of which, concerned with neutron scattering, remained in demand for many years. At the end of 1943 several scientists working on atomic energy, including Peierls, were transferred to the United States to assist in the 'Manhattan project'. Skyrme followed a little later, and worked first in New York, on problems concerning the diffusion plant for isotope separation, and then at Los Alamos. 
After the end of the Second World War Skyrme spent two years (1946-7) as a research fellow at Birmingham University, where he acquired a command of modern theoretical physics. One of the results he obtained provided a rigorous mathematical proof of an important theorem in nuclear physics. He submitted this for publication, but the referee wanted one section expanded; Skyrme never complied with this request, and the paper remained unpublished. The academic years 1948-9 and 1949-50 were spent at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, respectively. In 1949 he married Dorothy Mildred, daughter of Francis Charles Millest, commercial traveller; they had no children. 
From 1950 to 1962 Skyrme worked at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell, and these were his most productive years. Apart from papers relating to the design or interpretation of experiments in nuclear physics, and much work on specific problems of nuclear structure, he made two pioneering contributions to nuclear physics. One was to show how to handle short-range forces in a three-body problem; the other, not unrelated, was a powerful approximation to nuclear forces, later widely used as the 'Skyrme model'. An even more original contribution was a treatment of fundamental particles, in which particles such as neutrons and protons, which obey the Pauli exclusion principle, appear as manifestations of fields such as that of mesons. These ideas were so revolutionary that it was some years before they received adequate attention. Later the study of these 'Skyrmions' became a flourishing branch of theoretical physics. For this work Skyrme was awarded the Hughes medal of the Royal Society in 1985. 
During a year's leave from Harwell he and his wife spent a semester in the University of Pennsylvania and then returned via the United States, Australia, and the Far and Middle East, making all the land journeys by Land Rover. They had enjoyed Malaysia, and when changes at Harwell made his condition there less congenial, he accepted a post in the University of Malaysia in Kuala Lumpur, where they arrived, again by Land Rover, in the autumn of 1962. Since the staff of the department was much smaller than he had been led to believe, there were heavy teaching duties and few people interested in research. In 1964 Skyrme accepted an invitation to a professorship in Birmingham, initially as head of the department, but later he was relieved of the administrative duties. He remained in Birmingham until his death. 
Skyrme was distinguished by a deep understanding of physics, by a great command of mathematics, and, above all, by an original and fertile imagination. He was of medium height, with light brown hair and brown eyes. As a young man he had a slim, athletic figure; in later life he put on much weight. He tended to be rather quiet, being a solitary person who did not like joint work, but preferred to think about problems on his own. Skyrme died on 25 June 1987 in Selly Oak Hospital, Birmingham, of an embolism after an operation, his wife surviving him. 
Rudolf Peierls', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40678


Owen, (Paul) Robert (1920-1990), engineer, was born on 24 January 1920 in Dalston, London, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Joseph Owen, estate manager, and his wife, Deborah Grossmith. His secondary education was at the Central Foundation School (1933-8), a grammar school in the City of London. He then entered Queen Mary College, London University, to read engineering, specializing in aeronautics. On the outbreak of war in 1939 the college was evacuated to Cambridge. He graduated there in 1940 with first-class honours and won the Allen Low prize for the best student in engineering. 
Owen started work at the aircraft firm Boulton Paul in Norwich, but his potential for research soon became evident and in 1941 he joined the aerodynamics department of the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE), Farnborough. The work there was varied and challenging, ranging from problems of immediate urgency for the RAF to matters of great importance for future aircraft designs. It was evident that high speeds, extending into supersonic flight, would in due course become a reality, calling for new experimental and theoretical research tools. Owen's progress with such problems was remarkable. He quickly matured from his initial junior status to become a creative leader, and his promotion was rapid. Topics he successfully addressed included the development of low-drag wings and bodies, the stability and control of high-speed aircraft, the aerodynamic problems of guided weapons, and supersonic flight. When the war ended in 1945 he expanded his interests to include other applications of fluid mechanics. 
In 1953 Owen accepted an invitation to become reader and director of the Manchester University fluid motion laboratory, and three years later he was appointed professor and head of the newly formed mechanics of fluids department. In spite of his heavy administrative load, he became interested in meteorology and was also involved with local industrial problems -- for example, cotton spinning, ventilation, and the dangers of coal dust in mines. He became a member of the Safety in Mines Research Advisory Board in 1956. This led him to investigate the transport of dust particles by air flows, including saltation (the lifting of particles from a surface and their subsequent trajectories). This became a major activity, with important applications to soil erosion and desertification. In 1958 he married Margaret Ann, a law graduate of Oxford, daughter of Herbert Baron, solicitor. They had two sons and two daughters, in whom he took great pride and pleasure. 
In 1963 Owen moved to the Zaharoff chair of aviation at Imperial College, London. He there extended his interests even further, to the aerodynamics of buildings, heat exchangers, blood flow, and respiration. In 1966 a physiological flows unit was founded in his department. Meanwhile, however, he was an active member of the Aeronautical Research Council and in 1971 was appointed its chairman, a position he retained for a record eight years. Since this was a time of major new developments in aeronautics, the work of the council was of first importance and he took great pride in it. 
In 1984 Owen retired early, but he continued teaching and vigorously pursued his research, particularly in saltation. He developed fruitful contacts with workers elsewhere with similar interests, particularly in the Middle East, Africa, the USA, Denmark, and France, and he contributed key papers to international symposia. In 1985 he developed heart trouble and had a bypass operation. Nevertheless, he soon resumed his research, travelling and lecturing extensively, and seemed to recover well. 
Owen was passionately interested in music, drama, and the arts. His good looks and musical voice made him a natural choice in his youth for leading parts in the RAE dramatic society productions. He wrote and spoke with grace, wit, and a wry, kindly, self-deprecating humour. His sympathies were with the underprivileged and he constantly sought to apply himself to the problems of the developing world. He was accorded various honours, including election as FRS in 1971, appointment as CBE in 1974, and election as FEng in 1976. 
In 1988 Owen fell ill again with what was thought to be a viral infection. He continued writing and collaborating with his international colleagues, but recovery eluded him. He died of cancer in St Mary's Hospital, London, on 11 November 1990. 
Alec Young', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40679


Wex, Bernard Patrick (1922-1990), civil engineer, was born on 24 April 1922 in Acton, Middlesex, the only child of Julius Wex, a lace merchant from Germany, who had gone to England in 1900, taken British nationality in 1911, and in the same year married Gertrude Brady, a fashion saleswoman. His father died of pneumonia two weeks before he was born, and his mother went to live with her mother in Acton. He attended Acton county grammar school, where he showed all-round prowess, matriculating in 1938. On the outbreak of the Second World War his desire to become a Royal Air Force pilot was thwarted by minor astigmatism. After attending Sandhurst, in 1943 he became a tank commander (lieutenant) in the Royal Armoured Corps (23rd hussars). Having suffered pleurisy and pneumonia in 1944, he was transferred to administrative work until demobilization as captain in March 1947. In 1945 he married Sheila Evelyn Lambert, widow of Malcolm Kingsbury Lambert, RAF pilot, and daughter of Peter Thompson, a builder in north-west London; it was a very happy marriage, of which there were two sons. In October 1947 he was accepted by Imperial College, London, to read civil engineering and he graduated in 1950 with first-class honours, being top of his year and winning the Unwin medal. 
Wex immediately started work with Freeman Fox & Partners under Gilbert Roberts and, later, Oleg Kerensky. His early work included Auckland harbour bridge (built in 1955-9) and schemes for the 1000 metre Severn and Forth suspension spans. He gained site experience on the 600 megawatt Castle Donington power station. Design work on another power station was followed by six 177 metre span oil pipeline suspension bridges in India, and a further series of bridges to carry high-pressure gas in Pakistan, including the 1770 metre multi-span River Sutlej crossing, which was built entirely in one dry season. 
Appointed a partner in Freeman Fox in 1969, Wex oversaw construction of the M5 Avonmouth Bridge and took charge of the newly authorized Humber Bridge project. This had originally been studied by the firm in 1927-8 and proposed as a single 1372 metre span by Sir Ralph Freeman in 1935. Wex directed its final design and construction, adopting 'slip-formed' concrete for the towers, rather than steel, thus making substantial cost savings. He also used novel methods for sinking the south tower and anchorage foundations through 40 metres of water and silt to reach the Kimmeridge clay. The construction period coincided with unprecedented inflation and worsening industrial relations, which caused severe delays and mounting costs. Undaunted, Wex piloted client and contractors through to a supremely successful conclusion. The bridge was opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 17 July 1981. At 1410 metres its main clear span was the world's longest by 110 metres. Wex was appointed OBE in the 1982 new year honours list. 
Although the Humber Bridge was Wex's crowning achievement, he packed much else into the decade of the 1970s, including the cable-stayed box-girder Myton swing bridge in Hull and a slender 165 metre concrete arch bridge in South Africa. In 1979 he prepared a design for one of six contractors bidding in competition for the proposed River Foyle Bridge near Londonderry, Northern Ireland. His graceful 234 metre span twin-steel box-girder scheme was judged the winner for appearance by the Royal Fine Arts Commission and was also the lowest priced. The bridge was completed in October 1984. 
Wex led the seven-year inquiry into the 1969 collapse of the 381 metre Emley Moor television mast, and served energetically on many technical committees and on the council of the Welding Institute. He contributed much to the work of the International Association for Bridge and Structural Engineering, chairing its British group and technical committees; it made him an honorary member in 1990. He helped to found the Steel Construction Institute in 1986 and remained its chairman until shortly before his final illness. He wrote sixteen papers on six subjects, eleven of them between 1976 and 1984, which were published in ten countries, and he delivered many lectures at home and abroad. 
With his lifelong enthusiasm, unquenchable good humour, and first-class brain, Wex became a most proficient and successful creator of bridges, the equal of any of his time. He was a perfectionist in all he attempted, becoming a skilful photographer and cabinet-maker. He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE) in 1956 (fellow, 1968), and a fellow of the Welding Institute, where he also took the practical welding course, in 1972. In 1982 he was elected to the Fellowship (later Royal Academy) of Engineering, and awarded the fellowship of the City and Guilds Institute. In 1985 he won the ICE's Telford gold medal and became a fellow of the Institution of Structural Engineers. 
Wex was tall, of athletic build, fair-skinned with blond hair (which mostly disappeared in his early twenties), good-looking, and of extrovert personality. Wex died on 31 July 1990 in St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, while undergoing chemotherapy treatment for myeloid leukaemia. He was survived by his wife. 
Ralph Freeman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40680


Cochrane, Archibald Leman (1909-1988), medical scientist and epidemiologist, was born in Galashiels on 12 January 1909, the second child in the family of a daughter and three sons of Walter Francis Cochrane, of Kirklands, manufacturer of Scottish tweed, and his wife, Mabel Purdom, daughter and granddaughter of lawyers from Hawick. His grandfather's family had become wealthy, but the death of his father on active service in April 1917 led to his mother's relative impoverishment. He gained entry scholarships to Uppingham School and King's College, Cambridge, where he obtained first classes in both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1929 and 1931). 
An inheritance gave Cochrane the means to continue study, and in 1931 he began research in tissue culture at the Strangeways Research Laboratory, Cambridge, hoping to become a university lecturer. The results of his experiments, however, seemed trivial and the concomitant development of what he believed (erroneously) to be a psychological symptom led him to abandon the project and seek medical advice. British doctors were unsympathetic, and he sought help at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Berlin. He received sympathy there, but little else, and he turned to Theodor Reik, an early follower of Sigmund Freud, partly to obtain treatment and partly to learn enough about psychoanalysis to design ways of testing psychoanalytical hypotheses. The succeeding two and a half years did nothing for his complaint, but they provided an exceptional education, as he followed Dr Reik from Berlin to Vienna, and to The Hague, attending the clinical course in both the last cities. 
Returning to Britain in 1934 with fluent German, a hatred of fascism, and a sceptical attitude to all theories not validated by experiment, Cochrane enrolled as a medical student at University College Hospital (UCH), London. The outbreak of the Spanish Civil War and the intervention of fascist Germany and Italy led him to abandon his studies for membership of a field ambulance unit supporting the International Brigades, in which he was probably the only member with neither party political nor religious affiliation. After a year's service on the Aragon and Madrid fronts, he returned to UCH with valuable experience of wartime triage and the realities of left-wing politics. 
Cochrane qualified MB, BChir. (Cambridge, 1938) in time to complete a house physician's job at the West London Hospital and obtain a research appointment at UCH before war again intervened. He joined the Royal Army Medical Corps in 1940, and was posted to a general hospital in Egypt. He was then sent to Crete, where he was soon taken prisoner. There followed the darkest period of his life when, as medical officer for a prisoner-of-war camp in Salonika, he was confronted by major epidemics, severe malnutrition, and extreme Nazi brutality. During this time he undertook what he later described as his 'first, worst, and most successful controlled trial' in search of a cure for famine oedema, finding it in small amounts of yeast obtained on the black market. When he returned to Britain in 1945, a Rockefeller fellowship enabled him to take a course at the London School of Hygiene, where he became enthusiastic about the conduct of controlled trials by random allocation of treatments and obtained his diploma in public health (1947). He then went for a year (1947) to the Phipps Clinic in Philadelphia, where he developed a lifelong interest in the scientific study of diagnostic and prognostic error. In 1948 he accepted an appointment with the Medical Research Council's pneumoconiosis research unit in Cardiff. There Cochrane designed and started an ambitious project to test the idea that tuberculosis played an important part in transforming the disease into its most disabling form. 
In 1960 Cochrane was appointed David Davies professor of tuberculosis and diseases of the chest at the Welsh National School of Medicine, and transformed his team into a new epidemiology unit, of which he became director in 1969, under the Medical Research Council. With this support, he continued his studies of the progress of pneumoconiosis and conducted population surveys to study the natural history and aetiology of anaemia, glaucoma, and other common diseases. He showed the importance of building in checks on the reproducibility of any diagnostic procedure and demonstrated that it was regularly possible to get over 90 per cent of the public to participate in health surveys. The social importance of his trials was lucidly expressed in his short book, 'Effectiveness and Efficiency' (1972), which won him international acclaim. He became fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1965. 
In 1972 Cochrane became the first president of the new faculty of community (subsequently public health) medicine of the Royal College of Physicians. He had never been attracted by administration or ceremony and was relieved to hand over after two years. In this period, however, he succeeded in welding into a harmonious whole two mutually suspicious groups: academics in social medicine and practising medical officers of health. He was appointed MBE in 1945 and CBE in 1968, and had honorary doctorates from York (1973) and Rochester, USA (1977). 
Archie, as Cochrane was generally known, combined concern for public welfare with that for the individual and discovered late in life, as a result of the trouble he took over an illness of his sister's, that they both suffered from hereditary porphyria, which may have been responsible for the sexual condition that so affected his early career. He created a garden included in the national garden scheme and collected with discrimination contemporary paintings and sculpture. A man of medium height and athletic build, he had reddish hair and a permanently quizzical expression. He never married, having resolved to have no more love affairs after an unfortunate experience in the USA in 1947. He died of cancer after a long illness on 18 June 1988, at his nephew's home in Holt, near Wimborne, Dorset. He is commemorated in Green College, Oxford, to which he left a substantial legacy, by a residence for students and a fellowship for the director of the Cochrane Centre, set up by the Department of Health to promote overviews of controlled trials. 
Richard Doll', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40681


McElwain, Timothy John (1937-1990), cancer physician, was born on 22 April 1937 in Wellington, New Zealand, the only child of Allan R. McElwain, freelance foreign correspondent, and his wife, Marjorie (Miranda) Simpson, a commercial artist specializing in fashion. Because of the peripatetic nature of his father's employment, McElwain was educated in both Australia and England. He attended St Peter's College, Adelaide, from 1947 to 1949, and then Sloane School in London (1949-51). Back in Australia, he went to Haileybury College, Melbourne, from 1951 to 1957. He returned to London in 1957 to go to the London Polytechnic to study physics, chemistry, zoology, and botany for a first MB exemption. He duly achieved this, with passes in all subjects. He also became president of the students' union, chairman of the debating society, and president of the faculty club. He was keen on water sports and rowing. He was admitted to St Bartholomew's Hospital medical college in October 1960, being about five years older than the average student. His maturity is reflected in the fact that he had no difficulty with examinations, passing MB, BS finals with honours in 1965, when he obtained a distinction in applied pharmacology and therapeutics. He was awarded the Hayward prize in recognition of his contribution to student activities. 
McElwain did his house physician appointments at Bart's, where he worked for Gordon Hamilton Fairley, a pioneer of the drug treatment of cancer. His interest and ability in therapeutics ensured Hamilton Fairley's support, and he obtained one of the first Leukaemia Research Fund fellowships (1968-70), to work on childhood leukaemia at the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street. He passed his MRCP in 1968, and, after registrar appointments at Bart's (1967-8), and posts as lecturer (1970-71) and senior lecturer (1972-3) at the Royal Marsden Hospital, London, he was appointed in 1973 consultant physician at the Royal Marsden. He became head of the section of medicine in 1980, and was subsequently appointed Cancer Research Campaign professor of medical oncology in the University of London in 1983. He had been elected at an early age to the fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians, London, in 1977. 
McElwain brought to the Royal Marsden Hospital an appreciation of the importance of the discipline of internal medicine, not only in the proper use of drugs to combat cancer, but also in the expert general medical care necessary to the exploration of the drugs' potential. He pushed intensive therapy, using high doses of anti-cancer drugs, to the limit, and his resultant success in the care of myeloma, a highly malignant form of cancer, serves as a confirmation of the value of his work. This could not have been achieved without prolonged, intensive effort, and courage in facing the inevitable institutional resistance and resentments. 
As professor of medical oncology McElwain was in great demand from organizations abroad and at home. He was always generous with his time, holding such posts as consultant in medical oncology at the Tata Memorial Cancer Centre in Bombay, India, external assessor to the Chinese University of Hong Kong, and referee for research grant applications to the Medical Research Council of New Zealand. In Great Britain he was chairman or member of several important committees in such institutions as the Royal College of Physicians, London, the Medical Research Council, and the Wolfson Foundation. However, the position that gave him most pleasure was his presidency of the Association of Cancer Physicians. He was a member of the editorial boards of many specialist journals. He was a popular member of societies, and of national and international committees, where his knowledge, combined with good common sense and a pithy expression of his views, could often rescue a meeting that was faltering. 
McElwain was a large man, with a bald head, who loved food, wine, and music, and had a remarkable knowledge of contemporary literature. He had a library of over 2000 records of classical music. With his wit and his expansive personality, he was a charming and thoughtful host, and an invitation to his home was not to be missed. In 1970 he married Sheila Glennis, daughter of Richard Howarth, accountant, after a whirlwind courtship while he was a junior doctor at the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street. She brought love and security to his life and, while carving out a distinguished medical career for herself, was able to give him an elegant and happy home. There were no children. McElwain died at his home, 94 Clapham Common North Side, London, on 26 November 1990. 
J. S. Malpas', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40682


Chipperfield, James Seaton Methuen (1912-1990), circus proprietor and inventor of the safari park, was born on 17 July 1912 in a mahogany wagon on land belonging to Paul, third Baron Methuen, near Corsham, Wiltshire, the second son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Richard Chipperfield, owner of a small family circus, and his wife, Maud, daughter of George Seaton, another circus man. Because the show was constantly on the road, Jimmy received almost no formal education, rarely attending any school for more than a few days; but he grew up richly imbued with the traditions of the circus, in which his family had performed for more than two centuries. A short, stocky man with dark hair and strong features, he inherited his father's ferocious appetite for hard physical work. Hours on the trapeze equipped him with powerful arms and shoulders, and from an early age he showed an exceptional affinity with animals, not least with Rosie the elephant in which he and his elder brother, Dick, invested all their capital of $400 during the 1920s. He also trained lions and tigers, wrestled the bear, and played the clown. 
At the age of sixteen Chipperfield fell in love with another Rosie, daughter of Captain Tom Purchase, circus proprietor and lion trainer, who had been killed by a lion. In 1934, when he was twenty-two, the young couple eloped and married, to circumvent his father's opposition, and they remained happily married for nearly sixty years. Their eldest son, also Jimmy, died of tetanus at the age of six in 1941, but they had two more sons and two daughters. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War, Chipperfield set his heart on becoming a fighter pilot in the Royal Air Force. His handicaps would have defeated most aspirants: he had no mathematics, and only one kidney, the other having been crushed during a bout with Bruni the bear. Ignoring adverse medical reports, he put himself into school, alongside children, and by sheer determination mastered enough trigonometry to win his wings and fly Mosquito fighter bombers with 85 squadron. 
After the war Chipperfield returned to the circus, and in partnership with Dick built up the biggest travelling show in Britain. Then in 1955 he broke away on his own, farming in Hampshire, training animals for Walt Disney films, and founding a zoo in Southampton. He began to travel in Africa, and it was the sight of big game roaming the plains of Kenya and Uganda that gave him the most important idea of his life. This was for a novel form of zoo, in which the animals would run free in large paddocks, and human beings would stay in cages -- their cars -- to drive among them. It took him some time to find an ideal site, but in 1964 he hit on Longleat, the ancestral home of the Bath family. There, in partnership with the sixth marquess of Bath, he built the world's first safari park. While the fences were being installed, 'The Times' denounced the scheme as 'a dangerous folly', and called for its suppression; this made excellent publicity for the venture, which opened at Easter 1966 and proved a colossal success. 
Other parks followed at Woburn, Knowsley, Blair Drummond, and Bewdley. Their success attracted the enmity of traditional zookeepers, particularly Sir Solly Zuckerman, then secretary of the Zoological Society of London; but Chipperfield claimed with obvious truth that, apart from inventing a novel attraction, he had established useful breeding groups of endangered species. He became a rich man, bought expensive cars, and enjoyed his association with landed aristocrats such as the marquess of Bath and the duke of Bedford. 
In 1975 Chipperfield and Rosie suffered a severe blow when their eldest surviving son, Richard, was killed in a car accident in Uganda. An outstanding animal man, with an attractive personality, he had been the natural heir to the business. With him gone, it was left to Mary, the elder daughter, to carry on the family's circus traditions. During the 1960s Chipperfield settled comfortably, but without ostentation, into a substantial house on the outskirts of Southampton. In 1986 he moved to a farm at Middle Wallop, in Hampshire, where he remained surrounded by animals -- there was usually a chimpanzee on the premises, and often a lion cub -- and by the latest electronic gadgets. Although tough with anyone who crossed him, he was generous and loyal to friends, and retained a fierce pride in his family and their achievements. He published his autobiography, 'My Wild Life', in 1975, and died on 20 April 1990 at his home, Croft Farm, near Middle Wallop, and was buried at Great Wishford, Wiltshire. 
Duff Hart-Davis', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40683


Moores, Cecil (1902-1989), businessman, was born on 10 August 1902 in Manchester, the fifth child and third son in the family of four sons and four daughters of John William Moores (1871-1919), builder, and his wife, Louisa Fethney (1873-1959). He completed state elementary and secondary education, and in the early 1920s worked in a variety of jobs, which included training as an analytical chemist. 
In 1924 Cecil joined his brother John Moores in helping to run the Littlewoods Pools business, which the elder brother had already started. By 1932 it was so thriving and successful that John Moores decided to concentrate his attention on diversification and left the core pools business in the safe control of his brother. Cecil Moores's name became synonymous with what was Britain's, indeed probably the world's, largest football pools business. He was also a director of the Littlewoods organization, lending his considerable experience and talents to the progress of the other major businesses in the group, such as chain stores and mail order. 
Moores was a loyal Briton, buying the famous Bapton herd of dairy shorthorn cattle in the early 1950s to prevent its being exported to America. Under his direction the herd won many prizes in national competitions and when he eventually came to sell it he imposed a rigid condition that it should stay in Aberdeenshire, to which he had moved it after its acquisition. 
Moores's devotion to the work ethic was profound, but he also believed in enjoying life. His philosophy managed to combine both approaches: 'it is fun to work hard and to build a business'. His care of his employees embraced both these precepts also: he wanted to give them chances for 'fun' as well as for 'improvement'. His concern for them and their working conditions provided the company's employees with numerous social benefits long before the welfare state became a reality. This concern was extended to his customers -- for example, in 1957 he initiated a 'winners' advisory service' to help winners of very large sums to adjust to and cope with a sudden and unexpected fortune. He believed in practical involvement in management and his personal presence was manifest daily throughout the pools company. He arrived before most of the staff and usually did not depart until long after they had gone home. 
Moores's drive and organizing ability came to fruition with the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939. Virtually overnight the pools company was turned into an efficient war production machine, manufacturing and supplying everything from parachutes to Wellington bombers. The speed and efficiency with which a largely female clerical labour force was retrained and applied to these new activities were due in very large measure to the abilities of Cecil Moores. After the war he speedily guided Littlewoods Pools back to its pre-eminent position. He oversaw all the major developments in the pools industry, including, for example, the mechanization of the business, the provision of a nationwide coupon collector service (from 1957), and the use of Australian fixtures during the summer (from 1949). A shrewd man, he was once described as 'beady-eyed and on the ball' (private information). 
Moores was also keenly interested in many sports. As a young man he was an amateur soccer player for Hyde United and later played for the amateur Liverpool side the Azoics. Throughout his life he was a supporter of both Liverpool and Everton football clubs. He was also a horse-racing enthusiast and pursued numerous other sporting activities, including golf, snooker, shooting, and salmon and trout fishing -- at all of which he characteristically became proficient. In 1975 he was the driving force behind the formation of the Football Ground Improvement Trust (later the Football Trust), which provided about $40 million a year to help football at all levels. 
Cecil Moores was of medium height and stocky build, with straight brown hair and blue eyes. Totally without 'side', he could get on with people from all walks of life. On 11 June 1930 he married Doris May (died 1988), daughter of Thomas Steel, electrician. They had a daughter and two sons, the elder of whom, Nigel, died as a result of a motor accident in 1977. Moores was a devoted family man. He was also a generous host who enjoyed entertaining his friends and relatives in the house that he loved, which he had bought in Freshfield, Lancashire, before the Second World War. He could also entertain in other circumstances, and it was said of him that he was 'the best after-dinner speaker I've ever heard' (private information). 
Although Moores retired in 1979 as chairman of Littlewoods Pools, in old age he continued, as president of the business, to attend his office daily, maintaining regular contact with the family business. He died on 29 July 1989 while on a fishing holiday at Loch Trool in Kirkcudbrightshire, Scotland, one year after the death of his wife. 
Malcolm A. Davidson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40684


Edrich, William John (1916-1986), cricketer, was born on 26 March 1916 in Lingwood, Norfolk, the second son and second child in the family of four sons and a daughter of William Archer Edrich, tenant farmer, and his wife, Edith Mattocks, originally of Cumbrian farming stock, whose family had moved to Norfolk. Educated at Bracondale School, Norwich, where his cricketing prowess soon became evident, Bill Edrich was a member of a noted family of cricketers, which was able to field an entire eleven under the family name. His three brothers -- Geoffrey, Eric, and Brian -- all played first-class cricket, while his cousin John Hugh Edrich MBE was to be a well-known Surrey and England batsman. 
After several successful seasons with Norfolk in the minor counties championship, Edrich was advised to seek an engagement with Middlesex. He qualified for Middlesex and lived in London, playing variously for the Marylebone Cricket Club and Norfolk. He made his first-class debut for the minor counties in 1934, and such was his progress that, in his first full season for Middlesex in 1937, he scored more than 2000 runs, and was chosen to accompany the third Baron Tennyson's tour of India the following winter. In spite of several failures, he retained his test place, and in South Africa in the winter of 1938-9 he scored a match-saving 219 at Durban. In 1938 he managed the unusual feat of 1000 runs before the end of May. During the Second World War he served as a pilot with 21 squadron, Coastal Command, rising from flight lieutenant to acting squadron leader, and his bravery was rewarded with the DFC (1941). 
Returning to the cricketing fray in 1946, Edrich eventually regained his England place -- his test career was always dogged by selectors' inconsistencies -- and in 1947 he changed status from professional to amateur. The year 1947 proved to be his greatest. In partnership with the mercurial Denis Compton, he broke many records, and Middlesex and England flourished accordingly. In that summer he made 3539 runs, including 12 centuries, and averaged 80.43. He captained Middlesex from 1951 to 1957, initially in harness with Denis Compton, and, after his retirement from first-class cricket in 1959, played for his native Norfolk until 1971. 
In his 571 games in first-class cricket, Edrich scored 36,965 runs, including 86 centuries, with an average of 42.39. His highest score was 269 not out, against Northamptonshire in 1947. He also took 479 wickets and 529 catches, and made a solitary stumping. In 39 test matches he scored 2440 runs for an average of 40, and took 41 wickets. 
Edrich approached his cricketing duties with much the same fervour with which he tackled his romantic ventures. Gusto and valour were his watchwords. As a batsman, he was a courageous player of quick bowling, relishing the hook and the pull-drive, and dealing plainly and authoritatively with much that he faced. As a bowler, he rushed intrepidly into the attack, hurling the ball awkwardly at often startled opponents. He was a most effective fielder, initially in the out-field, but mainly in the slips. Above all, he was, in cricket as in his domestic life, abundantly cheery and optimistic. A Robert Bruce among cricketers, he was ever ready to try again. A very popular sportsman, he was only a little short of the highest rank of cricketers, and his fame was very much bound up with his sparkling relationship with Denis Compton. The sports journalist R. C. Robertson-Glasgow wrote that, while Compton was poetry, Edrich was 'prose, robust and clear'. Edrich was short, dark, and keen-eyed, with brisk, lithe movements. A man of ardent amorous energies, he was married five times, each for relatively short periods. His first four marriages ended in divorce, and his fifth wife outlived him briefly. His first marriage, in 1936, was to Betty, typist, daughter of Sydney William Hobbs, railway official. The marriage ended in divorce in 1944 and in the same year he married Marion, an officer in the Women's Auxiliary Air Force, the divorced wife of Edward Reginald Fish and daughter of Albert Ernest Forster, works manager. They were divorced in 1948, and in 1949 he married Jessy Shaw, the divorced wife of Harold Tetley and daughter of Hubert Gomersall, building society manager. They had one son and the marriage ended with divorce in 1960. In the same year he married Brenda Valerie Terry, insurance consultant, whose previous marriage had been dissolved, the daughter of Constant Wells Ponder, medical practitioner. They had one son; the marriage ended with divorce in 1973. His fifth and final marriage, in 1983, was to Mary Elizabeth Somerville, hairdresser, whose previous marriage had been dissolved, daughter of Frederick Vincent Wesson, sales manager. Edrich died in Chesham as the result of a fall down the stairs at home, following a St George's day celebration, just after midnight on 24 April 1986. A grandstand at Lord's cricket ground is named after him, matching one for Denis Compton. 
Eric Midwinter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40685


Farr, Thomas George (1913-1986), boxer, was born on 12 March 1913 at 3 Railway Terrace, Blaenclydach, Rhondda, the sixth of eight children (four sons and four daughters) of George Farr, miner, and his wife, Sarah Ann Owen. Farr's mother died when he was ten, and his father was soon afterwards struck with paralysis, dying a few years later. Tommy, who grew up in extreme poverty and was always thereafter careful with money, was a schoolboy boxer, then briefly a miner, before he met a disabled miner turned saddler, Job Churchill, who unofficially guided his career throughout the inter-war years. 
At the age of fifteen Farr joined the boxing booth of Joe and Daisy Gess at Tylorstown as a handyman. As he grew, he boxed as 'Kid' Farr, occasionally facing five opponents in an evening. Beyond the booth, he was paid 3's'. 6died for a contest of six rounds, and when he had saved $109 in his Post Office account, he bought a house at 59 Court Street, Tonypandy, for himself and his younger brother and sister. By 1929 Farr was boxing contests of ten rounds all over the Rhondda valley, and in the next five years he won and lost as a 'small hall' boxer whose style ('in-fighting was my speciality') did not appeal to major promoters. In Jack Petersen, Wales had produced its first ever British heavyweight champion in 1932, and he had the attractive style that Farr lacked. In the economic depression Farr could get few matches, and in 1933 he ignominiously lost his first London contest. At Tonypandy he won the Welsh light-heavyweight title, and in February 1935 at Mountain Ash challenged unsuccessfully for this British title, losing for the third time to the same man. Farr was not beaten again, however, until he met Joe Louis at the Yankee Stadium in New York city in August 1937. 
Seeking bigger purses in 1935, Farr signed with an experienced London manager, Ted Broadribb, and moved house to Slough. The boxer-manager relationship was stormy throughout the three years' contract, and Farr relied on the advice of Churchill, returning often to Tonypandy. Broadribb knew everybody, and he got a match with the former world light-heavyweight champion Tommy Loughran of Philadelphia, whom Farr outpointed over ten rounds at the Royal Albert Hall. Farr's earnings in 1936 were modest by boxing standards, less than $150 a fight, though he outpointed another former world title holder, and won the Welsh heavyweight championship by a knockout. His jabbing and spoiling, and clever inside work did not please spectators, and Farr remained in Petersen's shadow. 
Farr's glory came in his five contests of 1937. Petersen had lost twice, including, surprisingly, to Ben Foord for his British and empire heavyweight titles. Farr was Foord's first challenger, and gained the points decision in a pedestrian match at the recently opened Harringay arena. The Harringay promoters had brought over Max Baer, a charismatic Nebraskan, who had been world heavyweight champion in 1935, and whom they had to match with a British boxer. Farr was his only feasible opponent, and a month after the Foord fiasco, with the arena packed, he outpointed Baer over twelve rounds. Two months later, with the British boxing market in his pocket, Farr decisively stopped Walter Neusel, the hefty German who had thrice beaten Petersen, and Harringay rang with Welsh song. Aged twenty-four, he signed to meet Max Schmeling at Harringay for a guaranteed $7000, but broke this contract to sail to the USA with Broadribb for a $50,000 match (win, lose, or draw) with the new world heavyweight champion, Joe Louis. 
The 23-year-old Louis had been the first black man allowed to box for the world's heavyweight title since 1915, and he was a formidable champion. Possibly only Farr and Churchill fancied the challenger's chances. At 141/2 stones, Farr boxed brilliantly, never went down, and was outpointed over fifteen hard rounds. The fight commentary was broadcast by the BBC, the first sporting event to be relayed by transatlantic cable, and wirelesses were switched on in halls and homes in the early hours all over Britain. Farr's gritty loss was sporting memory's gain. 
Farr lost as many contests as he won between this and retirement in 1940. He enlisted in the RAF but was soon discharged unfit. He tried to come back to boxing in 1950, but gave up after two years. As a fighter, he was awkward for opponents and difficult for promoters and managers; as a person, 6 feet tall and with a craggy face, he was a raconteur and could sing well enough to make six popular records. His Welshness stuck, and he retained his love of sport. In 1939 he married Muriel Montgomery, daughter of Herbert Nicholas Germon, engineer. They had a daughter and two sons. Farr and his wife lived happily in Sussex until he died in Worthing on 1 March 1986. 
Stan Shipley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40686


Hasler, Herbert George (1914-1987), inventor of sailing equipment and Royal Marines officer, was born in Dublin on 27 February 1914, the younger child and younger son of Lieutenant Arthur Thomas Hasler, quartermaster, of the Royal Army Medical Corps, and his wife, Annie Georgina Andrews. His father was drowned when the troopship 'Transylvania' was torpedoed on 4 May 1917, leaving his mother to bring up the young boys on her own. She sent Herbert, with a bursary, to Wellington College, where he distinguished himself at cross-country running, rugby football, and as captain of swimming. He also boxed but, according to him, with rather less distinction. 
Blondie Hasler, as he became known, except to his family, because of his (thinning) blond hair and fair moustache, combined remarkable powers of physical endurance with above average strength and fitness (he was about 6 feet tall). Yet, throughout his subsequent career, he was loath to take advantage of these attributes, although they stood him in good stead in war and peace, preferring a well-reasoned, calm, and quietly conducted discussion to make his case. He also hated punishing men under his command, believing that their failure was the result of his lack of leadership. He had a totally original mind. 
Hasler was commissioned into the Royal Marines on 1 September 1932, and by 1935 had already achieved yachting distinction by sailing a 12 foot dinghy single-handed from Plymouth to Portsmouth and back again. It was then that he began expounding advanced nautical theories through illustrated articles in the international press -- a hobby that he pursued until his death. After the Second World War broke out, as fleet landing officer in Scapa Flow in 1940, he was sent to Narvik in support of the French Foreign Legion. In just a few weeks he was appointed OBE, mentioned in dispatches, and awarded the Croix de Guerre. 
On his return he wrote a paper suggesting the use of canoes and underwater swimmers to attack enemy shipping, but this was rejected by combined operations as being too radical and impracticable. However, in January 1942 Hasler was appointed to the combined operations development centre where, after the Italians had severely damaged HMS 'Queen Elizabeth' and HMS 'Valiant' in Alexandria harbour by the use of 'human torpedoes', his paper was immediately resurrected. He was ordered to form the Royal Marines boom patrol detachment (later to be dubbed the 'Cockleshell heroes' -- an expression of which he disapproved). When the problem of blockade-runners operating out of Bordeaux was identified in September, Hasler had his solution ready the next day. The submarine HMS 'Tuna' launched a raid on the night of 7 December 1942. Four men out of the original twelve reached the target in tiny two-man canoes, and only two, Hasler and Corporal Bill Sparks (1922-2002), returned, having made their way overland to Spain. Hasler was recommended for the VC, but was technically ineligible, having not been fired on. He was appointed DSO. The episode was turned into a film, 'Cockleshell Heroes' (1955), which was only loosely based on fact; it starred Jose Ferrer and Trevor Howard. 
Subsequently, Hasler experimented with different methods of attack, employing some of these ideas between 1944 and 1945 while serving as training and development officer with 385 Royal Marines detachment in the small operations group (Ceylon), planning submarine- and flying boat-launched raids into Burma. 
In 1946 Hasler won the Royal Ocean Racing Club's class three championships in his unconventional yacht, the 30 square-metre 'Tre Sang'. This was a remarkable achievement for a young officer. Hasler was invalided out of the Royal Marines in 1948 with the wartime rank of lieutenant-colonel. Retirement now allowed him time to concentrate on exploring, writing (in 1957 he wrote a play with Rosamund Pilcher, 'The Tulip Major', which was performed in Dundee), inventing, and developing a wide range of ideas, many of which are still in daily use. They included a floating breakwater and towed dracones (Hasler developed an earlier idea into a feasible design for transporting bulk oil). 
In 1952 Hasler published 'Harbours and Anchorages of the North Coast of Brittany' (rev. 1965), which set the standard for the genre, but his greatest civilian triumphs of invention -- and quiet, gentlemanly persuasion -- were yet to come. In 1953 he conceived and built 'Jester', based on a modified 26 foot Folkboat design, as a test bed for various sail plans (he eventually settled on the junk rig), and the internationally acclaimed, and first commercially successful, Hasler self-steering gear. 'Jester' was a radical advance in British yacht design and she was not the last yacht to come from his drawing-board. 
In 1957 Hasler proposed the idea of a quadrennial single-handed transatlantic race for yachts and after many set-backs this was sailed in 1960 by five yachts; Hasler came second in 'Jester'. He followed this in 1962 with a search for the Loch Ness monster and in 1966 by the first quadrennial two-handed round-Britain and Ireland race, in which Hasler (again, the instigator) was crewed by his wife in the equally radical 'Sumner'. These two races spawned almost all modern, short-handed racing worldwide, with Hasler acknowledged as the founding father: he received a number of international awards. In his later years he moved to the west of Scotland, where he farmed organically and wrote 'Practical Junk Rig' with J. K. McLeod (1988). His most important invention had been the self-steering gear, which became standard equipment and revolutionized sailing. 
Hasler was married in 1965, when in his early fifties, to Bridget Mary Lindsay Fisher, then in her mid-twenties, the daughter of Rear-Admiral Ralph Lindsay Fisher, and herself an experienced yachtswoman. Despite the age difference the marriage brought them immense happiness and a son and a daughter. Hasler died of a heart attack in Glasgow on 5 May 1987. 
Ewen Southby-Tailyour', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40687


Jones, (William) Clifford (1914-1990), rugby player and administrator, was born on 12 March 1914 in the Rhondda valley at Porth near Pontypridd, Glamorgan, the second son in a family of two sons and two daughters of Daniel Jones, wholesale fruit and vegetable merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Mary Lewis. He was educated at Porth secondary school and, from the age of fourteen, at Llandovery College. From 1933 he attended Clare College, Cambridge, where he obtained a third class in part one of the law tripos (1935) and a second (division two) in part two (1936). There he proved himself to be among the very first order of rugby players, winning a blue three times. 
It was at Llandovery College that Jones's extraordinary talent had been revealed. For five years, five afternoons a week, under the coaching of T. P. (Pope) Williams, he had been initiated into the arts of rugby, for which, at 5 feet 8 inches and only 101/2 stone, he was not well tailored. To survive, he relied on his quick wits and his electrifying speed off the mark. His swift, breathtaking sidestep (off either foot) he attributed, as he claimed in one of the embroidered anecdotes of which he was fond, to the daily necessity of avoiding the crowd, traffic, and lamp-posts of the narrow Welsh valleys and the cluttered passages of his college. Having played for the Welsh secondary schools between 1931 and 1933, he left a legacy of virtuoso running. He played his first senior game for Wales (against England) at the age of nineteen. He continued to play for Wales while at university, but his national career lasted only four years. He was unable to escape the ravages of rugby's muscular confrontations: bones were cracked and joints displaced. He missed an international season because of injury in 1937. This prompted his early thoughts of quitting, so that he played only thirteen times for his country (as captain in 1938) and a mere twenty-two for his club, Cardiff. He was one of the greatest outside-halves to have graced the game. 
While Jones was playing he insisted on assiduous preparation, bringing along his own masseur at a time when such assistance was unheard of. Although he was a supreme individualist he valued teamwork, as he emphasized in his book, 'Rugby Football', published in 1937. He benefited from the long pass from his partner at scrum-half, Haydn Tanner, while he in turn was able to utilize, as in the 1934 Oxford-Cambridge match, the powerful, long-striding skills of Wilfred Wooller outside him. This technique came to mature fruition in Wales's 13-12 victory against the New Zealand All Blacks in 1935, at Cardiff Arms Park. 
Jones declared his temporary retirement in 1938 in order to concentrate on further legal studies, but he had played his last game for Wales. In 1939 he married Gwendoline Mary, daughter of Frederick Bartle Thomas, wholesale butcher in Tonypandy; they had three sons. He returned to play for Cardiff against Bridgend on the first Saturday in September 1939, and war was declared the following day. In the same year he was appointed assistant solicitor to Glamorgan county council and assistant prosecuting solicitor to Glamorgan police. However, he took up these posts only briefly, because when war broke out he joined the 77th regiment of the heavy anti-aircraft Royal Artillery (Territorial Army), where he rose to the rank of major. Stationed in Berlin at the end of the war he was assistant to the chief legal officer. 
In 1946 Jones returned to Porth to join his father's business and later to start his own, Clun Fruits, in Pont-y-clun, where the family lived, before finally embarking on a property business. He had little contact with rugby for ten years and developed an enduring interest in watercolours, particularly marine and Victorian paintings. 
In 1956 Jones's interest in rugby revived and he became a member of the Welsh Rugby Union committee. In the following year he became a selector, a position he held until 1978. In the 1960s he was chairman of the committee which developed, in Wales, following the Welsh team's disastrous visit to South Africa in 1964, the world's first comprehensive rugby coaching scheme, from which was established a permanent national coaching organizer, the first of its kind in the rugby world. He was the union's president in the centenary year of 1980-81. He was also a member of the Sports Council of Great Britain from 1967 to 1971, and in 1971 was a founder member of the Sports Council for Wales. He presided over the 'golden age' of Welsh rugby football in the late 1960s and 1970s, being behind the squad training system which enabled Wales to dominate their European rivals. In 1979 he was appointed OBE. 
Jones was dapper, with fair hair and, in later years, nicely rounded features. He was animated and gregarious, as vibrant in his conversation as he was on the field. He invariably wore his Hawks' club tie and Cambridge blues' scarf. Jones died of a heart attack on 27 November 1990 at his home, Buttress House, Bonvilston, near Cardiff, to which he and his wife had moved in later years. He was buried in the churchyard of St Nicholas near Cardiff. His wife and sons survived him. 
Gerald Davies', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40688


Markham, Beryl (1902-1986), aviator and author, was born on 26 October 1902 at Westfield House, Ashwell, Rutland, the younger child and only daughter of Charles Baldwin Clutterbuck, farmer and formerly a lieutenant in the King's Own Scottish Borderers, from which he was cashiered for absence without leave, and his wife, Clara Agnes, daughter of Josiah William Alexander, of the Indian Civil Service. The Clutterbucks went to British East Africa in 1904 and in the following year bought Ndimu Farm at Njoro, overlooking the Rift Valley, where they built a timber and flour mill. In July 1906 Clara left for England with her son and soon divorced her husband. Left with her father, Beryl did not see her mother again until she was twenty-one. She lived a wild childhood with the farm's African children, particularly Kibii (whose name after initiation was arap Ruta), a Kipsigis boy. 
In 1911 Beryl was sent to Nairobi European School, from which she was expelled in her third term. She returned to the farm and possibly a promiscuous early adolescence, not being sent to school again until 1916, when an army officer paid for her to attend Miss Seccombe's school in Nairobi, providing he could marry her. She was again expelled. On 15 October 1919, at the age of sixteen, she married the officer -- Captain Alexander Laidlaw (Jock) Purves, son of Dr William Laidlaw Purves, founder of the Royal St George's Golf Club in Scotland. Purves bought land adjoining Ndimu Farm, but the marriage lasted only six months. Beryl began to train horses, as her father had done, and in 1921 left her husband to live on Soysambu, the farm on the floor of the Rift Valley owned by the third Baron Delamere. She stayed there as a trainer until 1924, when she left for London, where she discovered she was pregnant. She claimed the child's father was Denys Finch-Hatton, the lover of Karen Blixen, who later wrote 'Out of Africa' (1937), but she had been so free with her sexual favours that any of a number of people could have been responsible. She had a late abortion and returned to Kenya, where she met Mansfield Markham, the son of Sir Arthur Basil Markham, first baronet, Liberal MP and owner of collieries in the north of England. He was wealthy and they married in 1927. 
In 1928 Edward, prince of Wales, and his brother Henry, duke of Gloucester (1900-1974), visited Kenya. Beryl became mistress to Henry. She agreed to go to London to be with him, and he established her in a suite at the Grosvenor Hotel. On 25 February 1929 she had a son, about whom there was much speculation. However, he cannot have been fathered by Prince Henry, because Beryl must already have been pregnant when she met him. The boy was given to Markham's mother to bring up. When Markham threatened to cite Henry as co-respondent in a divorce, Queen Mary, in an effort to avoid scandal, made Henry settle on Beryl a capital sum of $15,000, which provided her with an annuity of $500 until her death. 
Beryl stayed in England until 1929, and learned to fly. Back in Kenya, she obtained her commercial pilot's licence in 1933. Following a dare, she decided to fly the Atlantic from east to west. On 4 September 1936 she took off from Abingdon, near Oxford, in a Vega Gull, without a radio. After 21 hours 35 minutes she landed in a bog at Baleine Cove, near Louisburg, Nova Scotia, 100 yards from the ocean, having run out of fuel. She was the first woman to fly the Atlantic from east to west, and the first person to make a solo non-stop crossing in that direction. 
Feted in America, she returned there in 1939, and met Raoul Cottereau Schumacher, son of Henri Schumacher, farmer, of Minneapolis. A well-read and articulate man, Schumacher worked as a ghost writer. In 1942 Beryl married him, having divorced Markham in the same year. In June 1942 'West with the Night', by Beryl Markham, was published in America. A remarkable account of her African childhood, it reached thirteen best-seller lists. The book was lyrically written, with many classical and Shakespearian allusions, and in a style similar in places to that of Antoine de Saint-Exupery, who had befriended Beryl in Hollywood and who may well have been a help with the manuscript. Beryl later claimed that he encouraged her to write the book. It is thought that Schumacher was also a considerable help in editing the manuscript. Some short stories she wrote were later gathered together by her biographer, Mary Lovell, and published as 'The Splendid Outcast' (1987). 
In 1950 Beryl returned to Kenya without Schumacher. Schumacher divorced Beryl in 1960 and died in 1962. Her remaining days were spent training horses in Kenya, South Africa, and Rhodesia. She won the Kenya top trainer's award five times and the Kenya Derby six times. In 1971 her son, whom she had seldom seen, died after a car accident in France, leaving two daughters, and Markham died three months later. 
In 1979 the Jockey Club of Kenya allocated Beryl a bungalow at its racecourse. 'West with the Night' was republished in 1982 and hailed as a lost masterpiece. By 1987, 140,000 copies had been sold and royalties began to pour in. Over a million copies were sold. 
Beryl Markham was 5 feet 8 inches tall, of willowy build, with blue eyes, fair hair, slightly wide-spaced teeth, and slim, boyish hips. Her beautiful long oval face had a determined chin. She was exceptionally promiscuous, but retained the loyalty of her male friends. Women found her often ruthless and selfish, although they admitted her stamina, physical prowess, courage, and ability to withstand pain. She died on 3 August 1986 in Nairobi Hospital, from pneumonia, which followed a broken hip. A service of thanksgiving was held in St Clement Danes, London, in September, also marking the fiftieth anniversary of her flight. 
C. S. Nicholls', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40689


Mercer, Joseph (1914-1990), footballer and football manager, was born on 9 August 1914 at 32 Queen Street, Ellesmere Port, Wirral, Cheshire, the eldest in the family of three boys and one girl of Joseph Powell Mercer, professional footballer, of Ellesmere Port, and his wife, Ethel Breeze. He was educated at Cambridge Road School and John Street Senior Mixed School, Ellesmere Port, playing football for the Cheshire schools' team. His father, a former Nottingham Forest player, was wounded in the First World War, and became a bricklayer. He died when Mercer was twelve. After leaving school, Mercer worked for Shell in a variety of unskilled jobs, and played football first for the village of Elton Green and for the Shell Mex team, and later for Ellesmere Port. Spotted at Elton Green by an Everton scout, he played for Everton as an amateur for two years before signing on as a professional in 1931. He became a regular first-team player during the 1935-6 season as a wing-half, and got his first England cap in 1938. He appeared five times for England during the 1938-9 season, in which Everton won the League championship. In September 1939 Mercer joined the army after Stanley Rous, secretary of the Football Association, had circularized footballers urging them to join the Army Physical Training Corps, so that they would keep fit. He became a sergeant-instructor, and ended the Second World War as a sergeant-major. He played in twenty-seven wartime internationals, captaining England on several occasions, and also played for Aldershot. On 3 September 1941 he married Norah Fanny ('b'. 1919/20), daughter of Albert Edward Dyson, provision merchant. They had one son. 
After the war Mercer was unhappy at Everton, and suffered from knee trouble. He was contemplating retirement in order to devote himself to running a grocery business in Wallasey when Arsenal offered $7000 for him in November 1946. He agreed to go on condition that he could live and train in Liverpool, and he continued to do so throughout his eight years with Arsenal. He became a half-back, and went on to captain Arsenal to two League championships, in 1948 and 1953, and to success in the FA cup final against Liverpool in 1950, a few days after being voted Footballer of the Year. In April 1954 he broke his leg, playing against Liverpool, and retired. 
For the next twenty years Mercer pursued a successful career as a football manager. He became manager of Sheffield United, who were relegated to the second division at the end of his first season there, in 1955 -- an inauspicious start. In December 1958 he replaced Eric Houghton as manager of Aston Villa, who were also relegated at the end of the season. But, under his management, Aston Villa came top of the second division in the 1959-60 season, and won the League cup in 1961. Mercer had a nervous breakdown in 1964, after a disappointing season when the club came nineteenth in the League championship, and he resigned. 
Mercer was out of football for fourteen months before becoming manager of Manchester City in 1965. He brought in Malcolm Allison as assistant manager and coach, and for five seasons this was a highly successful partnership. Manchester City came top of the second division in Mercer's first season there, won the League championship in 1968 and the FA cup in 1969, and in 1970 won both the League cup and the European Cupwinners' cup, beating the Polish team Gornik Zabrze 2-1 in the final. It was the first English club to win a domestic and a European trophy in the same season. Mercer's relationship with Allison soured after Allison, ambitious for promotion, became involved in boardroom intrigues, and Mercer left in 1972 to become manager of Coventry City. In May 1974, after the resignation of Sir Alf Ramsey, the England manager, Mercer agreed to be caretaker manager for the rest of the season. He was in charge for seven matches, with a record of three wins, three draws, and one loss. He was appointed OBE in 1976. 
Mercer was regarded as the greatest wing-half of his generation, and had the Second World War not interrupted his career he would have won many more England caps. As a manager, his greatest successes were with Manchester City, previously overshadowed by their neighbours and rivals, Manchester United. He was a popular manager, much loved for his amiable manner and his big smile. He was famous for his bandy legs and was often mistaken for the jockey Joe Mercer. Mercer died of Alzheimer's disease on 9 August 1990 at his home in St Margaret's Road, Hoylake, Wirral, Cheshire. He was cremated at Landican five days later after a funeral service at Hoylake parish church. 
Anne Pimlott Baker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40690


Peterson, John Charles (1911-1990), boxer, was born in Cardiff on 2 September 1911, the only son (there was also a daughter) of John Thomas Peterson, massage specialist, and his wife, Melinda Laura Rossiter. The family's name was Peterson, but Jack was known professionally as Petersen. It was a sporting family -- his father (whom the press called 'Pa') had trained south Wales boxers who were near-British champions. The younger Peterson was never a 'mountain' fighter (a bare-knuckle boxer who fought illegally). He did well at school and was an enthusiastic boy scout. Not surprisingly, he took up amateur boxing, and by the age of eighteen had reached the Welsh Amateur Boxing Association (ABA) finals at both middle and light heavyweight. In the following season he won Welsh titles at light heavy and heavyweight (1931), and the national ABA championships at the lighter weight. 
Petersen immediately turned professional, managed by his father and backed by a syndicate of Welsh sportsmen. He won his first nine contests within the space of ten weeks at the stadium in Holborn, London. Cardiff was considered by professionals not to be a boxing city, though the Petersons lived in Whitchurch and Jack trained at St John Square, taking the train to go up for his Monday evening matches. Cardiff's Greyfriars Hall was soon used to display this stylish, hard punching boxing prospect to his home supporters, and they became vociferously excited when he rescued a contest by a knockout in the fifteenth round. 
The British light heavyweight championship fell to Petersen at Holborn, and seven weeks later (July 1932), at Wimbledon stadium, he knocked out Reggie Meen, of Leicester, to become the British heavyweight champion, in his eighteenth professional contest, aged twenty. He was the first Welshman, and the youngest man, ever to win that title, and it was accomplished in ten months. The Cardiff press and the people of Wales glowed with pride. The light heavyweight division did not draw crowds to boxing matches, and though Petersen could still weigh 12 stones and 7 pounds he relinquished this title. As the champion at catchweights he became extraordinarily popular, partly because his opponents often outweighed him by 1 or 2 stones. He was an attacking boxer, a dark haired good-looking man, and the adjective 'gallant' appeared frequently in boxing reporters' commentary. On cinema newsreels his modesty and pride in his own locality registered with the general public. Petersen was the most popular British boxer since Bombardier Billy Wells. 
In 1933 an even younger man emerged as a contender. Jack Doyle, from co. Cork via the Irish Guards, had won his ten fights by knockouts within two rounds, and he and Petersen were matched at the White City stadium in July. The largest crowd at a boxing match in Britain at that time (some 30,000) assembled, only to watch Doyle repeatedly punch Petersen below the belt and be disqualified in the second round. Petersen ignored the fouls, did not go down, and honourably matched the bigger man blow for blow. In his next contest Petersen unexpectedly lost the British title to Len Harvey on points at the Royal Albert Hall (December 1933). It was his first defeat in twenty-five professional contests, and to a smaller, though exceptionally clever, man. 
Six months later (June 1934) Petersen beat Harvey to regain this title and also win the heavyweight championship of the British empire, for which black men were allowed to box. One such contender, Larry Gains from Canada, was the next boxer that Petersen defeated. The man from Cardiff defended both championships successfully until August 1936, when he lost heavily to Ben Foord, a Leicester based white South African, who was qualified by residence for both titles. While champion for the second time, however, Petersen had suffered international reverses. In 1935 he boxed only twice, and was beaten both times by a strong, young, 14 stone heavyweight from Germany, Walter Neusel. Petersen retired from boxing in February 1937, at the early age of twenty-five, after losing bruisingly to Neusel for a third time. 
During the Second World War Petersen was a physical training instructor in the Royal Air Force, and subsequently was heavily involved in Welsh affairs of the British Boxing Board of Control. In 1986 he became president of the board and was appointed OBE for his services to sport. He was also vice-chairman of the Sports Council for Wales. Petersen lifted the low prestige of British heavyweights in the inter-war years, and retired from boxing gracefully. In October 1935 he married Annie Elizabeth (Betty), daughter of Thomas Baker Williams, auctioneer, of Cardiff. His parents did not attend the long planned ceremony. 'Pa' had been in his son's corner throughout his career, but the boxer-manager relationship stopped after the second contest with Neusel, and Petersen managed himself for the last four matches of his six years' career. He died on 22 November 1990 at the Princess of Wales Hospital, Bridgend, of cancer of the lung. 
Stan Shipley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40691


Damm, Sheila Van (1922-1987), rally driver and theatre director, was born on 17 January 1922 in Gloucester Terrace, Paddington, London, the youngest of three daughters (there were no sons) of Vivian Van Damm (died 1960) and his wife, Natalie Lyons. Although her father had sponsored motorcycle speedway events in the 1920s, before inheriting the Windmill Theatre in London and initiating its format of non-stop revues, Sheila's upbringing in an all-girl Jewish family generated no interest in motoring beyond her training as a Women's Auxiliary Air Force driver. She subsequently trained privately as a pilot and joined the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve after the Second World War. 
As a promotional stunt for the Windmill Theatre, Sheila Van Damm was persuaded in November 1950 to enter her first motor sporting event, the MCC- 'Daily Express' car rally, driving a factory-prepared Sunbeam Talbot, which her father had persuaded the Rootes Group to enter carrying the words 'Windmill Girl' on the side of the car. Navigated by her sister Nona, she claimed third place in the ladies' section -- a performance which so impressed the Rootes team manager Norman Garrard that he invited her to join Nancy Mitchell and Bill Wisdom to form an all-women crew of a Hillman Minx in the 1951 Monte Carlo rally. She claimed further success in the 1951 RAC rally, when she won the ladies' prize for closed cars under 1500 cc at the wheel of her own Hillman Minx. This was the only occasion on which she competed as a private entrant. Subsequently, she would drive factory cars entered by the Rootes Group. 
Her first major success was in the 1952 Motor Cycling Club rally, when she won the ladies' prize in a Sunbeam Talbot. Despite disappointment in the 1953 Monte Carlo rally, when a series of punctures forced her out of contention, she soon afterwards entered the record books, outpacing her more illustrious team-mate Stirling Moss to set a class record for 2-3-litre cars, driving the prototype Sunbeam Alpine sports car at an average of 120.135 m.p.h. at Jabbeke in Belgium. 
Described in a contemporary report as 'a fresh faced woman, possessed of an infectious sense of fun', Sheila Van Damm had an ebullient and outgoing personality which masked a fearsomely competitive and determined approach to her sport. The 1953 alpine rally, one of Europe's toughest events, saw her, co-driven by Anne Hall, win not only the coupe des dames, but also one of the coveted coupes des Alpes, for finishing the event without gaining penalty marks for lateness. 
Van Damm competed in the Great American Mountain rally before claiming, with Anne Hall, another coupe des dames in the 1954 Tulip rally of Holland, a performance that also saw her winning outright the ten-lap race around the Zandvoort circuit. Winning a further ladies' award in the 1954 Viking rally in Norway successfully clinched the Ladies' European championship for Van Damm and Hall, a feat that they were set to repeat in 1955, after starting the season in fine style by gaining a coupe des dames after five years of trying, on the Monte Carlo rally. 
Despite covering over 14,000 miles a year on rallies, Sheila Van Damm still managed to combine motor sport with helping her father run the Windmill Theatre. However, in October 1955 she asked Sir William Rootes to release her to devote her efforts more fully to the theatre. Her final rally for the Rootes team was the 1956 Monte Carlo, in which she overcame myriad problems to finish, but without award-winning success. She was also invited to partner the Le Mans driver Peter Harper at the wheel of a Sunbeam Rapier in the 1956 Mille Miglia road race. Despite the severity of the event, she maintained intact her record of finishing every event which she started in her five-year career. Averaging 66.37 m.p.h., she and Harper won their class. 
Van Damm published her autobiography, 'No Excuses', in 1957. In 1958 she was appointed the first honorary colonel of the Warwickshire and Worcestershire battalion of the Women's Royal Army Corps (Territorial Army). She maintained her contacts with the motoring world as president of the Doghouse Club for motor-racing wives and ladies and later as president of the Sunbeam Talbot Owners' Club. Her first love, however, remained the Windmill Theatre. She continued its wartime reputation as 'the theatre that never closed' and its revue format, supporting young comedians including Peter Sellers, Tony Hancock, Harry Secombe, and Bruce Forsyth. She inherited the Windmill from her father on his death in 1960 and energetically presided over the theatre for a further four years, before relinquishing the battle against the advancing tide of strip shows and permissive cinemas in the Soho area, which forced it to close in 1964. 
Sheila Van Damm was well built, with dark hair and a round face. She never married and in later life moved to Broadford Bridge Farm, West Chiltington, Pulborough, in rural Sussex, where with her sister Nona she enjoyed running a small farm and stables, in addition to acting as a fund-raiser for the International Spinal Research Trust. She died of cancer at the London Clinic on 23 August 1987 and was subsequently commemorated by a memorial service at the West London Synagogue. 
Stephen Slater', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40692


Fairlie, Henry Jones (1924-1990), political journalist and author, was born on 13 January 1924 in Crouch End, London, the second son and fifth child in the family of three sons and four daughters of James Fairlie, journalist, and his wife, Marguerita Vernon. He was educated at Highgate School and Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he read modern history, obtaining second-class honours in 1945, and becoming secretary of the union in the Trinity term of 1945. A weak heart disqualified him from any form of military service, both during the Second World War and after it, but an interest in liberal politics led to his being appointed a lobby correspondent for the 'Manchester Evening News' at the remarkably early age of twenty-one. He progressed from there to 'The Observer' in 1948, and then in 1950 to 'The Times', where he wrote political leaders. 
Anonymity, however, did not suit Fairlie, and in 1954 he accepted an invitation to join the staff of 'The Spectator'. Building there on the foundations laid by his former colleague, Hugh Massingham of 'The Observer', he perfected the journalistic art form of the modern political column. Irreverent, witty, and seldom anything but well informed, Fairlie's weekly columns (appearing first under the pseudonym of Trimmer and later under his own byline) became required reading for politicians of all parties. This achievement was all the more notable as the time he spent at 'The Spectator' was relatively short, barely two years in duration. But it was during this period that Fairlie made perhaps his most lasting contribution to the vocabulary of British politics, putting into circulation the term 'the establishment' to describe those who, while often unelected, controlled the power points of British public life. 
In some ways, it was an uncharacteristic notion for Fairlie to have propagated -- the phrase had, in fact, first been given its modern usage by A. J. P. Taylor -- since by the mid-1950s his own political stance had become that of a romantic, if radical, tory. It was this which gave him his curious affinity with Harold Macmillan, to whom, especially after he started writing for the 'Daily Mail', he enjoyed regular access. Fairlie, however, was often wayward in his political judgements, and it was typical of this flaw in his journalistic make-up that he should have predicted in the 'Mail' that Labour under Hugh Gaitskell would defeat Macmillan in the 1959 general election. The 'Mail', after the tories had won a majority of 100, soon dispensed with his services. Thereafter he found an impecunious refuge in the columns of 'Time and Tide', where (as in 'Encounter') some of his more penetrating longer articles appeared in the early 1960s. He also enjoyed a brief Indian summer in another mass-circulation paper, the 'Daily Express', with some notable news scoops in the turbulent political year of 1963. Well before this, however, his personal difficulties had tended to overshadow his professional success, as marked in television and radio as it had originally been in the press. Always hospitable and, when in funds, generous to a fault, Fairlie exercised only the loosest control over the management of his own life. Pursued by debt, hounded by libel writs, and regularly the subject of bankruptcy proceedings (leading on one occasion to his imprisonment in Brixton), he eventually left Britain for the United States in 1965, never to return to his native land. 
In America, Fairlie built up a fresh, if equally controversial, journalistic reputation. Moving now steadily to the left, he early on attacked the power of money in American politics, as symbolized by the Kennedys. His assault on the funding of the Kennedy Library in Boston -- originally published in the 'Sunday Telegraph' -- briefly became a 'cause celebre' in American newspapers, making him for a time something of a pariah in a Kennedy-nostalgic Washington. But even when denied his customary access to the power structure, Fairlie could feel that his own fame was secure. His first, and best, book, 'The Life of Politics' (published in 1968 but largely written before he left Britain), drew on all his experience of Westminster and remains one of the most vivid defences of the parliamentary system. His subsequent two books -- 'The Kennedy Promise' (1973) and 'The Spoiled Child of the Western World' (1976) -- concentrated on critical American themes but were respectfully received on both sides of the Atlantic. 
Boyish in looks and capable, when sober, of being captivating in conversation, Fairlie exerted a powerful charm, particularly upon women. He was married in 1949 to Lisette Todd, daughter of Arthur Todd Phillips, architect. They had a son and two daughters. Fairlie's bohemian streak never allowed him to accept the normal constraints of matrimony (although never divorced, he and his wife separated in 1967). The tales of his various 'affaires' were legendary but were usually related, even by his romantic victims, with affection mingled with exasperated amusement. 
Fairlie's last years were spent working for the 'New Republic' in Washington, in whose offices he was eventually afforded the unusual facility of a bedroom in which to sleep. It was a striking testimony of the regard in which he was held by all those who shared his consuming interest in 'the life of politics'. He died in a Washington hospital on 25 February 1990, of heart failure. 
Anthony Howard', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40693


Goldie, Grace Murrell Wyndham (1900-1986), television producer, was born on 26 March 1900 in Glenfinnan, in the district of Arisaig, Inverness-shire, the only daughter and second of the three children of Robert James Nisbet, civil engineer, and his wife, Alice Isabel Wright. Her father's work took him to Egypt and Grace first attended school at the convent of Notre Dame de Sion in Alexandria. In 1916 the family returned to Britain and she was educated at Cheltenham Ladies' College. Despite a warning that her early schooling abroad would prevent her from going on to tertiary education, she managed to enter Bristol University, where she took a first-class honours degree in history (1921). She then went to Somerville College, Oxford, and achieved a second class in philosophy, politics, and economics (1924). 
For the next three years Nisbet taught history at Brighton and Hove high school. Petite and birdlike, in 1928 she married the handsome actor Frank Wyndham Goldie (1894-1957), the son of Lewis Alexander Goldie, solicitor, and his wife, Phillis Payne. They lived in Liverpool for six years, during which she lectured on drama, acted as an examiner in history, read plays for the repertory theatre where her husband was working, and wrote a book on its history, 'The Liverpool Repertory Theatre, 1911-1934' (1935). In 1934 they moved to London and for the next seven years she wrote radio criticism for 'The Listener', turning her attention to television when it started in 1936. During the Second World War she spent two years (1942-4) at the Board of Trade before joining the BBC staff in 1944 as a talks producer, replacing Guy Burgess. 
Goldie produced some major current affairs series such as 'Atomic Energy' (1947) and 'The Challenge of our Time' (1948). In 1948 she moved to the television talks department at Alexandra Palace, to the disappointment of Bertrand Russell, who said, 'My dear girl, television will be of no importance in your lifetime or mine; I thought you were interested in ideas.' She was indeed; and she managed to translate political or international ideas into effective television programmes. She successfully enlisted academics such as David Butler and Robert McKenzie to take part in the mammoth election results programmes which she mounted, beginning in 1951. She also encouraged political ministers to appear on the new medium in 'Press Conference'. In 1949 Goldie started 'Foreign Correspondent', shortly to be followed by 'International Commentary', 'Race Relations in Africa', and 'India's Challenge', all well-researched programmes, with articulate presenters such as the war correspondents Chester Wilmot and Edward Ward, as well as Christopher Mayhew and Aidan Crawley, then both former right-wing Labour MPs with considerable experience of the responsibilities of government and an interest in communication. Her regular use of these and other former Labour MPs led some Conservatives to complain that she was a well-known socialist. In fact her political instincts were Conservative, and her husband worked part-time for the Conservative central office. In 1954 a new head of television talks was appointed and Goldie became the assistant head of the department. Her high standards and her mastery of television techniques made her a valuable trainer of production staff who sought attachments to an expanding and highly regarded department. Without children herself, she particularly enjoyed recruiting and training youngsters. She excelled at starting new programmes, and making sure that they began well, but she tended to interfere with the minutiae of programme content, and it was not always easy for producers, especially the women, to work with her. She was described as having a whim of iron, and once a new series, such as the revamped current affairs vehicle 'Panorama', the daily magazine 'Tonight', or the arts programme 'Monitor', had been successfully launched, it was imperative to direct her restless energy elsewhere. She continued to produce major programmes herself, such as the tribute on Sir Winston Churchill's eightieth birthday in 1954, and 'Men Seeking God'. In 1958 she was appointed OBE. 
After the death of her husband in 1957, Goldie found relaxation difficult. Reluctant to return to her empty flat, she would remain late at the studios, arguing and dissecting programmes. Emboldened in the hospitality room, she would tell cabinet ministers, with the same asperity she showed to producers, what she thought of their performances. In 1962 she became head of talks and current affairs. After retirement in June 1965 she wrote 'Facing the Nation' (1977), a definitive book about television and politics. Grace Goldie died in London at her flat in Kensington, 86 St Mary Abbots Court, Warwick Gardens, on 3 June 1986. 
Leonard Miall', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40694


Hall, Henry Robert (1898-1989), dance-bandleader and radio broadcaster, was born on 2 May 1898 at 23 Bonar Road, Peckham, London, the eldest son in the family of three sons and three daughters of Henry Robert Hall, blacksmith, and his wife, Kate Ellen Smith. Part of his childhood in a poor but happy Salvation Army family in Peckham was spent learning the trumpet. While still at the London county council school in Waller Road, Peckham, he won a scholarship to Trinity College of Music, London, for trumpet, piano, and music theory lessons on Saturday mornings. He left school at fourteen, but his musical education fortunately continued when he was employed at the age of sixteen as a music copyist at the Salvation Army head office in Judd Street, King's Cross. His employer, Richard Slater, worked him hard but helped to develop his talents as player and composer. His 'Sunshine March' was later the basis for his BBC signature tune, 'Here's to the Next Time'. 
In December 1916 Hall enlisted in the Royal Field Artillery. His musical prowess was quickly recognized and he spent much time playing at troop concerts. After the war he undertook desultory engagements in the seedier music halls and played a cinema piano to finance advanced piano lessons at the Guildhall School of Music. In 1922 he accepted a Christmas job as relief pianist at the Midland Hotel, Manchester. A Chopin study played at a minute's notice in the hotel cabaret stopped the show, and Arthur Towle, general manager of Midland Hotels, signed up Hall as resident pianist. Within a year he was musical director of the hotel band, within ten he was in charge of the bands in all thirty-two hotels in the LMS railway group, and when the Gleneagles Hotel opened in 1924 Hall persuaded the BBC to broadcast his band on the opening night. This was the start of a broadcasting career which lasted forty years. In 1924 he married Margery (1894-1976), daughter of Robert Brook Harker, commercial traveller. It was a perfect partnership, and they had a son and a daughter. In 1932 Hall succeeded Jack Payne as musical director of the BBC dance orchestra, a move which involved a large cut in salary, but promised enhanced prospects. His was the first programme to be heard from the newly built Broadcasting House, in 1932. 
Hall's purist style of music left some listeners lukewarm, but the impeccably played musical arrangements, often made by Hall himself, and his modest way of announcing the items were appealing. The repertory of straight dance tunes interspersed with novelty items such as 'The Teddy Bears' Picnic' soon made the band, broadcasting at teatime and in the evening, enormously popular. In 1934 he had the idea of inviting show business stars to join him and his band in a programme called 'Henry Hall's Guest Night'. His introductory words, 'This 'is' Henry Hall speaking', became something of a national catch-phrase. The show was an instant success and ran for 972 performances over twenty-three years. The first chat show on British radio, it featured stars including Noel Coward, Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy, Danny Kaye, and Gracie Fields, with whom he always established an immediate rapport. The programme made him a major figure in the golden age of radio. 
A royal command performance, a film 'Music hath Charms' (1935), and an engagement to conduct the ship's band on the maiden voyage of the 'Queen Mary' showed a widening recognition of Hall's star status. By 1937, when many other dance bands were broadcasting, he asked permission to leave the BBC and take his band with him. Sir John Reith granted it and agreed that they would not be replaced. It was said that 40 million people listened to their final broadcast. 
Hall now faced a freelance career touring the major variety theatres with his band topping the bill. Fears that the public would not support a wireless star in the theatre were unfounded. 'Sold out' boards were everywhere and Hall was frequently mobbed by the fans. The tours continued during the years of the Second World War, during which Hall also gave troop concerts and guest nights. These strenuous and demanding years culminated in a second royal command performance (1948). After the war Hall began presenting stage shows, notably 'Irma la Douce' (1958). He continued to appear regularly on radio and television until 1964, and finally announced his retirement in 1970, when he was appointed CBE. 
A tall, dignified man, immaculately dressed, his dark hair brushed down, with a quizzical face and horn-rimmed glasses, Hall had flair and an engagingly hesitant style, which did not conceal a quiet authority inseparable from a lifetime of demanding high standards from himself and those around him. In return he received universal respect and affection. He was a showman completely in tune with the age in which he flourished. Hall died in Eastbourne after a long retirement, on 28 October 1989. 
Ian Wallace', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40695


Madden, Cecil Charles (1902-1987), radio and television producer, was born on 29 November 1902 at the British consulate in Mogador, Morocco, the eldest of three sons (there were no daughters) of Archibald Maclean Madden CMG, diplomatist, and his wife, Cecilia Catherine, daughter of Allen Page Moor, canon of Truro. He was educated at French schools in Morocco, schools in Spain, and in England at Aldeburgh Lodge preparatory school and Dover College. He acquired fluent French and Spanish. While working in a secretarial post with the Rio Tinto Company in Spain, he wrote revues in Spanish and played Freddy Eynsford Hill in a translation of George Bernard Shaw's 'Pygmalion'. Four times a year his professional duties took him to New York, where he saw Broadway productions in his free time. 
Between 1926 and 1932 every holiday was spent in Paris working in theatre management. Although Madden encountered famous stars such as Fernandel, Maurice Chevalier, Mistinguett, and Miss Bluebell, he was very proud of the fact that he improved backstage conditions for the chorus girls. As well as writing revues in French and Spanish, he wrote several plays in English. 
In June 1932 Madden married Muriel Emily, daughter of Brigadier-General James Kilvington Cochrane; they had a son and daughter. In 1933 he joined the BBC talks department, where he produced a series entitled 'Anywhere for a News Story' and subsequently produced the outside broadcasting spot on a popular Saturday evening programme, 'In Town Tonight'. 
Madden subsequently worked as a senior producer in the new empire (later overseas) service of the BBC, and in 1936 joined Gerald Cock, the recently appointed first head of the BBC's television service. In August 1936 they were told to prepare programmes to open the first high definition service in the world on 2 November. Plans changed and Madden was told to produce a show to be transmitted to Radiolympia in ten days' time. 'Here's looking at you' was seen by visitors to the exhibition and the few television set owners then living around London. Madden then created 'Picture Page', a magazine programme transmitted from Alexandra Palace on the official opening of the television service. From 2 November 1936, until television shut down on 1 September 1939, Madden organized and produced live programmes of variety, ballets, and drama, as well as Disney cartoons. 'A play a day' was his motto. He created the series '100% Broadway', 'Cabaret Cartoons', and 'Starlight'. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War, Madden returned to radio, and in 1940 was made head of the overseas entertainment unit in the Criterion Theatre, broadcasting all radio programmes to British Commonwealth forces serving abroad. He presented the 'American Eagle in Britain' programme from 17 November 1940 to 9 September 1945, earning the title of the 'GI's friend'. General Dwight D. Eisenhower visited the studio on 2 March 1944; on 7 June (D-day plus one) his brainchild, the allied expeditionary forces programme (AEF) of the BBC, began with Madden in charge of the integrated production. This programme informed and entertained its listeners until 25 July 1945. Artists included Gertrude Lawrence, Marlene Dietrich, George Raft, Bing Crosby, and Bob Hope. Major Glenn Miller conducted the American band of AEF until he disappeared in December 1944, Madden being the last civilian to see him alive. He was also the man responsible for discovering Petula Clark in 1942 and the Beverley Sisters in 1944. 
When television reopened on 7 June 1946, Madden returned to his former post of programmes organizer. In 1950 he was made acting head of children's programmes until April 1951. He then became assistant to the controller of television programmes and created 'Picture Parade', a magazine programme dealing with the film industry. He was also involved with a series of excerpts from West End plays, including 'Look Back in Anger'. 
Madden retired from the BBC in 1964, but he continued other activities, as a governor of Dulwich College preparatory school, and president of both the Glenn Miller Society and the British Puppet and Model Theatre Guild. His interest in young entrants to the profession was reflected in his work for the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA), as vice-chairman of the RADA Associates. He was involved with the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) and took part in the National Film School. His personal scrapbooks, containing records of television since 1936, aided research for the 'fifty years of television' celebrations in November 1986, when he was videoed from the studio at Alexandra Palace on 2 November. In the Museum of Film, Photography, and Television at Bradford he is commemorated in a life-sized model, seated in the gallery at Alexandra Palace. He was a BAFTA award winner (1961) and a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts (1950). In 1952 he was appointed MBE. Madden laid the foundation of British television, always with taste and high standards. His popularity with those who worked with him was not always shared by the BBC administration. With his sound knowledge of theatre he was a discoverer of talent as well as an innovator. 
Madden was tall, slim, and always immaculately dressed. He was charming, courteous, dignified, and had a great sense of fun, which prevented him from being pompous. Madden died in Westminster Hospital, London, on 27 May 1987. 
June Averill', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40696


Mitchell, Denis Holden (1911-1990), television and radio producer, was born on 1 August 1911 in Cheadle, Cheshire, the younger child and only son of Ernest George Mitchell, Congregational minister, and his wife, Ethel, 'nee' Alderson. The family went to South Africa when he was six but returned to England when he was ten, his father having been appointed minister of a church at Redhill, Surrey. Mitchell attended Caterham School, Surrey, where he twice failed his matriculation examination. 
Mitchell shared his mother's enthusiasm for drama, and as a teenager his temporary work included the carrying of spears at the Old Vic theatre. At the age of eighteen he returned to South Africa, where he stayed until 1949. His first work was as a bank clerk, and during his holidays he appeared as an actor in local stage productions, as well as acting and writing radio scripts for the South African Broadcasting Corporation. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War, Mitchell volunteered for service in the South African artillery, but because of his knowledge of drama and radio he was soon transferred to the entertainment unit of the Union Defence Force, being promoted to the rank of captain and placed in command of its operation in the Middle East and Italy. One of the members of his unit was Sid James, the actor. 
At the end of the war Mitchell worked briefly for a local newspaper, and then joined the staff of the South African Broadcasting Corporation. His programme work covered a wide range, but his main concern, he insisted, was with 'real people and real voices', and his own personality, quiet and sympathetic, explains why no interviewer has extracted more by saying less. His passion for drama had already vanished, never to return. 
On the advice of the BBC features producer D. G. Bridson, who had visited South Africa, Mitchell returned to Britain in 1949 and in 1950 became the BBC's features producer in Manchester, near to his birthplace. Most of his programmes were based on interviews with people whose voices were rarely heard: the homeless, nurses, the unemployed, and criminals. He always walked alone, often at night, usually finding people by chance. At a time when cameras and microphones were mainly studio-based, he worked out in the streets, recording people in their own surroundings. 
In 1955 Mitchell was briefly attached to the BBC television service in London, where he made his first documentary film, about teenagers, which gained an award at the Brussels Experimental Film Festival. On his return to Manchester in 1956 he continued to make television documentaries, notably 'Morning in the Streets' (1959), which won both the Prix Italia and an award of the Society of Film and Television Arts. He joined the Television Service at Shepherd's Bush in 1959, continuing his own style with 'Soho Story', about a London busker, but he also returned to Africa to make a series, 'The Wind of Change', and in 1961 he produced 'Chicago', the story of a city 'seen through the eyes of the people who live there, from the very poor to the extremely rich' (Denis Mitchell's notes proposing the film). 
Mitchell left the BBC in 1962, and the following year formed Denis Mitchell Films Ltd, a small company which survived until his death. It made documentaries for many organizations, including ATV, the BBC, Rediffusion, Southern Television, and Channel 4. Much of his most personal work was made for Granada Television, based again in Manchester, and his subjects (especially in the series 'This England', 1964-7) were usually 'ordinary folk'; but his interviewing technique was equally effective in 'Private Lives' (1972-3), in which the subjects came from many classes of society. A programme which he always regarded as one of his best was a portrait of Quentin Crisp. Towards the end of his life he became increasingly keen on making very short programmes, lasting between five and ten minutes, whose subjects were inevitably men and women in various walks of life. He made over 100 documentaries, and in 1975 received the SFTA's Desmond Davis award for his outstanding talent. 
Mitchell was of medium height, with hazel eyes and brown hair; he was gentle and softly spoken, and frequently smiling. In 1938 in Durban he married Dorothea (Sally), daughter of William Arthur Bates, telegraphic engineer in the Post Office. They had two daughters, the younger of whom died in 1970. His first marriage was dissolved in South Africa in 1948, and in 1951 he married Betty Annie, a BBC secretary and the daughter of a transport inspector, Albert Elmer Horne. They had one son. His second marriage was dissolved in 1965, and in the same year he married (Norah) Linda, who had been his secretary in the BBC, the daughter of John Hastings Webster, chartered accountant. They lived in the Norfolk countryside, the location of his film 'Never and always' (1977), which expressed its social history as seen by the local people. Mitchell died on 30 September 1990 at his home, Avondale, 42 Station Road, Great Massingham, Norfolk (although his death certificate gives 1 October as the day of death). 
Norman Swallow', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40697


Russell, (Muriel) Audrey (1906-1989), radio broadcaster, was born on 29 June 1906 in Dublin, the only child of John Strangman Russell, director of the family woollen mill, of Dublin, and his wife, Muriel Metcalfe, sister of E. Dudley (Fruity) Metcalfe, the closest friend of the prince of Wales (later Edward VIII and duke of Windsor). From an Anglo-Irish protestant background, her parents were part of Dublin society, and her father led the life of a country gentleman. She was educated at home by governesses, and later at Southlands, a private boarding-school in Harrow, before going to a finishing school at the Villa St Georges in Neuilly, Paris. 
Back in London, Audrey Russell trained as an actress for six months at the Central School of Speech and Drama, and then worked for several years as a theatre dogsbody, preparing stage meals, understudying, and taking walk-on parts. She was assistant stage manager for Rodney Ackland's play 'After October', which ran for a year in 1936, and then became stage manager for the Group Theatre, an avant-garde theatre club at the Westminster Theatre. 
With the outbreak of the Second World War imminent, Audrey Russell joined the London Fire Brigade (later the London Auxiliary Fire Service). She fought fires throughout the blitz. Stationed in Manchester Square, she was close to the BBC, and after she had been interviewed on the effects of the air raids she was asked to do a series of broadcasts on the work of the Auxiliary Fire Service, which included a description of the worst night of the blitz, 10 May 1941, when the House of Commons was bombed. This led to a secondment to the Air Ministry for six weeks, to do a series of talks on the work of the Women's Auxiliary Air Force. 
In 1942 the BBC asked to have Audrey Russell released from national service in order to join the magazine programme 'Radio Newsreel'. For two years she travelled all over the country, broadcasting from army camps, bomb sites, and rescue stations, interviewing those whose homes had been destroyed, and reporting on the damage done by flying bombs and rockets. On D-day she was in Trafalgar Square interviewing people on their reactions to the Normandy landings. In 1944 she was accredited as a British war correspondent by the War Office, and went with the war reporting unit to Europe to send back dispatches from Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany, and Norway. Suffering from influenza she returned home in March 1945 and spent the rest of the war in London. 
Determined to make a career in broadcasting rather than go back to the theatre, Audrey Russell accepted a post as a reporter in the new Home Service reporting unit, but she really wanted to be a commentator rather than a reporter. She was attracted by the tightrope quality of doing a live commentary, describing the action as it happens, which was very different from the work of a reporter, who could read from a script. She succeeded in 1947, when she was asked to join the outside broadcasts team commentating on the wedding of Princess Elizabeth, to cover the 'women's angle', describing the wedding dress and clothes worn by the guests. 
Audrey Russell decided in 1948 to leave the news division and join the outside broadcasts department on a contract basis. She became one of the principal royal commentators on state occasions, covering eight royal weddings between 1947 and 1981. She covered the Festival of Britain in 1951, and went on the first of many royal tours in 1952. At the coronation in 1953 she was in Westminster Abbey to describe the processions, and then accompanied the six-month royal tour around the world by sea. Every year she broadcast from the royal Maundy service. She covered the funerals of Sir Winston Churchill and Victoria (Mary), the princess royal, in 1965, and described the silver jubilee in 1977 and the eightieth-birthday celebrations for the queen mother in 1980. In recognition of her work the queen gave her a hand-embroidered chair. Although she was never tempted to leave radio broadcasting for television, she did a series of programmes on BBC television in the 1960s on the opening of the Queen's Gallery, Buckingham Palace, in 1962 and the first ten exhibitions held there. 
Audrey Russell was the only woman to be an accredited war correspondent in the Second World War, and the first woman news reporter when she joined the Home Service in 1945. Her voice was instantly recognizable, and she was to radio coverage of state occasions what Richard Dimbleby was to television. She became a freeman of the City of London in 1967, and was appointed MVO in 1976. 
Audrey Russell was tall, blonde, and elegantly dressed, with a beautiful, calm speaking voice, with the slightest tinge of an Irish accent. She loved painting in oils, and collected art, as well as lecturing on art and antiques. She was unmarried, having broken off her engagement to Brent Grotrian, the heir to a baronetcy. He was later killed in Burma, in 1941. She died on 8 August 1989 of Alzheimer's disease in Woking, Surrey. 
Anne Pimlott Baker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40698


Fuchs, (Emil Julius) Klaus (1911-1988), theoretical physicist, was born on 29 December 1911 in Russelsheim, Germany, the third child in the family of two sons and two daughters of Emil Fuchs and his wife, Else Wagner. His father, renowned for his high Christian principles, was a pastor in the Lutheran church who joined the Quakers later in life and eventually became professor of theology at Leipzig University. Fuchs's grandmother, mother, and one sister all took their own lives, while his other sister was diagnosed as schizophrenic. 
Fuchs went to school in Eisenach and continued his education in the universities of Leipzig and Kiel. It was at the latter that he became involved in politics and, after some soul-searching, doubtless inspired by his father's idealistic attitude, the Communist Party. After an altercation with the Nazis in 1933 he crossed the border into France and then, with the help of family connections, travelled to Bristol, where he studied under Nevill Mott and obtained a PhD. He took a DSc at Edinburgh University under the guidance of Max Born, one of the pioneers of the new quantum mechanics. After the outbreak of the Second World War he was interned with other German refugees in camps on the Isle of Man and in Canada from June to December 1940. 
In 1941 he was recruited by Rudolf Peierls to work on Tube Alloys, the codename for the British project to develop the atomic bomb ['see 'Tube Alloys directorate]. The following year, in spite of wartime restrictions, he was granted British nationality as a special case, and signed the 'Official Secrets Act'. In 1943 he went with Peierls to join the Manhattan project, which was the codename given to the American atomic bomb programme. He was posted to New York and then to Los Alamos in New Mexico, where he remained until after the resulting bombs had destroyed Hiroshima and Nagasaki. In 1946 he returned to Britain, where he was appointed by John Cockcroft as head of the theoretical physics division at the newly created Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell, then under the Ministry of Supply. He was given the civil service rank of principal scientific officer. He soon became senior principal and in 1949 deputy chief scientific officer. He took personal charge of the mathematical work which underpinned the development of nuclear power. 
In January 1950 Fuchs was arrested for transmitting significant information about Anglo-American work on nuclear weapons, including the hydrogen bomb, to secret agents of the Soviet Union. This he had been doing continuously since 1941, after Germany invaded Russia. He had felt so strongly that the details of atomic research should be shared with the Soviet Union that he made contact with a communist colleague he had known in Germany. He had been put in touch with someone working for the Soviet embassy. He was sentenced to fourteen years' imprisonment in February and his British citizenship was revoked in December 1950. Fuchs was released on 23 June 1959 after serving nine years and four months. Immediately after leaving Wakefield prison he joined his father and one of his nephews in what had become the German Democratic Republic (GDR), where he was appointed deputy director of the Institute for Nuclear Research in Rossendorf near Dresden; he retired in 1979. He never returned to the West. 
In 1959 Fuchs married a friend from his student days, a fellow communist called Margarete (Greta) Keilson, the widow of Max Keilson, president of the Association of Journalists in the GDR. They had no children. Fuchs achieved great prominence in East Germany and was elected to the Academy of Sciences and the Communist Party central committee. He was decorated with both the order of merit of the Fatherland and the order of Karl Marx. He had probably saved the Soviet Union two years' work on nuclear weapons. 
Of slight build, 5 feet 9 inches in height, with fast receding hair, Fuchs was physically attractive with a warm smile, although he often seemed frail. Always tidily dressed and with impeccable manners, he could be kind and sensitive towards his friends. His legendary shyness and aloof manner, however, did not always quite succeed in concealing his innate arrogance and conceit and his belief that he was uniquely valuable. He was possessed of formidable self-control. 
Short-sighted and noticeably left-handed, Fuchs was also a heavy smoker, drank quite a lot, and suffered from respiratory problems, as did his older brother, who had tuberculosis for many years. While in the USA and Britain he enjoyed social occasions and prided himself on being a good dancer. He was also keen on family life and frequently dropped in on his married friends. It is believed that he formed a relationship at Harwell with an older woman who was married to a senior colleague of his at Harwell who was also his close friend. He died in Dresden, on 28 January 1988. 
Mary Flowers', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40699


Philby, Harold Adrian Russell (1912-1988), spy, was born on 1 January 1912 at Ambala in the Punjab, the only son and eldest of four children of Harry St John Bridger Philby (1885-1960), civil servant in India, explorer, and orientalist, and his wife, Dora (died 1957), daughter of Adrian Hope Johnston, of the Indian public works department. With unconscious prescience they nicknamed him Kim. He was educated at Westminster School and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he joined the university socialist society and became a convinced communist. He obtained a third class in part one of the history tripos (1931) and a second class (division I) in part two of the economics tripos (1933). Philby was of medium height with a seductive smile. In 1933 he went on a trip to Vienna, where he met Alice (Litzi) Friedman, an Austrian communist, whose father was Israel Kohlman, a minor government official of Hungarian Jewish origin. They witnessed the street fighting which ended with the defeat of the socialists in February 1934, when they had a hurried marriage and left for England. By this time she had persuaded him to become a Soviet agent. While he was in Vienna the NKVD (the Soviet secret service) had talent-spotted Philby as a potential recruit. 
In June 1934, at a secret meeting in Regent's Park, Philby was approached by Arnold Deutsch, a Czech undercover Soviet intelligence officer operating in London. Philby welcomed the suggestion that he should penetrate 'the bourgeois institutions'. Another of his controllers was Teodor Maly, a Hungarian who had renounced the priesthood and become an idealistic convert to Bolshevism. Beginning his career as a journalist, Philby was instructed to sever all links with his communist past and swing over to the far right. Hence his involvement with the pro-Nazi Anglo-German Fellowship. First as a freelance and later for 'The Times' he went to Spain in February 1937 to cover the Spanish Civil War from the point of view of General Franco (whose planned assassination was part of his original brief), who awarded him the red cross of military merit. He left Spain in August 1939 with his overt right-wing credentials established, while his covert faith in Joseph Stalin remained untarnished by the terror of the mid-1930s, although he had an ambivalent attitude to the Nazi-Soviet pact in August 1939. His luck never deserted him, especially permitting him to survive the ups and downs of an alternating relationship with the Moscow centre. 
After the outbreak of the Second World War Philby went to France as a war correspondent. Returning to England after Dunkirk he was recruited, thanks to Guy Burgess, his friend from Cambridge and a fellow NKVD agent, into the SIS (the Secret Intelligence Service or MI6) in July 1940 and soon joined section five (counter-intelligence) in 1941. He set up a base in London with Aileen Furse (the daughter of Captain George Furse of the Royal Horse Artillery), with whom he had children but whom he did not marry until December 1946, a week after his divorce from Litzi. By then he was a rising star, having become in 1944 head of section nine, whose remit was 'to collect and interpret information concerning communist espionage and subversion'. When section nine was merged with section five in 1945 he alerted Moscow to the intended defection in Istanbul of Konstantin Volkov, who could have unmasked Philby. He was appointed OBE in 1946. 
In 1946 the SIS posted him to Turkey and in 1949 he became their representative in Washington, where he kept Moscow informed of Anglo-American intelligence collaboration. In 1950 he tipped off the Italian nuclear physicist and Soviet agent Bruno Pontecorvo, who defected to the Soviet Union. He also saw how the net was closing in on Donald Maclean. In 1950 Guy Burgess was posted to Washington and lodged with Philby. When Maclean and Burgess fled to Moscow the following year, Philby was summoned back to London and interrogated by MI5, who were persuaded of his guilt, but lacked the evidence of a confession to convict him. The SIS, however, in return for Philby's voluntary resignation, gave him a golden handshake. After his name had been cleared by Harold Macmillan in 1955, the SIS fixed his cover as a correspondent for 'The Observer' and 'The Economist', based in Beirut, where he arrived in August 1956. 
Aileen died in 1957. There were three sons and two daughters of the marriage; Philby had no other children. In 1959 he married Eleanor Brewer, from Seattle, who was formerly married to Sam Pope Brewer, Middle East correspondent of the 'New York Times'. In Beirut, Philby was successfully reincarnated as a journalist until Anatoly Golitsyn's defection to the CIA in 1962 filled the gaps in the case against him. The SIS and MI5 then confronted Philby with a prosecutor's brief in January 1963, plus an offer of immunity if he returned to London and made a full confession. Philby admitted he had been a Soviet agent but said no more. He quietly arranged his escape and arrived in Russia at the end of January 1963. Five months later he was granted Soviet citizenship. 
Eleanor soon joined him, but she so disliked life in Moscow that she left for good in 1965; she died in America in 1968. Meanwhile, Philby had been awarded in 1965 the order of Lenin and the order of the Red Banner. He began an affair with Melinda Maclean, the wife of Donald Maclean, who had also defected to Moscow, but this did not last. Heavy drinking and smoking dominated his life until 1970, when George Blake, another defector, introduced him to Rufina Ivanova, half Polish and half Russian, whom he married in 1971. She was the daughter of an expert on the chemical treatment of furs. In 1980 his award of the order of Friendship of Peoples preceded his East German, Hungarian, Bulgarian, and Cuban decorations. He died in Moscow on 11 May 1988, receiving his final recognition in an elaborate funeral organized by the KGB. A private buyer purchased the lion's share of Philby's papers, which were auctioned at Sothebys in July 1994. He was survived by his fourth wife. 
Nigel Clive', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40700


Wynne, Greville Maynard (1919-1990), businessman and spy, was born on 19 March 1919 in Wrockwardine Wood, east of Shrewsbury, Shropshire, the only son to grow up of Ethelbert Wynne, plater, and his wife, Ada Pritchard. He had three elder sisters; an elder brother had died aged one in 1915. He was brought up at Ystradmynach, a mining village 12 miles north of Cardiff, where his father was a foreman in an engineering works. His mother died when he was fourteen. He worked in his middle teens as an electrician, and took evening courses in engineering at Nottingham University. 
Called up into the army in 1939, Wynne spent the Second World War as a sergeant in the field security police, looking after elementary security in various parts of Great Britain. He acquired the vocabulary of the intelligence corps, in which he served. On being demobilized in 1946 he married, on 21 September at St Anne's, Wandsworth, Sheila Margaret, daughter of Gordon Beaton, chemist. They had a son. 
Wynne already described himself, on his marriage certificate, as a consulting engineer -- a trade in which he made himself useful to exporters, with whom lay the country's best hope of staying solvent. In a decade and a half he built up a profitable small business, and came to specialize in assisting exports to eastern Europe, then under rigid communist control from Moscow. He occasionally visited the USSR to forward his clients' interests. He was a short, stocky man, with a brisk, cheerful manner, a toothbrush moustache, and smooth dark hair. 
As a matter of routine MI6 (the Secret Intelligence Service) briefed many British businessmen who travelled behind the iron curtain about points for which they might like to look out while there; Wynne was among them. Chance turned him into an important pawn in the 'great game'. Oleg Penkovsky, a colonel in Russian secret military intelligence, had been demoted from work he enjoyed in Turkey to run a Moscow committee that enquired into scientific matters -- a cover for industrial espionage against the capitalist powers. Entirely disillusioned with the Soviet regime, Penkovsky sought to change sides, and through several intermediaries approached the American Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), without securing a response. He then approached Wynne, who informed MI6, which decided to take the case up, and to handle it jointly with the CIA. MI6 accepted Wynne as one of the conduits through which material could from time to time be passed to and from Penkovsky. 
Some of this material was of world strategic importance, for it enabled the Americans to outface the Russians in the Cuban missile crisis of 1962. Shortly thereafter Wynne, who may have shown unprofessional enthusiasm at finding himself in Penkovsky's presence, unaware of the strictness with which Soviet citizens kept watch on each other, was abruptly arrested in Budapest on 2 November 1962. He discovered after he had been flown to Moscow that Penkovsky was already in gaol. After nine months' intermittent, fierce interrogation, the two were given a public show trial there on 7-11 May 1963. 
Wynne stuck to his cover story that he was a simple businessman, admitting to having carried packets, but denying any knowledge of their contents. Penkovsky was sentenced to death, Wynne to eight years. After less than a year of hideous discomfort at Vladimir, some 120 miles east of Moscow, Wynne was, again abruptly, flown to Berlin and exchanged for a leading Soviet agent, Conon Molody (Gordon Lonsdale), early on 22 April 1964. The exchange received a torrent of publicity in the Western news media. MI6 and the CIA paid Wynne more than $200,000 compensation. 
Wynne's wife had stood by him loyally; but his marriage swiftly broke up. He went off to Majorca with his secretary, Johanna Hermania, the daughter of Dirk van Buren, a civil servant. They married on 31 July 1970 at Kensington register office; his first wife had divorced him in 1968. There were no children of the second marriage. Wynne wrote two books, to try to make money out of what had happened to him: 'The Man from Moscow', a life of Penkovsky and himself (1967), and the much more fanciful 'The Man from Odessa' (1981), in which, for example, he claimed to have held an army commission, which he never did. He never went back to business, lived latterly in Spain, and died of cancer in the Cromwell Hospital, Kensington, on 27 February 1990. A memorial service was held in Chelsea Old Church, London, on 5 May 1990. 
M. R. D. Foot', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40701


Cooper, Diana Olivia Winifred Maud, Viscountess Norwich (1892-1986), actress, society hostess, and author, was born on 29 August 1892 in London into the Manners family where she was accepted as the third of three daughters and the fifth of five children. Her assumed father was Henry John Brinsley Manners, marquess of Granby, later eighth duke of Rutland, MP (1852-1925), and her mother was (Marion Margaret) Violet (1856-1937) ['see 'Manners, (Marion Margaret) Violet], artist, daughter of Colonel Charles Hugh Lindsay. It was generally believed, and certainly by Diana, that her true father was Henry John Cockayne (Harry) Cust (1861-1917), politician, journalist, and brother of the fifth Baron Brownlow. She received no formal education, but was educated at home by governesses and the culture of her surroundings. She learned much, including great drifts of poetry, which she remembered to her dying day. In her voluminous correspondence and in the drafts for her books, her prose was vivid and imaginative, and her idiosyncratic spelling added to its charm. 
At ten years old, Diana contracted Urb's disease, a form of paralysis, and for five years was a semi-invalid. She never complained, but, because of her illness, was certainly over-indulged by the family. In 1910 she formally came out and took her place at the centre of that so-called golden generation, soon so largely to perish in war. At this time her beauty was first acknowledged. She was hailed 'queen of beauty', but also acquired some notoriety. She and her immediate circle dubbed themselves the 'corrupt coterie', and lived their lives of privilege to the full and sometimes to excess. Diana was much criticized when, at a party on the Thames in 1914, Sir Dennis Anson swam for a dare and was drowned; this tragedy haunted her all her life. When the First World War came in 1914, Diana Manners trained as a member of the Voluntary Aid Detachment at Guy's Hospital. She was hard-working and conscientious, and acted as a nurse at Guy's and at the hospital established by her parents in their London house in Arlington Street. 
Diana had many suitors and mourned the deaths of several of them in the fighting. (Alfred) Duff Cooper (1890-1954), at first in the Foreign Office and then in the Grenadier Guards, was among her most ardent admirers. In 1916 she promised to marry him, but was prevented by lack of money and opposition from her ambitious mother. Even the DSO, to which Duff Cooper was appointed in 1918, failed to overcome this opposition. Eventually, however, agreement was given and they were married on 2 June 1919. It was a marriage which never staled. Diana had many who loved her and Duff was frequently unfaithful; but for each the relationship with the other remained the most important thing in their lives. 
To earn money Diana acted in two unmemorable films before her marriage and gained the reputation of a hard-working actress as well as a transcendent beauty. Marriage and Duff Cooper's wish to enter politics increased the need for money and Diana was glad to accept Max Reinhardt's offer to play the Madonna in a mime play, 'The Miracle'. This was first staged in the USA from November 1923 to the following May, and again for the following three autumns and winters. It toured Europe in 1927, and London and the provinces in 1932; the last performance was in January 1933. 'The Miracle' was a phenomenal success, and Diana Cooper's triumphant part in it was remembered as long as she lived. The money earned allowed her husband to enter parliament, as MP for Oldham, in 1924. 
On 15 September 1929 Diana had a son, John Julius. He was her only child and she took a close and intelligent interest in his education. Once 'The Miracle' was ended, she was primarily concerned with her husband's career rather than her own, and she gave him powerful support, as chatelaine of Admiralty House (Duff Cooper became first lord of the Admiralty in May 1937). There she first had the opportunity to display her outstanding talent as a hostess in a splendid setting. In the 1930s the Coopers were friendly with Edward VIII and Mrs Simpson and accompanied them on the cruise of the 'Nahlin' in 1936. They were spoken of as belonging to Mrs Simpson's camp, but this was never the case. 
Diana supported Duff throughout the Second World War, even accompanying him to Singapore and the Far East against convention, and in the face of opposition. When in Britain, they lived in the Dorchester Hotel and at Bognor in a house given to Diana by her mother, where she found complete happiness running a smallholding farm. In January 1944 Duff Cooper became British representative to the French committee of liberation in Algiers and in November British ambassador in Paris. His wife was unfailingly at his side; her French was fluent but inaccurate, and she was by no means a conventional ambassadress, but she gave the embassy a glamour possessed by none other. With her remarkable ability to get on with people, she collected a group of artists and writers known as 'La Bande'; it was said with criticism that some of them had collaborated with the Germans. While at the embassy Diana Cooper discovered and rented the house 'she loved best in the world', the Chateau St Firman at Chantilly. On leaving the embassy at the end of 1947, contrary to convention and to the aggravation of their successors, the Coopers returned to live at Chantilly. 
In 1952 Duff Cooper was created Viscount Norwich, but Diana would have none of it, announcing in 'The Times' that she wished to retain her former name and title, so Lady Diana Cooper she remained. In 1953 Duff Cooper was taken violently ill; he recovered, but died on 1 January 1954 on a cruise to Jamaica. He was buried at Belvoir Castle, but Diana did not attend the funeral: she never attended the funerals of those she loved. Her life had been centred round Duff for thirty-five years, and she was distraught without him. 
Diana lived for a further thirty-two years. She disliked getting old, but found solace in writing a three-volume autobiography, which was a resounding success. She gained much comfort from John Julius, her grandchildren, and her many friends. She retained her love of travel and her interest in people: she still enjoyed each new experience, even, it seemed, two burglaries, when she displayed her courage and her enduring star quality. She is remembered mostly for her outstanding beauty, but for most people this obscured the fact that she was a shy, very clever, and sometimes extremely funny woman. She died on 16 June 1986, at her London home, 10 Warwick Avenue. 
Charteris of Amisfield', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 40702


Roberts, William Edward (1902-1948), college head, literary scholar, and poet, was born in Bournemouth on 6 December 1902, the eldest of four children of Edward George Roberts, a Bournemouth shopkeeper who also owned a small farm in the New Forest, and his wife, Henrietta Mary Sellers. He began his education in a New Forest village school before moving in 1914 to Bournemouth School on a scholarship, and then to King's College, London (1920-22), where he took a BSc in chemistry, and to Trinity College, Cambridge (1922-5), where he took a BA in mathematics, read widely in literature, philosophy, and history, and briefly became a communist. It was at Cambridge that he became known as Michael, because of his admiration for the Russian poet-scientist Mikhail Lomonosov, and it was as Michael Roberts that he wrote his books and made his reputation. 
Roberts was an educator all his adult life, except for the war years. He began as a physics master at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne, in 1925, moved to Mercers' School, London, in 1931 as senior maths master, but returned to Newcastle in 1934 to be sixth-form master at the grammar school. The following year he married the biographer and critic Janet Buchanan Adam Smith (1905-1999), daughter of Sir George Adam Smith. There were three sons and a daughter of the marriage. From 1941 to 1945 he worked in London for the European service of the BBC; in 1943-4 he provided programmes addressed to the editors of the clandestine press in occupied Europe. In March 1945 he returned to education as principal of the College of St Mark and St John in Chelsea, where he remained until his death. 
Roberts in the classroom was a strenuous, intimidating figure -- tall, gaunt, hawk-faced -- who demanded more of his students than they thought they had in them. His classes were eclectically brilliant, like his mind; he taught not simply physics or maths, but a whole world of thought -- literature, politics, history, whatever he thought important at the moment. Weak students feared his scathing censure, but the best remembered him with gratitude. In his physical life Roberts's strenuousness led him to mountaineering (he was elected to the Alpine Club in 1936), and he made climbing a part of the education of his students. During school holidays he led parties of schoolboys on expeditions to the Lakes and the Alps that made extreme demands on both leader and followers, and as principal of St Mark and St John he continued to climb with students. 
During the early 1930s Roberts began to establish a reputation as editor, critic, and poet. Two anthologies that he edited, 'New Signatures' (1932) and 'New Country' (1933), were the first collections of writings by his contemporaries to be published, and they did much to identify the Auden generation. These anthologies were followed by 'Critique of Poetry' (1934), a book of essays that brought his scientist's rigour of thought to the analysis of poetry, rather in the way two other scientifically trained critics of the time, I. A. Richards and William Empson, did. 
It was in those years that Roberts met T. S. Eliot, who became his editor at Faber and Faber and his close friend. His first book for his new publisher, 'The Faber Book of Modern Verse' (1936), was an influential and long-lived anthology that included American as well as English poets, and helped to establish the literary definition of 'modern' as transatlantic. (Equally long-lived was his 'Faber Book of Comic Verse', 1942, which remained in print for almost fifty years.) 
In his other books for Faber, Roberts turned away from the literary and political preoccupations of his generation to consider broader philosophical issues. 'The Modern Mind' (1937) is a study of the effects of science on language, and on attitudes toward religion, poetry, and science itself. 'T. E. Hulme' (1938) is a study of the thought of the early twentieth-century philosopher. His last two books, 'The Recovery of the West' (1941) and 'The Estate of Man' (1951), deal with the future of mankind and of the earth, each book beginning with a scientist's concern for the husbanding of the world's resources, but expanding to include the social and moral implications of material problems. 
Eliot regarded Roberts as the Hulme of his era. Like Hulme, he was a social philosopher out of step with his time, who valued conservative concepts such as tradition, order, and authority as essential to a civilized society (though unlike Hulme he retained his liberal social concerns for the poor and the powerless). Most of all Roberts shared with Hulme and Eliot a belief in the social necessity of religious faith. 'The Recovery of the West' concludes that 'no civilization can be firm unless it is built on an enduring faith', and that 'for Western Europe there is no reputable and enduring faith except Christianity'. Those seem always to have been his deep convictions. 
Those convictions were fundamental to Roberts's remarkable work as principal of the Church of England training college of St Mark and St John. When he assumed the principalship in 1945 the college had been battered by war and vandalism, and its members consisted of a single teacher and a dozen students. His task was to restore the physical college, and to recruit a faculty and a student body; but he had also to create a new training programme suitable to post-war needs and compatible with the college's church affiliation. He succeeded admirably in these tasks, against great odds, before his tragically early death, from monocytic leukaemia, in Hammersmith Hospital on 13 December 1948. He was buried four days later at Mortlake cemetery. 
During his lifetime Roberts wrote three volumes of poems: 'These our Matins' (1930), 'Poems' (1936), and 'Orion Marches' (1939). His poems do not express the full range of his thought and feeling, and in that sense he was a minor poet, though a gifted and committed one. They speak primarily of his tragic sense of life in images of strain and conflict, of failure and death. This is especially true of the many fine poems he wrote about climbing, which was for him a personal symbol of the human qualities he most valued: strenuous effort, personal responsibility, and courage for its own sake. 
In his obituary of Roberts, Eliot wrote: 'He remains... a rather lonely figure in his time: his ideas were not fashionable, nor are they sympathetic to any but a small minority now'. That judgement continues to be true. But if he was isolated, it was a voluntary isolation. In a collective time he chose to be an independent thinker, neither right nor left, but himself. 


@@@@@


doc= 40703


Hulme, Thomas Ernest (1883-1917), philosopher and poet, was born on 16 September 1883 at Gratton, Horton, Staffordshire, the eldest of two sons and one daughter of Thomas Hulme (1853-1933), a gentleman farmer who later went into the ceramic transfer business, and his wife, Mary Young. He attended Newcastle High School for Boys (1894-1902), where he won many of the school's mathematics and science prizes and was elected 'whip' of the debating society. Admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, on an open mathematics exhibition in 1902, he became rebellious and was sent down two years later for idleness and a surfeit of pranks. The mock funeral organized by his friends in farewell was so large and rowdy that news of it reached 'The Tatler' in London (1904). He enrolled at University College, London, but left in 1906 without a degree and set sail for a stay of several months in Canada, where he began jotting down his thoughts on the nature of truth, knowledge, the world, and language. Published after his death, these notes, known as 'Cinders', together present a nominalistic view of the world as a plurality which no single theory can comprehend. In the spring of 1907 he returned to England, but soon crossed to Brussels where he taught English for a year and worked on his 'Notes on language and style'. A collection of jottings like 'Cinders', they present a similar view of the world: all theories are toys, language is not equivalent to reality, a writer's beliefs reflect his prejudices rather than universal truth -- though in 'Notes' these themes are applied to language and style. 
When Hulme returned home to London in 1908, he joined a group of enthusiasts known as the Poets' Club and soon was calling for a new beginning in English poetry; he wanted an 'impressionistic' verse not bound by the old rules of metre. Early in 1909 he formed his own group of like-minded poets, which included F. S. Flint and the young American Ezra Pound, who acknowledged his debt to Hulme when he launched his imagist movement and published Hulme's 'Complete Poetical Works' (five short, gem-like poems) as an appendix to his own book 'Ripostes' (1912). 
In mid-1909 the second period of Hulme's intellectual life began with a more serious study of philosophy. Convinced that Henri Bergson provided a way out of the nightmare of nineteenth-century materialism and mechanism, he began a three-year stint of writing and lecturing about Bergson. He also translated into English Bergson's 'Introduction a la metaphysique' (1912). 
But even as Hulme was busy explaining and defending Bergson, he became interested (1911) in political theory. Hulme described himself as a tory, but he was not much interested in day-to-day politics. Instead, he began to write about the philosophical issues: the nature of man, the idea of progress, the difference between theory and practice, and the emotional and non-rational character of political belief. He pointed to Georges Sorel and to the group of contemporary French writers known as 'L'Action francaise'. What he liked was their opposition to 'romanticism'; and in 1911, on his way to or from the Fourth International Philosophical Congress in Bologna, which he covered for the magazine 'Nature' and the London weekly the 'New Age', he met Pierre Lasserre, a leading member of 'L'Action francaise', who endeavoured to prove to him that Bergson was nothing but 'the last disguise of romanticism', and that, if applied to politics, Bergson's theory of real time would mean a continual progress for mankind -- an idea Hulme opposed. 
Unable to reconcile his own political beliefs with Bergson's philosophy, Hulme ceased writing about Bergson in 1912 and began to work out his own philosophical position, which drew a sharp distinction between two ways of regarding the nature of man, namely the 'romantic' and the 'classical'. In 'A Tory Philosophy' (1912) he described the classical as based on a belief that man is by nature limited and incapable of attaining any kind of perfection. Only through discipline could he achieve anything of value. The romantic view, Hulme said, was the opposite: it asserted man was naturally good and that whatever he accomplished was by the breaking of rules. One or other of these two attitudes lay, Hulme maintained, behind opinions on every subject, from politics to art. The romantic and classical temperaments as reflected in poetry is the subject of what is probably his best-known work, the 1912 lecture 'Romanticism and classicism' (first published posthumously in 'Speculations', 1924). Readmitted to Cambridge in the spring of 1912, owing largely to a letter from Bergson, Hulme fled to Germany that summer to avoid prosecution by an enraged don whose sixteen-year-old daughter had received letters from Hulme while she was at school at Roedean. During his German trip (1912-13) he became interested in the visual arts through the work of the art theorist Wilhelm Worringer. Hulme came to think of the avant-garde art of pre-war England as heralding the breakup of the humanistic attitude which, taking man as the centre of all things, had dominated thinking since the Renaissance. Thus he began to publicize the work of such contemporary artists as Jacob Epstein (who sculpted Hulme) and David Bomberg, whose hard-edged style seemed to point to a classical renewal. He also translated into English Sorel's 'Reflexions sur la violence' (1914). 
When war broke out in August 1914 Hulme enlisted in the army as a private and in December was sent to the western front. In April 1915 he was sent home wounded and did not return to the fighting until March 1916 when, through the help of Sir Edward Marsh, he was granted a commission as temporary second lieutenant in the Royal Marine Artillery. While at home he published a long series of 'War notes', some of which revolved round his opposition to the pacifists of the day, including Bertrand Russell, with whom he debated in the 'Cambridge Magazine'. He also wrote what would be his final and most important pages, called simply 'A notebook' when published in the 'New Age' in 1915-16 (posthumously retitled 'Humanism and the religious attitude' in 1924). Here he synthesized what he had thought his way through during the past decade: ideas on discontinuity and 'cinders'; his theory that beliefs and convictions are based on unconscious assumptions about the world; the difference between the romantic and classical views of man; and most important, perhaps, his belief in the existence of original sin. Though closely related to views he had expressed earlier on romanticism and classicism, he now went further. The realization that there is nothing wonderful in man was, he said, a necessary preparation for the religious attitude, but, by itself, led only to a rejection of romanticism and the adoption of the classical attitude. The religious attitude required further that one recognize a separation between the material world and the world of ethics and religion. Perfection belonged only to the divine and could not be legitimately introduced on the human plane. All philosophies since the Renaissance shared a 'family resemblance' in that they failed to see the chasm between the organic world and the worlds of ethics and religious values. Hulme claimed they all accepted an unconscious humanism, in which man was viewed as naturally good, a reservoir of possibility. He himself believed 'the religious conception of ultimate values to be right, the humanist wrong'. And he predicted that the religious attitude, which had prevailed in the Egyptian and Byzantine empires and during the middle ages in western Europe, would come back in some form to replace the humanistic attitude of his own day. 
Hulme was a large man, with an open, genial face. From 1911 until the war he presided over a weekly salon which nearly everyone in London who was connected with the arts seems at one time or another to have attended. He was remembered as a brilliant Johnsonian talker, with a ranging curiosity and dominating personality which drew out the opinions of others and stimulated debate. Though he was known for his energetic pursuit of young women and had long friendships with Ethel Kibblewhite and artist Kate Lechmere (1887-1976), he never married. He was killed in action near Nieuport in Flanders on 26 September 1917 and was buried in Koksijde military cemetery in Belgium. He published no book of his own during his lifetime; nor did his writings become the basis for any philosophical school. Despite this, he held a small but definite place in twentieth-century intellectual life and letters, particularly as forerunner in the movement towards a 'new classicism'. Such diverse thinkers as Ramiro de Maeztu, I. A. Richards, V. A. Demant, J. G. Crowther, and Iris Murdoch all commented on his importance. T. S. Eliot, in 'Criterion', went so far as to describe him as 'the forerunner of a new attitude of mind, which should be the twentieth-century mind, if the twentieth century is to have a mind of its own'. 


@@@@@


doc= 40704


Rickword, (John) Edgell (1898-1982), poet and book reviewer, was born on 22 October 1898 at 28 Head Street, Colchester, the fifth and last child of George Rickword, borough librarian, and his wife, Mabel Thomas ('nee' Prosser). From dame-school Rickword went to Colchester Royal Grammar School in 1908 and joined the Artists' Rifles in 1916, the earliest time at which he could have enlisted. Rickword was on active service in France for most of the last two years of the First World War and was awarded the Military Cross 'for conspicuous gallantry and initiative'. In the months after the armistice, he developed septicaemia which led to the removal of his left eye. Invalided out of the army, Rickword went up to Pembroke College, Oxford, in October 1919 to read modern languages, but left the next year without taking his degree. He became a contributor to the 'Daily Herald' and the 'New Statesman' and on 25 October 1920 married Margaret (Peggy) McGrath, daughter of John McGrath, farmer; their daughter had been born the previous month. Rickword's early married life, living in a succession of London flats and then in Chipstead, Surrey, was happy and productive. A second daughter was born in March 1922. 
Rickword had been writing poetry since his mid-teens and published his first collection, 'Behind the Eyes', in 1921. His work as a literary journalist earned him recognition as an astute early interpreter of modernist poetry (see his anonymous review in the 'Times Literary Supplement' of T. S. Eliot's 'The Waste Land'). In 1923 he was contracted to write a biography of Arthur Rimbaud, whose poetry (of which Rickword made notable translations) had been highly influential on his own. By the time the Rimbaud book was published in 1924, Rickword had suffered a personal calamity when his wife had a nervous breakdown and the family broke up, Peggy going into a mental hospital and their daughters into foster homes. 
Rickword moved into a flat in London with Bertram Higgins, together with whom and Douglas Garman he became founder of the short-lived but influential 'Calendar of Modern Letters' (1925-7), 'a sort of discontented club' as Rickword himself described it many years later, 'discontented with all the established novelists and the literary cliques' ('Poetry Nation', 78). Among the writers they published were D. H. Lawrence, Luigi Pirandello, Isaac Babel, Liam O'Flaherty, and the poets Robert Graves, John Crowe Ransom, Allen Tate, and Hart Crane. He also edited two volumes of 'Scrutinies' in this period (1928, 1931) and published two more volumes of poetry, 'Invocations to Angels' (1928) and 'Twittingpan' (1931), before he all but gave up the writing of verse. The abrupt end to his career as a poet has been attributed to his communist beliefs (Rickword joined the Communist Party in 1934), though Rickword himself explained it differently: 'I simply wasn't in a mind to write poems' (J. Lucas, 'The 1930s: a Challenge to Orthodoxy', 1978, 9-10). 
In the 1930s and 1940s Rickword's energies were focused on political activism, as a founder and editor of 'Left Review' (1934-8) and one of its successors, 'Our Time' (1941-9). He was instrumental in the formation of the Left Book Club and the British section of the Writers' International, whom he represented as part of a delegation to the 1937 conference in Madrid during the Spanish Civil War. Described as 'one of the few really outstanding critical intelligences on the far Left' (R. Giddings, 'Tribune', 5 Jan 1979, 6), he was an inheritor of the English radical tradition of Marvell, Milton, Swift, and Hazlitt, all of whom he wrote about in publications ranging from the 'Daily Worker' to the 'Penguin Guide to English Literature'. As a poet he reacted strongly against the insipidity he perceived in the work of his contemporaries and strove to develop an aesthetic of 'negative emotions' deriving his use of form and symbol from the poets he specially admired, the French symbolists and English metaphysical poets -- he was called by Herbert Palmer 'the only complete and satisfactory English symbolist' (H. Palmer, 'Post-Victorian Poetry', 1938, 256-8). In these tastes, and in his outstanding ability as an essayist and editor, he had more in common with Eliot than any other of his contemporaries. Rickword's poetry is trenchant, skilful, and encompasses a wide range of styles, from powerful satire to unusual and lyrical love poems. In metre and diction, as well as politically, he prefigured the Auden generation of poets, but unlike them wrote in an atmosphere of self-determined isolation. His absence from print hindered general recognition of his poetry, and the pared down 'Collected Poems' that appeared in 1947 was not very well received. Rickword retired into a career as a bookseller, in Kent and later in London, with his second wife, Doris Russell (Jonny) Back (1899-1964) (they married on 24 July 1944 following Peggy's death in June that year), with whom he had been living since 1934; an artist and dressmaker, she was formerly the wife of Gilbert Back and was the daughter of Frederick Russell Quilter, civil engineer. 
Rickword stuck to his Marxist principles, but left the Communist Party quietly after the Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956. He was manager of Collet's bookshop in Hampstead from 1954. Jonny's health deteriorated after 1960 and she died in 1964 from a brain haemorrhage; a year later Rickword went to live with Beatrix Hammarling at 2 Hopping Lane, Islington, his home for the remaining seventeen years of his life. His sight, which had been weak for years, was lost completely by 1976. A revival of interest in his work began in the late 1960s with the republication of his 'Collected Poems' and of 'Left Review'; these were followed by his 'Essays and Opinions' (1974), 'Selected Poems and Translations' (1976) and collected prose, 'Literature in Society' (1978). 
Edgell Rickword died from carcinoma with obstructive jaundice on 15 March 1982 at the Whittington Hospital, Islington, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 40705


Powys, Theodore Francis (1875-1953), novelist and short-story writer, was born on 20 December 1875 at the vicarage, Shirley, Derbyshire, the third child and third son of the eleven children -- who included John Cowper Powys (1872-1963) and Llewelyn Powys (1884-1939) -- of the Revd Charles Francis Powys (1843-1923), son of the Revd Littleton Charles Powys, rector of Stalbridge, Dorset. Theodore Powys's mother was Mary Cowper Johnson (1849-1914), daughter of the Revd William Cowper Johnson, rector of Yaxham, Norfolk. The 'Cowper' derives from the family of poet William Cowper; there was a distant Welsh strain in both sides of the marriage. 
Charles Francis Powys became curate of St Peter's Church, Dorchester, Dorset, in 1879, and vicar of Montacute, Somerset, in 1885. Theodore Powys was educated at Hardye's School, Dorchester, and at Sherborne preparatory school, in Dorset, and then at Eaton House School, Aldeburgh, Suffolk, where he met Louis Wilkinson, a son of the master, who became a lifelong friend of the Powyses. After training Powys farmed near Sweffling, Suffolk, from 1895. In 1901 he retired to Studland on the Dorset coast to read and write, and moved inland to Chaldon Herring on the Dorset downs in 1904. On 19 April 1905 he married Violet Rosalie Dodds ('b'. 1886/7), the eighteen-year-old daughter of a local solicitor. They had two sons and later adopted a daughter. 
There are Nietzschean undertones in Powys's early biblical commentaries, of which only 'An Interpretation of Genesis' (1907) reached publication. Early in the century he turned to fiction, but none of it was published before 1923, although 'The Soliloquy of a Hermit' (1918) carried an advertisement that a novel, 'Mr Tasker's Gods' (1925), was forthcoming. Between 1923 and 1932 only one year did not see the issue of at least one title. Many of Powys's stories have never been published. 
Powys is best known for the novel 'Mr Weston's Good Wine' (1927), but 'Mark Only' (1924) and 'Unclay' (1931) are also outstanding among his longer fictions. The most praised collection of his countless short stories is 'Fables' (1929). The setting of most of the tales is an elemental Dorset, and the characters are elemental cartoons that interact against that background to convey allegories of the search for everlasting truths. Elaborate allusions drawn from Powys's wide reading play on deliberately down-to-earth village commonplaces in seemingly artless and often cryptic sentences. Much of the dialogue is in dialect. Powys had an eye for the bizarre and was a sardonic humorist. Although he read the freethinking literature of his time, he was never a rationalist and questioned all newfangledness. His personal values never strayed far from the evangelicalism of the rectory, and he was a persistent churchgoer. 
Powys was of medium height, and darkish in his farming years, when he had a moustache. Later he was stocky, clean-shaven, and white-haired, his characteristic expression being that of one always ready to be amused. His talk, like his prose, was pithy and quirky. Powys had a stroke in 1937 and in 1940 moved to Mappowder, north Dorset. In 1953 his health worsened, and he died at his home, The Lodge, Mappowder, on 27 November of that year. He was buried in Mappowder churchyard, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 40706


McGonagall, William (c.1825-1902), poet and actor, was born in Edinburgh, the fifth child of Charles McGonagall, a migrant Irish cotton weaver, and his wife, Margaret Maxwell. The family settled eventually in Dundee where William McGonagall also became a hand-loom weaver. On 11 July 1846 he married Jean King of Edinburgh; they had seven children. McGonagall was largely self-taught. He was passionately fond of Shakespeare and at about the age of twenty began his career as an amateur actor in the role of Macbeth. He went on to appear in minor parts in the wood-and-canvas 'penny gaffs' and to give public recitations wherever he could find a paying audience. 
It was not until his early fifties that McGonagall was seized with 'a strong desire to write poetry' (McGonagall, 'Poetic Gems', 6-7). His first efforts were published in the Dundee edition of one of the leading Scottish popular papers, the 'Weekly News'. He soon established his characteristic manner, with such pieces as 'The Famous Tay Whale' and 'The Tay Bridge Disaster' which remain among the best-known of all his poems. He wrote about battles, fires, shipwrecks, and disasters; processions and shows; and the deaths of public men. There were verses about tourist spots, and watering holes; heroic deeds from Scottish history, and the superior qualities of Sunlight Soap; poems in praise of temperance and love and nature; and a number of quite unsingable songs. Much of what he described he cannot possibly have seen: recycled material from newspaper columns was conjured into rhyme by an uncertain practitioner whose foremost need was to feed himself and his family. 
McGonagall's diction was drawn from the high fustian of Scottish popular melodrama, and his metre from the printed poetry of the street. His control of tone was erratic, fluctuating between the lofty and bathetic, and his imagery was frequently conventional. The predominant tone was gloomily fatalistic, focusing on man's ceaseless struggle with malignant natural forces, and the manifold perils of existence. If he had been merely inept, of course, he would simply have been forgotten, like countless other proletarian versifiers. McGonagall's triumph was to forge, by some unfathomable alchemy, the commonplace effects of popular-print rhetoric into an unmistakably personal style. Nobody else has ever sounded quite like him. And he had positive strengths: a sense of wonder, a childlike ability to enter absolutely into what he depicted, and a real gift for narrative that could shape appropriate material into racy little verse-novellas with a rough but genuine graphic power. 
As the weaving trade declined, McGonagall struggled to make a living selling his poems in the streets, and performing in music-halls and pubs. These tended to be anarchic places and he often found his audiences disruptive. The writer William Power saw him in the Albion Halls in Glasgow: 'He wore a Highland dress of Rob Roy tartan and boy's size. After reciting some of his own poems, to an accompaniment of whistles and cat-calls, the Bard armed himself with a most dangerous-looking broadsword, and strode up and down the platform, declaiming... 'Give me another horse! -- Bind up my wounds!' His voice rose to a howl. He thrust and slashed at imaginary foes. A shower of apples and oranges fell on the platform. Almost before they touched it, they were met by the fell edge of McGonagall's claymore and cut to pieces. The Bard was beaded with perspiration and orange juice. (Power, 285)' A number of strands of Scottish popular culture came together in McGonagall -- the bellowing street-corner elocutionists, the urban broadsheet and song-slip patterers, the penny readings, which mixed entertainment with self-improvement, and, most of all, perhaps, a line of genuinely popular poetry. He was the heir not of Burns and Hogg and Lady Nairne, but of chapbook writers such as Claudero and Dougal Graham, and through them a tradition of metrical journalism going back to the broadside poets of the seventeenth century. An estimated 200,000 people were regularly writing poetry in Victorian Scotland and they found their main publication outlet in the burgeoning popular press of which the 'Weekly News' was an outstanding example. It was there that 'the Great McGonagall' found much of his inspiration; there too his work first appeared in print, while the journal's heartless chronicling of his many mishaps kept him steadily before the public eye as a potential butt and object of ridicule. Unable to endure relentless persecution by local audiences, he moved briefly to Perth, and then, in 1895, to Edinburgh. As a performer of his own works he enjoyed a national reputation in Scotland but he was unable to secure engagements in the music-halls of London or New York. William McGonagall died of a cerebral haemorrhage at his home, 5 South College Street, Edinburgh, on 29 September 1902. He was buried in Greyfriars kirkyard, Edinburgh, in a pauper's grave, but a plaque was later erected to his memory there. 


@@@@@


doc= 40707


Berger, Francesco (1834-1933), music administrator, was born in London on 10 June 1834, the son of a Bavarian mother and a naturalized Italian father, a merchant from Trieste. He studied music in Trieste with Luigi Ricci and Aegidius Karl Lickl, then went to Leipzig, where he learned piano with Felix Moscheles and composition with Moritz Hauptmann. In 1855 he settled in London and started practice as a conventional music 'professor', teaching young ladies the piano and accompanying singers. In later life his pupils included Marie Corelli and Sybil Thorndike. He published more than a hundred works for the piano, violin, and cello, and as many songs, duets, trios, and partsongs. 'The Band Passes' was a minor success, and, among his educational works, 'Pretty Little Pieces for Pretty Little Players' drew on melodies from Weber, Verdi, and popular tunes. Other music included a mass and an opera, 'Il lazzarone'. A youthful friendship with Charles Dickens and Wilkie Collins led to his providing incidental music to 'The Frozen Deep' and 'The Light House', entertainments written by Collins and in which Dickens acted; Queen Victoria commanded a private performance of the latter. In 1864 Berger married Annie Lascelles, a contralto whose voice he described as being 'rich, mellow and of exceptional compass', who was admired by the queen and Prince Albert and for whom composers including Balfe, Wallace, and Macfarren wrote songs (Berger, '97', 97-8). She abandoned her career on her marriage. In 1868 Berger established the 'Apres-midis Instrumentales'. From 1885 he taught at the Royal Academy of Music, and later also at the Guildhall School of Music. 
There was no reason to expect that Berger's election to the Royal Philharmonic Society in 1859, as member in 1871, as director in 1880, and, crucially, as secretary from 1884 to 1911, would give an entirely new brand of vital leadership to that once distinguished institution. Seventy years after its establishment in 1813, the society was artistically and financially moribund, impervious to a new world of public concerts. Berger found new audiences, subscribers, and alternative sources of income. With legendary displays of obsequiousness he wooed prima donnas and virtuosos including Patti and Paderewski, countering inflated demands for fees (newly transformed by America and international agents) with similarly modern images of tradition and heritage, and offering medals in place of dollars. Attempting to discipline and maintain an orchestra (never possible for long in London), he built attractive programmes from the competing requirements of quality, popularity, and nationalism in an age of live repertory. Taking the society into profit within a decade earned him a modest cheque and testimonial, headed by the lord chief justice, to his 'indefatigable and self-denying zeal'. These feats of entrepreneurship, sustained without much faltering for a further twenty years, might have earned lasting fame and fortune in an easier business. 
After 1911 Berger subsisted on pittances from teaching and nondescript journalism, presumably reduced by the collapse of the old drawing-room piano culture in which he had his roots. In 1930 he was granted $100 from the civil list 'in recognition of his services to music'. He published a tutor, 'First Steps at the Pianoforte' (1894), and 'Musical Expressions, Phrases and Sentences' (1921). He also wrote two books of memoirs, 'Reminiscences, Impressions and Anecdotes' (n.d. [1913?]) and '97' (1931). They give a vivid account of London's social musical life in Victorian and Edwardian times, with glimpses of the many musicians, including Wagner and Tchaikovsky, who visited London, and an admiring portrait of Dickens. Berger retained to the end of his long life an alert face with a neat beard and a high forehead, crowned in these last years with a shock of white hair. He died on 25 April 1933, at his home, 38 Hardwicke Road, Palmer's Green, London, at the age of ninety-eight. 


@@@@@


doc= 40708


Newman, Robert (1858-1926), concert manager, was born on 26 July 1858 at 121 Regent Street, London, the son of Charles Newman, a job master who had contracts to supply horses to the royal mail, and his wife, Emiline Maria, 'nee' Love. His first employment, as a stock jobber, ended in bankruptcy after two years in 1887, when he was twenty-nine. He then studied singing in Italy, ran a concert agency in London, and, from 1888 until December 1889, studied singing at the Royal Academy of Music. He sang professionally as a bass for six years, and was chosen by Sir Hubert Parry to sing the title part in the first performance of his oratorio 'Job', at the Gloucester festival in 1893. Lacking exceptional abilities as a singer, however, Newman went into partnership with an Oxford Street concert agent named Farley Sinkins. They leased Covent Garden Theatre for a series of Promenade Concerts in autumn 1893, employing a good quality orchestra of 100 players conducted by Frederick H. Cowen. The opening of the Queen's Hall complex in Regent Street that same year brought Newman the great opportunity of his life: he became its first lessee and manager. The first official concert in the large hall took place on 2 December 1893 and included a performance of Mendelssohn's 'Hymn of Praise' conducted by Cowen, with a choir hand-picked by Newman. He was confident of a large public for good-quality orchestral music at the Queen's Hall and planned a continuous series of Promenade Concerts during the summer, aiming through lower prices to attract a larger and less affluent audience while fashionable society was away and no good music was available. He approached Henry Wood, as yet hardly known on the concert platform, early in 1895 to conduct them. Financial support was provided by Dr George Cathcart, a well-known throat specialist. The first concert took place on 10 August 1895. The excellence of the programmes (which always included a new work and favoured little-known Russian and French music) and the high orchestral standards were immediately noted in the press. Thus began a partnership that lasted for thirty-two years and created an entirely new audience, repertory, and status for orchestral music in London. 
Until 1902 Newman managed the Queen's Hall entirely alone. He added Saturday Afternoon Symphony Concerts in January 1897 and Sunday Afternoon Concerts, begun in the face of much sabbatarian opposition, later that year. He invited the leading continental conductors and orchestras, and the Queen's Hall soon became the focus for London's concert music. Notable early events included two London music festivals, in 1899 and 1902, in which the celebrated Lamoureux Orchestra under its founder and the Queen's Hall Orchestra under Wood shared the programmes. In 1902 Newman became bankrupt as a result of the failure of a venture in theatrical management. A syndicate chaired by the financier and philanthropist Edgar Speyer was created to underwrite the orchestra, and the music publisher Chappell took the lease of the Queen's Hall, retaining Newman as manager until 1906. Soon after the outbreak of the First World War Chappell also assumed proprietorship of the orchestra, which it renamed the New Queen's Hall Orchestra; Newman continued as its manager. The later support of the orchestra and Promenade Concerts by the BBC was first negotiated, unsuccessfully, by Newman shortly before his death; he was the constant factor in changing commercial conditions. 
Newman was a man of few words and a formal manner but unfailing courtesy, single-minded and straightforward in all his dealings. He was a bulky, commanding figure with a heavy, well-groomed black moustache, very blue eyes, and a stern expression. He worked his musicians hard but sympathetically, regularly observed his concerts, and sought to make them physically attractive. In 1904 he fiercely resisted the still prevalent deputy system that undermined standards; he opposed the strong anti-German feeling in 1914 by reinstating German works -- especially Wagner -- in the programmes, for which they were famous. He died on 4 November 1926 at a nursing home at 40 Belsize Grove, Hampstead, of acute entero-colitis (from which he had suffered for three months), at the age of sixty-eight, and was interred in Hampstead cemetery, Fortune Green Road, on 8 November. He was survived by his wife, Florence Maud Newman; two children are recorded, a son and a daughter (married as Mrs E. F. Andrews). His family residence at time of death was 246 Finchley Road, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 40709


Clark, (Thomas) Edward (1888-1962), music administrator and conductor, was born on 10 May 1888 at 125 Westmorland Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, one of three children of James Bowness Clark (1863/4-1934), coal exporter and dedicated amateur musician, and his wife, Elizabeth Thirlaway (1858/9-1939). The Clark home was a local centre of musical activity, with James for two decades the secretary of the Newcastle and Gateshead Choral Union; he donated a complete set of brass and woodwind instruments to the Newcastle Philharmonic Orchestra and later left his large collection of scores, music books, and concert programmes to the Newcastle City Library. After leaving school, Edward toured the continent, studying for a time in Paris (1907-8), where he met the composers Claude Debussy, Maurice Ravel, and Albert Roussel. His stimulating musical experiences were the basis of a formal presentation given upon his return to Newcastle, launching the mission that pervaded his entire career: to encourage British audiences 'to understand this music of to-day before it becomes the music of the day before yesterday' (T. E. Clark, 'Paper on a Modern French Composer: Claude Debussy', privately printed, 1908). 
In 1909 Clark moved to Berlin and there took lessons from the conductor Oskar Fried while working as a correspondent for the 'Musical Times'. In October 1910 he was introduced to the composers Arnold Schoenberg and Anton Webern, a meeting that changed the course of his professional life. After Schoenberg moved to Berlin a year later, Clark helped him to raise funds, studied with him (1911-14), and was an active participant in his circle, attending concerts and social events with Webern, the composer Ferruccio Busoni, the pianist Eduard Steuermann, and others who lived in Berlin or visited Schoenberg there. Clark decided to remain in Germany, but his plans were thwarted when war was declared. He was interned at the Ruhleben racecourse near Berlin until 1917, when he was released through the auspices of the Red Cross. 
After returning to England, Clark found conducting opportunities, assisting Ernest Ansermet and Adrian Boult with the London seasons of the Ballets Russes. On 10 August 1921 he married Frances Dorothy 
(Dolly; 'b'. 1893/4)
, the daughter of a retired army officer, Arthur James Stephen. In the same year Clark devised, produced, and conducted a ground-breaking series of orchestral concerts in London, exploring new music by British and continental composers. However, these projects were financially unsuccessful, and, faced with family responsibilities once his son James was born in 1923, he joined the BBC in August 1924 and soon became musical director of the Newcastle station. Administrative shortcomings were noted from the start, but his imaginative ideas and interests in new music transformed the region's music broadcasts, invoking praise from the community as well as the attention of the music department in London. Although Dolly left him in summer 1925, Clark remained in Newcastle until the station orchestra was discontinued at the end of the following year. 
In January 1927 Clark transferred to the BBC in London, where he became a programme builder and conducted studio broadcasts. Further administrative deficiencies led to a curtailing of his responsibilities, but his unusual musical interests and wide-ranging European contacts distinctively shaped the BBC's music programming of the inter-war years. In particular, the 'BBC Concerts of Contemporary Music', aired from 1926 to 1939, brought to British listeners the latest in art music, showcasing works by composers such as Schoenberg, Webern, Berg, Stravinsky, Bartok, Kodaly, Prokofiev, Hindemith, Krenek, Vaughan Williams, Bridge, Van Dieren, Busoni, and Falla, often performed by the composers themselves or their advocates. Clark contributed to the ingenious structuring of the new BBC Symphony Orchestra in 1929. He also served on the committee recommending British works to the jury of the International Society for Contemporary Music (ISCM), and was the music director of the Arts Theatre Club in London. In 1936 Clark's integrity was questioned concerning the use of BBC funds during a business trip. He in turn was infuriated by alterations to programmes he had devised for the BBC Symphony Orchestra's spring tour, and resigned from the music department in March. Although he occasionally worked as a consultant programme builder, gave broadcast talks, and conducted for the BBC subsequently, he never again worked for the corporation as a full-time employee. 
Indeed, Clark never again worked anywhere on a full-time basis. In 1938 he met the composer (Agnes) Elisabeth Lutyens (1906-1983), and they married on 9 May 1942. He continued his work as a freelance conductor, and once again served his home community during the war years, returning to Newcastle to found and conduct the North East Regional Orchestra. In winter 1945-6 he used an inheritance from his brother to mount three concerts at the Wigmore Hall, London, featuring music by British and European composer colleagues. For the BBC Third Programme in 1948 he devised and presented an important series of eight programmes, 'Turning Points in Twentieth-Century Music', explaining and comparing works by Schoenberg, Bartok, and Stravinsky. He devoted himself to the promotion of new music, serving as honorary secretary of the ISCM (1936-1947), organizer of the London ISCM Festival (1946), ISCM president (1947-52), chairman of the London Contemporary Music Centre (1947-52), and music adviser to the Institute for Contemporary Arts (from its inception in 1948). He also conducted music that Lutyens composed for the BBC radio features department into the 1950s. However, in 1955 Clark brought a slander suit against the composer Benjamin Frankel, claiming that Frankel had falsely accused him of embezzling ISCM funds. After five days of testimony, in which the legal teams focused on a possible communist subplot, Clark lost the suit, but felt exonerated since the jury stated that his integrity was not in doubt. Nevertheless, he never regained his standing in the music community. He died suddenly of a coronary thrombosis at his home, 76A Belsize Park Gardens, Hampstead, London, on 30 April 1962, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 4 May. 
The lack of administrative skills that ultimately led to the notorious suit plagued Clark throughout his professional life and caused many to overlook the significance of his contribution: Clark's passion for new music, innovatory programming schemes, and positions in leading new music organizations, particularly the BBC during its formative years, had a profound impact in shaping British music-making of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 40710


Legge, (Harry) Walter (1906-1979), impresario and record producer, was born in Keith Grove, Ravenscourt Park, London, on 1 June 1906, the son (there was to be a younger sister) of Harry Legge ('b'. 1871) and his wife, Florence ('b'. 1871). His father was a successful tailor, and Legge was educated until the age of sixteen at Latymer High School, in Hammersmith, where he excelled at languages. As a young man, Legge collected records as a hobby, and, encouraged by his father, he also regularly attended Royal Albert Hall Sunday concerts. In these circumstances, he was soon able to teach himself to read music and German, though he never received any formal training as a musician. He acquired 'a fine ear, understanding of style and unusual linguistic prowess' ('New Grove', 611). 
Legge was expected to follow his father's trade but, determined to pursue a career in classical music, he secured a job in 1927 with the HMV record shop in London's Oxford Street, part of the Gramophone Company. This lasted only a few months because he criticized the company's policy. Undeterred, he obtained further employment with the company, this time as writer of sleeve notes and articles for 'The Voice', HMV's monthly magazine for retailers, which he also edited. In this capacity he began attending recording sessions and quickly impressed HMV's musical director Fred Gaisberg with his musical knowledge and discernment. In 1931, when the classical business slumped in the great depression, Legge conceived the ingenious idea of 'Society Editions' whereby a minimum number of subscribers guaranteed in advance to buy certain proposed recordings. The first project was a collection of Hugo Wolf songs and its success led to subsequent recordings of works by Bach, Beethoven, Sibelius, Delius, Mozart, and others. Legge soon started to take an active role in the recording studio, first in the production of 'Society Editions' and later also for the HMV recording programme of local British artists like Myra Hess, Benno Moisiewitsch, and Walter Goehr. 
In 1934 Legge met Sir Thomas Beecham for the first time. Beecham quickly became impressed with him and insisted that Legge supervise all his recording sessions: a demand to which Fred Gaisberg readily agreed since Beecham was one of the few artists with whom Gaisberg did not get on well. Beecham also made Legge assistant artistic director of his opera company at Covent Garden, giving Legge freedom to engage all the singers and conductors. Always critically appreciative of the talents of performers, Legge provided Beecham with a dazzling array of fine singers and conductors until the outbreak of war in 1939 put an end to opera at Covent Garden. Throughout the 1930s Legge remained active as a musical journalist. He first wrote for 'The Gramophone' magazine in 1928, and in 1932 became music critic for the 'Manchester Guardian', covering such disparate events as the 1933 season at Bayreuth (with Adolf Hitler in the audience) and the Russian ballet's visits to London. He later wrote for the 'Times Saturday Review' and for the American journal 'High Fidelity'. 
During the Second World War, Legge's poor eyesight prevented him doing war service but he worked for Entertainments National Services Association (ENSA), organizing classical concerts for the armed forces and war workers. The Gramophone Company had by this time become EMI, and Legge also continued to supervise classical recordings. When hostilities ceased, Legge joined EMI's revived international artistes department as manager of the Columbia label and, together with David Bicknell, who was manager of the HMV label, immediately began to restore EMI's artiste roster, placing under exclusive contract Herbert von Karajan, Wilhelm Furtwangler, Dinu Lipatti, Walter Gieseking, Elisabeth Schwarzkopf, and many others. In 1941 Legge married the singer Florence Annie (Nancy) Evans; they had one child, Helga Maria. The marriage was dissolved in 1948, and in 1953 Legge married his second wife, the soprano (Olga Maria) Elisabeth Schwarzkopf (1915-2006); there were no children from this marriage. 
Outside the record business, Walter Legge also had a galvanizing impact on the performance of music in Britain. According to 'New Grove', he 'always worked to raise standards of musical execution and interpretative artistry' (611). With this intent in 1945 he brought the Philharmonia String Quartet into being, and was its musical director. Legge also founded his own orchestra, the Philharmonia. Although he later remarked that he established it merely as a hobby, Legge undoubtedly felt the need for a virtuoso British symphony orchestra with which he could make recordings and thus set new, superior standards of musical performance. Beecham conducted its first public performance, a programme of Mozart, at Kingsway Hall on 27 October 1945. Karajan became its principal conductor, and guest conductors included Wilhelm Furtwangler, Arturo Toscanini, Guido Cantelli, Carlo Maria Giulini, and many others. When Karajan left to succeed Furtwangler as principal conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra, Legge appointed Otto Klemperer to take his place with the Philharmonia. Not content, in 1957 Legge created the Philharmonia chorus, in order to perform Beethoven's ninth symphony (with Klemperer as conductor). The chorus too 'was immediately recognised as a choir without peer' ('New Grove', 611). The Philharmonia and its chorus together were 'an elite whose virtuosity transformed British concert life' (ibid.). 
The period from 1945 to 1964 was a golden age for both Legge and EMI, when Legge's talents as both record producer and impresario reached their peak. Throughout these years he continued to place under contract to EMI the greatest artistes in the world, enriching London's musical life with his Philharmonia concerts and making a vast number of outstanding recordings that set standards unlikely ever to be surpassed. However, by June 1963 Legge felt that his freedom to make recordings was severely restricted by EMI's newly formed international classical repertoire committee, whose function was to control all the company's classical recording activities. He therefore tendered his resignation on notice of one year, but in March 1964, after a disagreement with Otto Klemperer over the recording of Mozart's 'Die Zauberflote', Legge departed and made no further recordings for EMI except those involving his wife, Elisabeth Schwarzkopf. He remained active in musical life on the continent, however, organizing concerts and producing recordings for other firms. 
Legge died at Cap Ferrat, France, on 22 March 1979. One of his wife's recordings that he had produced closed his memorial service at St James's, Piccadilly. Although Legge was a generous and delightful host and an irresistible conversationalist, he was also ruthless in the pursuit of his own ends, though these were invariably connected with the art of music and his contribution to it. The pianist Gerald Moore once aptly described Legge as 'a Diaghilev where music is concerned'. As a record producer and musical impresario Legge was undoubtedly without equal, and 'his activities have immensely benefited musical performance and appreciation all over the world' ('New Grove', 612). 


@@@@@


doc= 40711


Davis, Sir Edmund Gabriel (1861-1939), mining financier and art collector, was born on 3 August 1861 at Tintern, Gardiner's Creek Road, Toorak, Melbourne, Australia, the second of the four children of Samuel Davis, merchant, and his wife, Josephine, daughter of Jacob Bensusan. He had two brothers and one sister. At the age of eight Davis moved to Paris with his parents. He was educated at Highburn House, St Leonards, and at the College Chaptal in Paris, where he studied painting at the studio of Victor Leclaire. In 1879 he left for the Cape Colony, where he was employed by his uncle's firm, M. L. Bensusan & Co. of Cape Town. Here Davis laid the basis of his later fortune, initially by leasing guano islands off the Cape Coast, and soon afterwards by acquiring copper and railway interests in South-West Africa. The beginning of 1888 found him on the goldfields of Barberton and the Witwatersrand, from where he left for Paris in order to raise capital for his Transvaal ventures. When none of them proved successful, Davis shifted his operations to London, becoming a partner in the firm of Jacob Picard & Co. in 1889. In the same year he married his cousin, Mary Zillah Halford (1866-1941). They had no children. 
Davis's South African contacts brought an unending stream of speculative mining ventures to his attention. In the 1890s these were in two areas: central Africa, where Cecil Rhodes's British South Africa Company was ruthlessly establishing its authority under the auspices of a royal charter; and west Africa. By 1904 Davis had acquired sufficient notoriety through his vigorous promotion of dubious concerns on the fringes of the City's capital market for 'The Economist' to denounce him by name. Holding more than fifty directorships, and chairman of twelve companies, Davis had interests spanning the globe. At this stage of his career they included gold- and diamond-mining companies in Africa and South America, as well as tramway companies in Hong Kong and Singapore. In the decade before 1914, Davis and Herbert Hoover, later president of the United States of America, became embroiled in controversy when they successfully manipulated the share ownership of the Chinese Engineering and Mining Company in order to wrest control of the Kaiping collieries from their Chinese owners. To many of his Edwardian contemporaries, Davis seemed to be merely the latest in a long line of shady company promoters. 
But although a faint air of sharp practice clung to him for the rest of his life, this was also the period in which Davis first displayed his unequalled talent for winning control of business involved in important base minerals. He increasingly devoted his time to constructing cartels. Monopoly or near monopoly control over large sections of the base mineral industry was the key to much of his subsequent success. It was a strategy which he employed to marked effect in coal, chrome, asbestos, manganese, copper, tungsten, tin, and vanadium mining. 'I have ever had a leaning towards base metals in preference to the more precious ores', insisted Davis. 'They have always interested me. I like tonnages' ('African World Annual', 1933, 40). 
During and after the First World War the fortunes of Davis's enterprises soared. His control over the production of chrome, a commodity regarded as vital to the allied war effort because of its steel-hardening qualities, allowed him to repair his battered reputation. From 1915 onwards Davis worked closely with the Admiralty and the Ministry of Munitions in securing supplies of key minerals for Britain and France, while simultaneously denying them to the central powers. Because of Davis's intervention, so 'The Times' claimed on 22 February 1939, 'Germany found herself practically 'frozen out' from chrome ore, as was indicated by the erratic firing of some German guns towards the end of hostilities'. 
The coming of peace saw Davis presiding over an international network of companies and mines that between them controlled about 90 per cent of world chrome production. Although he was never able to replicate the same degree of control over other base minerals, he none the less steadily expanded the scope of his asbestos and copper mining interests in the course of the 1920s and 1930s. In 1929, after successfully waging a savage price-cutting war against Canadian producers, Davis was invited by Turner and Newall, the largest British company in the field, to merge his interests with theirs. Sealed just before the great depression caused prices to tumble, the deal enormously strengthened Turner and Newall's hand in winning an important share of the dwindling world market for asbestos products. 
Over the same two decades Davis played a crucial role in the development of the Northern Rhodesian copperbelt. Together with Sir Chester Beatty and Sir Ernest Oppenheimer, he was instrumental in raising the huge sums of capital required to bring mines to the point of production in a part of the world remote from major markets. In all of this, Davis occupied a pivotal position on the board of the British South Africa Company, which he had joined in 1925. The net result made him an extremely powerful figure in the economy of central Africa. Not surprisingly, Davis loomed large in the calculations of settler politicians. 'Everybody knows that the economic dictator of this country is Edmund Davis', the Southern Rhodesian house of assembly was told. 'There may be a case for monarchy; but the King should not sit in an office in London, he should be a Rhodesian' ('Debates of the Legislative Assembly', 1930). 
Despite his financial success, Davis was fond of saying that he could have made as much out of art as he did in business. A noted connoisseur and collector, pictures were with him a passion. With the help of Charles Ricketts, Davis and his wife launched themselves into the art market as major collectors in the late 1890s. Their purchases included paintings of the old masters, and Victorian and modern works. They also owned a collection of major Rodin sculptures. As active patrons of the arts, the Davises' inner circle of artist friends included Ricketts himself, Charles Shannon, James Pryde, and George Lambert. All of them at one time or another lived at Lansdowne House, a block of artists' studios designed for Davis by William Flockhard. 
Davis's magnificent art collection was displayed in his Holland Park home, 13 Lansdowne Road, which was designed for him in 1896; and at Chilham Castle in Kent, which he acquired in November 1918. Situated near Canterbury, Chilham was repaired by Sir Herbert Baker. As part of the renovations an enclosed swimming pool was constructed, and here Davis liked to exercise surrounded by Rodin statues. Lesser pictures filled his houses in Venice and the French riviera. Davis's hospitality was famously lavish. Known as a big earner and a big spender, he entertained frequently. Favoured artist friends were taken on Mediterranean cruises on his yacht, the 'Catania'; and his musical evenings regularly employed entire orchestras. Davis was said particularly to enjoy fancy-dress balls. 
In 1915 Davis presented a major collection of contemporary British paintings to the Luxembourg gallery in Paris, for which he was decorated by the president of France, Raymond Poincare. In 1935 and again the following year he donated paintings and bronzes to the South African National Gallery, but in 1938 his collection suffered a major loss when thieves broke into Chilham Castle and made off with five paintings. These included 'Saskia at her Toilet' by Rembrandt, and portraits by Reynolds, Van Dyck, and Gainsborough. The two Gainsboroughs were found abandoned in a local wood, but the other paintings were never recovered. Davis's collection did not outlive him; the Rodins were sold privately, and the remaining paintings auctioned. At his death his estate was valued at $394,518 4's'. 4died 
Davis brought to his art collection the energy and conscientious attention which also characterized his business operations. Renowned for his astonishing memory, he was widely recognized as having a genius for finance as well as a gift for intense concentration on detail. At shareholders' meetings he invariably spoke without notes. Always busy, he was reputed by his associates to be one of the most difficult men in the City with whom to make an appointment at short notice. Short and, in later life, increasingly stout, Davis was thought to bear more than a passing resemblance to Napoleon. Certainly he relished being known as the 'Napoleon of finance', and the 'Napoleon of Northern Rhodesia'. He was knighted in 1927. His sudden death on 20 February 1939 at Chilham Castle left his contemporaries as divided in their opinion of him as they had been during his life. While some celebrated the lightning quickness of his brain and his generosity towards friends, others remembered him for his bluntness and irascibility. 


@@@@@


doc= 40712


Sutherland, Helen Christian (1881-1965), collector and patron of the arts, was born on 24 February 1881 at 167 Cromwell Road, Kensington, London, the eldest of three children and the only daughter of Sir Thomas Sutherland (1834-1922), shipowner and Liberal Unionist MP for Greenock, and his wife, Mary Alice Morris (died 1920), daughter of the Revd John Macnaught. Thomas Sutherland was a cultured man who loved the theatre, travel, and literature -- traits inherited by his daughter. She was educated at boarding-school in Barnet and afterwards at the Convent of the Assumption in Paris, whose frugality and order she loved. Though she appeared small and rather delicate, she even at an early age had a strong will and a desire for perfection. 
On 11 February 1904 Sutherland married Richard Douglas Denman ('b'. 1876/7), and they set up home at Swan Walk, Chelsea. She occupied herself in voluntary work at the Lady Margaret Hall Settlement in Lambeth and in mixing among friends whom Denman introduced to her. The marriage failed and was annulled in 1913, after which she surrounded herself with their friends who included the Quaker Hodgkin family, and in particular Ellen and her husband, the archaeologist R. C. Bosanquet. Sutherland herself became a Quaker in 1914 or 1915. During the First World War she continued her social work, sheltering enemy aliens at a house in Vale Avenue. 
On her mother's death in 1920, Sutherland, who had reverted to her maiden name, inherited a substantial fortune; her father left his own fortune to the King Edward's Hospital Fund when he died in 1922. She bought the lease on 4 Lowndes Square, London, and also rented a summer residence at Bamburgh Castle, Northumberland, to be near the Hodgkins and the Bosanquets. She also visited Paris, where she frequented exhibitions and began to buy pictures, including two by Courbet, several Persian miniatures, and works by Seurat and Andre Derain. In 1925 she was introduced to Ben and Winifred Nicholson by her friend the painter Constance Lane, and began to buy works by them and by Paul Nash, Duncan Grant, and the French sculptor Aristide Maillol. 
In 1929 Sutherland leased Rock Hall, near Alnwick, Northumberland. She gave up Lowndes Square and rented a flat in Grosvenor Square as a base for her frequent visits to London. Rock Hall was beautifully decorated and hung with a growing collection of art works that she regarded 'not as a collection but singly as particular delights, fresh experiences, sometimes as experiments' (Gray, 19). In the introduction to an exhibition of her collection held at Abbott Hall Art Gallery, Kendal, in 1964 Helen Knapp observed that 'Miss Sutherland does not collect as other people do: each painting, each object seems rather to be drawn to her than she to it; and becomes part of her and her ambience'. Her patronage of artists, both in purchasing works and in offering other forms of support, was a major contribution to contemporary art in the 1930s. She was clear in her likes and dislikes, and concentrated on the works of those whom she knew and admired, whether professional or amateur. Among those whose work she supported were members of the Ashingdon Artists, a group of, mainly, coalminers who had taken up art as part of a local adult education programme. Members visited Rock Hall, were introduced to artists in Sutherland's circle and, through her generosity, visited galleries in London in 1936. 
Many guests stayed at Rock Hall, including the painter David Jones, whom Sutherland met in 1929 through a fellow art lover, Jim Ede. She was a demanding hostess whose personal regime impressed Winifred Nicholson: 'She had a cold bath every morning, walked every day... about twenty miles, lived on nothing but apples, grapes, pineapple and a little lettuce'. But equally Sutherland impressed the painter because she 'carried with her a life of imagination, in which the most tangible objects were flowing streams, almost invisible new Moons, Chinese painters... the warbling of larks and wailing of curlews' (Checkland, 63). Politics and religion also played an important part in Sutherland's life: she rejoined the Church of England, though she later turned to Catholicism. 
After the lease on Rock Hall ended Sutherland moved in 1939 to Cockley Moor, a Lakeland farmhouse above Ullswater. There, as in Northumberland, she involved herself in local issues and got to know local musicians and artists. In 1964, having become increasingly frail, she moved to a nursing home at Stoke Poges, in Buckinghamshire. She donated much of her library to Lancaster University and sold or gave away a large part of her collection, retaining just a few prized pieces, which she took with her. She died, of stomach cancer, on 29 April 1965 at Stoke Place Nursing Home. She bequeathed the remainder of her collection to Nicolete Gray. The importance of the works that Sutherland collected is reflected by their later acquisition by such major galleries as the Tate; the British Museum; the Scottish Museum of Modern Art, Edinburgh; and Kettle's Yard, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 40714


Brodrick, Cuthbert (1821-1905), architect, was born on 1 December 1821 at Summergangs, Hull, the sixth son of the ten children of John Brodrick, shipowner and merchant, and his wife, Hannah Foster. Both families had been employed for several generations in maritime activities on the Yorkshire coast. The young man grew up in Hull, then one of the chief ports in the United Kingdom. He was educated there, at first privately and then at Kingston College. On 4 January 1837 he was articled to Henry Francis Lockwood (1811-1878), who had set up in practice in 1834 in the town, where his best work, such as Trinity House Chapel (1839-43), was neo-classical in style and an obvious influence on the young Brodrick, who was quick to reveal his talents as a draughtsman. In this respect he probably benefited from the presence of Thomas Allom (1804-1872), the noted topographical and architectural artist, who was a junior partner of Lockwood's for a short time 'c'.1841-1843. In 1839 Brodrick was awarded a silver medal for his measured drawings of the elaborate fourteenth-century Percy tomb in Beverley Minster, Yorkshire. 
After completing his articles, Brodrick had a year's tour of buildings in England, France, and Italy; there is no record of a companion on his travels. After his return to Hull in 1845 he set up in practice there on his own account and secured a number of minor commissions; but in November 1852 he was appointed architect for the Hull Royal Institution, an impressive public building of which the main facade was a Corinthian colonnaded screen based on the late seventeenth-century east front of the Louvre, Paris. The institution was the starting point of his design for Leeds town hall, which he won in open competition in 1853. This extended the colonnaded screen treatment to the whole building, in which can be identified the influence of the bourse in Paris (built from the designs of J. T. Brongniart, 1739-1813) and of Sir John Vanbrugh's 'heroic' architecture. It is 'the most considerable public monument built just after the mid-century' (Hitchcock, 'Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries', 158), with its great domed tower that was an addition to the original design but quickly became a 'sine qua non' for other municipal palaces. The town hall was a model for several other public buildings, for example the town halls at Bolton (1866-73), Portsmouth (1886-90), Morley, Yorkshire (1895), and Durban, Natal (1883-5), and Parliament House, Melbourne, in Australia (1856). 
In 1856 Brodrick was awarded a silver medal in the prestigious international competition for Lille Cathedral, and he had begun to enter contests for public buildings in London and the major towns. In 1857 he was placed fifth for his design for a new War Office in Whitehall, which 'The Builder' noted as having strong points of resemblance to Leeds town hall, his first major building, which became an 'idee fixe' that haunted him. Its heavy columnar mass was there again in his designs submitted in 1866 in a limited competition for remodelling and enlarging the National Gallery in Trafalgar Square. The elliptical Leeds corn exchange (1860-62), in some ways his finest work because of the unity of design and relationship between decoration, form, and function, owed its inspiration to the eighteenth-century Halle au Ble, Paris, but its interpretation is Brodrick's. Other buildings he designed in Leeds are the mechanics' institute (1860-66), warehouses in King Street (1862), and Headingley Hill Congregational Church (1864). 
In Hull, his native town, Brodrick won the competition for a new town hall in 1861, but he was not successful in the competitions for Preston town hall (1853), Manchester assize courts (1859), Liverpool Royal Exchange (1863), the Natural History Museum, South Kensington (1864), Bolton town hall (1865), Hull Dock offices (1866), Manchester Royal Exchange (1866), the National Gallery (1866), and Manchester town hall (1866). Although the elemental form of Leeds town hall could sometimes be discerned in these designs, Brodrick used both Gothic and Second Empire eclectic styles as alternatives to the classical columnar. He even used a Moorish style for the Oriental Baths in Leeds (1864), and what 'The Builder' called 'a mixture of Hindoo and Mohammedan' (29 Sept 1866, 724) for a vast custom house in Bombay, which was commissioned but not built. 
It was in the Second Empire style that Brodrick designed his last major success, the Grand Hotel, Scarborough (1862-7). Rising high above the town on its prominent site, this huge hotel with 300 bedrooms and impressive public rooms symbolized the wealthy West Riding on holiday, just as Leeds town hall is the apotheosis of local government and culture. The colourful brick and stone facades burst out at the top into mansarded pavilion roofs, domes, 'oeil-de-boeuf' windows, caryatids, and pediments, all reminiscent of the new Louvre, Paris, and creating what Henry-Russell Hitchcock called 'the climax of English Second Empire' (Hitchcock, 'Early Victorian Architecture', 1.213). Inside, its staircase is a modified version of that in the Paris Opera, and the decoration in the rooms was Parisian-inspired. 
Brodrick remained in practice in Leeds (and in London, where he had opened an office in 1863) until about 1870, and he occasionally exhibited at the Royal Academy. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1860, and a member of its council in 1874, although by that time he was living in France. In England he had led a bachelor life in lodgings and clubs, but in 1876 he bought a house at Le Vesinet, Seine-et-Oise, a 'ville-parc' laid out on picturesque English lines. On 7 May 1885 he made a late marriage to Margaret Chatham, 'nee' Barber ('c'.1814-1888), a widow. After her death at Le Vesinet he is believed to have moved away from the town, but nothing more is known of him until around 1899, when he rented a house, La Colline, Gorey, Jersey, where he died on 2 March 1905. He was buried in St Martin's churchyard, near Gorey. 


@@@@@


doc= 40715


Brzeska, Henri Alphonse Seraphin Marie Gaudier- (1891-1915), sculptor and draughtsman, was born on 4 October 1891 at Vomimbert, St Jean-de-Braye, on the outskirts of Orleans, France, the only son and eldest of the three children of Germain Gaudier (1864-1934) and Marie-Alexandrine, 'nee' Bourgoin (1865-1954). Both parents came from French artisan families, his father being a carpenter-joiner and his maternal grandfather a wheelwright. In 1907 Gaudier's academic and linguistic ability won him a two-year state scholarship for study abroad, which he spent at the Merchant Venturers' Technical College in Bristol, and working for a coal exporter, Fifoot, Ching & Co., in Cardiff, before travelling to Germany, where he stayed in Nuremberg and Munich. During this period he determined, though entirely self-taught, on an artistic career aiming at magazine illustration, though his efforts in this direction under the name Gerald proved unsuccessful. 
On his return to France in September 1909, Gaudier worked briefly in Paris for a publisher, a lens manufacturer, and a textile firm while studying voraciously in the libraries and museums. He drew people, animals, and the urban scene, laying the basis of his rapid and immensely versatile draughtsmanship. In May 1910 he met Sophie Suzanne Brzeska (1871-1925), a Polish woman who became his lifelong companion in a volatile but probably platonic relationship. They moved to London in January 1911, adopting the surname Gaudier-Brzeska and the identity of a Franco-Polish brother and sister to lend respectability to their cohabitation. 
While employed from March 1911 to July 1913 as a foreign-language clerk with Wulfsberg & Co., a timber importer in the City, Gaudier-Brzeska spent all his spare time studying in libraries, museums, and galleries and making work from clay, cut plaster, and bought, begged, or stolen offcuts of stone. Despite his job and Sophie's sporadic employment as a governess, they were scarcely able to make ends meet and led a penurious existence in a series of rented rooms in Chelsea and Fulham. During protracted separations they exchanged letters; this correspondence, of which only his side survives, and Sophie Brzeska's autobiographical writings (now at the Musee des Beaux-Arts, Orleans, Cambridge University Library, and Essex University Library), provide vivid insights into their lives and thoughts. 
During 1912 Gaudier-Brzeska began to establish himself as a sculptor, first in clay and then, probably from mid-1912, in stone, assimilating the influence of Rodin, fauvism, cubism, Brancusi, and examples of non-European art from China, Africa, and Oceania, in rapid succession; a fluidly modelled bronze, 'Dancer' (1913, Tate collection), for which the painter Nina Hamnett modelled, preceded by only weeks an aggressively primitivistic carving in Mansfield stone, 'Redstone Dancer' (1913, Tate collection). Stylistically eclectic but formally inventive and often savagely humorous, he had 'an amazing faculty for synthesis' (Pound, 7). His sculptures during 1912-13 were primarily Rodinesque figure studies, including theatre, ballet, and wrestling subjects, and modelled portraits of friends, including the writer Enid Bagnold (1912, priv. coll.), the journalist Frank Harris (1913), and fellow artists Alfred Wolmark (1913) and Horace Brodzky (1913). Meeting Jacob Epstein in June 1912 confirmed his interest in direct carving which increasingly took over but never entirely superseded modelling in his working practice. Animal and bird studies remained a favourite theme evolving from quick zoo sketches to the semi-geometric primitivism of 'Stags' (alabaster, 1914, Art Institute of Chicago) and 'Bird Swallowing a Fish' (plaster, 1914, Kettle's Yard, Cambridge) and the intuitive cubism of 'Birds Erect' (limestone, 1914, Museum of Modern Art, New York). However, despite his self-conscious modernism, he could still draw inspiration from the classical tradition, as seen in his small marble 'Torso' (1913, Tate collection), 'Maternity' (1913), and 'Seated Woman' (1914, both Musee National d'Art Moderne, Paris). 
During 1913-14, working from a comfortless studio, first at 454A Fulham Road (January to September 1913) and then Arch 25, Winthorpe Road, Putney, Gaudier-Brzeska became an increasingly prominent figure within the London avant-garde, especially after beginning to exhibit his sculpture at the London Salon in July 1913. There he met the American poet Ezra Pound, to whom his slight, sinewy figure appeared 'like a well-made young wolf or some soft-moving, bright-eyed wild thing' (Pound, 45). His friendly relationships with a wide range of artists within otherwise mutually antipathetic groups -- Roger Fry's Grafton Group and Omega workshop artists, Camden Town artists such as Harold Gilman and Robert Bevan, as well as Wyndham Lewis and his circle -- were indicative both of his eclecticism and of the respect which his talent and sharply critical intelligence commanded. He was elected to the London Group in February 1914 and was chosen as chairman of the artists' committee for the 1914 London Salon. However, he sold few sculptures and received only a handful of small private commissions. 
Through his friendship with Pound, Gaudier-Brzeska became increasingly identified with the nascent vorticist group during 1914 ['see 'Vorticists]. His sculptures, whether large like the so-called 'Hieratic Head of Ezra Pound' (1914, R. Nasher Collection, USA), commissioned by the poet himself, or very small like the carved metal 'Torpedo Fish' (1914, Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto) and 'Doorknocker' (1914, Kettle's Yard, Cambridge), take on increasingly sharp-edged, geometric, and abstract forms in keeping with the vorticists' virile, machine age aesthetic. He was one of the signatories of the vorticist manifesto and contributed two seminal articles, 'Vortex -- Gaudier-Brzeska', to the 1914 and 1915 issues of 'Blast'. In these he revealed literary gifts and an impressive grasp of the history of sculpture. His opening statement, '
Sculptural energy is the mountain. 

Sculptural feeling is the appreciation of masses in relation. 

Sculptural ability is the defining of these masses by planes. 
('Gaudier-Brzeska', 1.155)' became a rallying call for modern British sculpture, influencing Henry Moore and Frank Dobson among others. 
In September 1914 Gaudier-Brzeska returned to France and enlisted as a private in the 129th regiment of the French army, serving in the Craonne sector near Rheims. Twice promoted -- to corporal and sergeant -- he was due for officer training when he was killed by a single bullet through the head on 5 June 1915 at Neuville-St Vaast in Artois and was buried in the military cemetery there. 
Sophie Brzeska inherited his work by an 'inter vivos' gift; on her death, insane and intestate, in 1925, it was valued at $545. The enthusiasm of artists and the publication of Pound's 'Gaudier-Brzeska: a Memoir' (1916) and H. S. Ede's 'Savage Messiah' (1931) led to a growing appreciation of his catalytic role in the birth of modernist sculpture in Britain but he remained until the late 1950s virtually unknown in his native country. His life with Sophie Brzeska, as told by Ede, acquired mythic status, notably in Ken Russell's film 'Savage Messiah' (1971), but as early as 1934 their relationship was the acknowledged inspiration for the artist and writer protagonists in 'The Laughing Woman', a play by Elizabeth Mackintosh writing under the name of Gordon Daviot. 


@@@@@


doc= 40716


Tschichold, Jan (1902-1974), typographer and writer, was born on 2 April 1902 at Leipzig, the eldest son of the sign-painter Franz Tzschichhold (1878-1947) and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Zapff (1874-1947). He was educated successively between 1916 and 1923 at the teacher-training college at Grimma, near Leipzig, and in Leipzig at various graphic arts academies. He married on 31 March 1926 Edith Kramer (1905-1986), a journalist; their son Peter was born in 1929. They lived mainly in Basel from 1933 to 1968, when they moved to Berzona, Ticino, Italy. He died in hospital in Locarno, Italy, on 11 August 1974, and was buried on 13 August. 
Tschichold lectured on typography and lettering at Leipzig and later at the school for German master printers at Munich. After the Nazi government terminated this appointment and placed Tschichold and his family in 'protective custody' in 1933, he moved to Basel to write and practise as a freelance typographer. Although never connected with the Bauhaus, he was an early exponent of asymmetrical design and the use of sans-serif types, exemplified in his first book, the didactic 'Die neue Typographie' ('The new typography', 1928), and in the less dogmatic 'Typographische Gestaltung' ('Typographic design', 1935). Later work for Swiss publishers employed traditional centred designs and seriffed types. 
Tschichold was a masterly typographer in many media, particularly books, posters, and commercial jobbing printing, where his constant search for transparent clarity and fashionable predilection for asymmetric design ensured a steady demand for his services. By middle age, however, he was a leading advocate of traditional centred design for books and acknowledged as a leader in this craft. He is best known in Britain for his subtle and magisterial typographical redesign of Penguin books between 1947 and 1949, when he was living at the Old Mill House, West Drayton, Middlesex. Without obtrusively disturbing the familiar format and livery of the various series, he imposed on Penguin's printers the highest standards of design, composition, and page make-up consistent with mass production. These standards, similar to those already employed by discerning publishers and printers such as the Oxford and Cambridge university presses, were taken up enthusiastically by many others who wished to produce books of a quality to match the Penguins, which had achieved a commanding position in both popular and accessibly scholarly publishing during the Second World War. The Penguin composition rules written by Tschichold to codify his requirements showed the way to a more professional attitude to book production among emerging British book designers. 
Tschichold was an accomplished designer of types. Sabon, designed between 1964 and 1967, is a masterpiece. It was the first typeface to be designed for hand composition and hot-metal setting on the Monotype (single-character) and Linotype (line of type) composition systems, has triumphantly survived adaptation to photo-composition, and is today one of the most popular typefaces for bookwork. 
Like his English counterpart Stanley Morison, Tschichold was a fluent and assertive writer on typographic design and widely read in the history of printing. He had a particular interest in Chinese and Japanese calligraphy and Chinese colour printing, on which he published six works between 1940 and 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 40717


Innes, James Dickson (1887-1914), painter, was born on 27 February 1887 at Greenfield Villas, Murray Street, Llanelli, one of the three sons of John Innes and his wife, Alice Ann Mary, 'nee' Rees. Although, as Augustus John put it, he felt bound to Wales 'by every tie of sentiment and predilection' (Holroyd, 352), his father, an engineer (or possibly, as recorded on Innes's birth certificate, an accountant) at a local tin-plate works, was in fact Scottish, and his mother was of French extraction. Innes was educated at the local higher grade school before being sent to Christ College, Brecon (1894-1904). He then studied art at Carmarthen Art School (1904-5) and from there won a scholarship to the Slade School of Fine Art (1906-8), where he fell particularly under the influence of Philip Wilson Steer. His other formative influences were the works of John Cotman and Turner (he always carried with him a copy of Turner's 'Liber Studiorum'). While still a student he began to exhibit at the New English Art Club. He had rooms in Fitzroy Street, London, and briefly experimented with the subject matter and techniques then being espoused by his neighbours Walter Sickert and Frederick Spencer Gore. 
In 1908 Innes travelled to France with John Fothergill. They visited Caudebec, Bozouls, and then -- 'because it looked so good on the map' (Holroyd, 352) -- the little town of Collioure on the Mediterranean coast near the Spanish border. The revelation of southern light and colour had a lasting effect on Innes and his art. The trip had to be curtailed, however, when Innes fell ill. He returned to England and was diagnosed as consumptive. His mother took him to St Ives to rest and recuperate. During his convalescence he painted a series of idealized landscapes. When he was well enough Innes returned to France, where he took a studio in Paris. Outside a Parisian cafe he met and fell in love with Euphemia Lamb, the wife of the artist Henry Lamb. With her he travelled south again to Collioure. A one-man exhibition of his watercolours -- many of which were done on this trip -- was mounted at the Chenil Gallery, London, in January 1911. The work showed increasing stylization of forms and flatter bolder colours derived, perhaps, from his study of Japanese prints. 
Innes returned to London in the autumn of 1910 and began to see much of Augustus John (whom he had first met while at the Slade). Together the two painters began to explore and paint in north Wales. In the spring of 1911 Innes 'discovered' the mountain of Arenig, which was to become one of his sacred sites; under a cairn on the summit he buried a casket of Euphemia Lamb's letters. John and he rented a cottage nearby, at Nant-ddu. Following John's example, Innes began to make quick oil sketches, rather than watercolours. These small landscapes -- done at great speed -- he charged with the colour and intensity that he had first discovered in the south of France. 
At the end of 1911, after a third excursion to Collioure, Innes returned to London and contributed to the second Camden Town Group show. His bohemian existence, and his refusal to compromise in the face of his illness, were, however, taking a heavy toll on his health. He travelled to Spain with Lord Howard de Walden (a new patron) and to Ireland (at the invitation of Lady Gregory), but suffered a collapse at Galway races and had to be taken back to England by John. In search of health, he made another visit to the south of France, accompanied by the young Australian painter Derwent Lees. Although frequently depressed, he produced some his best work, transforming the landscape through his heightened sense of colour and form. It was a style that, although essentially post-impressionist, also owed something to the symbolist tradition in its emotional intensity. 
On his return to London in the spring of 1913 Innes enjoyed a successful one-man exhibition at the Chenil Gallery. It was his swan song. The money he earned was spent on a series of medical retreats, in England and then abroad -- in Morocco and on Tenerife in the Canary Islands. He did no more work but his health continued to decline. Brought back to England by his brother Jack, Innes was nursed by his mother at Brighton, and then moved to a nursing home at Swanley, Kent, where he died on 22 August 1914. 
Innes was an arresting and 'artistic' figure, with his broad-brimmed Quaker hat, coloured silk scarf, long overcoat, and gold-topped ebony cane. John described him as having: 'features of a slightly cadaverous cast, with glittering black eyes, a wide sardonic mouth, a prominent nose and a large bony forehead, invaded by streaks of thin black hair... [He] spoke with a heavy English accent, which had been imposed on an agreeable Welsh substratum. (John, 'Fragment of an autobiography', 255)' Yet besides this pose, and a certain appetite for dissipation, his most telling characteristic was a rare and unselfconscious, almost visionary, directness. 


@@@@@


doc= 40718


Bushe, Sir (Henry) Grattan (1886-1961), lawyer and colonial governor, was born in Trinidad on 1 January 1886, the son of John Scott Bushe, colonial secretary of Trinidad and acting governor at the time. An ancestor was Charles Kendal Bushe (1767-1843), solicitor-general for Ireland (1805) and chief justice of the king's bench and queen's bench in Ireland (1822-43). Henry Grattan Bushe was educated at Aysgarth School and Denstone College. 
Called to the bar in 1909, Bushe was a member of the south-eastern and western circuits in 1910-16 and of the Hertfordshire and Essex sessions in 1916, and a member of Marshall Hall's chambers. He then began a public service career as secretary to the royal commission investigating the contracts between the War Office and Sir John Jackson Ltd (1916-17). On 14 April 1914 he married Mary Kenrick Gibbons Chambers. They had one son (killed in action in 1944). In 1917 he joined the Dominions and Colonial Office as acting legal assistant; he subsequently became assistant legal adviser (1919-31) and legal adviser (1931-41). 
A junior colleague, William Dale (who eventually became legal adviser to what became the Foreign and Commonwealth Office), later described Bushe in his memoirs. He was: 'a small spare man with flat grey hair, glinting brown eyes, and an impish look... Brooding over the legal scene sat Bushe, in his large room overlooking Downing Street. He was of Irish extraction, a penetrating lawyer, outspoken; he hit hard at humbug, and could be sarcastic, not to say cynical. (Dale, 57)' Bushe was deeply committed to the rule of law and sound administration in the colonies. He introduced the professional magistracy to take over the magistrates' courts from the district officers in east and west Africa. In the 1930s he was much involved in the problem of Palestine, where Britain had assumed the mandate from the League of Nations after the First World War. Bushe had little sympathy for the concept of a national home for the Jews as outlined in the Balfour declaration, and little or no patience with the very serious tensions between Arabs and Jews. In the abdication crisis in 1936 he was principally concerned to ascertain the views of the colonies, to advise, and to preserve the constitutional monarchy. 
In 1941 Bushe was appointed governor and commander-in-chief of Barbados. This transfer to a governorship was a promotion without precedent in the colonial service, for governors had rarely been chosen from the ranks of practising lawyers and never before from the legal staff of the colonial office. It was neither an easy post nor an easy period. Bushe was sent to administer a community which, while itself highly critical, took unkindly to criticism from others and was very conscious of the fact that its House of Assembly was, next to the House of Commons and the Bermuda House of Assembly, the oldest legislature in the British empire. But it could hardly be expected that a constitution devised for an infant white settlement in the reign of Charles I would be flexible enough to meet conditions in the twentieth century with a large ethnic population -- of rapidly growing political consciousness -- living side by side with the descendants of the original white settlers. Indeed, the rigidity of the constitution and other defects had long given rise to friction between governors and elected members. 
As a trained constitutional lawyer, Bushe was quick to see where the constitution could be improved, and was able before the end of his term of office to prepare the way for improvements. He had also to contend with all the security measures necessitated by the war and with the difficult questions of conserving and distributing food stocks seriously restricted by the enemy submarine blockade. The ethnic element, sharing the general West Indian political desires, wanted a wider franchise; labour demanded wider recognition; and the planters were unsure of the future for their sugar. All these insistent problems Bushe handled shrewdly, skilfully, and with success; and his administration proved to have been a significant stage in the history of the colony. He retired in 1946, returning to Britain. 
Bushe was appointed CMG in 1927 and CB in 1932, and was advanced to KCMG in 1936. He was also a knight of grace of the order of St John. His club was the Union Club. Lady Bushe, a trained musician and keenly interested, as a dame of the order of St John of Jerusalem, in the work of the St John Ambulance Brigade and of the Girl Guides, actively supported her husband in everything that made for the encouragement in the colony of music, drama, and cultural activities. Sir Grattan Bushe died at Guy's Hospital, London Bridge, London, on 23 August 1961. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 40719


Pim, Sir Alan William (1871-1958), administrator in India and colonial adviser, was born on 17 May 1871 at Foxrock, co. Dublin, one of at least four children of James Pim and Elizabeth Fayle Evans of Monkstown, co. Dublin. From 1885 Pim attended the Society of Friends school, Bootham, Yorkshire (which took a large number of boys from Ireland), winning the annual old boys' association leaving scholarship on his departure in 1887. He attended both Leipzig University and Trinity College, Dublin, where he matriculated as a scholar in 1891, graduating BA in 1893. 
After success in the 1894 Indian Civil Service exams, Pim arrived in India on 4 December 1895. He held various positions in the North Western Provinces and Oudh (later the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh) including, briefly, from May 1898, those as private secretary to the lieutenant-governor, Sir James La Touche, and as assistant settlement, and then settlement, officer. Pim published a monograph on the region's woollen industries in 1898. In 1903 he was appointed to the provincial legislature, and then in 1910 was made the joint secretary of the board of revenue. Remaining in India during the war, Pim served as secretary to the government from April 1912 to August 1917. In 1916 he married Nora Gordon, daughter of Sir J. Scott. Appointed divisional commissioner, in April 1925 he returned to the board of revenue as commissioner. Pim was selected as a temporary member of the United Provinces executive council in December 1928. He retired in July 1930 having been made CIE in June 1918, CSI in January 1926, and KCIE in June 1929. Pim belonged to both the Royal Asiatic Society and the Punjab Historical Society. In 1935 he was made KBE. 
His most notable and important work, investigating the financial and economic conditions of British colonies, chiefly African, began in 1932 when the Colonial Office appointed Pim to carry out a financial and economic inquiry in Swaziland. Pim undertook similar commissions in Zanzibar, also in 1932, where he reached the difficult conclusion that the numbers and salaries of European and Indian officials would have to be cut in order to effect an improvement in the government's financial position, in the Bechuanaland protectorate in 1933, British Honduras in 1934, and Basutoland in 1935. In Kenya, Pim investigated the controversial issue of the racial basis of taxation in 1936. His report, recommending a European income tax, was described as a 'Mill's bomb' by dismayed white settlers (Bennett, 326). His last major appointment was as financial and economic commissioner in Northern Rhodesia in 1937, and his painstaking work on these commissions, by highlighting the need for colonial economic reform, contributed to the late 1930s official reassessment of colonial development policy. 
The Colonial Office continued thereafter to draw on his expertise, with Pim advising in a report submitted in 1948 against the possibilities of large-scale settlement of European displaced persons in Kenya, Tanganyika, and Northern Rhodesia. Pim also served from 1935 on the colonial development advisory committee. All this experience equipped him for subsequent activities as a speaker and writer concerned with African economic conditions. He gave the 1938 Beit lectures on colonial economic history at the University of Oxford, published in 1940 as 'The Financial and Economic History of the African Tropical Territories', paying particular attention to the application of European capital, and produced 'Colonial Agricultural Production' under the auspices of Chatham House. A draft of a book dated 1953 entitled 'The dependent empire' went unpublished. 
Little is known about Pim's private life, but he listed his hobbies as 'rather indefinite, books generally, and some games; later, travel' ('Bootham School Register', 183). He died aged eighty-seven at the White House, Headington Hill, Oxford, on 28 June 1958. He was survived by Lady Pim. 


@@@@@


doc= 40720


Vischer, Sir Hanns (1876-1945), educationist, was born at Basel, Switzerland, on 14 September 1876, the third of five children of Adolf Eberhard Vischer (1839-1902), a prosperous Swiss silk merchant, and his wife, Carolina Rosalia (Rosalie) Sarasin. His father was a deeply committed evangelical Christian and an Anglophile, sentiments which his son Hanns fully shared. Educated first at the Humanistisches Gymnasium in Basel, Vischer then went on to St Lawrence College at Ramsgate, Kent. He read modern languages at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1899. His early rowing experience on the Rhine got him into the first boat crew: a contemporary recalled the courage, gaiety, and charm of 'Swissy'. 
From childhood Vischer had been attracted by the idea of Africa, and he spent his last long vacation from Cambridge studying Hausa in Tripoli. He also undertook a medical course at a Swiss hospital. After a year studying theology at Ridley Hall in Cambridge, he sailed for Nigeria in November 1900 as a lay missionary with the Church Missionary Society. He spent a year at Loko on the Benue River, but resigned from his post in 1902. He informed the society that in order to keep in touch with the country where he felt 'lies the work of my life' (Parkinson, 7) he had applied for British nationality and also for a place in the British colonial service. He successfully obtained both, and in 1903 joined Sir Frederick Lugard's staff in Northern Nigeria. Appointed resident at Bornu in 1905, he spent much of these early years having to live down 'the objections to employing him which his name at first excited' (ibid.). A keen linguist, he became proficient not only in Hausa, but also in Arabic and a number of other local languages. 
Keen to learn more about the peoples of the region, Vischer obtained permission to return from leave via an ancient slave trading route. His subsequent journey from Tripoli across the Sahara to Lake Chad between July and December 1906 proved to be a memorable experience, and in 1910 he published 'Across the Sahara', an account of the journey illustrated with his own sketches. As well as describing the colourful characters he met, he collected much useful information about this neglected region; and the book was given much publicity in the 'Illustrated London News' and elsewhere. 
In 1908 Vischer was seconded to take charge of educational work in the Muslim emirates -- a field which he was thereafter to make his own during a long and successful career. In 1910 he was appointed the first director of education in Northern Nigeria. His initial objectives were to open a government school at Kano for training teachers, and to institute a school to provide technical instruction in local agriculture and crafts. He also organized a class for the sons of local chiefs, to familiarize them with European teaching, and to foster good relations within the emirates. He set to work with what Marjorie Perham later described as 'enthusiastic idealism' (Parkinson, 9). After studying what was being done in the Sudan and elsewhere in the region, and despite his evangelical background, Vischer sought to adapt Western educational ideas to local African values and traditions. 
On 31 January 1911 Vischer married Isabelle von Tscharner (1884-1963) from Bern; they had four sons. Isabelle shared his love for the Hausa, and between 1912 and 1914 they lived in 'a large, rambling mud-brick house... surrounded by examples of local arts and crafts' (Parkinson, 11). A popular figure among the Hausa, Vischer became known as Dan Hausa ('son of Hausa'). During this period he built up an ethnographic collection that he later presented to the Basel Museum fur Volkerkunde, run by an uncle. 
Vischer's educational work in Nigeria was unfortunately cut short by the onset of the First World War, but his achievements, though modest, were enlightened, and provided a model for later expansion. Between 1915 and 1919 he served in military intelligence, and from May 1917 was based in Bern with the rank of major. Because of ill health and a desire to be with his young family, however, he chose not to return to the colonial service after the war, but sought other employment in Britain. In 1923 he was approached by J. H. Oldham, the influential secretary of the International Missionary Council, with a view to becoming secretary of the newly established advisory committee on native education in tropical Africa. Vischer's blend of colonial service and commitment to the cause of educational progress in Africa, allied to his linguistic ability in European and African languages, made this an ideal appointment. The committee's role was expanded in 1929 to cover education in the colonies, and Vischer then shared the workload with a joint secretary, Arthur Mayhew. Part of Vischer's role was to provide the committee with up-to-date information on conditions in Africa, and to keep in touch with educational authorities throughout the continent. Through his wide contacts and travels during the following two decades Vischer was able to promote his educational ideals. He played an important role in the investigation carried out by the committee that resulted in the report 'The Place of the Vernacular in Native Education' (1927). He made important recommendations for the recruitment, training, and selection of education officers; and he also tried to organize support and hostels for African students studying in Britain. 
A skilled linguist himself, Vischer was instrumental in the foundation of the International Institute of African Languages and Culture in 1926, and served as its honorary secretary-general until 1945. In this role he worked closely with scholars and missionaries on projects that aimed to transform oral African languages into literate ones. In particular, he played a key role in running the institute's bureau, which produced textbooks for African schools and a quarterly journal, 'Africa'. He himself continued to write and speak about comparative colonial education and Hausa linguistics. From 1931 he helped organize a series of pioneering social and anthropological studies in Africa, funded by the Rockefeller Institute. His concern was not so much academic as social, writing that 'if we are to be true to our ideal these studies must further a practical and human cause, the progress of the African' (Parkinson, 28). 
With the onset of the Second World War, Vischer again served in intelligence. He nevertheless ensured the institute's survival, and it resumed full working from 1 January 1943. During the war he worked for the department of propaganda to enemy countries, and served as its liaison officer with MI6. In addition he broadcast in Hausa, French, and English on the BBC West Africa Service on a variety of subjects ranging from Britain's allies to the colour bar, 'a subject about which he had strong feelings' (Parkinson, 37). He was made a CMG in 1936, and knighted in 1941. Early in 1945 Vischer was invited to Paris to meet the new French minister for the colonies, but unfortunately caught a chill which led to pneumonia. He returned to Britain, and died at his home, Tykeford Lodge, Newport Pagnell, Buckinghamshire, on 19 February 1945. 
Vischer devoted his life to the progress of education in Africa. With his cosmopolitan background and strong sympathy with African culture, he made an important contribution to the evolution of British educational policy. As Sir Ralph Furse wrote, 'Hanns was unique. So was his contribution to the modern colonial story' (Parkinson, 1). 


@@@@@


doc= 40721


Harris, Sir John Hobbis (1874-1940), campaigner against slavery, was born on 29 July 1874 at Grove Street, Wantage, the son of John Hobbis Harris, plumber (and later a builder), and his wife, Elizabeth Emily Saunders. An earnest Christian, young John Harris spent all his free time doing evangelical social work in the common lodging houses under the leadership of F. B. Meyer of Christ Church, Westminster Bridge Road, London. While working as a twenty-year-old in the City of London for Cooks, the gentlemen's outfitters, he also began to train to become a Baptist missionary in central Africa. Together with his wife, Alice (1870-1970), daughter of Alfred Seeley, a silk works manager, whom he had just married (on 6 May), Harris sailed for the Congo in May 1898. They had two sons and two daughters. 
At first Harris concentrated on learning the language and customs of the people of his part of the Congo Free State, and in teaching basic skills such as housebuilding. But very soon he was forced to witness such abominations in the treatment of the local people by agents of King Leopold II of the Belgians that, instead of bringing Christ to pagan Africa, Harris had to respond to the revelation that it was the Christians who were now the crucifiers. He watched horrifed as Africans were lashed mercilessly with a long whip of twisted hippopotamus hide by other Africans who would be flogged themselves if they refused to obey European orders. Shortly afterwards he and his wife were shown the amputated hand and foot of a five-year-old girl by her distraught father. The source of all this horror was King Leopold's insatiable demand for rubber and ivory which his company extracted from the Congo, ostensibly via a 'civilizing' mission but in fact by slavery, hostage-taking, the torture and mutilation of women and children, the burning of whole villages, and, when necessary, mass murder. The Harrises realized that they must abandon private protest for public action. The British consul, Roger Casement, and the investigative journalist E. D. Morel joined with John Harris to inform the British government of the atrocities and to urge it to intervene. But at first no one in high places responded except Charles Dilke, Lord Lansdowne, and H. R. Fox Bourne. In 1903-4 John and Alice Harris supplied E. D. Morel's Congo Reform Association with a detailed account, attested by Alice Harris's photographic evidence, of the deliberate system of atrocity being perpetrated. In December 1904 John Harris was asked by the local Africans to represent their case and translate their submissions to King Leopold's (packed) commission of enquiry. Its reluctant, shameful, findings were eventually published in October 1905, but without any of Harris's damning evidence. John Harris himself then published the pamphlet 'Rubber is Death: the Story of the Bonguronga Rubber Collectors', enumerating case after case, giving the names of the victims and their families, many of them known to him personally. 'Again and again when these horrors have been brought to our notice, we have been ashamed that our skin is white... Has the conscience of Christian England gone to sleep?' (Harris, 21). 
Despite the fact that they had to leave behind their own small children in Britain, and at real risk not only to their health but to their lives, Alice and John Harris continued 'to march round the world... laying before the public the evidence [of]... the barbarous nature of the system' ('Anti-Slavery Reporter and Aborigines' Friend', April 1911). Supported by the evidence of the actual whips and chains used and the sixty photographs of both victims and perpetrators taken by Alice Harris (made into lantern slides), the Harrises spoke in the cause of Congo reform at well over 600 public meetings in Britain, Europe, and the United States before 1910. In 1911 they travelled 5000 miles, on river steamer, by canoe, or on foot through almost impenetrable tropical forests, on a fact-finding investigation of current conditions in central and west Africa. 
John Harris became a political crusader against white capitalist imperialism in general, advocating a system of genuine, international trusteeship in the interests of all native peoples on every continent. Between 1910 and 1940 he produced a number of important articles and books on the topic, including 'Dawn in Darkest Africa' (1912), 'Africa, Slave or Free?' (1919), and 'Slavery or 'Sacred Trust'?' (1926). In these he identified usurpation of land as the root of the evil that then led to forced labour in order to exploit the mineral resources and products of the soil. Harris redefined contract labour and debt bondage as neo-slavery; he insisted that the native should see some benefit for all his taxation and, unlike most of his contemporaries at the beginning of the twentieth century, he believed that the native races had as much right to self-determination as any one else. 
From 1910 to 1940 John Harris was parliamentary secretary to the amalgamated Anti-Slavery and Aborigines' Protection societies. In 1923 he was elected Liberal MP for Hackney North, but lost his seat at the next election in 1924. As a member of the national executive of the League of Nations Union, he visited Geneva every year and added international lobbying on behalf of all the native races to his workload. In 1933 John Harris was knighted in acknowledgement of his part in getting the League of Nations to accept British proposals for the suppression of slavery world wide. According to Lord Lytton, 'It was the 'thing' slavery, not merely the 'word', which he worked to abolish' ('Anti-Slavery Reporter and Aborigines' Friend', July 1940). Therefore Harris also tackled the abuse of 'mui tsai' -- 'adopted daughters' -- in domestic servitude in Hong Kong, Malaya, and Ceylon; he placed questions in parliament to challenge the use of ten-year-old African children as labourers in British Kenya; he investigated and criticized the endemic, systematic oppression of black people both in the southern states of America and in southern Africa; and he was one of the earliest to monitor and criticize white Australia's racist oppression of the Aborigines. In addition, John Harris would never refuse a request to help individual Africans finding themselves in difficulties in London. Not surprisingly he wore himself out. 
Sir John Harris died suddenly from bronchitis and a cerebral haemorrhage on 30 April 1940, at Stonelands, Bath Road, Frome, Somerset. Obituaries glow with regard for the meticulous integrity of his research, and for his tireless, courageous altruism: 'He was afraid of nobody', wrote Gilbert Murray ('Anti-Slavery Reporter', October 1941). According to Charles Roden Buxton, 'He was a truly lovable man' ('The Friend', 10 May, 1940). The burial, probably on 6 May, and memorial services were conducted by the Society of Friends, which Harris had joined after the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 40722


Rattray, Robert Sutherland (1881-1938), colonial official and ethnographer, was born on 5 September 1881 in Bahr, Bengal, the fourth child of Arthur Rattray, Indian civil servant, and his wife, Mary Sutherland. A scion of distinguished Anglo-Indian families, he was sent home as a child to Gatehouse of Fleet in Scotland where, before his father's retirement from the Indian Civil Service, he and a sister were cared for by a great-aunt. After local schooling he attended Stirling high school but left to join the imperial yeomanry at the outbreak of the South African War in 1899. In December 1902 he joined the central African trading company, the African Lakes Corporation. Initially based in Blantyre, Nyasaland, he was soon sent 'up-country' to Lilongwe. While his leisure was dedicated to a lifetime devotion to game shooting, here Rattray began his serious study of what he initially called 'folklore', which he learned from local hunters whose languages he mastered. Much of this material appeared in his first publication, 'Folklore, Stories and Songs in Chinyanja' (1907). 
In 1906 Rattray joined the customs service of the west African colony of the Gold Coast. Taking advantage of a Colonial Office scheme, he enrolled in his first home leave as a student in anthropology at Exeter College, Oxford, where he studied with R. R. Marett, eventually securing a diploma in 1914, the degree of BSc in 1925, and that of DSc in 1929. During the same leave he joined Gray's Inn and began writing his law examinations before returning to his post in the eastern Gold Coast. In 1913 he was appointed assistant district commissioner in Ejura, in the northern region of Asante. A talented linguist, Rattray had already mastered the lingua franca of many of the labourers and traders in the northern Gold Coast. This led to his 'Hausa Folklore' and his 'Elementary Mole Grammar' of 1918. Now, in Asante, his interest turned to the culture of the dominant political force of the pre-colonial Gold Coast, a polity which, after a sequence of wars, had been finally defeated by the British in 1896. The first fruit of his study was 'Ashanti Proverbs' (1916). Although the work bore the patronizing subtitle 'The primitive ethics of a savage people', what Rattray consciously displayed was both sophisticated and complex. 
In 1914 Rattray married Constance Mary Stanley, with whom he returned to the Gold Coast as war broke out with Germany. Created a captain in the Gold Coast regiment -- he used this title for the rest of his life -- he saw action during the invasion of the German colony of Togoland; he was now asked to administer part of the conquered territory, though its Ewe-speaking population never attracted his ethnographic interest. During leave in 1915 he worked further on his law examinations, and he was called to the bar in 1918; in the same leave he learned to fly. In 1919 he was posted to the colonial capital, Accra, as assistant colonial secretary and clerk to the legislative assembly; this bored him. Relief came with his appointment as special commissioner and the first 'government anthropologist' in 1920, a post exclusively attached to the Asante region. Reflecting his academic training, his initial enquiries were focused on religion and kinship. 
Although an employee of government, Rattray's research agenda was only slightly shaped by administrative imperatives. Thus the first results of his work were to be a general survey, 'Ashanti' (1923), followed by 'Religion and Art in Ashanti' (1927). The latter displays not only the command of ethnographic detail of the former but also a deep sympathy with the moral basis of Asante cosmology. In the same period he played a major part in organizing the much admired Gold Coast exhibits at the British Empire Exhibition of 1924. Rattray's work was becoming relevant to the administrative ambition to restore the Asante confederacy. His legal training and the current concerns of social anthropology rather than policy, however, led him to the collection of the material which was published in his 'Ashanti Law and Constitution' (1929). Much of the colonial understanding of Asante which governed the eventual restoration of the confederacy in 1936 was drawn from this influential book. Taken together, his three major books on the Asante people constitute the most detailed ethnographic study of any African people in the inter-war period and retain their importance as primary sources for modern scholars. 
Rattray was felt to be far too eccentric and temperamental to rise to higher levels of the administration; however, because of his growing reputation he was given the status and pay of a provincial commissioner but without the duties. His interest in the Asante seems to have declined and his final book on this polity, 'Akan-Ashanti Folk-Tales' (1930), is basically raw, un-analysed data. He was now drawn to the northern Gold Coast, and his research here resulted in his 'Tribes of the Ashanti Hinterland' (1932). An enthusiastic pilot, Rattray flew his biplane from London to Accra in 1928, shortly before retiring from the colonial service. On retirement he unsuccessfully pursued innumerable academic posts and research grants. His much respected empirical work had not been followed by theoretical publications; this and his age presumably conspired against an academic career, although he taught Hausa to colonial service staff in Cambridge in the mid-1930s. He was to irritate the Colonial Office by writing articles hostile to the policy of indirect rule. Always delighted by evidence of African cultural self-assertion, he dedicated his romantic novel 'The Leopard Princess' (1934) to Paul Robeson. 
Rattray's private life is something of a mystery. His marriage failed, and he spent years unsuccessfully trying to divorce his wife. He was the father of a girl, the result of a liaison with a Frenchwoman during a leave period taken in France. He was killed in a gliding accident on 14 May 1938 at Farmoor, Oxfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 40723


Torday, Emil (1875-1931), anthropologist, was born in Budapest, Hungary, on 22 June 1875. His family were landowners, with estates in the town of Torda which subsequently, with boundary changes, became part of Romania. Little is known of his early life or his education, which he received in both Hungary and Germany. He was enrolled as a student at the University of Munich, but left without completing his degree and moved to Brussels where he worked for a time in a bank. Torday was an excellent linguist who learned to speak fifteen languages, eight of them African, and had already developed the engaging, maverick personality which became apparent in his later activities and in his more popular writing. 
Torday's reputation rests largely on his experiences in equatorial Africa, where he travelled and worked almost continuously from 1900 to 1910. He first took up a colonial administrative post at Lake Mweru in the south-east of Congo Free State. He had few formal duties and spent his time learning local dialects and developing an interest in Luba culture. In 1904 his appointment came to an end and he voyaged back to Europe, but sought a way of returning to central Africa at the earliest opportunity. On a visit to London he met Thomas Athol Joyce, a curator at the British Museum, and formed an association with this institution which influenced his whole career. When he returned to the Belgian Congo -- this time as an employee of the Compagnie du Kasai, and later when mounting his own expedition in 1907 -- he increasingly came to act as an agent of the British Museum. In this capacity he undertook ethnographic surveys of the people of the Kwango-Kwilu river basin and of the Kasai, formed comprehensive ethnographic collections, and created photographic and phonographic records. Over 3000 objects collected by Torday are now in the British Museum collections. 
The centre point of Torday's ethnographic work was his engagement with the Kuba peoples, and especially his relationship with the nyimi (king) Kot aPe (or Kwete in Torday's spelling). Always an advocate of indigenous views, Torday found in the Kuba a sophisticated kingdom with a sumptuous artistic tradition, and in Kot aPe an impressive ruler. Furthermore, the Kuba had a dynastic history which could be related to European chronologies: it was founded in the early seventeenth century, dated in oral tradition to a known passage of Halley's comet. In Congo, the very heart of Conrad's 'heart of darkness', Torday believed he had 'discovered' a kingdom on a parallel with European dynasties. 'Have the staff of police at the British Museum been doubled to keep out the publishers?', he wrote to enquire of Joyce (letter, 1909). Here was a culture to overthrow many western stereotypes. 
When he returned to Europe in 1909 Torday began publicizing his expedition's achievements. He was awarded the imperial gold medal for science and art by the emperor of Austria in 1910. In 1913 he spent several months as a lecturer and curator in Philadelphia, but based himself mainly in London. A series of articles, monographs, and popular books appeared, of which the best-known was 'On the Trail of the Bushongo' (1925). On 17 March 1910 Torday married Gaia Rose Macdonald ('b'. 1884/5), a Scotswoman, and had a daughter, Ursula (1912-1997), who subsequently became a romantic novelist under the pseudonym, among others, of Paula Allardyce. A medical career at the London Hospital was cut short by the outbreak of war, during which Torday engaged in relief work for prisoners of war. He subsequently continued as an anthropologist through his writing, his involvement with the International African Institute, the Royal Anthropological Institute, and Save the Children International. His last substantial work was another ethnographic survey, 'Descriptive Sociology: African Races' (1930). Torday died in London on 9 May 1931 of heart failure, following an operation, at the French Hospital, Shaftesbury Avenue, close to the British Museum. 
Torday's influence on subsequent anthropology has not been extensive. He held no formal position, and was not interested in big theories, like his contemporary and adversary Leo Frobenius. Yet the extent and value of his documentary work on the cultures of Congo remains a primary point of reference. An exhibition of his collection at the Museum of Mankind, London (part of the British Museum), in 1990 attracted new attention to his work. His photographic archive is divided between the latter depository and the Royal Anthropological Institute, which is the custodian of his manuscripts. 


@@@@@


doc= 40724


Culshaw, John Royds (1924-1980), record producer and television executive, was born on 28 May 1924 at 47 Lethbridge Road, Southport, Lancashire, one of at least two children of Percy Ellis Culshaw, banker's clerk, and his wife, Dorothy Royds. He attended first the Merchant Taylors' School in Crosby and then the King George V Grammar School in Southport, and at the age of sixteen followed his father as a clerk with the Midland Bank. He studied the piano from an early age, but became increasingly dissatisfied with his own musical abilities, and, with encouragement from his mother, developed a deep interest in concert performance and opera. 
Culshaw began his war service in 1942 joining the Fleet Air Arm as a volunteer and serving in Trinidad and Europe. While still in the services he attended a concert given by the great Russian composer Sergey Rakhmaninov, and this helped forge the direction of his subsequent career. In November 1946, after his discharge from the services, Culshaw joined the Decca Record Company's publicity department, writing sleeve notes for classical music records. The following year he began work on a biography of Rakhmaninov (published in 1949). In the same year his book on Brahms appeared, as well as a popular introduction to the concerto, and a guide to the main developments of contemporary music. 
The failure of his period as editor of the Decca house magazine 'Music', however, convinced Culshaw that his real talents lay elsewhere, and by the end of 1947 he had completed his first recording sessions at Decca as a record producer. During these early years as a Decca producer he made several notable recordings, such as Richard Strauss's 'Arabella' and Charles Gounod's 'Romeo and Juliet'. Culshaw left Decca in 1954 and went to work for the Hollywood-based Capitol Records, then expanding its classical recording programme. There he made several important records including one of the then comparatively unknown Hungarian conductor Georg Solti conducting a performance of the Brahms 'Requiem'. He also undertook a series of remarkable recordings of performances by Eduard van Beinum and the Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam. Culshaw's greatest contribution to recorded culture, however, was to take up the best part of the decade after 1957. 
In 1956 Culshaw returned to Decca as manager of the classical record department, having persuaded a reluctant Maurice Rosengarten, then executive manager of the Decca record business, to allow him to produce the first complete stereo recording of Richard Wagner's 'Ring' cycle, with Georg Solti conducting. The first of the four operas, 'Rheingold', was released in 1958, and, according to Culshaw, in the following year it sold more copies than Elvis Presley LPs. Making this mammoth series Culshaw called on the latest recording technology, including stereophonic sound. The recording, 'with its brilliant use of sound effects and aural perspectives, heralded a new era' ('The Times', 29 April 1980). Culshaw later documented the hilarious details of this momentous event in a book entitled 'Ring Resounding: the Recording in Stereo of Der Ring des Nibelungen' (1967). 
By the time the project was complete, Culshaw had established himself as one of the world's great record producers. For this work, he was made an OBE in 1966. He subsequently recorded most of the major operas in the repertoire. In addition he received numerous other awards including several prestigious grand prix de disques from the French industry. Moreover, the 'Ring' recordings proved to a sceptical music industry that classical music could be successfully encapsulated on disc: a factor that helped ensure the proliferation of a broad range of classical music available on record. 
In 1967, after completing his 'Ring' cycle, Culshaw moved into the medium of television, becoming head of music at BBC television, thus combining his twin passions for music and visual media. While at the BBC he forged an important working relationship with Benjamin Britten. He persuaded Britten to conduct a television performance of his opera 'Peter Grimes' and further he commissioned Britten to write a new opera, 'Owen Wingrave', for the BBC. Culshaw was invited to Snape in Suffolk and reported positively to Britten on the possibilities of transforming The Maltings into a concert-hall, writing that: 'there was a feeling about the place, about its setting by the river with the view of Iken church through the reeds and across the marshes that made it right. If Ben was to have a concert hall on his doorstep, this was it. (Carpenter, 456)' Culshaw later initiated the Benson and Hedges music festival at Snape (and was planning the fourth season at the time of his death). 
During his time with the BBC, Culshaw did much to broaden the availability and the appreciation of classical music on television. In 1975 Culshaw left the BBC and the same year was elected to the Arts Council of Great Britain. He pursued a writing and lecturing career, and in 1977 became a senior fellow in the creative arts at the University of Western Australia. He also took on the responsibility for the annual United Nations concert in New York, and acted as a music consultant to the Australian Broadcasting Commission. 
Throughout his life John Culshaw combined personal ambition with a love of recorded music, but he was not without his critics. Donald Mitchell commented unfavourably on the way in which Culshaw courted Britten's favour: 'The manipulative side of it was all too transparent. John certainly made an innovative and influential contribution to the record industry, and we must all be indebted to him for his historic series of Britten recordings. But at the BBC he seemed to me to be out of his depth. (Carpenter, 504)' Nevertheless, he had an ingenuity and a persuasive personality which mostly won him the friendship and respect of colleagues and artistes alike. He made a lasting contribution to the record industry and television, and left a priceless heritage for the listening public.Culshaw died of cirrhosis and hepatitis on 27 April 1980 at the Royal Free Hospital, London. He never married. His autobiography, which was in the final stage of completion when he died, contains much of interest about the man and the industries he dominated. It was published under the title of 'Putting the Record Straight'. The work provides a remarkable insight into the difficulties encountered when highly creative individuals are forced to work together to produce a commercial product. In a glowing obituary 'The Times' noted that 'The immense proliferation of classical recordings now available to all, at comparatively low cost, can be directly attributed to Culshaw's pioneering and imaginative work' ('The Times', 29 April 1980). 


@@@@@


doc= 40726


Lancastre Saldanha, Adeline Louisa Maria de, Countess de Lancastre (1824-1915), aristocrat, was born on 24 December 1824, in Charles Street, Berkeley Square, London, the eldest of the three children and only daughter of Spencer Horsey Kilderbee 
(from 1832, De Horsey; died 1860)
and Lady Louisa Maria Judith (died 1843), daughter of John Rous, first earl of Stradbroke. Educated at home by French governesses, she became fluent in five languages and an accomplished musician. Adeline De Horsey made her society debut in the 1842 season, and rapidly acquired a reputation as an unconventional, ambitious flirt, substantiated by her engagement in 1848 to the Carlist pretender to the Spanish throne, the count of Montemolin. His failure to take the throne led directly to the ending of the engagement. 
Rumours about De Horsey's morals burgeoned when society observed her blossoming relationship with a friend of her father's, James Thomas Brudenell, seventh earl of Cardigan (1797-1868), army officer, who was married (albeit formally separated from his wife). In defiance of social convention, Adeline De Horsey was regularly seen riding in Hyde Park with the earl, without benefit of chaperon. In 1857, the remonstrations of her father caused her to leave his house, initially for a hotel in Hyde Park Square, and subsequently for a furnished house in Norfolk Street, Park Lane, where she was established by Cardigan as his mistress. She remained there until Cardigan arrived with the news of the death of his wife in July 1858. They sailed to the Mediterranean in August and were married in Gibraltar on 28 September. Lady Cardigan joined her husband in his favourite pursuits, hunting, yachting, and racing, and became a notable member of the 'sporting set'; the courtesan Skittles referred to her as 'the head of our profession' (Thomas, 306). She was never welcomed in polite circles or at court. After Cardigan's death, childless, on 27 March 1868, Lady Cardigan took over the management of the family estates, which had been left to her for her lifetime; the improvements which she carried out and the repayment of heavy mortgages on the estates were a source of pride to her. 
On 28 August 1873, Adeline Cardigan was married again, to Don Antonio Manuelo de Lancastre Saldanha, conde de Lancastre (died 1898), having unsuccessfully sought to marry Disraeli. Following the marriage, she spent some time in his native Portugal, and in Paris, where the count preferred to live. By 1879, the countess of Cardigan and Lancastre (as she styled herself) had returned to Deene Park, ostensibly to oversee the management of the estates, while her husband remained in Paris, where he died in 1898. 
In 1909 she published a volume of memoirs, 'My Recollections', which caused tremors to run through high society. Written by a publisher's assistant from notes of conversations, the book is full of scandal and malicious gossip, some half-remembered, some evidently fabricated, from the mid-Victorian period, without the customary discretion as to persons. The timing of the publication -- coinciding with anxieties over Lloyd George's budget -- was a particular source of concern. Lady Dorothy Nevill remarked: 'What people are afraid of is that when the election comes these Radical demons will cut pieces out just to show what the upper classes are' (Nevill, 194). Lady Cardigan remained unrepentant; eccentric and autocratic to the last, she died at Deene Park on 25 May 1915, and was interred in the parish church at Deene, with her first husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 40728


Schiff, Sydney Alfred (1868-1944), novelist, translator, and patron of the arts, was born in London, the illegitimate child of Alfred George Schiff ('c'.1840-1908), a stockbroker, and Caroline Mary Ann Eliza Cavell, 'nee' Scates (1842- 'c'.1896). Caroline had married John Scott Cavell in 1861: he filed for divorce in 1867 on the grounds that Caroline had committed adultery with an unknown person in 1865 and had borne a daughter (Carrie Louise) from this relationship, and that she had cohabited with Alfred Schiff since November 1865. Sydney Schiff's birth was registered under another, untraceable name; the date which the family used as his birthday, 12 December 1868, cannot be confirmed. Caroline married Alfred Schiff in 1869, and they had four further children, one son and three daughters. 
Schiff was educated at G. T. Worsley's Preparatory School at Hillingdon, Middlesex, and at Wellington College, Crowthorne, Berkshire. In 1886 he was unsuccessful in his efforts to enter Oxford to read law, and in 1887 he travelled first to Canada, to work for a friend of his father, and subsequently to the United States, to work for his uncle Charles. Travelling in the States, Schiff met Marion Fulton Canine ('b'. 1867/8, died after 1932), whom he married on 29 August 1889 in Ontario. The couple returned to Europe, but the marriage was not a success. In spite of the family wealth, Marion's expectations of luxury were not fulfilled; moreover, she antagonized her mother-in-law, and mocked Sydney's literary aspirations. The couple separated in 1908; Marion filed for divorce in June 1910, and the decree absolute was declared on 8 May 1911. 
Schiff married Violet Zillah Beddington (1874-1962) on 10 May 1911. Violet and her family were more encouraging of artistic endeavour than Schiff's parents or his first wife, and he turned his attentions to writing fiction and to patronage of the arts. His first novel, 'Concessions' (1913), was published under his own name, but 'War-Time Silhouettes' (1916) and subsequent works appeared under the name Stephen Hudson. The pseudonym was adopted in anticipation of the appearance of 'Richard Kurt' (1919), the first of a sequence of autobiographical novels. Schiff had begun work on these in 1911, but during the First World War he and Violet had enthusiastically read Proust's 'Du cote de chez Swann'. 'A la recherche du temps perdu' provided a precedent for the scale, if not the manner, of Schiff's autobiographical sequence. Schiff later extensively revised and combined several of his novels as 'A True Story' (1930). His championing of Proust in British literary circles also led to his translating 'Time Regained' (1923) after the death of C. K. Scott Moncrieff. 
During the war Schiff developed his role as a patron of the arts, supporting Isaac Rosenberg with small gifts of money and painting materials. He subsidized the short-lived but influential periodical 'Art and Letters' (1918-20), as well as contributing to it and editing one issue. In the post-war period he encouraged and supported other modernist artists and writers through purchases and gifts of money, and through correspondence, hospitality, and conversation. His manner was recalled by Jacob Isaacs as being 'fastidious, punctilious' and 'exquisitely courteous', while his appearance, on account of his moustache and conservatively tailored jackets, was that of a military man (Beddington-Behrens, 59-60). His circle included Wyndham Lewis, T. S. Eliot, Katherine Mansfield, John Middleton Murry, and Frederick Delius. Though the Schiffs retained a base in London, they frequently travelled and lived elsewhere in the south of England and on the continent, and in consequence a substantial body of correspondence has survived. They became more settled with the move to Abinger Manor, near Dorking, in 1934. Their house was damaged by a stray German bomb in August 1944, and the shock may have been a contributing factor in Schiff's death at the Sackville Court Hotel, Kingsway, Hove, Sussex, from heart failure on 29 October 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 40729


Miller, Max (1894-1963), comedian, was born on 21 November 1894 at 43 Hereford Street, Brighton, the second of five children of James Sargent, builder's labourer, and his wife, Alice, 'nee' West. After a childhood marked by considerable poverty and a much disrupted education he left school at twelve, barely literate. He worked in Brighton as milk roundsman, tailor, and golf caddy and spent a short period in London as a motor mechanic. Inspired by the song-and-dance routines of black-face music-hall act G. H. Elliott, he began singing in local public houses, accompanied by his father on the piano, and joined an amateur concert party in 1913. After volunteering for the army in 1914 he was posted first to India, once again joining a concert party, and then in 1915 to Mesopotamia, where he was temporarily blinded by shellfire. After being discharged in 1918 he returned to Brighton and, as Harry Sargent, turned professional with Jack Sheppard's Concert Party as a light comedian. Here he met (Frances) Kathleen Marsh ('b'. 1897/8), a contralto and child impersonator, and they married on 17 February 1921: in the same year, and at her suggestion, he assumed the stage name Max Miller. As well as working in revue he increasingly concentrated on stand-up comedy, appearing as a solo music-hall turn and adding the distinctive Cheeky Chappie to his billing matter. Miller's rise was steady rather than dramatic, but a first booking at the London Palladium in 1929 boosted his career significantly and his appearance at the 1931 royal variety performance symbolized his arrival at the top of his profession. 
Six feet tall with very blue eyes and a good physique, Miller embellished his natural advantages with an outrageously eye-catching costume consisting of multicoloured plus-fours -- most famously he wore red, white, and blue at the 1937 royal variety performance -- set off by white shoes and white trilby. He also exuded a boastful self-confidence on stage, exemplified by such catchphrases as 'This is clever stuff I am giving you lady'. However, his greatest gifts were his sense of timing, use of silences, winks, and gesture, and above all what 'The Times' referred to as 'his engaging intimacy' ('The Times'). Often working from very close to the edge of the stage and drawing audiences in through continual asides and direct address, he created a rapport, almost a comic conspiracy, between performer and audience that has rarely been equalled. 
By the 1930s, sexual innuendo had become Miller's stock-in-trade. It was delivered both through jokes (supposedly selected from his 'white' or 'blue' books, according to the level of indelicacy) and short comic songs which he accompanied on the guitar, a feature originally developed during a South African tour in 1932. Many commentators spoke of a sense of danger when Miller performed, an almost tangible testing of boundaries. This was heightened by a certain sexual ambiguity, with audience howls at his stage garb and rather feminine make-up being met with the challenging cry 'Well, what if I am?'. His act offended some managements, with the Finsbury Park Empire fining him for a quintessentially 'blue book' Millerism concerning 'the girl of eighteen who swallowed a pin but didn't feel the prick until she was twenty-one' (East, 105). However, Miller's popularity and the fact that he was deemed acceptable enough to play royal variety shows in 1931, 1937, and 1950 (his act suitably, although not totally, toned down), suggests that he articulated a strong strain of sexual knowingness within British culture. Although he played throughout Britain and made several foreign tours, he was most frequently seen and most popular in London and the south-east, his speech apparently too fast for some provincial audiences. Despite his Brighton roots (and, initially, accent) he was often seen as the embodiment of 'a real Cockney' ('Performer', 18 Nov 1937), and in this context he perhaps helped construct certain notions of popular metropolitan style and attitude. 
Miller continued to play in revue virtually throughout his career, with 'Apple Sauce' (1940), also featuring Vera Lynn, a particular success. However, his tendency to dominate the stage and a penchant for extended ad libs sometimes limited his effectiveness and tried the patience of fellow actors. He made his screen debut with a much praised cameo portrayal of a song-plugger in the 1933 version of J. B. Priestley's 'The Good Companions'. Although he was to make another thirteen feature films up to 1943, with the exception of 'Educated Evans' (1936) his output was generally commercially and critically disappointing. He played too much to the camera (his success in the 'Good Companions' owed something to director Victor Saville's distracting him with a dummy camera) and tended to reproduce his stage persona rather than developing character. Miller was a regular broadcaster on Radio Luxemburg and on the BBC, although his humour was a constant source of worry. He was 'faded' and subsequently banned for five years by the BBC in 1944 after fears that he was about to repeat a joke for which he had already been severely chastised. 
Miller's career declined gradually from the late 1940s. In the immediate post-war period American comedians dominated the major London variety theatres -- Miller deliberately over-ran in the 1950s royal variety performance in protest at the length of time allotted to Jack Benny -- and in the 1950s the advent of television, which Miller never mastered, proved virtually terminal to the industry. His 1957 live long-playing recording 'Max at the Met' showed a man still capable of outstanding performances but in September 1959 he suffered a heart attack; he performed only infrequently from then on -- his final stage appearance was at Folkestone in December the following year. Apart from a few recording sessions he spent a rather solitary retirement in Brighton. 
A talented golfer, Miller also enjoyed keeping parrots, gardening, and riding. He was not notably popular with his fellow performers. Alongside his dominating personality on stage, he was deemed to be excessively mean, although friends and family claimed that he was quietly generous to various individuals and favourite causes. His wife, Kathleen, was hugely influential in organizing and managing his career (she answered fan mail and even signed his autographs, partly to disguise his poor educational levels) but he felt dominated by her and enjoyed a close relationship with Ann Graham, usually described as his 'organizational secretary', from the 1930s. He died on 7 May 1963 at his home, 25 Burlington Street, Brighton, from complications following influenza, and was cremated at the Downs crematorium, Brighton, on 11 May. Although an increasingly marginal figure at the time of his death, subsequent critical reassessment has secured Miller's reputation as probably the greatest stand-up comedian of his generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 40730


Mary Adelaide, Princess, duchess of Teck (1833-1897), philanthropist, was born Mary Adelaide Wilhelmina Elizabeth on 27 November 1833 in Hanover, the youngest of the three children of the seventh son of George III, Adolphus Frederick, duke of Cambridge (1774-1850), and his wife, Princess Augusta (1797-1889), the daughter of the landgrave of Hesse-Cassel. When she was four, her family moved to Kew, where she had the conventional training of a princess, strong on female accomplishments and the history of the royal family. A lively, imperious girl, she was highly conscious that she derived from the Hanoverian line -- the 'old royal family' -- and not the Saxe-Coburgs. 
The first duty of a princess is marriage, but Princess Mary's obesity must have alarmed prospective suitors (the American minister estimated that she weighed 250 pounds). In 1856 she declined a proposal from the widowed king of Sardinia. Just as she was becoming reconciled to remaining a 'jolly old maid', the prince of Wales (later Edward VII) discovered a handsome young officer in the Austrian army, Prince Francis of Teck (1837-1900), the son of the duke of Wurttemberg. Queen Victoria, perhaps remembering the prince consort's wish to introduce 'strong dark blood' into the royal family, approved of the match. After a brief courtship, the couple married at Kew on 12 June 1866. They lived in Kensington Palace, but in 1870 moved to White Lodge in Richmond Park. They had three sons, among them Alexander Cambridge, earl of Athlone, and a daughter, Princess Victoria Mary (Princess May), who married George, duke of York, later George V. The penniless Prince Francis, who became the first duke of Teck in 1871, lacked employment but found distractions in gardening, feuding over questions of precedence, and arranging the jewels on his wife's dresses. The duchess had a passion for objects but little idea of how to pay for them, although Angela Burdett-Coutts helped out in emergencies. It was a volatile marriage. 
The duchess of Teck was remarkable for her benevolence, and she increased her overdrafts by giving away at least 20 per cent of her annual allowance of $5000 granted by parliament. She came from a notable philanthropic background (her father had been the patron of about thirty institutions), but few other members of the royal family so happily transformed good works into a career. A devout Anglican, her charity, like her jewellery, was highly polished and ready to be worn at a moment's notice. Appeals and begging letters bombarded her daily at White Lodge, and though discriminating, she obliged a large number of supplicants each year. Caught up in the craze for bazaars, she had as many as six of them on the go at any one time. The public loved to see her acting as a shop-woman. She enjoyed the part, but often stipulated that if she attended a sale, she could not be expected to purchase the goods. 
With the years, the duchess was often on charitable parade opening schools, visiting orphanages, and laying foundation stones. She was highly visible in philanthropic causes associated with the queen's jubilee year, 1887. In her prime, she was arguably the hardest working member of the royal family. Her many charities included Dr Barnardo's, the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, the Royal Cambridge Asylum, the St John Ambulance Association, the Young Women's Christian Association, and a dozen or so London hospitals. She was particularly assiduous in her work for the Needlework Guild, which recruited large numbers of middle-class women to make clothes for the poor. Although she had the common touch with the working classes, she could be sharp with ladies who obstructed her charitable administration. As a frequent visitor to the East End, where she was known as 'Fat Mary', she sought to reduce social distress while encouraging deference in the poor. 
The duchess of Teck was a pillar of the monarchy's policy of cultivating civil society. Her association with good causes, like that of other members of the royal family, brought the crown and the middle classes into alliance. It raised the prestige and reaffirmed the importance of the monarchy in a time when it was retiring from national politics. Not the least of her services to the crown was the inculcation of charitable habits in her daughter, later Queen Mary, who further expanded the monarchy's welfare role. The duchess's last public appearance was a visit to the Royal Hospital, Chelsea. She died of heart failure at White Lodge on 27 October 1897, after an operation for a strangulated hernia, and was interred in the royal vault at Windsor Castle on 3 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 40731


Murray, Lady Evelyn Stewart- (1868-1940), Gaelic folklorist and needlewoman, was born on 17 March 1868 at Blair Castle, Perthshire. She was the third daughter of John James Hugh Henry Stewart-Murray, seventh duke of Atholl (1840-1917) and his wife, Louisa (1844-1902), eldest daughter of Sir Thomas Moncreiffe, seventh baronet, of Moncreiffe, Perthshire. Like her three sisters and two surviving brothers, Lady Evelyn had a conventional upbringing, being educated by governesses at Blair Castle. She was presented at court in 1887. After teenage illnesses in 1881 and 1887, she took up the study of Gaelic. Initially encouraged by her father, her enthusiasm burgeoned, and between February and November 1891 she collected 240 Gaelic stories from a wide area of the family estate and west Perthshire, walking many miles, ignoring meals, and working late into the night. Her family considered her activities inappropriate and her enthusiasm disproportionate, and she came into frequent conflict with her parents, especially her mother who was dismayed and infuriated by Evelyn's refusal to participate in the normal social activities of her class. At the end of 1891, Lady Evelyn was sent to Switzerland on what was intended to be a short visit, but she then refused to return to Scotland. In 1895 she settled in Belgium, where she lived on a small allowance from her parents. She never married, but generally had a servant or companion with her. She maintained contact with her siblings through letters and occasional visits, but never saw her parents again, and in 1907 made arrangements so that she need not even correspond with her father. Her interest turned to needlework, and she became both a collector and a highly skilled practitioner, her own work culminating in a piece depicting the British arms, which has been regarded as being perfect of its kind. 
During the First World War Lady Evelyn remained in Belgium, which was suffering terribly under German occupation; her family tried to relieve her privations by sending food and clothing, but her passbook photograph of this period (the only surviving adult likeness) shows the image of a frail, aged lady, although she was only forty-six. After the war, her greatest work completed and her parents dead, she lived on quietly in Belgium, absorbed in her garden, music, and books. To escape the outbreak of the Second World War and in deteriorating health, she returned to Britain, where on 30 July 1940 she died at the house of her brother James at Easter Moncreiffe, Perthshire. She was buried beside her sister Helen at Tirinie on the Atholl family's Perthshire estates. 
Lady Evelyn Stewart-Murray's needlework collection was placed on display at Blair Castle, and her Gaelic stories went to the School of Scottish Studies at the University of Edinburgh. Although one scholar has assessed Lady Evelyn's life as one of 'tragedy and wasted potential' (Jalland, 279), the importance of her work as both needlewoman and collector of folk stories was beginning to be recognized some sixty years after her death. 


