@@@@@


doc= 40733


Grenfell, Ethel Anne Priscilla, Lady Desborough (1867-1952), hostess, was born on 27 June 1867, the daughter and only surviving child of Julian Fane (1827-1870), diplomatist, and fourth son of John Fane, eleventh earl of Westmorland (1784-1859), and his wife, Lady Adine (died 1868), daughter of the sixth Earl Cowper. Both her parents died before she was three, and she used to say that until she was five she never wore anything but black. She was brought up at Panshanger, Hertfordshire, and was heir to that estate of 30,000 acres and a fine collection of pictures. She grew up to be outstandingly pretty, and had numerous admirers, but she chose solid worth in the shape of William Henry (Willy) Grenfell (1855-1945) of Taplow Court, Buckinghamshire, athlete and public servant, whom she married on 17 February 1887; he was created Baron Desborough in 1905. She was an extra woman of the bedchamber to Queen Mary from 1912. 
Ettie Grenfell was notable in three different roles: as a mother, as a brilliant hostess, and as mistress (perhaps platonic) to a series of devoted men. She had five much-loved children (Julian, Billy, Monica, Ivo, and Imogen), in whose lives she played a big part. As a young man Julian Grenfell, who was an uncomfortable mixture of athlete and poet, rebelled against her worldly lifestyle, but he still wrote to her: 'I don't want to see you again ever because everyone after you is like flat soda water' (Desborough, 186). 
Ettie Grenfell was a leading member of the group of politically minded intellectuals known as the Souls, whom she entertained at her famous Saturday to Monday parties at Taplow Court. Arthur Balfour, the central figure, was one of her greatest friends. Osbert Sitwell called her the last of the great whig hostesses and certainly, descended as she was from Lady Melbourne and Lady Palmerston, she was bred for the part; she also looked the part, like a Gainsborough picture, and she talked in the Holland House drawl. She had an insatiable interest in human beings: Sitwell described how every guest when he left Taplow believed he was the only person she had wished to talk to, and not only that, but also that his presence had been the very making of the party. Lord David Cecil described how, seated between the prime minister and a fifteen-year-old schoolboy -- himself -- she lavished her attention and charm equally on both. Max Beerbohm in his skit on Taplow in 'The Seven Men' added a barb: 'exclusive she was but not of publicity. Next to Windsor Castle [Taplow] was the most advertised house in England' (M. Beerbohm, 'The Seven Men', 1919, 62). 
Perhaps due to her traumatic childhood with its many bereavements, Ettie Grenfell had a hunger for admiration, and, not satisfied with the dog-like devotion of her husband -- whom she loved none the less -- she embarked on a series of long-drawn-out love affairs. The first was with George Wyndham (1863-1913); he was succeeded by Evan Charteris (1864-1940) and by John Baring, later second Baron Revelstoke (1863-1929), who was hers for life. Maurice Baring, the novelist, was also enamoured of her and portrays her as Leila, the vamp in 'C' (1924). As she grew older she favoured younger men such as Archie Gordon, who was engaged to Violet Asquith. He was killed in a car crash in 1909. 'Ettie is an ox', commented Margot Asquith, 'she will be made into Bovril when she dies' (Desborough, 185). 
Lady Desborough was soon to need all her toughness. From the outbreak of the 1914 war her two elder sons, Julian and Billy, fought gallantly in France, but in 1915 both of them were killed. To staunch her grief, and as a memorial to her sons, she told the story of their lives, mainly from their letters, in 'Pages from a Family Journal', published privately in 1916. It is a touching yet unsentimental work. Her elder daughter, Monica, also served in the war, as a Red Cross nurse in France. Her youngest son, Ivo, died in a car accident in 1926. 
Between the wars the Desboroughs continued to live in their two great houses, Taplow and Panshanger, giving weekend parties for Arthur Balfour and the thinning ranks of the Souls. Willy died in 1945; an old friend described Ettie in her last years as 'a lady of great age, lying half paralysed in a huge empty house and saying with the heart rending ghost of a gay smile: 'we did have fun didn't we?'' ('The Times', 30 May 1952). She died at Panshanger on 28 May 1952; the funeral was at Hertingfordbury and the burial at Taplow on 1 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 40734


Harrison, Austin Frederic (1873-1928), journalist and journal editor, was born on 27 March 1873 at 1 Southwick Place, London, the second of four sons and a daughter of the positivist writers Frederic Harrison (1831-1923) and his wife, Ethel Bertha Harrison (1851-1916). His first lessons, with his older brother, Bernard, were given by their parents until December 1880. Then, to the boys' delight, their father employed as their tutor the struggling young novelist George Gissing. His visits to the Harrisons' comfortable house at 38 Westbourne Terrace, Bayswater, continued for three years, after which Austin spent three years at St Paul's School, London, and three at Harrow School. He then studied languages in Lausanne, Marburg, and Berlin to prepare for the Foreign Office examination. After failing it in 1896, he was hired by 'The Times' as a favour to his father, and sent to its Berlin office. Its formidable chief, George Saunders, soon had him dismissed, and he was then sent by the 'Manchester Guardian' to the Hague Peace Conference to assist W. T. Stead, who also eased him out. He fared better at Reuters news agency in Berlin, rising to office manager. 
By 1904 the German foreign office's control of information and Reuters' prohibition against opinion in dispatches so frustrated Harrison that he resigned from Reuters and documented his apprehensions about the Kaiser in 'The Pan-Germanic Doctrine' (1904). In London he did freelance journalism until his book caught the eye of Sir Alfred Harmsworth (later Lord Northcliffe), who suddenly installed him as political editor of his prestigious Sunday 'Observer'. Besides weekly leaders, Harrison wrote eye-witness accounts of St Petersburg after 'bloody Sunday' (22 January 1905) and of German political developments in 1906, reprinted as 'England and Germany' in 1907. Towards the end of that year, the unpredictable Harmsworth replaced him with J. L. Garvin, naming Harrison 'The Observer's' literary editor and drama critic of the 'Daily Mail'. 
Finally, at the end of 1909 Harrison attained the position that made his reputation. Sir Alfred Mond (later the first Baron Melchett) invited him to edit the 'English Review', a literary and political monthly which Mond had just purchased. Aware that mismanagement had doomed it under its founding editor, Ford Madox Hueffer (later Ford), Harrison displayed Nietzsche's admonition in his office: 'Be hard, my brothers'. His editorial practices irritated some, but contrary to what is often asserted the 'English Review' maintained its high standards for years. Indeed, Harrison published many of Ford's contributors -- for example, Joseph Conrad, D. H. Lawrence, H. G. Wells, and Norman Douglas, who became his literary sub-editor. He opened the review to women, continental writers, and promising unknowns. By challenging conventional attitudes towards sexuality with the work of writers like Frank Harris he ran afoul of the Vigilance Society, newsagents, and libraries. 'The Spectator' accused him of 'dumping garbage on the nation's doorstep' (8 July 1911). Harrison defended his 'adult review' in a petition signed by fifty well-known writers. 'The Everlasting Mercy' by John Masefield created another storm, but caused the circulation to jump to 18,000. Reducing the magazine's price from 2's'. 6died to 1's'. in 1912 proved advantageous, and Harrison was able to buy out Mond in 1915. 
Under Harrison the 'English Review' supported liberal reforms and military preparedness. When his fears of Germany were validated in 1914, he reprinted his earlier warnings in a best-seller for Stanley Unwin, 'The Kaiser's War' (1914). The death of Harrison's youngest brother in the battle of Festubert (1915) made him especially bitter about the scandal of shortage of munitions. He supported the coalition war cabinet, but was so opposed to Lloyd George's punitive peace terms that he stood quixotically against the prime minister in his own Welsh constituency in 1918. He was an early proponent of a league of nations. 
In 1923 Harrison sold the 'English Review', which was then in decline. Having helped found PEN, an international society of writers, he wished to write books himself. While engaged in newspaper journalism, mainly for the 'Sunday Pictorial', he published 'Lifting Mist' (1924), a novel about school life; 'Pandora's Hope' (1925), speculations about women; and his one enduring book, 'Frederic Harrison: Thoughts and Memories' (1926), a loving portrait of his father. They had resolved their differences over Austin's marriage on 30 April 1914 to the American-born Mary Medora Greening (1880-1980) after her divorce from the pianist Evlyn Howard-Jones. Harrison took a great interest in the education of his children, two daughters and a son. He died at his home, Lychgate House, Seaford, Sussex, of bronchial pneumonia on 13 July 1928, and was cremated on 17 July at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 40735


Charteris, Mary Constance, countess of Wemyss (1862-1937), hostess, was born on 3 August 1862 at 44 Belgrave Square, London, the eldest of the five children of the Hon. Percy Wyndham (1835-1911), second son of the first Lord Leconfield, and his wife, Madeline, 'nee' Campbell (died 1920). 
Mary Wyndham was brought up in an unconventional household that was both aristocratic and artistic. Her father, an MP and master of fox hounds, was an important patron of the Pre-Raphaelites; her mother, a talented decorative artist herself, filled her house with artists and writers. Mary was educated at home by a German governess. Her looks were outstanding. In 1886 she was painted by Edward Poynter as a dark, thoughtful beauty, and in 1899, famously, by Sargent as one of the three Wyndham sisters: above the swirl of satin and tulle, her face is that of a woman of distinction and intelligence with chiselled features and large dark eyes. 
On 9 August 1883 Mary Wyndham, persuaded by her mother, married Hugo Richard Charteris, Lord Elcho (1857-1937), heir to Francis Wemyss-Charteris-Douglas, eighth earl of Wemyss. It was a good match, but not a happy marriage. Lord Elcho could be brilliantly amusing, but he was a tricky character, a compulsive gambler on the stock exchange, and flagrantly unfaithful. His father, an attractive but overbearing man who despised his son, owned Gosford, a grand Georgian house with an extensive estate in East Lothian. His other house, Stanway, in Gloucestershire, he gave to his son on his marriage. Mary Elcho fell in love, not with her husband, but with his house. 
Stanway, built in the seventeenth century of golden Cotswold stone, with a great tithe barn in the garden and a gatehouse that might be, but isn't, by Inigo Jones, was, and remains, a house of immense romantic charm. Mary Elcho decorated it with William Morris wallpapers in the arts and crafts manner, helped by her mother, who was simultaneously moving into Clouds, perhaps the most famous of all the arts and crafts houses. The Elchos' seven children (one died in infancy) were born between 1884 and 1902. Hugo Elcho was often absent, and his gambling left her short of money, but at Stanway his wife ruled as squire, filling the cold house with warmth and life. 
Mary Elcho was the least rank-conscious of the great Edwardian hostesses. At Stanway she mixed Fabians with fashionable young men, working writers with cabinet ministers; but most of her closest friends were members of the group known as the Souls, of which Arthur Balfour (1848-1930) was the central figure. Others were Margot Asquith, Ettie Desborough, Lord Curzon, and Mary's brother, George Wyndham. The Souls were literary, intellectual, and above all conversationalists. The hostess acted as conductor, with the most brilliant male guest playing first violin. In these roles Mary and Arthur excelled. 
For all his charm Balfour found communicating at a deeper level nearly impossible; he needed Lady Elcho's warmth and zest and she became a safety valve, the only person in whom he could even partly confide. The friendship helped Mary Elcho to withstand the difficulties of her marriage, and they corresponded for forty years. Balfour's letters are full of politics, friends, social life, philosophy, and the books he was reading or writing; hers -- and she was the more natural letter writer -- swoop from subject to subject, funny, appreciative, self-mocking, knowing how to entertain. 
But Mary Elcho's warm-bloodedness had its hazards. In 1895, accompanied by her children and their governess, she went to stay in Egypt with her cousin, Wilfrid Scawen Blunt, the poet, drawing-room revolutionary, and notorious philanderer. They camped in the desert and in his diary Blunt noted proudly that between her tent and his 'there were Mary's naked tell-tale footsteps in the sand' (Longford, 312). Mary returned to England pregnant by Blunt, but Hugo behaved according to the conventions of the day and accepted the child as his own. 
In June 1914 Hugo Elcho succeeded his father as ninth earl of Wemyss, and he decided to let Stanway and move to Gosford, where he lived in comfort with his mistress, Lady Angela Forbes. Mary was saved from exile from her beloved Stanway by James Barrie, the playwright, who employed her daughter, the author Lady Cynthia Asquith, as his secretary, and who took over Stanway, with the family in it, every summer. 
In the 1914-18 war the Wemysses lost two sons: the eldest, Ego, in Egypt in 1916, the youngest, Yvo, in France in 1915, when he was just nineteen. To their memory their mother wrote the story of their lives. 'A Family Record' (1932) consists of letters to and from the two sons, skilfully linked by Mary Wemyss's cool, well-written prose. It is a moving work. 
Mary Wemyss's last years were spent at Stanway where, 'dowdily dressed, unconscious of the distinction that ever accompanied her' ('The Times', 3 May 1937), she recreated the Stanway magic for another generation of Charteris children. In the spring of 1937 she was taken ill at Stanway and died in a Cheltenham nursing home on 29 April. Her burial took place at Stanway on 1 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 40737


Kerr, Cecil Chetwynd, marchioness of Lothian (1808-1877), Roman Catholic convert, was born on 17 April 1808 at Ingestre Hall, Staffordshire, the daughter of Charles Chetwynd-Talbot, second Earl Talbot of Hensol (1777-1849), and his wife, Frances Thomasine (1782-1819), daughter of Charles Lambart of Beau Parc, co. Meath, Ireland. She was sixth child and younger daughter in a family of twelve children. Her mother died when she was only eleven; her father proved an attentive parent, encouraging her study of Latin and the 'Commentaries' of Blackstone. He raised in her his own moderate high-churchmanship to respect the sabbath, the 'Book of Common Prayer', and the established church. She became a woman whose vitality was combined with a natural reserve, striking rather than beautiful, with a strong sense of moral duty. On 12 July 1831 she married John William Robert Kerr, seventh marquess of Lothian (1794-1841), and they made their home in Scotland, at Newbattle Abbey, Midlothian, although she preferred their house at Monteviot in Roxburghshire. They had five sons and two daughters before the marquess died suddenly at his estate at Blickling, Norfolk, on 14 November 1841. Cecil Lothian never married again and began to devote herself to the care of her children, to the very capable management of the estate, and to a new sense of religion. 
Abandoning the religion of her father and husband, with its emphasis on establishment, Lady Lothian became one of the earliest sponsors and financiers of Tractarianism in Scotland. This took the form of her building and endowing a chapel for the Scottish Episcopal church at Jedburgh, near Monteviot. She supervised its construction carefully, building it in the Gothic style approved of by the Camden Ecclesiological Society and Tractarians. It included a stone altar redolent of the Tractarian doctrine of eucharistic sacrifice. She also insisted on the almost unprecedented use of the Scottish communion office, the nonjuring office of eighteenth-century Episcopalians which was preferred by many Tractarians as being more explicitly Catholic than the 'Book of Common Prayer'. The church's consecration on 15 August 1843 was attended by leading high-churchmen and Tractarians, including Walter Farquhar Hook and John Keble. But Lady Lothian became increasingly uncertain about the catholicity of Anglicanism. Her allegiance was gradually undermined by the successive secessions to Rome of John Henry Newman in 1845; the chaplain at Dalkeith who was her spiritual adviser; and, finally, by Henry Manning in 1851, as a consequence of the Gorham judgment. Instructed by Manning, she became a Roman Catholic in June 1851. Her conversion imperilled her guardianship of her sons, as the other guardians appointed by her husband's will sought to have them removed from her custody lest she attempt to convert them to Rome. (They were not concerned about the religion of her daughters.) In a midnight adventure, she escaped from Newbattle Abbey with her younger children, taking them to Edinburgh where they were received into the Roman Catholic church. Her eldest son, William, the eighth marquess, was away at Oxford at the time, and remained a staunch Episcopalian. 
Lady Lothian now became a sponsor of Roman Catholicism in Scotland. She built a Roman Catholic church at Dalkeith, began regular visits to Rome, and undertook extensive charitable work in Edinburgh assisted by her friend Charlotte, duchess of Buccleuch, who would eventually convert in 1860. One of Lady Lothian's daughters, Cecil, became a Sacred Heart nun in the convent in Paris in 1859. Having established a connection with the Jesuits in Farm Street, London, Lady Lothian encouraged their opening a church in Edinburgh, and they eventually took over the church at Dalkeith in 1861. She was active in the Refugee Benevolent Fund in London, established as a consequence of the Franco-Prussian War of 1871, but her relief work in England was never as much her own as the missions in Jedburgh and Dalkeith. Her son Lord Walter Kerr (1839-1927), later admiral of the fleet and senior naval lord, was a companion when his naval life allowed, but his marriage in 1873 brought a new loneliness in her final years. In 1877 Lady Lothian went to Rome for the jubilee of Pius IX and died there on 13 May. Her body was buried at the foot of the altar in the church at Dalkeith. 


@@@@@


doc= 40740


Warton, Jane (bap. 1724, d. 1809), author, was the daughter of Thomas Warton (1688-1745) and his wife, Elizabeth (1691-1762), daughter of Joseph Richardson, rector of Dunsfield, Surrey, and sister to the 'two learned brothers' Thomas Warton (1728-1790) and Joseph Warton (bap. 1722, d. 1800). She was baptized on 20 August 1724 at Basingstoke, Hampshire, where her father was vicar and master of the grammar school. She contributed a poem on her father's death, 'Ode on the Death of the Author, by a Lady', to the volume of 'Poems on Several Occasions' which her brothers produced in 1748 in an effort to raise money to clear their father's debts. Her literary interests were marked and her critical abilities were respected within the family. In 1753 Joseph invited her to write an essay for Johnson's 'Adventurer', and 'Adventurer', no. 87, 'Politeness a necessary auxiliary to knowledge and virtue', may be by her. Also in 1753 she began working as a governess to the two daughters of William Thoyts of Whitechapel and Carshalton. She remained close to Joan ('b'. 1747) and Mary Anne ('b'. 1749) for the rest of her life. Her first major publication was the anonymous 'Letters Addressed to Two Young Married Ladies, on the Most Interesting Subjects' (2 vols., 1782) which was addressed to them. 
Though anonymous, Warton's writing was not secret: Joseph wrote to her in 1781: 'I am rejoiced to find you are becoming one of Us -- Authors I mean. Depend on my doing my Utmost with Dodsley' (Bodl. Oxf., Don c 75, fol. 38). Like her friend Hester Mulso Chapone she found her way into becoming 'one of Us -- Authors' by writing prescriptive literature aimed specifically at women. The 'Letters' concern themselves with questions of morality and behaviour, with a particular emphasis on the role of the mother (or governess) in child-rearing. They advocate early learning; stress the duties of life and the necessity of religion, humility, and compassion; and pay particular attention to girls' education in a way which foreshadows Mary Wollstonecraft's later work. In 1783 James Dodsley published her novel 'Peggy and Patty, or, The Sisters of Ashdale', in four volumes. This novel both makes clear her identification with the Wollstonecraftian feminism of her own time and, in its sympathy for the fallen woman, anticipates the preoccupations of Victorian feminists. It develops the idea expressed in 'Letters' that virtuous women should show charity to 'unfortunate women', the seduced and abandoned, because 'the villainy of men' knows no bounds. It is only 'particular circumstances' that protect fortunate women: 'these wretched women were once happy and innocent as yourselves' (Warton, 'Letters', 1.35). Peggy and Patty are happy, innocent country curate's daughters who go to London to find work and are lured into a brothel, drugged, raped, ruined, and turned into courtesans. The attractions of the courtesan's life are well shown: as the madam of the brothel says, 'who lives so grand as a kept lady? How infinitely is her situation to be preferred to a poor devil of a wife' (Warton, 'Peggy and Patty', 1.140). If the 'unbridled lust' of men is the initial danger, it is women's subsequent economic dependence on men in a society that offers so few employment opportunities that destroys them. Once turned off, Peggy and Patty have only the streets to go to and only their bodies to trade. In a number of affecting scenes they sicken, starve, and die in a garret. Though sentimental, the novel reveals a caustic impatience with the double standard. It is vividly written and outspoken. 
Very little is known about Jane Warton's life, and the observations of others build a picture of an 'unfortunate girl', who had 'a Warton Genius, totally perverse in worldly affairs' (H. Reid, 'Jenny: the fourth Warton', 'N&Q', 231, 1986, 84). Warton died, unmarried, at Wickham, Hampshire, on 3 November 1809. In her obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' it was declared that she was disabled by rheumatism and could 'only move on her knees'. This, while metaphorically suggestive, seems most unlikely on the evidence available. 


@@@@@


doc= 40741


Kirby, Mary (1817-1893), writer on natural history, was the second of five children of John Kirby (died 1848), a prosperous Leicester hosiery manufacturer, and Sarah Bentley, an invalid whose death in 1835 left Mary and her elder sister in charge of the household. Religion and education were family priorities; Mrs Kirby took the children to Robert Hall's Baptist chapel and Mary was sent to schools in Market Harborough and Leicester. Mary also received instruction in languages from a family friend and went to lectures at the local mechanics' institute. 
Seaside holidays at Ramsgate first shaped Mary Kirby's interest in collecting and studying plants, and local flora later became her focus. In 1840, recuperating from an injury, she spent time in Charnwood Forest near Loughborough, and botany was both an occupation and a resource. She became caught up in the mid-century 'botanical mania'. Aided by clergyman-naturalist Andrew Bloxam she compiled and edited the first 'Flora of Leicestershire', issued as a preliminary list in 1848 with blank pages for local botanists to enter records and observations. The definitive issue in 1850 groups more than 900 flowering plants and ferns according to the orders of the natural system, and cites localities and details about habitats. Notes of general and medical interest were prepared by Mary Kirby's youngest sister, 
After the death of John Kirby in 1848 the unmarried Kirby sisters were able to stay for two years rent-free in the family home in Friar Lane, Leicester, and later obtained the freehold. Long-term economic planning was necessary, however, and Mary and Elizabeth began to 'plot and plan for book-writing' (M. Kirby, 70). With Mary's botanical knowledge and Elizabeth's writing skills, they embarked on a career as joint authors of juvenile and natural history books. 
Mary and Elizabeth Kirby worked as a sisterly writing team for twenty-five years, and produced a steady stream of more than twenty-five publications that included illustrated books, serial tales for magazines, school books, and fiction of an improving kind. In 'The Discontented Children, and how they were Cured' (1854), their first original story book, the children of a gentleman and a gamekeeper are given the opportunity to experience each other's lives; the rustic children, restored to their parents after adventures and hardships, were 'only too happy to find themselves once more among their equals and in their proper station'. The second edition, in 1859, contains illustrations by Phiz. Their natural history books, written principally for young readers, were informational rather than moralizing. 'Plants of the Land and Water' (1857), one of two of their books issued in the 'Observing Eye' series, presents botanical information and 'curious facts' about the uses of plants, in the form of 'Short and Entertaining Chapters on the Vegetable World'. Their books on insects were 'Caterpillars, Butterflies, and Moths' (1857) and 'Sketches of Insect Life' (1874). 'The Sea and its Wonders' (1873), with short informational chapters on topics such as the Gulf Stream and the turtle, aimed to 'allure' the young reader to study 'the great book of Nature, rather than to perplex him with a strictly scientific arrangement'. 'Chapters on Trees' (1873), a 'Popular Account of Their Nature and Uses', aims for a general rather than juvenile readership, and is well stocked with botanical information as well as history and folklore about trees from around the world. 
During their long and successful joint career as Victorian professional women writers, the Kirby sisters published with Thomas Jarrold, Griffith and Farran, Thomas Nelson, and Routledge. Mary Kirby wrote that 'Earned money seems always the sweetest and best of any; and we were glad to find a ready sale for our manuscripts, and also to put the profits into our pockets' (M. Kirby, 165). She recalls in her autobiography that they once wrote: 'a humourous piece of what would happen a hundred years hence; how the men would be thrust out from all the professions by the women, and even the government of the country would be carried on by women, and in the houses of parliament there would not be a man to be seen. (ibid., 126)' Mary and Elizabeth Kirby lived in Norwich and Great Yarmouth after 1855. Elizabeth was in delicate mental health, but they maintained a regular writing schedule. On 1 August 1860 Mary, aged forty-three, married Henry Gregg (died 1881), curate of a church in Norwich, with Elizabeth as a witness. The sisters bought the living of Brooksby, Leicestershire, for Gregg, and they all lived together in Melton Mowbray in Six Elms, a house built for them. Mary and Elizabeth continued writing their books together, and the latter also issued four titles separately: 'Steps Up the Ladder, or, The Will and the Way' (1862), 'Dame Buckle and her Pet Johnny' (1867), 'Lost Cities Brought to Light' (1871), and 'Margaret's Choice' (1872). She died on 23 June 1873, at Six Elms. 
Mary Kirby was widowed in 1881, and money troubles ensued. Her autobiography, 'Leaflets from my Life: a Narrative Biography' (1887), a rich source book of local history and mid-nineteenth-century social history, is filled with detail about family connections and social routines in the middle-class household of her youth and adult life. She died on 15 October 1893 at her home in Melton Mowbray, aged seventy-six, and was buried in the same grave as her husband and her sister near the wall of the Brooksby church. Her will, dated 27 January 1891, left an estate of $730 to her only surviving sister, Mme Katharine Coulin. 


@@@@@


doc= 40742


Kent, Elizabeth (1790-1861), botanist and writer, was born in Brighton on 13 March 1790, a younger daughter of Ann Kent, court milliner. Nothing is known about her father; when Bessy (as she was known at home) was thirteen her widowed mother married Rowland Hunter, a bookseller in St Paul's Churchyard. Although she had only a dame-school education, Elizabeth Kent had clear intellectual interests, and studied languages and botany. The marriage of her older sister Marianne to Leigh Hunt brought her into lifelong contact with the Romantic writers, including Mary Shelley. She was Hunt's confidante and later his principal correspondent during Hunt's stay in Italy, 1822-5; his sonnet 'To Miss K.' (1818) asks 'what sylvan homage would it please your Leafyship to have?' Until 1836 she lived with her mother and stepfather, where, she later recalled, she passed much of her time in writing. 
Elizabeth Kent combined her literary and botanical interests by writing about plants, producing books and essays meant to excite an interest in flowers among those who were otherwise 'deterred by the terms of science which met them at the threshold'. 'Flora domestica, or, The Portable Flower-Garden' (1823, 1825) is an engaging book about container-gardening. Addressed to town-dwelling 'lovers of nature', it lists flowers, shrubs, and small trees that can be grown in pots and tubs, gives horticultural tips about soil, cultivation, and watering, and includes anecdotes on topics such as the introduction of species into Europe. Kent cites many verses by classical and contemporary poets, including Keats, Shelley, and Charlotte Smith. Her book represented the contemporary Romantic suburban aesthetic, and was widely praised by Byron, Coleridge, and Clare. In 'Sylvan Sketches, or, A Companion to the Park and the Shrubbery' (1825), a compendium of information about trees and shrubs, she celebrates plants because 'there is something beyond mere use, something beyond mere beauty, in their influence upon the human mind'. Her chapter on the maple tree, for example, successfully blends botany and poetry by surveying different species of 'Acer', describing North American sugaring (tapping sap from the sugar maple to make syrup), and interpolating verses from Virgil, Sidney, Cowper, and Clare. 
Elizabeth Kent also integrated botany into her other activities. She wrote a series of introductory articles for young people on Linnaean botanical nomenclature and systematics in the 'Magazine of Natural History' (1828-30), and advertised lessons for young ladies 'in the science of botany' ('The Times', 7 Aug 1828). She wrote a section on botany in 'The Young Ladies' Book' (1829), and updated Galpine's 'Synoptical Compendium of British Botany' (1834) and Irving's 'Botanical Catechism' (1835). Other writing included a book of tales for children, reviews for J. C. Loudon's 'Magazine of Natural History' during the late 1820s, and many unsigned articles and reviews for Leigh Hunt's 'Indicator' (1819-20) and 'The Tatler' (1830-32). 
Elizabeth Kent was left without provision after the death of her mother and the failure of Hunter's business in 1836. She worked as a governess from 1837 to 1846, and received a legacy of $300 from her employer, Mr Bind. This was followed by a period of illness and an unsuccessful attempt to establish a seaside home for young invalids at St Leonards. By 1849, with impaired sight, she was dependent on friends 'of that class having more mind than money' (Kent to Royal Literary Fund, 1855). She applied to the Royal Literary Fund for assistance in 1855, and detailed her 'extreme privation' and 'delicate circumstances'. She endeavoured to support herself as a writer, but found herself 'a stranger in the literary world'. A second application, in 1858, records a fruitless attempt to interest a publisher in a manuscript about 'a visit to the principal watering-places on the southern coast' with botanical information. Leigh Hunt supplied testimonials about her 'impoverished circumstances' and 'high respectability'. At the time of her last application, in 1860, Kent was living with her nephew Thornton Hunt and his large family at 39 Bedford Street, Strand, with no money for clothing, laundry, and medicine. She died in 1861. 


@@@@@


doc= 40748


Price, Henry Habberley (1899-1984), philosopher, was born in Neath, Glamorgan, on 17 May 1899, the son of Henry Habberley Price, a mechanical engineer, and his wife, Katherine, 'nee' Lombard. He was educated at Winchester College and then served in the Royal Flying Corps (later the RAF) during 1917-19. After the war he proceeded to New College, Oxford, as a scholar to read 'literae humaniores'. He took a first in 1921. In the following year he was elected a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, and he was an assistant lecturer at Liverpool University in 1922 and 1923. During this period he also spent some time at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he acquainted himself with the philosophical approaches of G. E. Moore and C. D. Broad; these he found more congenial than the idealism which still dominated Oxford philosophy. In 1924 he was elected a fellow and lecturer in philosophy at Trinity College, Oxford, where he remained until 1935; in that year he was elected Wykeham professor of logic and moved to New College. 
Price specialized in epistemology, particularly the problem of knowledge of the external world. In 1932 he published 'Perception', which attempted to articulate a non-phenomenalist alternative to the causal theory of perception. Phenomenalism regarded objects as 'permanent possibilities of sensation' whereas Price refused to identify families of sense data with the physical objects which cause them. Instead he pursued a phenomenological method to articulate a relation of 'belonging' between sense data and physical objects. 
Price continued his research into the philosophy of perception with his 'Hume's Theory of the External World' (1940), a sustained and sympathetic reading of a much neglected section of Hume's 'Treatise'. Hume had been unable to reconcile sensory experience of an external world with sceptical reason, whereas Price envisaged a resolution of these two faculties through the concept of the imagination which makes perception of the material world possible. According to this interpretation the imagination plays a role akin to Kant's transcendental ego. Hence it sees Hume as somewhat closer to Kant than is usually acknowledged. 
Price also explored the philosophy of thinking, and published his findings in 'Thinking and Experience' (1953), an analysis of the nature of concepts and their relation to sense experience. He took issue both with the symbolistic theory, which identified conceptual thought with the use of symbols, and with the classical account -- attributed to Descartes, Locke, and Kant -- which regarded concepts as mental entities. Instead Price proposed that concepts are dispositions rather than entities and that memory is crucial to conceptual cognition. 
Price was regarded as an outstanding lecturer and a considerate tutor and supervisor. J. O. Urmson, an undergraduate at Corpus Christi College in the 1930s, remembered Price as the teacher 'who at the time young philosophers wanting to break out a bit went to... a rather left-wing example of the traditional school' (private information). Price retired from the Wykeham chair in 1959. His successor, A. J. Ayer, had earlier attended and been influenced by his lectures. In his inaugural lecture Ayer spoke of Price's influence: 'In the sombre philosophical climate of the Oxford of that time, here was a bold attempt to let in air and light: a theory of perception in which the principles of British empiricism were developed with a rigour and attention to detail which they had in that context never received. (Ayer, 79)' After retiring from his chair Price continued to be philosophically active. He was a visiting professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, in 1962 and pursued his interest in religion. His Gifford lectures given in 1960 (published in 1969 as 'Belief') examined theories of belief and considered the implications of his arguments for propositions on the immortality of the soul and the existence of God. 'Contra' the positivist doctrines made popular by Ayer which regarded such propositions as meaningless, Price argued that there is evidence for both the soul and God from the existence of paranormal phenomena. 
Price was interested in parapsychology -- telepathy, clairvoyance, telekinesis, apparitions, hauntings, mediumship, the psychic ether, and survival after death -- throughout his career, but he never attempted to integrate it with his more orthodox philosophical work. He also gave the Sarum lectures in Oxford in 1970 on similar themes, later published as 'Essays on the Philosophy of Religion' (1972). A further volume of this work was published posthumously in 1995 as 'Philosophical Interactions with Parapsychology'. In 1939 he was president of the Society for Psychical Research. 
Price, who never married, lived with his sister, Katy, in Headington, Oxford, where he enjoyed his hobbies of watercolour painting and ornithology. Although a shy man he was a generous host to former pupils and colleagues from abroad, organizing bird-watching expeditions and visits into the woods at night to hear nightingales. He died at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 26 November 1984. 


@@@@@


doc= 40749


Dingwall, Eric John (1891?-1986), anthropologist and librarian, was born in Nuwara Eliya, Ceylon, the only son of Alexander Harvey Dingwall (1860-1936), a tea planter, and his wife, Catherine Emily, formerly Marson (1863?-1932). He seems not to have known his date of birth, but for official purposes would put down 21 April 1891. His death certificate gives his year of birth as 1890. He was educated at Fairleigh School, Weston-super-Mare (his father had retired there), then privately, and at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he read modern languages, taking his BA in 1915 and his MA in 1918. From 1915 to 1918 he worked in Cambridge University Library, becoming an assistant librarian. In 1918 he married Doris Dunn, daughter of S. P. Dunn JP, of Bradfield, Berkshire. 
Dingwall came from an affluent family and was astute in financial matters (he left an estate valued at $678,246). This enabled him to engage freely in his many unusual interests, of which the earliest was perhaps conjuring -- he joined the Magic Circle in 1909 and ultimately became an honorary vice-president. Related was his interest in the performances of mediums and clairvoyants. In 1920 he joined the Society for Psychical Research (SPR) and in 1921 he went to New York as director of the department of physical phenomena in the American SPR. From 1922 to 1927 he was research officer of the SPR in London. In these two capacities he sat with many notable American and European mediums (mainly physical mediums). His most important reports (all of them negative or noncommittal) are to be found in the 'Proceedings' of the SPR. In 1922 with Harry Price he republished, with an added bibliography, 'Revelations of a Spirit Medium' (1891), a classic expose of the methods of fraudulent mediums, and in 1927 he brought out a brief handbook, 'How to Go to a Medium'. 
Dingwall's interests and outlook were very different from those of the SPR's ruling body, and disagreements mounted over apparently successful experiments on telepathy for which the classical scholar, Gilbert Murray, had been the subject. Dingwall felt that essential control conditions had been neglected because of Murray's great eminence. In 1927 his tenure as research officer was allowed to lapse. Meanwhile Dingwall had become increasingly interested in anthropology and the study of aberrant human customs, particularly sexual ones. In 1925 and 1927-9 he registered as a research student at the University of London, where his anthropological work, published as 'Male Infibulation' (1925), 'The Girdle of Chastity' (1931), and 'Artificial Cranial Deformation' (1931), obtained him a PhD (1929) and a DSc (1932). He was the 'editor' (really the translator and reviser) of the work by H. H. Ploss, M. Bartels, and P. Bartels, 'Woman: an Historical, Gynaecological and Anthropological Compendium' (3 vols., 1935). All these works, like most of Dingwall's writings, are permeated with great quantities of bibliographical information. During this period he also published two highly characteristic short books, 'Ghosts and Spirits in the Ancient World' (1930) and 'How to Use a Large Library' (1933). 
From 1935 (by which time his marriage had ended) to 1937 Dingwall travelled extensively in Europe, North and South America, and the West Indies, studying 'rare and queer customs', and 'abnormal mental phenomena'. From 1941 to 1945 he was attached to the Ministry of Information and to a department of the Foreign Office, but always remained very secretive about this work. 
In 1946 Dingwall offered his services to the department of printed books of the British Museum, and was appointed an honorary assistant keeper. He worked principally on the 'private case' of erotic material, to which he added many rarities, often at his own expense. In addition he dealt by post and telephone with numerous enquiries on out of the way subjects, and went on doing so from his home when age made it harder for him to travel. He remained closely in touch with the scientific and medical literature on sexual behaviour, normal, abnormal, and criminal, and would occasionally give lectures on the last to groups of police officers. 
Psychical research, which Dingwall saw as a key area in an ongoing struggle between rationality and superstition, continued to intrigue and exasperate him. He was strongly but not undeviatingly sceptical about psychic phenomena. His post-war publications included 'Some Human Oddities' (1947) and 'Very Peculiar People' (1950), which contain, 'inter alia', sympathetic essays, with extensive bibliographies, on such psychic enigmas as St Joseph of Copertino, D. D. Home, and Eusapia Palladino. His trenchant scepticism found expression in 'The Haunting of Borley Rectory' (with K. M. Goldney and T. H. Hall, 1956) and 'Four Modern Ghosts' (with T. H. Hall, 1958). 'Abnormal Hypnotic Phenomena: a Survey of Nineteenth-Century Cases' (4 vols., 1967-8), which he edited and in considerable part wrote, raised the scholarly history of mesmerism and hypnosis to a new level. In 1956 came his most commercially successful book, 'The American Woman', an unflattering social and historical analysis which was much resented by its targets, but sold well (no doubt to American men). 
On 13 December 1954 Dingwall married a psychologist, Dr Norah Margaret Davis (died 1976), daughter of Edgar William Davis, clergyman, and a year or two later left Cambridge (where he had lived for over twenty years) to set up home in a pleasant small estate at Crowhurst in Sussex. He had become rather well known. Few people could claim to be an authority on so many different subjects, and few were so ready to pass on information and references. He had, however, certain eccentricities. He was an avid and enterprising collector not just of books, but of photographs, clocks, automata, porcelain, workshop tools, and all sorts of oddments. It was typical of him that he once bought the wreck of a magnificent cage of automaton singing birds from a passing rag-and-bone man, restored it, and ultimately presented it to the British Museum. He tended to see persons and issues in black or white, and would scent plots, deception, and double-dealing rather readily. He did not hesitate to make these opinions known, but beneath his edgy and combative exterior lay a real vein of generosity and kindness. 
Dingwall was blue-eyed, of middle height, and spare build, and he possessed a restless energy. Though short-sighted, he was keenly observant. He had a sharp and incisive voice, and was an excellent public speaker and a highly entertaining conversationalist. The death of his wife on Christmas eve 1976, soon after they had moved into a flat in St Leonards, Sussex, was a crippling blow, but with great fortitude Dingwall stayed on alone, working steadily until his own death from heart disease in St Helen's Hospital, Hastings, on 7 August 1986. He arranged to have his carotid artery severed prior to cremation in Hastings. 
Dingwall's massive card indexes, his notebooks, and newspaper cuttings, were left to the University of London Library. The bulk of his remaining estate was divided between the British Library and the horological section of the British Museum's department of medieval and later antiquities. 


@@@@@


doc= 40751


Myers, Arthur Thomas (1851-1894), physician, was born on 16 April 1851 at St John's parsonage, Keswick, Cumberland. He was the third and youngest child of the Revd Frederic Myers (1811-1851), perpetual curate of St John's, Keswick, and his wife, Susan Harriet, 'nee' Marshall (1811-1896). In July 1851 his father died, and his mother, who came from a wealthy family, moved with her three sons first to Blackheath and then to Cheltenham, where all three were sent as day boys to Cheltenham College. Arthur was a good all-rounder, who played cricket and rackets for the school. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1869, became a scholar of the college in 1872, and in 1873 obtained a first class in the classical tripos and a second class in the natural sciences tripos. He also won the Winchester reading prize. He was captain of the college cricket eleven, and gained a half blue at real tennis. After graduating Myers turned to medicine, studying at Cambridge and at St George's Hospital, London. He obtained his LSA in 1879, a Cambridge MD in 1881, and his MRCP in 1882. He settled in London, becoming house physician and medical registrar at St George's and physician to the Belgrave Hospital for Children. He also practised privately, and he published several rather routine medical papers. 
Myers's interests lay particularly in mental disorders and their treatment by hypnotism. Hypnotism, little known in Britain, was attracting considerable attention in France. In and after 1881 he paid a number of visits to Charcot, Bernheim, and other leading French authorities, with many of whom he established friendly personal relations. His own publications on the subject, though neither numerous nor lengthy, are moderate in judgement and exceptionally well informed. No British medical man knew more about contemporary European hypnotism, or about the history of mesmerism and hypnotism; he wrote the article on James Esdaile for the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 
Related to his interest in hypnotism was his involvement in the Society for Psychical Research (founded in 1882), of which his eldest brother, Frederic William Henry Myers, to whom he was very close, was a leading member. A well-established tradition held that the hypnotic, or mesmeric state is especially conducive to telepathy and clairvoyance, and Arthur Myers was involved as participant or adviser in various of the society's early hypnotic experiments. His activities were mocked, though not unkindly, in J. K. Stephen's poem 'To A.T.M.', a clever parody of Frederic Myers's 'St Paul'. He was also often consulted on the psychopathological issues which can arise in psychical investigations. On behalf of the society he and his brother assembled an outstanding collection, still extant, of rare books, periodicals, and pamphlets on mesmerism and hypnosis. 
Myers's hypnotic studies and his interests in psychical research came fruitfully together in a long, thoughtful, and frequently cited paper, 'Mind-cure, faith-cure, and the miracles of Lourdes', which he and Frederic published in the 'Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research' in 1893. The paper discussed the kind of evidence that reports of allegedly miraculous cures ought to offer, presented a selection of the most striking and better attested cures, and showed that very similar cures had been obtained without any hint of the miraculous. In the great majority of the 'miraculous' cases there was inadequate testimony or the likelihood of misdiagnosis, sometimes combined with a strong element of suggestion. 
Various photographs of Arthur Myers survive, but no description of him. Although a bachelor, he was a kindly and sociable if occasionally brusque individual, an enthusiastic cricket and tennis player, and a keen walker, skater, and climber. His many friends included several of his most eminent contemporaries. His undoubted abilities as a physician (he became an FRCP in 1893) could have led to a distinguished medical career. But, despite valiant endeavours to remain cheerful and positive, his life was increasingly overshadowed by a then hopeless malady. His first slight attacks of what was diagnosed as 'petit mal' epilepsy took place in 1871. At first they amounted to no more than a brief but overwhelming absorption 'in a vivid and unexpected recollection'. He also had a few 'grand mal' attacks. However it was the so-called 'petit mal' which gradually disabled him. It steadily progressed into more frequent episodes of what would now be termed psychomotor epilepsy, involving superficially intelligent but really disordered sequences of actions for which he had afterwards no recollection. On rare occasions these seem to have resulted in anti-social behaviour. He gave up medical practice in October 1893. In 1877 and subsequently he consulted J. Hughlings Jackson, the celebrated neurologist. Jackson published two papers (Jackson, 1889; Jackson and Colman, 1898) largely about Myers's case. He made extensive use of Myers's own notes. These papers are still regarded as milestones in the development of modern ideas about temporal lobe epilepsy. 
On the morning of Tuesday, 9 January 1894 Myers was found at his London home, 2 Manchester Square, in a coma apparently induced by some narcotic medicine. He died the following day, and was cremated at Woking five days later. At the inquest the possibility of suicide was clearly in the air. But testimony was heard that he had been in unusually good spirits on the Monday afternoon and evening; he was known to have regularly taken narcotics, and there was no suggestion of financial worries (his estate was later valued at $28,056). His death was attributed to asphyxia during epileptic coma, accelerated by a dose of narcotic medicine while suffering from incipient Bright's disease. Hughlings Jackson (who chanced to be Myers's neighbour) assisted at the post-mortem, seeking the temporal lobe lesion which he anticipated. He was rewarded by the discovery of a very small cavity in the left mesial temporal lobe -- a tiny thing (if indeed it underlay Myers's epilepsy) to have ruined the career of a sensitive, brave, and intelligent man. 


@@@@@


doc= 40752


Bentinck, Margaret Cavendish, duchess of Portland (1715-1785), collector of art and natural history specimens and patron of arts and sciences, was born on 11 February 1715 in London, the only surviving child of Edward Harley, later second earl of Oxford (1689-1741), and his wife, Henrietta Cavendish Harley (1694-1755), daughter of John Holles, duke of Newcastle upon Tyne (1662-1711), and Lady Margaret Cavendish (1661-1716). The marriage of Margaret's parents in 1713 had been eagerly sought by the bridegroom's father, Robert Harley, first earl of Oxford. The bride brought with her great wealth, along with the Cavendish estates. 
Margaret Harley soon became a favourite of the literary circle surrounding the Harleys. Matthew Prior addressed verses to her when she was five beginning, 'My noble, lovely, little Peggy', which have often been described as the finest poem to a child in English. As an infant Margaret was painted with her mother by Bernard Lens III (1681-1740), who subsequently gave her art lessons. To her marriage, on 11 June 1734, to William Bentinck, second duke of Portland (1709-1762), she brought a dowry of $20,000, about half the value of her husband's estates. Her parents had considered many offers made to them for her hand, and fixed on Portland as the candidate least prone to fashionable vices. Fortunately for the marriage, the duke, unlike Margaret's father and two sons, managed to avoid ruinous expense. 
The couple settled at Bulstrode, near Gerrards Cross in Buckinghamshire, where the duchess paid special attention to the gardens. For the next fifty years she devoted her time and energy, and much of her wealth, to the formation of an immense collection embracing natural history, in its broadest sense, and the fine arts, stored at Bulstrode. It was, eventually, the largest in Britain, and possibly in Europe, exceeding that of Sir Hans Sloane deposited in the British Museum. She developed a passion for botany and cultivated the friendship of the plantsman Philip Miller (1691-1771) and the botanical illustrator Georg Dionysius Ehret (1708-1770), who produced for her many of his most notable paintings of British plants. She also employed John Lightfoot (1735-1788), the naturalist, as chaplain and librarian. Together they created a herbarium, now at Kew. One of her special interests lay in seashells: through Peter Collinson (1694-1768) she obtained drawings of American shells by William Bartram (1739-1823). Her fondness for botany also brought her into contact with Joseph Banks and Daniel Solander, who visited her after their return from Cook's first voyage. The duchess kept bees and hares, as well as maintaining an aviary and a menagerie. 
To care for her five surviving children (a daughter was to die aged sixteen), the duchess employed Elizabeth Elstob (1683-1756), the pioneering Anglo-Saxon scholar, as governess from 1739 until her death. From the age of seventeen Margaret had been on close terms with Elizabeth Robinson (1720-1800), better known as Mrs Montagu, 'Queen of the Blues'. Together they engaged in many pursuits, intellectual and social, until their relationship declined about 1753. Another friend was the poet Edward Young (1683-1765), for whom the duchess tried unsuccessfully to obtain a deanery from the duke of Newcastle. Young was likewise unable to persuade her into admiring the novels of his friend Samuel Richardson; late in life she expressed her much greater delight in Fanny Burney's work 'Cecilia' ('Diary and Letters', 2.254). 
Mary Delany (1700-1788) was a close friend from youth. Through Mary's brother, who lived near Wootton Hall, Northampton, the duchess met and generously befriended Jean Jacques Rousseau who took refuge there for a few months in 1766-7. She sent him plants and books, and in September 1766 he joined her on an expedition to the Peak District in search of wild plants. After the death of the duke in 1762 and of her own husband in 1768, Mrs Delany passed every summer at Bulstrode, where in 1772 she devised her method of cutting flowers in paper, allegedly deceiving the duchess with her initial collage into taking it for a real geranium. The two women botanized and ornamented a grotto at Bulstrode with an ever-increasing collection of shells. The duchess spent her winters in London, where she created a 'museum' of natural curiosities at her house in the Privy Garden, Whitehall. She also made Mrs Delany an interest-free loan of $400 to enable her friend to buy a house in London. 
The most famous item in the duchess of Portland's huge collection was acquired in 1784, when she bought the so-called Portland vase from Sir William Hamilton. The vase, previously known as the Barberini vase, was and remains 'an outstanding example of ancient Roman glass using the cameo technique' (Stourton), made up of several layers of coloured glass which were then cut and decorated, in this case to show six figures in two mythological scenes. The vase probably dates from the early first century AD. The duchess paid $2000 for the vase and three other items; sold at her death, it was bought back by the third duke for $1029. The vase was loaned in 1810 to the British Museum, where it remains. 
The duchess died at Bulstrode after a short illness on 17 July 1785. Mary Delany was left to the kindness of George III and Queen Charlotte, who had often visited Bulstrode, as well as receiving the duchess at Windsor. The duchess's huge collection of works of art and virtu was disposed of at a sale in 1786 lasting thirty-eight days. The aim was to recoup the family fortunes, drained by the electioneering expenses of her elder son and the high living of the younger. Four of the duchess's children survived to adulthood: Elizabeth (1735-1825) married Thomas Thynne, later first marquess of Bath (1734-1796), and was lady of the bedchamber to Queen Charlotte; Henrietta (1737-1827), married George Grey, later fifth earl of Stamford (1737-1819); the statesman, William Henry Cavendish Cavendish-Bentinck, third duke of Portland (1738-1809), married Lady Dorothy Cavendish (1750-1794), daughter of the fourth duke of Devonshire; and Edward Charles (1744-1819) married Elizabeth Cumberland (died 1837). 


@@@@@


doc= 40753


Littlejohn, Sir Henry Duncan (1826-1914), medical officer of health and expert in forensic medicine, was born on 8 May 1826 at the family home, 33 Leith Street, Edinburgh, the seventh of the nine children of Thomas Littlejohn, master baker and a burgess of Edinburgh, and his wife, Isabella Duncan, daughter of Henry Duncan, merchant of Edinburgh. He received a general education at Perth Academy and then attended Edinburgh high school from 1838 until 1841, after which he entered upon the study of medicine; he graduated MD at Edinburgh University in 1847, and in the same year became a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. His postgraduate training included a period as house surgeon at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary (1847-8) and then a year spent in Paris, Vienna, and Berlin, with his lifelong friend John Smith, founder of the Edinburgh Dental Dispensary. Littlejohn then returned to the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary as assistant pathologist. There followed a brief spell of general practice in Selkirk, specializing in obstetrics, until he returned to Edinburgh in 1853. He took his examinations for the fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1854. 
Littlejohn is acclaimed equally by historians both of public health and of legal medicine. Certainly his role in public health is more evident, owing perhaps to the larger number of published reports and articles. Nevertheless, his career began and ended in forensic medicine, running concurrently with his employment in public health. In August 1854 he was elected by Edinburgh town council to the part-time salaried position of police surgeon in place of Dr George Glover, who had been dismissed owing to his overzealous pursuit of public health infractions. Ironically, Littlejohn himself was destined to become one of Scotland's leading sanitarians. By coincidence he was related to the then lord provost of Edinburgh, a fact commented upon by Littlejohn's rivals. 
Littlejohn's medico-legal career began with appearances in the summary courts immediately following his appointment as police surgeon. His high-court career began in 1855, when he appeared in a variety of criminal cases, including culpable homicide resulting from a railway accident with twenty deaths, an assault with intent to ravish, a wife murder, and three cases of child murder. In one of the last category, the drowning of a newborn child in Duddingston Loch by the mother, Littlejohn's cogent medical report drew a note of commendation from the bench which assured his rise. 
By 1858 Littlejohn was appearing as a crown medical examiner in the Edinburgh justiciary courts. In 1856 he began lecturing on forensic medicine at Surgeons' Hall, the extramural school at which he had attended undergraduate classes. Perhaps spurred by Littlejohn's medico-legal ability, the Board of Supervision for the relief of the poor (all of whose members were lawyers), the central Scottish public health authority, first appointed under the 1856 'Nuisance Removal (Scotland) Act', commissioned Littlejohn in 1859 to investigate the sanitary condition of Wick; it was the board's first report under the act. The accuracy of this and subsequent reports earned Littlejohn the permanent salaried post of medical adviser to the board in 1873. 
In 1862 Littlejohn was also appointed as Edinburgh's first medical officer of health, under the terms of the 1862 'General Police Act (Scotland)'. Thus he simultaneously filled no less than five part-time posts in public and legal medicine. He had no private practice and derived his income from two sources: the permanent salaried posts of Edinburgh's medical officer of health and police surgeon, and medical adviser to the Board of Supervision; he also received fees obtained from the posts of extramural lecturer and crown medical examiner. 
In 1855 the 'Edinburgh Medical Journal' was launched to replace the 'Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal' and the 'Edinburgh Monthly Journal of Medical Science', and Littlejohn became its first editor. He remained in the post until 1860. During that time and throughout his career he used the 'Journal' to report interesting forensic cases, to air medico-legal differences with colleagues, and to publish texts of his extramural lectures. He found no time, however, to write a textbook similar to John Glaister's 'Text-Book of Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology and Public Health' (1902). 
Littlejohn's cases included deaths by firearms, poisoning, stabbing, and strangling. Like Glaister he considered himself a medical detective, who used fingerprints, bite marks, and photography as evidence to solve criminal mysteries. He became an expert in all theatres of death, appearing in more than a hundred capital charges and many culpable homicide and assault cases. He shared the limelight with Douglas Maclagan in the notorious poisoning cases of Dr Pritchard, for the murder of his wife and mother-in-law (Glasgow, 1865), and of Eugene Marie Chantrelle, for the murder of his wife (Edinburgh, 1878). In 1893 Littlejohn gave crown medical evidence during the trial of Arthur Monson for the murder, by shooting, of his aristocratic pupil Cecil Hamborough, with Matthew Hay giving evidence for the defence. 
Littlejohn lectured without notes, using his accumulating forensic cases and skills to illustrate his lectures. His extramural lecture course was extremely well attended, at times attracting more than 250 students, possibly to the detriment of Douglas Maclagan's university course. Littlejohn counted some of the foremost future medical figures among his students, including Joseph Bell, thought to be model for Conan Doyle's master sleuth, Sherlock Holmes. Littlejohn himself has been described as providing the author with authentic High Court examples. 
In 1897, at the age of seventy-one, Littlejohn succeeded to the Edinburgh chair of forensic medicine and public health, on the retirement of Sir Douglas Maclagan. Taking the opportunity provided by the changeover, Edinburgh University recognized the growing importance of public health and established a separate, endowed, chair of public health; Littlejohn therefore became professor solely of forensic medicine. He retired from the chair in 1906 and was succeeded by his only son, Harvey Littlejohn. In 1907 Littlejohn senior was presented with his portrait by Sir George Reid at a packed ceremony in Surgeons' Hall. 
In sanitary matters Littlejohn did much to prod the social conscience of ratepayers and local councils to further the improvement of Scottish public health in general and of Edinburgh in particular. His services to the Board of Supervision and the Local Government Board are charted in their annual reports. Littlejohn's 'Report on the Sanitary Condition of Edinburgh' (1865) pinpointed the capital's sanitary inadequacies and their sequelae, which led to a death rate of 24 per thousand: this had reduced to 14 per thousand by 1908, when Littlejohn retired as medical officer of health. He was deeply involved with William Chambers in the building of Victorian Edinburgh and in the provision of a municipal fever hospital. In strictly medical matters Littlejohn invoked the wrath of most of the local profession during his campaign for compulsory notification of infectious diseases, accomplished in clause 208 of the 1879 'Edinburgh Municipal Police Act'. Significantly, the clause placed the onus of notification squarely on the shoulders of the attending doctor rather than the householder. Scotland achieved compulsory notification of infectious diseases under the 1897 'Public Health (Scotland) Act'. 
Littlejohn was elected president of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1875, and from 1883 until 1885 he was president of the Edinburgh Medico-Chirurgical Society. The University of Edinburgh conferred upon him its honorary degree of LLD in 1893 and he was president of the Royal Institute of Public Health in the same year. He was knighted in 1895. Littlejohn's interests were many. He was an unpaid director of the Sick Children's Hospital, manager of the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, and chairman of the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children and of other medical and charitable institutions. He was also a founder member of the Scottish Burial Reform and Cremation Society in 1888. 
A 'well-kent' Edinburgh figure in his frock coat and top hat, Littlejohn enjoyed being seen to board moving tram cars, whose drivers knew not to stop. He was an elder of St Giles's Church and attended daily services there, and was once mistaken for an official guide, whose task he duly performed before being recognized, much to his chagrin, by a passing colleague. A glimpse of Littlejohn's pawky humour is caught in his story that although he had been rejected for life insurance by three medical referees, it had been his doleful duty to attend the funerals of all three doctors. Littlejohn was married to Isabella Jane, daughter of H. Harvey; she predeceased him. In addition to their son they had at least one daughter. A medical giant who bestrode Edinburgh public life for half a century, Littlejohn died at his country house, Benreoch, Arrochar, Dunbartonshire, on 30 September 1914. He was cremated at the Glasgow crematorium and his ashes were then taken to the Dean cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 40762


Mercer, Sir Walter (1890-1971), surgeon, was born on 19 March 1890 at Cockholmbank, Stow, Midlothian, the second son of Ebenezer Beattie Mercer, a woollen manufacturer, and his wife, Jessie Mary Graham ('nee' Greenfield). He was educated at George Watson's College, Edinburgh, and matriculated at Edinburgh University in 1907. From there he graduated MB, ChB in 1912, and then held a number of posts as house officer in hospitals at Carlisle and Berwick upon Tweed. In 1915 he joined the King's Own Scottish Borderers as the regimental medical officer, and later the Royal Scots Fusiliers. He served on the western front at the battle of the Somme, on the Messines Ridge at the third battle of Ypres, and at base hospitals in France and Italy. During the war Mercer received a permanent injury to the index finger of his left hand, but this was never allowed to interfere with his dexterity as a surgeon. 
In 1918 Mercer joined the Edinburgh War Hospital at Bangour, West Lothian. There he met several distinguished American orthopaedic surgeons, who aroused his interest in orthopaedics. After demobilization in 1920 he was appointed as surgeon in charge of the Tynecastle Orthopaedic Clinic, Edinburgh, which was set up to care for disabled ex-servicemen. In 1921 he became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. In the same year he became assistant surgeon to Professor John Fraser at the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, where he was responsible for both the emergency and the elective work in orthopaedic surgery as well as being a clinical tutor. On 14 March 1923 Mercer married Helen May Margaret (Maisie) Lunan ('b'. 1899/1900), daughter of George Lunan, a pharmaceutical chemist, and his wife, Sarah Jane ('nee' Milne). They adopted a son, David. In 1925 Mercer was appointed consultant surgeon to the South Eastern Counties of Scotland Sanatorium, East Fortune, East Lothian, which specialized in caring for patients with tuberculosis and where he was especially interested in the effects of tuberculosis on the bones and joints. He later became a consultant in tuberculosis at the City Hospital, Edinburgh, and at Bangour, where he established the thoracic unit for the east of Scotland during the Second World War. 
Mercer published 'Orthopaedic Surgery' in 1932 and this became a standard textbook, running to eight editions. It was his most important publication. He also wrote many articles on orthopaedics. In recognition of his work he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1935. During the war Mercer was appointed consultant in orthopaedic surgery to the Department of Health, Scotland, and chaired the Ministry of Health advisory committee on artificial limbs. Despite all this Mercer was essentially still a general surgeon, skilfully performing operations in abdominal, thoracic, and vascular surgery. To extend his range, immediately after the war he went to the USA to train in cardiac surgery under Alfred Blalock at Baltimore, where he also undertook research on babies born with congenital heart defects. Mercer then returned to Edinburgh, to concentrate on heart surgery at the Royal Infirmary. In 1948 he became the first occupant of the Law chair in orthopaedic surgery at Edinburgh University, and he devoted himself exclusively to orthopaedics. His teaching ward rounds were attended by large numbers of postgraduates from all over the world. He set high standards for his surgical trainees, by whom he was greatly respected, and was universally recognized as a most skilled and dexterous surgeon in all aspects of surgery. His reputation was enhanced by his becoming chairman of the editorial board of the 'Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery' from 1954 to 1961 and vice-president of the British Orthopaedic Association. 
In 1951 Mercer became president of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh; hitherto the college had acted merely as a surgical examining body, but under Mercer it adopted a more active role. Mercer started short courses in surgery to help postgraduates, especially those from overseas, to prepare for their fellowship and other examinations. For the fellows he founded the 'Journal of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh' in 1955 and organized regular clinical meetings, to enable them to keep abreast with the latest surgical developments and with college news. He then laid plans to redevelop the college buildings, and the work began in 1960. Mercer was knighted in 1956 and made an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of England. In the next year he retired as professor of orthopaedic surgery and as president of the college. From 1959 to 1971 he was honorary librarian of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. In 1960 he was appointed a deputy lord lieutenant of the county of the city of Edinburgh. 
A contemporary noted that Mercer 'moved and spoke with a briskness characteristic of his operating. He never wasted time but always had an ear for any approach worthy of consideration. He was impatient of irrelevance and vague discussion and preferred the direct approach to any problem surgical or personal. To his intimate circle he showed a sense of humour and a warm understanding of problems which superficially might have seemed contrary to his outward, almost mechanical, efficiency. ('Lancet', 501)' Mercer, whose hobbies had included tennis and golf, died in Edinburgh on 23 February 1971 of heart disease. He was survived by his wife and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 40763


Monro, John (bap. 1670, d. 1740), surgeon, was baptized in Edinburgh on 19 October 1670, the third son of Sir Alexander Monro (1629-1704), commissary of Stirling, of Bearcrofts, near what later became Grangemouth, Stirlingshire, and his wife, Lillias Eastoun. He was initially apprenticed on 8 April 1687, the start of the Monro family's involvement with medicine, as a servant to William Borthwick, a leading Edinburgh surgeon. Borthwick at that time could not, under existing regulations, take on any new full apprentices. However, Monro became fully apprenticed to him as surgeon in January 1689, largely as a result of his father's influence over the Incorporation of Chirurgians (later the College of Surgeons). He duly completed his apprenticeship in April 1692. On 11 October 1692 he matriculated at the University of Leiden. This experience was to inspire him with an aim to found a faculty of medicine at Edinburgh University, since no university in Britain had a medical school like those on continental Europe. 
Monro returned to Scotland in 1694 and the next year became surgeon to Lieutenant-General Sir Henry Belasyse's 22nd (Cheshire) regiment of foot, where he stayed until 1700. However, he was on active service abroad with the regiment only during the summers, spending winters in London, where he probably practised surgery in the hospitals. He then returned to Edinburgh, where he established an apothecary's shop. He became a burgess of the city on 19 August 1702, a precondition of membership of the Incorporation of Chirurgians of Edinburgh, which would enable him to practise surgery within the burgh. He was elected a member on 11 March 1703. Monro was elected as boxmaster (treasurer) to the incorporation from 1708 to 1710 and as deacon (president) from 1712 to 1714. As deacon he had a seat on the town council of Edinburgh, which controlled many aspects of civic life. He was also deacon convener of the trades in Edinburgh and represented the town on the convention of royal burghs of Scotland. Queen Anne died shortly before his term of office as deacon ended in 1714, and he took part in proclaiming George, elector of Hanover, as king, showing his support. Monro was surgeon to the poor in Edinburgh from 1713 to 1720. 
Monro married twice; first, in 1694, Jean Forbes (died 'c'.1710), with whom he had a son, Alexander Monro primus (1697-1767); and second, in 1721, Margaret Main, 'nee' Crichton. Monro still retained the idea of establishing a medical school in Edinburgh and arranged Alexander's education with the plan that he should play an important role in any such school. Monro told the physicians and surgeons of Edinburgh of 'a plan which he had long formed in his own mind, of having the different branches of Physic and Surgery regularly taught at Edinburgh, which was highly approved by them' (Craig, 361). Early in 1720 Monro used his power in the Incorporation of Chirurgians of Edinburgh 'to force the two demonstrators of anatomy to resign in favour of his son, who was appointed by the town Council as professor of anatomy on 29 Jan. 1720' (Morrell, 50). He also encouraged Charles Alston, one of Alexander's fellow students, to amass a collection of plants and to advertise public lectures in Edinburgh which became known as materia medica. Hence the faculty of medicine of Edinburgh University was born. 
Monro died at Carolside, near Earlston, Berwickshire, in 1740. 


@@@@@


doc= 40766


Ewart, Peter (1767-1842), engineer, was born on 14 May 1767 at Troqueer Manse, near Dumfries, the son of the Revd John Ewart, minister in Troqueer parish and his wife, Mary ('nee' Corrie). He was the ninth of eleven brothers and sisters, some of whom also had distinguished careers. His eldest brother was Joseph Ewart, who became a diplomat; and his brother William was a merchant and partner of John Gladstone (father of W. E. Gladstone) in Liverpool. 
After early education at a local school, Ewart at the age of fifteen attended lectures at Edinburgh University, where his cousin John Robison (1739-1805) was professor of natural philosophy. (It was this connection that later commended him to James Watt.) At about the same time he was apprenticed to John Rennie (1761-1821), then a millwright in Haddingtonshire. In 1784 Rennie, when commissioned by Watt to help with the erection of the Albion Mills, Blackfriars, took Ewart with him to London. Four years later Ewart was at work on a water-wheel for Matthew Boulton's rolling mill in Birmingham. At this time markets for Watt's rotative steam engine were opening up in the growing cotton and woollen textile industries; and in 1789 Boulton and Watt sent Ewart to Manchester to erect a Watt engine for Peter Drinkwater. In 1790 Ewart became Boulton and Watt's northern area representative. This brought him into contact with other leaders of the industrial revolution, such as George Lee (who married his youngest sister, Mary Ewart), Benjamin Gott, Samuel Oldknow, and William Strutt. 
The problems of dealing with unreliable component suppliers were so frustrating that, in 1792, Ewart resigned as area representative and went into partnership with Oldknow as a cotton spinner. When Oldknow's enterprise failed, Ewart found, in 1793, a new partner in Samuel Greg, of Quarry Bank Mill, Styal, near Manchester. Here he improved the water power resource by building a masonry dam on the River Bollin and this work, together with the mill, is now maintained by the National Trust. At Styal, Ewart may well have made a significant contribution to the development of water power and the design of water-wheels, and in addition he installed a Boulton and Watt engine, as a standby power source. 
The Greg partnership ended in 1811, when Ewart concentrated his efforts on his own mill in Manchester. The extent to which this move was due to a new and quite different interest can only be conjectured. He had joined the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society in 1798; in 1812 he became, with John Dalton, a vice-president of the society. His wide experience of steam and water power on the one hand and his knowledge of mathematics and natural philosophy on the other made him unusually well qualified to pronounce on the vexed questions of power, force, and work, still veiled in confusion. An attack, probably by John Playfair, in the 'Edinburgh Review' (12, 1808, 120-130) on W. H. Wollaston's Bakerian lecture, and on John Smeaton's experiments between 1759 and 1782, was the occasion for the longest (153 pages) and most important of the four papers Ewart published, 'On the measure of moving force' (1813). This was a sustained plea that British mathematicians and natural philosophers should take account of the concept of 'living force' or 'vis viva' and the related measure of work (force times distance), advocated strongly by Smeaton, supported by Wollaston, and used by most engineers. 
The received doctrine that momentum (mv) is the true measure of the force was supported by the fact that momentum is conserved when inelastic bodies collide, while 'vis viva' (mv2) is apparently not conserved. Ewart, following Smeaton, argued that the apparent loss of 'vis viva' was accounted for by the 'change of figure' of the colliding bodies. And, having countered the theoretical objections to 'vis viva', he pointed out that a wide range of manufacturing processes depend on 'change of figure' and that the losses entailed can be accurately calculated. The received doctrine cannot account for 'change of figure'. An insight, in the paper, was his assertion, contrary to the Edinburgh critic, that to a given quantity of heat, used in a steam engine, there must correspond a fixed amount of work. Ewart knew, of course, that in all practical engines the full amount of work could never be realized. He did not, however, recognize that heat could be converted into work. 
This was the longest paper yet published, and for a long time to come, in the Manchester 'Memoirs'. Ewart acknowledged John Dalton's support and 'candid encouragement' in writing it and it may be assumed that Dalton had advocated publication in its entirety. Moreover, Dalton dedicated the first part of volume 2 of his 'New System of Chemical Philosophy' (1827) jointly to Ewart as a friend and 'for the able exposition and excellent illustrations of the Fundamental Principles of Mechanics in his essay on the measure of moving force'. James Watt, and his son James Watt Junior, seem to have approved of the work too. Apart from its originality, in the British context, and the knowledge of continental ideas that it revealed, the paper is of some significance as a distinctive contribution to the new, Manchester, school of science; and James Prescott Joule, a loyal pupil of Dalton, established his comprehensive ideas on energy and the mechanical theory of heat on the basis of the doctrines of 'vis viva' and the related 'measure of moving force'. 
Ewart left Manchester in 1835, when he was appointed the first chief engineer and inspector of machinery for the navy's steam ships. He died on 15 September 1842, as a result of an accident in Woolwich Dockyard, when a chain carrying a very heavy load suddenly snapped. It is not known whether his wife, formerly Miss Kerr, whom he had married in 1802, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 40767


Smith, Thomas (bap. 1752, d. 1815), lighting engineer, was baptized on 6 December 1752 in Ferryport-on-Craig, Fife, a small village opposite Dundee, the son of Thomas Smith, mariner, and his wife, Mary Kay. In 1764 Smith was apprenticed at Dundee to a metalworker named Cairns, after which he went to Edinburgh, probably in 1770 when building of the 'new town' was in progress, as a journeyman metalworker. By 1781 he was trading as a tinsmith from Bristo Street, where he manufactured oil lamps, brass fittings, fenders, and other household metal articles. His business prospered and by 1790 he had moved to premises in Blair Street, where he employed a larger workforce. He was elected to the Edinburgh Guild of Hammermen in 1789, and became its master and a city magistrate in 1802. 
On 19 February 1778 Smith married Elizabeth Couper (1758-1786), daughter of a Liberton farmer. After her death, on 20 October 1787 he married Mary Jack (1762-1791). In the year following her death, on 14 November 1792 Smith married Jean Hogg, 'nee' Lillie (1751-1820). Jean Lillie had first been married in 1771, to Alan Stevenson (1752-1774), and then in 1777 to James Hogg, an Edinburgh gunsmith, whom she divorced in 1792. 
Smith took an interest in improving the illumination of lighthouses in 1786, before the board of commissioners of northern lighthouses was formed in the same year to improve the almost non-existent lighting of Scotland's coast. He had proposed to the chamber of commerce at Edinburgh that a lamp with metallic reflectors be substituted for the coal light at the old private lighthouse on the Isle of May, but they declined their support. On 16 June 1786 Smith wrote 'A comparative view of the supperior advantages of lamps above coal light when applyd to light houses', in which he confirmed that he had 'constructed 2 small reflectors & lamp with a view to demonstrate by experiment what has been only laid down in theory' (NL Scot., MS Acc. 10706, 88). He then petitioned the board of manufactures in Edinburgh on the utility of such lamps and they resolved to allow $20 towards the expense of making a model of a reflector lamp and trying an experiment on Inchkeith, a trial that is believed to have been successful. The Northern Lighthouse Board appointed Smith as their first engineer on 22 January 1787. 
After receiving instruction in lighthouse construction and illumination in Norfolk from Ezekiel Walker of King's Lynn, Smith enthusiastically set to work in 1787, without payment, on the provision of new lighthouses for the Northern Lighthouse Board, until 1793 when he was awarded a salary of $60 per annum and his expenses. The board did not regard his lack of building and architectural experience as an impediment, as such skills could be and were brought in under his general direction. 
During the next two decades, commencing in 1787 with the conversion of Kinnaird Castle into a lighthouse -- followed by the Mull of Kintyre (1788), North Ronaldsay (1789), Eilean Glas (1789), and Pladda (1790) lighthouses -- Smith was responsible for providing or improving thirteen lighthouses. Independently of the board he was responsible for harbour lights at Leith and Portpatrick, and on the rivers Clyde and Tay. His last major lighthouses were Start Point, Orkney (1802-6) and Inchkeith (1804), both for the board, and Little Cumbrae (1793), for the Clyde Lighthouses Trust. 
From 1797 Smith delegated most lighthouse matters to his apprentice and stepson Robert Stevenson, who married his daughter Jane, and established the Stevenson dynasty of engineers which practised until 1952. Stevenson formally succeeded him as engineer to the Northern Lighthouse Board on 12 July 1808. This enabled Smith to concentrate on lamp manufacture and the expansion of his shipping and other interests, particularly his general and street lighting business. By 1800 his lamps were lighting much of eastern Scotland and the central belt as far west as Glasgow. In 1804 he was the public lighting contractor for both the Old and New towns of Edinburgh and, by 1807, for lighting the streets of Perth, Stirling, Ayr, Haddington, Aberdeen, and, in 1810, Leith. In 1808 Smith retired from the business, which was then carried on by his son James. 
Smith developed and made arrays of parabolic reflector oil lamps. Each lamp had a light source at its focus and a curved reflector formed of small pieces of mirror glass set in plaster that produced a beam of light. His first light, at Kinnaird Head, had an intensity of about 1000 candlepower, which, although feeble compared with its modern counterpart of 690,000 candlepower, nevertheless represented a worthwhile improvement on coal lights. He retained glass-faceted reflectors for new lights until 1801, after which, because of Robert Stevenson's influence, he started to manufacture Argand lamps with silvered copper reflectors. This improvement which produced a significantly brighter light is believed to have been first installed in Scotland at Inchkeith lighthouse in 1804. 
Details of Smith's reflectors became more generally known from an article 'Reflector for a light-house' in the supplement to the third edition of 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1801). In it Smith is described as 'an ingenious and modest man [who] has carried [his inventions] to a high degree of perfection without knowing that something of the same kind had been long used in France'. This tribute was omitted from later editions, including the last carrying the article (1823), after the editor had learned of Ezekiel Walker's prior development of the glass facet reflector lamp concept. Nevertheless, Smith was the first to introduce brighter lights into Scottish lighthouses, and has a good claim to be regarded as Scotland's first lighting engineer. He died on 21 June 1815 at 1 Baxter's Place, Edinburgh, and was buried in the old Calton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 40768


Higgins, Terrence Lionel Seymour (1945-1982), first publicly identified AIDS victim in the United Kingdom, was born on 10 June 1945 in Priory Mount Hospital, Haverfordwest, Pembrokeshire, the son of Marjorie Irene Higgins (formerly Phillips), a railway porter in Haverfordwest. Remembered through the manner of his death, and the work of the trust that bears his name, the life of Terrence Higgins reflects at every turn the shifting history of the gay male community in late twentieth-century Britain. 
Higgins joined the Royal Navy at the age of eighteen in 1963, and as a gay man came into conflict with the prevailing hostility towards homosexuality in the services. Consequently he decided to leave. A contemporary reports that the authorities refused to discharge him on the grounds of his homosexuality. Instead, he painted hammer and sickle motifs around his ship, was formally charged, and was asked to leave the navy. 
Higgins moved to London, where the changing climate of the 1960s, the partial decriminalization of homosexuality in 1967, and the work of the Gay Liberation Front from the early 1970s had created a rapidly expanding, commercial scene of gay clubs and bars. Entering into this world he lived first in Notting Hill and Streatham, eventually settling in a flat with friends in Barons Court Road, Kensington. He worked as a telex and computer operator and as a barman in the best-known gay club, Heaven. 
In the summer of 1981 Higgins began to lose weight, developing a persistent rash and gradually becoming weaker and weaker. In April 1982 he collapsed on the dance floor at Heaven and was taken to St Thomas's Hospital, discharging himself after a number of days when doctors were unable to diagnose or treat his condition. In the middle of June he collapsed again and was readmitted to the isolation unit. Diagnosed as having parasitic pneumonia, he died in St Thomas's on 4 July 1982 at the age of thirty-seven. His body was cremated. Pneumonia was given by the coroner as the cause of death on his death certificate, which was certified 'after post mortem without inquest' (d. cert.). 
Higgins's death came at a time of increasing concern in the gay community over an apparently new disease affecting the immune system of a number of gay men in New York, San Francisco, and Los Angeles. In the autumn of 1982 a growing number of articles in the United Kingdom focused on what had been termed the Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) epidemic, noting the presence of cases in Britain alongside the numbers of American deaths. Although Britain's first AIDS case had been reported in 'The Lancet' in 1981, it was the death of Terrence Higgins that brought the disease fully into public view. 
Frustrated by the absence of a medical explanation for why Higgins had contracted pneumonia, and concerned at the risk of the disease spreading further, his friends sought to use his death as a platform for further action. Meeting in mid-November 1982, Terrence's former partner Rupert Whitaker, together with Martyn Butler, Tony Calvert, Len Robinson, and Chris Peel, set up the Terrence Higgins Trust. Its formation was announced in the free newspaper 'Capital Gay' on 26 November 1982. Under the headline 'US disease hits London', the paper identified four AIDS-related deaths in London. Terrence Higgins was named as one of these men, the first person to be publicly identified as dying from an AIDS-related illness in the UK. By announcing the charity in this way his friends sought to draw some good from their loss, saying 'we have named it after Terry but we are doing it for the people who are left. He was a great inspiration to us all'. In creating this publicity they also exploited it, personalizing and humanizing AIDS in order to raise money to fund medical research into the causes of the disease and educate gay men about its potential dangers. 
The Terrence Higgins Trust remains the largest and best-known British AIDS organization, continuing the work of education, research, and support which started with the death and naming of Terrence Higgins in 1982. 


@@@@@


doc= 40770


Anes, Dunstan (c.1520-1594), merchant, was born in Portugal as Gonsalvo, the second son of a merchant, Jorge Anes (died in or before 1540), and his wife, Elizabeth Rodrigues ('b'. 1481, died after 1568). He had an elder brother, Francisco, and two sisters. His father was born a Jew in Valladolid and brought to Portugal as a child, where the family was baptized by force in 1497. Jorge Anes died in Portugal. When the Portuguese inquisition started to persecute the New Christians, his widow and four children left Portugal late in 1540 and took refuge in London. She settled in the parish of St Nicholas Acon, south of Lombard Street. 
In England Gonsalvo Anes changed his name to Dunstan Anes, almost certainly by confirmation of Edmund Bonner, bishop of London. On 2 December 1548 he married Constance ('b'. 'c'.1530, died in or after 1594), daughter of Simon Ruiz, surgeon at St Nicholas Acon. He acquired a house in Crutched Friars and they had fourteen children. They conformed to the established church, while practising Judaism in the privacy of their home, because Judaizing was then a capital crime in England. On 22 June 1557 Dunstan was admitted to the freedom of the city of London on the recommendation of Philip and Mary I, and also to the Grocers' Company. On 6 June 1568 Dunstan registered his coat of arms and genealogy at the College of Arms. He described himself as 'Purvyor and Marchant for the Queen's Matis Grosery for the Howseholde' ('Visitation of London', 74-5). On 22 November 1573 a passport was issued to Dunstan Anes and Robert Chatterton 'to pass into France for provision of wines for her Majesty, with their four geldings and one hundred marks in money' ('APC, '1571-5'', 142-3). 
In 1581, when Don Antonio, the claimant to the Portuguese crown, went to England, Dunstan Anes was active in his support and in procuring munitions for his expedition to the Azores. His eldest daughter, Sarah, had married Roderigo Lopez, the queen's physician. Dunstan and his sons are mentioned several times in the dispatches of the Spanish ambassador, Bernardino de Mendoza. He reported that one Gonzalo Jorge was acting for Don Antonio, and that his second son, Jacob Anes, was living in Lisbon and spying for him. In October 1581 he reported that William Anes (1562-1630), Dunstan's seventh son, had gone to Lisbon by way of France in the queen's ships with a cargo of wheat and letters from Don Antonio. He described William as a young man of twenty, 'well built with a fair and handsome face and a small fair beard' ('CSP Spain', 1580-86, 179). Philip ordered the arrest of Jacob Anes, but in March 1582 Mendoza reported that he had gone to London from Terceira and had spoken to the queen. In 1583 Dunstan's eldest son, Benjamin, sent a report from Terceira to Sir Francis Walsingham. Jacob Anes migrated to Constantinople with his sisters Elizabeth and Rachel in the service of Alvaro Mendes, duke of Mytilene. There he converted to open Judaism, and in 1613, 'for the love that he bore to our English nation', he received the traveller Thomas Coryate 'with very courteous entertainment' (Purchas, x). Three of Dunstan Anes's sons became free of the Grocers' Company by patrimony: Benjamin, in 1571; James, or Diego, the third son, in 1583; and William, in 1594. In 1588 Pedro de Santa Cruz denounced Dunstan Anes and his son William to the alcalde of Madrid: 'He knows, as it is public and notorious in London, that by race they are all Jews, and it is notorious that in their own homes they live as such observing their Jewish rites, but publicly they attend the Lutheran Churches. (Wolf, 'Jews in Elizabethan England')' Dunstan Anes died intestate at Crutched Friars in 1594 and was buried under his pew at St Olave's Church, Hart Street. Administration of his estate was granted to his widow. 
William Anes joined his uncle Francis, who was a merchant and burgomaster of Youghal in Ireland. In October 1583 he went to London from Cork with letters from Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond, to the privy council; William had 'behaved himself like a tall and valiant man against the traitors at the last attempt against that town' ('CSP Ire., 1574-85', 474). William carried on the family business as a London merchant. In 1601 he entered into a bond for $3000 at the high court of admiralty to enable a group of Amsterdam Portuguese Jewish merchants to recover their goods from six ships of Emden taken prize by Sir Robert Mansell in the queen's ships. In 1626 William Anes and Philip Burlamachi were the king's factors for tobacco and licensed to import 50,000 pounds of tobacco free of duty for the king. 
The Anes family was unusual in that its members lived, traded, and prospered in Tudor and Jacobean London for ninety years, publicly conforming to the established church and practising Judaism in their homes. 


@@@@@


doc= 40772


Salvador, Joseph (1716-1786), merchant, was born on 21 January 1716 in London, the eldest son of Francis Salvador ('c'.1685-1754), merchant of Lime Street, and of his wife, Rachel Mendes da Costa ('c'.1690-1758). Joseph Salvador served as a warden of London's Portuguese Synagogue in 1746, 1751, 1755, and 1765. He was active in founding its infirmary, the Beth Holim, and is portrayed in an engraving attacking its committee entitled 'The Jerusalem Infirmary: alias a Journey into the Valley of Jehosaphat'. 
On 15 October 1738 Salvador married Leonora 
(Rachel; 1716-1766)
, eldest daughter of Antonio Lopes Suasso, third baron d'Auvernes le Gras. They had two sons, who died in infancy, and five daughters. He traded in partnership with his younger brother Jacob with a joint capital of $58,000. In 1749 Jacob died, leaving two sons. Salvador realized that if they too were to die their land would be forfeit to the crown, because Francis Salvador was Dutch-born. He therefore petitioned the duke of Newcastle in January 1753 for an act of parliament to enable Jews to be naturalized. He published two pamphlets in favour of this measure under the pseudonym Philo Patriae. In these he gave an interesting summary of the activities of London's Jewish merchants, arguing that it was in the national interest to encourage their residence and trade. The 'Jewish Naturalization Bill' was duly enacted, but the opposition launched a fierce campaign against the measure and won in Oxfordshire at the general election 1754. The act had by then been repealed, and Salvador's ill-judged initiative set back the improvement of Jewish civil status for many years. 
When Salvador inherited his parents' fortune, he spent $2000 on buying 100,000 acres of land in South Carolina, extended his country estate at Tooting, and in 1757 built a handsome town house in White Hart Court, Bishopsgate. In 1759 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1764 a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He was the secretary of the London Committee of Deputies of British Jews on its foundation in 1760, and its president in 1778. Like his father he was, to use his own phrase, a merchant 'of the most extensive Trade and plumb Capitals' (Philo Patriae, 'Further Considerations', 35-6): he owned ships and was a major importer of rough diamonds and bullion. In 1761 Newcastle procured Salvador's advice on floating a government loan. Under Lord Bute's ministry Salvador continued to advise the Treasury and to underwrite its new issues. He was active in mustering support for Robert Clive in the power struggle within the East India Company, and Clive employed him to market his diamonds. As he prospered, Salvador spent money on 'protecting' expensive mistresses, first Catherine Maria Fischer (Kitty Fisher) and then Margaret Caroline Rudd. He had a natural son, Joseph Salvador de Moriencourt, by the comtesse de Moriencourt. 
In 1763 financial failures in Amsterdam caused Salvador heavy losses. George Clive wrote to Robert Clive that Salvador's capital was then reduced from $200,000 to $80,000. At the same time his insolvent son-in-law, Joshua Mendes da Costa, sued him over his daughter Judith's marriage contract. In 1773 another financial crisis in both Amsterdam and London destroyed most of his fortune. He sent his nephew Francis Salvador to South Carolina to manage and develop their American plantation. Francis was elected to the general assembly and then to the provincial congress and was active in the colony's struggle for independence. In 1776, leading a unit against British-armed Cherokees, Francis was shot and then scalped to death. His widow, Joseph's daughter Sarah, and their children were baptized in 1780. Joseph Salvador sold his property in England and half of his American estate and then settled on his 50,000 acre plantation at Coronaca Creek, South Carolina, in 1784. He died there on 29 December 1786 and was buried in the Da Costa Sephardi cemetery in Charleston. Joseph Salvador was an articulate, able, and ambitious merchant. Active as a Jewish leader and government adviser, he met his reverses of fortune with courage. 


@@@@@


doc= 40773


Nunes, Hector (1520-1591), physician and merchant, was born in Evora, Portugal. His family were among those Jews who had been forcibly baptized in 1497 by order of King Manuel I. He studied medicine at Coimbra University, taking a BA in 1540 and an MB in 1543. Because at this time the Portuguese Inquisition started to persecute the New Christians, he left Portugal. In 1549 he was living in London, in the parish of St Olave, Hart Street. In 1553 he was fined by the College of Physicians for practising medicine without a licence. In 1554 he was elected a fellow and in 1563 a censor of the college, with the responsibility for examining candidates and deciding which should be admitted and allowed to practise medicine. He had an uncle, Henrique Nunes, who was a merchant and physician living in Bristol from 1546 to 1554, to whom Nunes used to send the correct dates of the Jewish festivals. 
Like his uncle, Nunes combined his medical practice with foreign trade. The London port book of 1566 shows him importing nineteen butts of sack from Cadiz. On 29 September in the same year he married Leonor (or Elinore) Freire of Antwerp, who also came from a Portuguese crypto-Jewish family. They lived in Mark Lane in the city of London. He figures frequently in the acts of the privy council as a trader with Portugal, where he is usually called 'Dr Hector'. 
As well as trading as a merchant, Nunes had a court practice as a physician. He prescribed for Lord and Lady Burleigh. He must have rendered service to the government, possibly in connection with the treaty negotiations with Portugal of 1572, for in 1573 he was granted a fifteen-year monopoly of the importation of Spanish wool for making felts and felt hats, subject to paying double customs. In 1574 he was granted the lands of St Mary's Abbey in Ireland, formerly belonging to the earl of Desmond. This transaction was followed by a series of unsuccessful attempts to win a lawsuit against the earl with the backing of the privy council, but the earl had powerful friends in Ireland and Nunes did not. In 1575 his wool patent was reissued and extended to twenty years. He was endenizened as an English subject in 1579 and after that publicly conformed to the Church of England, while presumably practising Judaism in the privacy of his home. The statute concerning the burning of heretics ('De haeretico comburendo') made it unsafe to do otherwise. Lawsuits in the admiralty and queen's bench courts show that he traded to Spain and Portugal, imported Brazilian sugar, and acted as a marine insurance broker. In 1582 his household included his wife, three clerks, and two black women. Nunes and his wife had no surviving children. 
In 1583 Lord Henry Howard, then a state prisoner in the Fleet, wrote to the secretary of state, Sir Francis Walsingham, to ask permission to consult his old physician 'Dr Hector'. Walsingham employed Nunes as his intermediary from 1585 to 1586 in opening peace negotiations with Spain. This he did by corresponding with Dr Antonio Castilho, who had been Portuguese ambassador in London in 1580. After these negotiations failed, Nunes kept Walsingham informed about the preparations of the Spanish armada in Lisbon. In 1588 Spaniards in London reported this back to Philip II. Nunes's brother-in-law and partner, Bernardo Luis Freire, was arrested and interrogated in Madrid. 
Nunes died in Mark Lane, London, in September 1591 and was buried at his request in the churchyard of St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney. The provisions of his will imply that he had modest means. In it Nunes describes Lord Burleigh as his 'verie good lorde' and mentions his friendship with Sir Thomas Heneage. 
Nunes was a well-known figure in Elizabethan London, both as a physician and as a merchant. His trading connections with Spain and Portugal, his vulnerability as a refugee, and his loyalty made him valuable to the English government. Walsingham made good use of him both as a diplomatic intermediary and as a source of intelligence about the Spanish armada. 


@@@@@


doc= 40776


Whatman, James (1702-1759), paper maker, was born in Loose, near Maidstone, Kent, and baptized there on 4 October 1702, the only son and the youngest in the family of three children of James Whatman (1656-1725), a tanner, and his second wife, Mary (died 1726), daughter of George Charlton. The Whatman family had been in Kent since the fifteenth century. Whatman inherited the tan-yard in Loose on his mother's death, and although he is described as a tanner until 1740, he became involved in paper making in 1733, when he bought Old Mill, Hollingbourne, the site of an old fulling mill, built a new paper mill, and installed Richard Harris. Harris moved to Turkey Mill, on the River Len, east of Maidstone, in 1736, and bought it in 1738, with capital provided by Whatman. He then pulled down the old mill and rebuilt it. It is likely that Harris, after finishing his apprenticeship, had visited Holland to learn new techniques, and that he began to apply these at Hollingbourne, and then at Turkey Mill, installing new machinery, including the 'Engine' (later called the 'Hollander Beater') which was used for turning linen rags into pulp. When Harris died in November 1739, he left Turkey Mill to his widow, Ann (1708-1789), daughter of Thomas and Sarah Carter of Leeds, Kent, and on 7 August 1740 she married James Whatman. He became joint life tenant with her of Turkey Mill, and moved to Turkey Court. They had one son, James Whatman ['see below'], and one daughter, and Ann had one daughter from her first marriage. 
At Turkey Mill, with the new equipment, Whatman very soon began to make high-quality white paper. The first known Whatman watermark dates from December 1740, in 'Select Harmony Fourth Collection', a set of six concertos published by John Walsh. From 1747 many state papers were written on Whatman paper, and it was increasingly used in aristocratic households. Although at first Whatman's reputation was based on the quality of his writing paper, by the 1750s his paper was being used in printed books, and Horace Walpole's Strawberry Hill press printed 500 copies of Lucan's 'Pharsalia' on paper marked 'J. W.' in 1758. More importantly Whatman was the first paper maker in Europe to make wove (or vellum) paper. Made by a different process from laid paper, wove paper was smoother, with a more uniform thickness, and although at first it was intended only for fine printed books, by 1800 it had completely replaced laid paper. In 1796 Whatman's son told the American paper maker Joshua Gilpin that his father first made wove paper in 1756, and the earliest known example is in John Baskerville's edition of Virgil's 'Bucolica, georgica et Aeneis', printed in 1757, which contains some pages of wove paper. After more experiments to improve the quality of the paper, Whatman supplied Baskerville with wove paper for his quarto edition of Milton's 'Paradise Regained' in 1759, and J. and R. Tonson printed Edward Capell's 'Prolusions: or Select Pieces of Ancient Poetry' (1759) on Whatman's wove paper. Whatman died on 29 June 1759 and was buried in Loose church on the same day. 
His son, 
Four days before the wedding Whatman's mother transferred the business to him, and moved to Devon with her daughter. It was already one of the largest paper-making concerns in Kent, and Whatman soon became a leading figure in the industry. As early as 1764 he was chosen by the paper makers of Great Britain to petition the commissioners of the excise about the duties on paper, and in 1767 he served as high sheriff for Kent. When William Hickey visited Turkey Mill in 1768 he wrote of the 'great paper manufacturer, who entertained us in a princely style', and by 1771 Whatman was claiming to make more paper than any other English manufacturer. Like his father he experimented with new techniques, and in 1772 he made his first sheets of 'antiquarian' paper, the largest paper ever made in England, 52 in. x 31 in., for James Basire's copper-engraving of 'The Field of the Cloth of Gold'. This paper was soon much in demand from engravers, and he first exported it to the continent in 1775, a significant moment in the history of English paper making, when for the first time English makers rivalled continental ones. By 1778 Whatman's reputation was such that Edward Hasted, in his 'History of Kent', noted that he made the manufacture of writing paper 'to a degree of perfection superior to most in this kingdom' (vol. 2, 132). 
Whatman's wife died in July 1775, and on 3 December 1776 he married Susanna (1753-1814), the eldest of the six children of Jacob Bosanquet, a merchant and banker, and a member of a Huguenot family which had arrived in London from Languedoc in 1686. Her notebook on household management was published in the name of Susanna Whatman in 1952. Their son, James, was born in 1777. The business continued to prosper. Average annual profits between 1781 and 1787 were $4000, and in 1785 Whatman bought a third mill, Poll Mill. He had bought the adjoining estate of Vinters, with 84 acres, in 1783, and after rebuilding the house and converting the land into a park, he moved there in 1787. In 1797 he employed Humphry Repton to redesign the park, but Whatman died before the alterations could be carried out. 
Whatman did not make much wove paper at first, but after Benjamin Franklin had exhibited wove paper in Paris in 1777, inspiring several French makers to try to make their own, Whatman began to develop it again: he told Gilpin that he had brought it into repute in 1778-9. The government first used wove paper for state papers in 1784, at about the time that other English makers began to produce it, and he began to make antiquarian wove paper. Whatman paper was used for public documents in Washington from 1789. A series of classical texts published by T. and T. Payne, printed on yellow wove, included the works of Sallust (1789), four volumes of Tacitus (1790), and Livy's 'Histories' (1794) in eight volumes. William Blake used Whatman paper for his illuminated books, including 'Songs of Innocence' (1789) and 'The Marriage of Heaven and Hell' (1790). Whatman wove paper was used in several large printing projects, including Boydell's edition of Shakespeare (1791-1804), Thomas Macklin's seven-volume edition of the 'Bible' (from 1790), and Bowyer's edition of Hume's 'History of England' (from 1794). At the same time he was installing new iron engines in the mills, and experimenting with bleaching. 
Despite all this activity Whatman was making less profit in the early 1790s. He had a severe stroke in February 1790, and his profits fell to $181 in 1791. After the outbreak of war with France in February 1793 a number of banks and businesses failed; this, combined with labour unrest and his poor health, led him in October 1793 to initiate the sale of the business for $20,000 to the Hollingworth brothers of Maidstone. The sale was completed in August 1794. He lent his manager William Balston $5000, which enabled him to buy a partnership in the new firm, but he does not seem to have considered giving any share in the business to his sixteen-year-old son. Whatman allowed the new firm to use the 'JWhatman' watermark, and after the Hollingworths left the firm in 1806, W. and R. Balston, makers of high-quality writing and drawing paper, continued to use the Whatman trademark. 
Whatman was ill again in 1796, and had an operation in London in July. He died at his home on 17 March 1798, the day on which he made codicils to his will. The cause of his death was never revealed, but it was probably suicide. He was buried at Boxley church on 26 March 1798. His widow lived on at Vinters, handing it over to her son on his marriage in 1811. 


@@@@@


doc= 40778


Bossom, Alfred Charles, Baron Bossom (1881-1965), architect and politician, was born at 17 Caledonian Road, Islington, London, on 16 October 1881, the elder son of Alfred Henry Bossom (1854-1919), a stationer, and Amelia Jane (died 1920), daughter of Edmund Henry Hammond of Finsbury. He was educated at St Thomas's Charterhouse Church of England School in Finsbury, and was then articled as an architect, as well as attending the evening school of the Royal Academy. In April 1900 he joined the housing section of the London county council's architect's department as a draughtsman. 
Bossom migrated to New York about 1905, in the first instance apparently to assist the English amateur architect and socialite George A. Crawley, who had acquired domestic commissions for Henry Phipps, a partner in US Steel. Doubtless on the strength of this connection and his experience at the London county council, he was put in charge of some industrial housing being built in conditions of urgency by US Steel at Pittsburgh. His involvement in a later crash programme of housing at Bridgeport, Connecticut, for Remington workers making arms for the Russian market at the start of the First World War, enhanced Bossom's expertise in building productivity. But he also worked on the restoration of the historic Fort Ticonderoga, New York, for the Pell family (1908-9). 
In 1910 Bossom married Emily (died 1932), daughter of Samuel Gamble Bayne, an oil magnate of Ulster origin and the president of the Seaboard National Bank, set up to deal in oil certificates. This appears to have marked the start of his independent career as an architect of banks and skyscrapers, which he conducted from an elegant office in Manhattan, designing mainly in the 'bankers' Renaissance' style then popular in America. He also took a keen interest in the blend of pre-Columbian and early Spanish-American architecture in Mexico, which he characterized as 'a style so free, so largely suited to our needs that it would seem as if the American point of view had found its expression on this continent centuries ago' (Bossom, 'Architectural Pilgrimage', 6-7). Beside the Seaboard Bank's headquarters in New York, he built: the Liberty Bank, Buffalo, New York; the Virginia Trust Company and First National Bank, Richmond, Virginia; the People's Bank, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania; the Greenwich Trust Company, Greenwich, Connecticut; and the Magnolia Petroleum Building, Dallas, Texas -- in its time the tallest structure south of Washington. By the early 1920s Bossom was wealthy, with powerful business and professional connections and a burgeoning taste for politics. Treasurer of the New York Architectural League, he was also honorary secretary of the US Baltic League, chairman of the American Mid-European Association, and founder of the Movement for Co-operation in Government, while his wife was treasurer to the New York Philharmonic Orchestra. 
However, Bossom had retained his British citizenship, and in 1926 the couple made their home in England, where their children were already at school. Free of the need to work, Bossom rejoined the London county council, at first as a 'Municipal Reform' member of its housing committee (1927) and then as an alderman (1930-34). In the general election of 1929 he was defeated as a Conservative in Hackney, but in 1931 he triumphed at Maidstone with a majority of over 20,000. He bought an ancient house (Stoneacre, Otham) near Maidstone and for twenty-eight years conscientiously nursed the seat, to which he was regularly re-elected with substantial majorities. 
The death of his wife and eldest son, Bruce Bayne (1917-1932), in a flying accident clinched Bossom's commitment to politics and public service. He was totally dedicated to the Conservative Party, and was conspicuously loyal in turn to its successive leaders. From a maiden speech on 'waste in the construction of airfields' he went on to committees involving public expenditure and was resolutely opposed to high taxation. An early mark was made with a trade mission in 1933 to the Baltic states, exploiting his earlier contacts. He acted as a spokesman for architecture and construction in parliament, introducing as a private member in 1938 the second 'Architects Registration Bill', which secured the 'closed shop' in architecture, and campaigning for the reduction of building costs through American-style efficiency in construction. Long before he had argued that 'commercial buildings have to be commercial... bringing in a revenue commensurate with the amount of investment' (Bossom, 'Architectural Pilgrimage', 9). Bossom fervently admired the American skyscraper, and published 'Building to the Skies: the Romance of the Skyscraper' in 1934. But he strenuously opposed the introduction of higher buildings in Europe, and once crossed the Atlantic by liner just to argue the point in a conference. 
Bossom was naturally drawn into the wartime investigations into fast construction methods, and in 1943 headed a mission to examine the success of the Tennessee valley authority in assembling prefabricated homes brought to the site in halves, with fittings already complete. This mission had some impact on the British 'prefab' programme. Subsequently he became president of the Modular Society, set up in 1952 to bring dimensional co-ordination to post-war building production. He also took particular interest in the Royal Society of Arts, of which he was chairman. Preferring the variety of delegations, international business and friendship associations, and social and voluntary organizations to the lure of ministerial office, Bossom gloried in giving parties and going on trips to other countries. He amassed dignities and honorary offices with the same enthusiastic acquisitiveness as he collected North American Indian artefacts and police truncheons. A conscientious attender of the Commons when in England, he fell in love with its rituals and procedures, and was moved to publish 'Our House' (1948), a brief admiring exposition of its formalities. 
In 1934 Bossom was married again, this time to Mrs Elinor Armstrong, daughter of Samuel Gamble Dittenhofer of Minnesota; they divorced in 1947. He received a baronetcy in 1953, and took into his arms a steel building column with three floor girders and the motto 'Esto quo es' -- 'be yourself' -- a wry comment, perhaps, on Churchill's witticism: 'Bossom? Funny name -- neither one thing nor the other.' In 1959 he finally stood down from the Commons. A life peerage in 1960 took him to the Lords, where he was not conspicuous. He died on 4 September 1965 at his home, 1 St John's House, Smith Square, Westminster, and was buried three days later at Thursley, Surrey, next to his first wife. The baronetcy passed to his second son, Clive ('b'. 1918). A third son, Doric (1922-1959), predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 40782


Payne, Antony (d. 1691?), giant, was reputedly 7 feet 2 inches tall at the age of twenty-one. No authentic records of his parentage, birth date, baptism, or marriage survive, but there were certainly Paynes living during the seventeenth century in Stratton, Cornwall. Antony Payne evidently died and was buried there on 13 July 1691, according to later accounts aged about eighty. However, as the parish registers do not begin until 1687 it is possible that the record of Payne's burial has been lost and that the entry is of a kinsman of the same name. Sibilla Payne, buried at Stratton on 9 July 1691, may have been his wife. Payne was, it seems, throughout his life a devoted and valued retainer in peace and war of the Grenvilles of Stowe, notably of John Grenville, first earl of Bath. Again, documentation is lacking, but a clearly contemporary painting, confidently ascribed to Sir Godfrey Kneller and dated 1680, depicting a military Payne against a background of Plymouth citadel, where Bath was governor, gives credence to claims for Payne as a yeoman of the guard and halberdier there. After many vicissitudes of ownership and treatment, the portrait came late in the nineteenth century into the possession of the Royal Institution of Cornwall. 
An engraving of the painting had accompanied a circumstantial account of Payne in C. S. Gilbert's 'Historical Survey of Cornwall' (1817). From this point on the legend of a gentle giant -- the 'Falstaff of the West' -- began to emerge, clinched by an article by R. S. Hawker, vicar of Morwenstow, Cornwall, in 'All the Year Round' for 1866 (vol. 16), later incorporated into his 'Footprints of Former Men in Far Cornwall' (1870). Inimical to the current processes of reform in church and state, and nostalgic for his own (but shared) brand of Stuart Anglican royalism, Hawker was more than a mere romancer. A purpose underlay all his writings in prose and verse. A slipshod researcher who 'never let facts, or the absence of them, stand in the way of his imagination' (Granville, vii) or his aspirations, Hawker presented Anthony (his spelling) as 'a true Stuart', 'a wonderful boy', plebeian but a leader, physically skilled, brave and bright, loyal to the end. No contemporary report puts Payne present at the battle of Lansdowne (5 July 1643), but Hawker prints a handsome consoling letter from him to Grace, widow of Sir Bevil Grenville, heroically killed in action there. Its style soon exposed it as a fabrication, but Hawker's vivid characterization, supported by dubious artefacts -- Payne's 6 quart flask -- and invented folk metaphors -- 'as long as Tony Payne's foot' -- created an instant tradition which survived with advantages in Cornish popular history. Therein lies the true historical significance of Antony Payne: hardly in what he was or did in his own time, but for what was made of him from two centuries on, as a symbol of a continuing Cornish patriotism generally and for glimpses of the values of an arch-conservatism for which Hawker was in effect an enthusiastic literary agent. 


@@@@@


doc= 40783


Vyvyan, Sir Richard, first baronet (1613-1665), politician and local administrator, was the eldest son and heir of Sir Francis Vyvyan (died 1635) of Trelowarren, Mawgan in Meneage, Cornwall, and his second wife, Loveday, daughter of John Connock of Treworgy, St Cleer, in the same county. His father was governor of St Mawes Castle from 1603 until 1632, when he was removed for embezzlement. Vyvyan matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 20 June 1631, graduating BA the same day. He entered the Middle Temple in November 1631, reigning as prince in the Christmas masque of 1635, but was not called to the bar. Knighted on 1 March 1636, in October of that year he married Mary, daughter of James Bulteel of Barnstaple. They had six daughters and two sons. Vyvyan represented Penryn in the Short Parliament of 1640, and Tregony in the Long Parliament until he was disabled for royalism in January 1644. 
In late September 1642, during the Truro mayoral elections, Vyvyan arrived at the town hall urging the outgoing mayor to call out the trained bands for the king. Upon the mayor's refusal Vyvyan appealed to the crowd outside, since 'they know not what unlawfull Assemblies were gathered in many parts of the County to the danger of their lives, their wives, and children, if they came not out to assist the Sheriffe and Justices' ('New News from Cornwall', 1642, 1). The new mayor duly released the town arms, and the following day the trained bands were sent out for the king. 
On 14 November 1642 Charles I issued a commission to Vyvyan to coin plate into money and to pay it over to Sir Ralph Hopton. On 3 January 1644 the king issued a further commission to Vyvyan to erect a royalist mint at Exeter, but Vyvyan's two surviving account books for the mint show that he had moved the mint to Exeter in September 1643, immediately after the capture of the city. He remained there almost continuously from September 1643 to April 1646, with two notable exceptions. On 27 January 1644 he attended the Oxford parliament, and he was created a DCL by the university the following month. In August 1644 he followed the king in his campaign against Essex in Cornwall, and on 12 February 1645 was created a baronet for his services to the royal cause. 
In November 1642 Hopton had commissioned Vyvyan to erect a fort on Dennis Head, at the mouth of the Helford River. Building work began in spring 1643. On 19 February 1644 the king issued a commission authorizing Vyvyan to complete the fort, and to establish a garrison of one lieutenant, one master gunner, five other gunmen, one porter, and forty rank and file. Vyvyan paid for the erection of the fort and maintained it for eighteen months at his own expense, at a total cost of $1350. After the fort's surrender to Fairfax on 18 March 1646 Vyvyan spent a further $2055 10's'. on arrears of pay. 
Vyvyan was in Exeter when the city fell and on 9 April 1646 was named in the articles for the surrender of the city. On 20 June 1646 he begged to compound for his delinquency, and on 8 October his fine was fixed at $600. It was also agreed that his goods in Exeter and stock in Cornwall, seized contrary to the terms of the treaty of Exeter, should be restored, but the local committees did not comply. It was only after Fairfax's intervention that, on 3 April 1648, parliament remitted $300, the second half of Vyvyan's fine, in compensation for the loss of his goods. On 11 May 1649 Vyvyan accepted this final discharge of his estate, estimating that he had spent nearly $10,000 in the king's cause. 
Nothing is known of Vyvyan's activities during the interregnum. However, he celebrated the Restoration in 1660 by erecting two granite pillars at Trelowarren, and his former services were rewarded with the governorship of St Mawes Castle and appointment as gentleman of the king's privy chamber. He was returned as the member for St Mawes in 1663 and served the constituency until his death on 3 November 1665. He was buried, as he had requested, 'without any Pompe or extraordinary cost or expense' (will), on 10 November at Mawgan in Meneage. His wife survived him, and his eldest son, Vyell ('bap'. 1634, died 1697), succeeded to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 40784


Hogge, Ralph (d. 1585), gun-founder, was a leading figure in the expansion of the iron industry in the Sussex Weald. Nothing is known of his parentage or place of birth, though he was probably born in Sussex. He had business connections with Brian Hogge, a brother or close relative, who worked in the ordnance office for fifty years. Holinshed gave to Hogge and Peter Baude the credit of being, in 1543, the first to cast iron guns in England, at a furnace in Buxted, Sussex. This achievement is more likely to have been the first successful casting of an iron gun in one piece, breach and barrel together. Hogge's part, though important, was probably that of the skilled furnace master. He and Baude, then the leading bronze gun-founder, would have worked under the direction of William Levett, the king's 'gunstonemaker', who went on to supply cast-iron ordnance until his death in 1554. In his will Levett left Hogge, his 'servant', $10 and a quantity of iron (TNA: PRO, PROB/11/37/5). 
Hogge may at first have worked Levett's furnaces, for on 14 November 1559 he was appointed to Levett's post of 'gunstonemaker'. Then on 13 May 1560 he was married at Maresfield, Sussex, to Margaret Henslowe, from a well-to-do family; her father, Edmund, was master of the game in Ashdown Forest. Hogge being of humbler origins, the marriage would have been a significant upward step in his career. He opened two new furnaces near Maresfield and his production began to be reflected in contemporary records: the lease of woodlands in Fletching, where he lived, and the delivery of guns, shot, and iron materials to the ordnance. The navy however preferred bronze to cast-iron guns. 
Nevertheless, before the end of the 1560s as many as eight furnaces within a few miles of Buxted were casting iron guns; and this over-production was to characterize the industry for the rest of the century. To the alarm of the privy council and the merchant community, guns surplus to local needs were finding eager purchasers abroad: they were bought by privateers, pirates, and even the Spanish. The council's response was, on 5 March 1568, to vest in Ralph Hogge an exclusive right to the export of guns and shot. This should have bolstered Hogge's business while ensuring for the state an immediate supply of ordnance in time of danger. But Hogge's monopoly was soon challenged. By 1574 he was complaining bitterly to the council of the ease with which iron guns were sold across the channel. He appears to have reduced his own capacity to one furnace. 
The threat to national security and trade caused sharp alarm in the council; and vigorous efforts were made, without in the end much success, to eliminate these clandestine sales. Hogge, however, believed that at last his concession would be protected and that increased production was justified. Within two years he was managing four furnaces capable of turning out guns, all conveniently close together in the Maresfield and Buxted area. 
Hogge is the only sixteenth-century founder of iron guns of whose transactions some record has survived. Between 1576 and 1578 he used his brother-in-law John Henslowe as an agent. Henslowe recorded regular payments to woodcutters, colliers, miners, and carriers; and he also accounted to Hogge for occasional sales of guns and shot. The accounts cover a short period only and Henslowe was not the only agent used. Despite this it is possible to construct a picture of the likely surplus Hogge earned. From one furnace with a mixed output of guns, shot, and pig iron Hogge might have shown an annual surplus of $300. Working three or four furnaces should have given him, for those days, a very good income. However, there is no evidence that Hogge was in fact making vast amounts of money, or was sharing it with partners or investors. The only sign of affluence was his construction in 1581 of a house of modest size in Buxted (subsequently known as Hogge House), perhaps for his retirement. 
About this time, however, Hogge took a case against another agent, accusing him of embezzling $6000. In the course of this dispute (which was never settled) Hogge claimed that he himself could neither read nor write and was so disabled he could not physically supervise his furnaces. If true, this suggests that towards the end of his career Hogge's affairs were in disarray due to a combination of factors: rapid expansion; lack of education and managerial ability; physical handicaps; and the need to rely on agents who may have been both inefficient and dishonest. 
Hogge died in 1585 and was buried at St Margaret the Queen, Buxted, on 14 December. Although the leading sixteenth-century producer of cast-iron guns, he died by no means a rich man. His will made no mention of ironworks or equipment (TNA: PRO, PROB/11/69). All he had was his house, which he left to his widow for her lifetime and then, since they had no children, to his nephew Thomas, who quickly sold the reversion. John Henslowe moved in with his sister, claiming that Hogge had mortgaged the property to him for $120. This claim eventually failed after many years of dispute. 


@@@@@


doc= 40785


Easdall, William (d. 1643), civil lawyer, was born of unknown parents in Westminster. He was educated at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and started his working career acting as an attorney collecting rents for Westminster Abbey, although there is no record of his appointment. Leases reveal that Easdall acted as an attorney for Richard Neile in Rochester diocese in 1610, in which year he also performed the duties of a personal secretary and carried out a survey of the diocese of Coventry and Lichfield for Neile, prior to the latter's becoming bishop of that see. It was after Neile's move to Lincoln in 1614, the year that Easdall graduated LLB from Cambridge, that Easdall's career really blossomed. In June 1616 he was appointed commissary to the bishop for the archdeaconries of Lincoln and Stow and official of the archdeacon of Buckingham (who happened to be Neile's half-brother, Robert Newell). Easdall remained on close terms with Neile, but 1617 witnessed a parting of their ways as Neile moved to Durham. In 1620 Easdall proceeded LLD, and in 1623 submitted a request to join Doctors' Commons, although he does not appear to have started paying dues until 1624. 
From that date Easdall occupied various prominent positions in the northern province. It may have been in recognition of a shift of interests that he surrendered the office of porter of Westminster Abbey close. From 1624 to 1632 he occupied, through the patronage of Archbishop Toby Matthew, the important post of commissary of the exchequer and prerogative court of York. He also shared the chancellorship of York -- with Matthew Dodsworth (1624-7), Edward Mainwaring (1627-37), and George Riddell (1637-40). It is perhaps ironic that Easdall was appointed, additionally, chancellor of the diocese of Durham in 1627 just as Neile was leaving for Winchester, but they were reunited when he retired from that post to devote all his efforts to York in 1632 on Neile's appointment as archbishop. By this date Easdall had also become a commissioner for causes ecclesiastical in the province of York. 
Easdall served as a justice of the peace for Yorkshire between 1629 and 1632. Once described as a 'typical Caroline bureaucrat of the school of Wentworth and of 'Thorough'' (Marchant, 'Church under the Law', 48), Easdall was much more than that. As a loyal friend of Richard Neile -- acting as godfather to the latter's grandchildren -- Easdall deserves great credit for the success of the campaigns which were initiated throughout the province of York in the 1630s. It was he who masterminded the metropolitical visitation of 1632-3; he personally ensured that it was one of the most successful in living memory, both in its effect on the lives of clergy and laity and in its production of revenue for the archbishop, and that the campaign to restore churches initiated at that visitation was sustained throughout the province through the work of the chancery court to which his roving inspectors reported. Easdall's reports to Neile serve as key evidence of diocesan administration in the 1630s and indicate that Easdall was as committed as his episcopal master to the programme to promote the 'beauty of holiness'. Easdall died in York in December 1643 and was buried on 16 December in York Minster. An administration of his goods was entered on 22 February 1644 and finalized on 2 May. He left everything, apart from an earlier gift of $20 for Peterhouse Chapel, to his daughter Barbara, his wife, whose name is unknown, having apparently died. 


@@@@@


doc= 40786


Newell, Robert (1576-1642), Church of England clergyman, was born in Westminster, the son of Robert Newell (died 1602) and Sybil Neile (died 1611), who had been married at St Margaret's, Westminster, in April 1575. His mother had three surviving sons from her first marriage to Paul Neile, William, Walter, and Richard Neile (1562-1640), who had a distinguished career in the church which benefited Newell greatly. Educated first at Westminster School, Newell matriculated from Richard's college, St John's, Cambridge, about 1595 and graduated BA in 1597. Possibly through the influence of the Cecil family, Neile's patrons, in 1599 he became rector of Wormley, Hertfordshire. The following year he proceeded MA, was incorporated with Neile at Oxford, and on 26 October was ordained priest in London by John Sterne, suffragan bishop of Colchester, with letters testimonial provided by Neile and William Baylie, archdeacon of Peterborough. 
In 1605 Newell became vicar of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, a Cecil living which he took over from Neile on the latter's promotion to the deanery of Westminster. It was through Dean Neile (from 1608 also bishop of Rochester) that he gained his first significant clerical appointments -- in 1607 the reversion to a canonry in Westminster and, on his resignation of Wormley in 1610, the rectory of Islip, Oxfordshire, a living in the gift of the dean and chapter of Westminster. Following Neile's translation to Lichfield also in 1610, the same year Newell took a Chichester prebend and succeeded his stepbrother as treasurer of Chichester Cathedral (although he seems to have regarded both as sinecures), and also gained from him the Lichfield prebend of Pipa Parva; he exchanged the last for the wealthier prebend of Colwich in 1613. On 17 September 1612 at St Giles Cripplegate, London, he married Elizabeth Clarke, sister of Gabriel Clarke, one of Neile's chaplains and later archdeacon of Durham; they had five children -- Sybil, Richard, Dorothy, Elizabeth, and John. 
When it was rumoured in 1614 that he might gain the living of Clifton Campville, which eventually went to John Overall, Newell was described as a royal chaplain. On Neile's translation to Lincoln the same year Newell duly gained a Lincoln prebend and became subdean of the cathedral. That April -- on Neile's collation -- he attained his most important clerical position, that of archdeacon of Buckingham, a post he held until his death. Again in 1614, Cecil family patronage accounted for his appointment as rector of Clothall, Hertfordshire. In October 1620 Neile, now bishop of Durham, gave Newell a Durham prebend, but there is little evidence that he ever resided either in Durham or Buckinghamshire, where, presumably through local gentry patronage, he also acquired the rectory of North Crawley in 1631. Instead he concentrated on his duties at Westminster, where he finally took possession of his prebend in April 1620; he resigned his Chichester prebend in 1622. He always took his work at the abbey seriously and was part of a group of canons led by Peter Heylin who took over its running after the sequestration of Dean John Williams in 1637. 
While Newell undoubtedly benefited from the patronage of his illustrious stepbrother, he appears to have been an able and efficient clergyman in his own right. He served Neile conscientiously when the latter was dean of Westminster and appears to have moved out of his stepbrother's shadow most effectively when in the diocese of Lincoln. It was the latter diocese which seems to have claimed his affections, for his will notes bequests to Lincoln of communion pots and $1000 for the cathedral fabric fund. He also made generous provision for the poor of various places, particularly Clothall, in memory of his wife's family. John Clarke, a fellow Lincolnshire minister, dedicated his 'Holy Oil for the Lamps of the Sanctuary' to Newell in 1628. Records of the archdeaconry of Buckinghamshire, including his surviving visitation returns for 1626, 1627, 1630, 1635, 1637, and 1639, suggest that he shared Neile's interest in observing all church ceremonies with due order and dignity, and in aptly fitted surroundings. They reveal a man concerned for order and ceremony, one who insisted that people should receive communion kneeling. 
Newell was still treasurer of Chichester Cathedral, when he died on 21 June 1642 at Winchester; he was buried in Winchester Cathedral. His will, not proved until 1646, suggests that he died relatively well off, for he left several hundred pounds each to various members of the extended Neile/Newell family, including Gabriel Clarke, John Neile, and Edward Burby, with whom he was probably staying when he died. His wife had predeceased him. Their elder son, Richard, successively a member of three Cambridge colleges, Emmanuel, St John's, and Peterhouse, at the last of which he was a fellow from 1639 to 1642, followed his father into the church. He succeeded his father as subdean of Lincoln Cathedral in 1641, but was sequestered shortly before his death in 1645. 


@@@@@


doc= 40787


Robert Steele (1745-1830) and Elizabeth Scott (1750-1800). The elder Robert Steele was the son of James Steele (1709-1786), shipbuilder, and his wife, Anne Laurie (1720-1795). James Steele had a small shipyard at Saltcoats, Ayrshire, specializing in fishing vessels and coasters, and it was here that his son learnt his craft as an apprentice shipwright. When his father died in 1786, Robert took charge of the firm, and he remained in Saltcoats for another decade. While there he married Elizabeth Scott and they had at least four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 40789


Salter, John Henry (1862-1942), naturalist and diarist, was born on 5 June 1862 at Westleton, Suffolk, the son of William Henry Salter (died 1869/70) and his wife Lucy, formerly Appleton. His Quaker parents were shopkeepers. He had one brother, William. His father died when he was seven, and the family then moved to Scarborough. He attended the Quaker school at Ackworth, Yorkshire, studied botany at Flanders College and Owens College, Manchester, and taught at Quaker schools in Lisburn in Northern Ireland, in Yorkshire, and in Birmingham. He was briefly on the staff of University College, London, before going to the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, in 1891 as assistant lecturer and demonstrator in biology. He initiated the College Scientific Society in 1892. In 1896 he had leave of absence for nine months at Bonn University in Germany where he worked on starch grains, and for this work he gained his DSc from University College in 1897. In that year he spent three months at Marburg University in Germany, working on the relationship between the algal and fungal components of lichens. 
Salter was appointed first professor of botany at Aberystwyth in 1899, and on 15 August the same year he married Adah Sophia (1862/3-1917), the daughter of Henry Freeman, a Birmingham tea blender. They had two sons, Arnold and Ronald. He resigned his chair in 1903, but held minor posts as curator of the University Museum and lecturer in bacteriology and entomology in the agricultural department until 1908, when because of his wife's deteriorating health he retired completely and in December took her and their sons to Guimar on Tenerife. In February 1910 they moved to south-east France, staying at a variety of health resorts including Arcachon, Bagneres-de-Bigorre, and Capbreton. They moved to Verwood in Dorset in 1916 and after Adah's death there in 1917 and the completion of his sons' education, Salter returned to Aberystwyth in 1923, living for the rest of his life at Fairview, Llanbadarn Fawr, on the outskirts of the town. 
Throughout his life Salter made extensive collections of plants and insects which are now in the National Museum and Gallery of Wales. He published many papers and notes, chiefly in the 'North Western Naturalist'. One of his chief interests was in discovering the height above sea level at which plants could grow, and this resulted in a paper, 'The Altitudinal Range of Flowering Plants and Ferns in Mid Wales' (1928). He wrote a 'List of the Flowering Plants and Ferns of Aberystwyth and Neighbourhood' [1901], followed by 'The Flowering Plants and Ferns of Cardiganshire' (1935) which is still the only flora of the county. His stay in the Canaries resulted in a paper 'Regional Distribution of the Native Flora in Teneriffe' (1918), and he is commemorated in the name of a Tenerife moss 'Brachythecium salteri' Cardot & Dixon. His herbarium, now at the National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff, comprised some 3000 specimens, including 700 plants that he grew in his own garden at Fairview, the flowering dates of which he meticulously recorded in his diaries. 
Ornithology was Salter's other main interest, also resulting in many short articles, 'List of the Birds of Aberystwyth and Neighbourhood' (1900), and a popular book, 'Bird Life throughout the Year' [1913]. Although he was an enthusiastic egg collector (it is not known whether his collection has survived), he was not a shooter and often deplored the activities of those who were. He was very much a conservationist in his concern for birds as well as for plants and wild places, and in 1903 he initiated through the British Ornithologists' Club the red kite protection scheme that led to the revival of the fortunes of this species in mid-Wales. The scheme is still in existence. 
Salter's greatest legacy is probably his natural history diaries, now in the National Library of Wales. They contain entries covering sixty-eight years and are immensely readable, carefully composed (presumably mostly from field notebooks that have disappeared), and give a vivid picture of his days in the field especially in Cardiganshire, Tenerife, the western Pyrenees, and Dorset. As a descriptive source for the state of plant, bird, and other animal life of the countryside in his time they are invaluable, and they contain much still unpublished information of importance. Although his correspondence has not been preserved, he copied much relevant material from it into his diaries. In Cardiganshire he frequently walked 20-30 miles a day and never owned a car. He was a tall, quietly spoken, shy and retiring man, a Quaker, a vegetarian, a teetotaller and a non-smoker. In spite of his academic career, it is as a local naturalist who was the main source of information on the natural history of Cardiganshire and the neighbouring parts of mid-Wales for over fifty years that he is best remembered. He was found dead after a fall in his garden on 5 August 1942, never having fully recovered from a prostate operation in March of that year. He was buried with a Quaker funeral on 8 August in Llanbadarn Fawr churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 40790


Day, James Wentworth (1899-1983), journalist, was born on 21 April 1899 at Marsh House, Exning, Suffolk, the elder son of James Thomas Wentworth Day (1862-1906) of Wicken, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Martha Ethel, daughter of Llewellyn Hatch Staples of Bourn, in Cambridgeshire. Wentworth Day, who was known to his friends as Jim, was educated at Newton College, Newton Abbot, and read English as an extramural student at Cambridge University under Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch. After service in the First World War (in 1917-18) he became a journalist, learning his craft on the 'Cambridge Daily News' and then in Fleet Street as a reporter on the 'Daily Express', where in 1923 he was promoted to publicity manager after only five days. From 1924 to 1925 he was make-up sub-editor of both the 'Sunday Express' and 'Daily Express'. He also edited a monthly sporting publication called 'English Life', and became Lord Beaverbrook's personal assistant. He was assistant editor of 'Country Life' at the age of twenty-six and acting editor of 'The Field' (1930-31). 
A high tory patriot of extreme right wing views, in 1933 Wentworth Day became the personal representative of the eccentric pro-fascist Lady Houston, and was involved with her sponsorship of the duke of Hamilton's first flight over Mount Everest. Once, when involved with one of Lady Houston's political meetings, he was attacked and received a black eye. A few days later in a West End club Churchill walked in with a friend to whom he introduced Wentworth Day as Lady Houston's kept man -- 'Observe the love token in his eye'. Although impressed by Mussolini, Wentworth Day persistently warned of the danger posed by German ambitions and criticized the Nazi regime. 
After editing the 'Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News' from 1935 to 1937 Wentworth Day made a sudden switch of career to become propaganda adviser to the government of Egypt, providing material for a book, 'Sport in Egypt' (1938). He served as a war correspondent in the Second World War but was invalided out in 1943. 
Wentworth Day was a self-styled politician though never a member of parliament, having unsuccessfully contested Hornchurch (in 1950 and 1951) and campaigned in seven other by-elections. He listed among his recreations in 'Who's Who' 'taking the left wing intelligentsia at its own valuation', and to this end he acted as an 'agent provocateur' at a political meeting in Newark during the 1945 general election. While the marxist Harold Laski, then chairman of the Labour Party, was in Newark giving a political address, Wentworth Day put some leading questions to him, making sure that someone from the 'Newark Advertiser' reported them. Laski sued the newspaper for suggesting that he had advocated revolution by violent means, but the jury found for the paper and Laski's career was seriously damaged. He also threatened to thrash the Christian socialist vicar of Thaxted, Conrad Noel, if the latter removed a union flag from the church. 
Wentworth Day was the author of many books, including biographies of Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother (1967), Princess Marina, duchess of Kent (1962), Sir Malcolm Campbell (1931), and Lady Houston (1958). He contributed to various journals such as 'Country Life' on ghosts, farming, wildfowling, and on his beloved East Anglia; he also published many books on these topics, including 'Essex Ghosts' (1973), 'Farming Adventure: a Thousand Miles through England on a Horse' (1975), 'The Modern Fowler' (1934), and 'Norwich and the Broads' (1953). From 1962 to 1966 he edited 'East Anglia Life', a job for which he was eminently suitable, but quarrelled with the proprietor and resigned. 
Wentworth Day was married three times: his first wife was Helen Alexia Gardom, whom he married on 12 December 1925. They were divorced in 1934, and he married (Elizabeth) Nerina Shute (1908-2004) on 24 November 1936. This relationship also ended in divorce in 1943, whereupon he married Marion Edith McLean of New Zealand, with whom he had a daughter. Wentworth Day was a caricature of a reactionary English country gentleman of the old school. He was often irascible and difficult to deal with, defects aggravated by old age and near blindness. He died at his splendid house at Ingatestone, in Essex, on 4 January 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 40791


Smith, Robert William Innes (1872-1933), physician and medical historian, was born at North Bridge, Edinburgh, on 26 December 1872, the eldest of the three sons of William Smith (1848-1931), chemist and inventor, and his wife, Louisa Selina Campbell-Colquhoun (1847-1923), daughter of John Ferguson of the Lairg, Glenledknock, Perthshire. At birth his father gave him the name of Innes (referring to his own coheiress great-grandmother, a descendant of the twelfth chief of clan Innes). He used Innes as part of his surname from 1895. 
Smith was educated in Edinburgh at Daniel Stewart's College and graduated MB CM at Edinburgh University in 1894. He qualified MRCS, LRCP, London, in 1900. He spent a period on postgraduate work at Ancoats Hospital, Manchester, and then at King's College Hospital, London, and gained his MD degree at Edinburgh in 1902. In 1896 he married Blythe Simpson Chalmers (died 1957), with whom he had four children. 
Innes Smith spent almost all of his professional life in Sheffield, in general practice. However, he also became surgeon to the major steel firm of Vickers Sons and Maxim Ltd, and was much called upon there and elsewhere as a result of the expertise he had developed as a medical referee not long after the 'Workmen's Compensation Act' of 1897. At that time, in heavy industry in particular, both management and the workforce were having to adapt to the deep social impact of that act. Because of his special skill Innes Smith was called as an official witness in 1907 at the hearing of the royal commission on the poor laws and relief of distress. He was the moving force behind the initiation of the Sheffield Works Ambulance Movement, having shown that the severe injuries sustained by employees in heavy industry could justify a large firm in running its own ambulance. He was also an Admiralty surgeon for twenty years, a fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine, and a member of the Sheffield Medico-Chirurgical Society; and he was involved in many charitable organizations, becoming honorary secretary (later president) of the West Riding Medical Charitable Society and vice-president of the Royal Medical Foundation of Epsom College, for whom he raised large sums of money. 
Throughout his dedicated and busy life Innes Smith took the keenest interest in medical history, and in 1927 he was vice-president of the section of the history of medicine at the 95th annual meeting of the British Medical Association. He wrote monographs on Sir John Eliot MD and on Dr James Mounsey of Rammerscales. He felt that insufficient credit had been awarded to Mounsey as a result of his being confused by some with the eccentric physician Messenger Monsey. Conceived during a period of illness, Innes Smith's 'magnum opus' was 'English-Speaking Students of Medicine at the University of Leyden' (1932), which was well received internationally at the time of its publication and which remained the standard reference work in its field. In addition to its valuable introduction, the compilation provides the names of about 2000 medical figures, usually with brief, well-researched biographical notes. The groundwork for his Leiden book also provided almost as many names of English-speaking medical practitioners who had attended other European universities. This manuscript listing was at its most developed for Padua, and less so for Rheims and Utrecht; additionally it included such student names as Innes Smith could obtain from Angers, Basel, Bologna, Bourges, Caen, Cahors, Ferrara, Franeker, Groningen, Harderwyck, Helmstadt, Montpellier, Orange, and Pisa. The records for twenty-one other universities had held no English medical names. 
Ill health prevented Innes Smith from completing a further work from any of these concurrent researches. He died of cancer at his home, Totley Brook Road, Dore, Sheffield, on 28 April 1933, survived by his wife, and was buried in Crookes cemetery, Sheffield. His scattered manuscript notes, which comprise about 1500 medical names, remained in the archives of the Royal College of Physicians, London until they were collated and published posthumously in 1996, in computer readable form together with several bound printed sets in hard covers under the title 'English-speaking students of medicine at continental universities: the work archive of R. W. Innes-Smith'. He was also the biographical subject of a FitzPatrick lecture of the Royal College of Physicians (London). 
When his posthumous work is included Innes Smith's biographical listing has provided the best available details of medical students during those centuries when British students often had to go abroad if they sought university medical education, owing to the poor state of medical teaching at home. Innes Smith also collected 'carmina' (laudatory verses) composed between 1650 and 1654 by English-speaking students, usually in Latin, in honour of the anatomist and surgeon Antonio Molinetti of Padua. A critical analysis of these 'carmina' and a critique of the genre of these fashionable poems have since been published. 
Innes Smith amassed one of the largest collections of prints of medical portraits in private hands, and in so doing he effectively illustrated his uncanny gift for remembering and being able to identify a likeness. This helped him to recognize an important portrait of Sir Charles Scarburgh which had been wrongly identified, Scarburgh having been royal physician to Charles II, James II, and Queen Mary. He bought the portrait and presented it to the Royal College of Physicians (London). Most of his iconographic collection of prints and engravings has survived and is in the care of Sheffield University, together with a part of his extensive library on medical history. 
During his lifetime Innes Smith's research led to articles in the 'Edinburgh Medical Journal' and to shorter submissions or notes to the 'British Medical Journal', 'The Lancet', and the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine'. After his death Sir Henry Wellcome asked for his cap, gown, microscope, and other items, for the Wellcome Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 40794


Gower, Millicent Fanny Sutherland-Leveson-, duchess of Sutherland (1867-1955), society hostess and social reformer, was born on 20 October 1867 at Dysart House, Fife, the eldest child of Robert St Clair-Erskine, fourth earl of Rosslyn (1833-1900), and his wife, Blanche (died 1933), daughter of Henry Fitzroy and widow of the Hon. Charles Maynard. Frances Evelyn (Daisy) Greville, countess of Warwick, was her half-sister. On her seventeenth birthday she married Cromartie Sutherland-Leveson-Gower, marquess of Stafford (1851-1913), and rapidly established herself as one of the most successful London hostesses, one of the few who was at home with both the Marlborough House set and the Souls. Her first book, 'How I Spent my Twentieth Year', was published in 1889. Two sons and two daughters were born between 1885 and 1893; the eldest child, a daughter, died at the age of two and a half. In 1892 her husband succeeded to the title of fourth duke of Sutherland, and to extensive estates in Scotland, Staffordshire, and Shropshire. Their London residence, Stafford House, became (as it had been under Sutherland's grandmother, the Duchess Harriet) a great venue for social and political receptions. Millicent's fame as a society beauty was captured about 1904 in John Singer Sargent's portrait of her. 
But Millicent Sutherland was not content to be merely a society hostess. She had a serious outlook on life and became active as a social reformer, earning the nicknames the Democratic Duchess and Meddlesome Millie; she did not travel as far down the road to socialism as her half-sister, Daisy Warwick. She campaigned successfully for the elimination of the use of lead in pottery glazing in the Staffordshire potteries, for which she was caricatured by Arnold Bennett in his 'Five Towns' novels as the Countess of Chell. She contributed a chapter, 'On the dangerous processes in the potting industry', to a local study of workers in pottery manufacture. She also founded the North Staffordshire Cripples' Aid Society, attempted to revive the home-spun woollen industry in the Scottish highlands, and helped to found a rural technical school at Golspie in Sutherland. She served as president of the Scottish Home Industries Association. The duchess also had ambitions to be a writer. Her first novel, 'One Hour and the Next' (1899), reflected her growing political awareness and surging romanticism; a volume of short stories, 'The Winds of the World' (1902), was scathingly reviewed but was avidly read by a less critical public. She commissioned and edited a volume of poetry by leading poets of the day and wrote a play in blank verse, 'The Conqueror', which received a dozen performances at the Scala Theatre in London in 1905. In 1924 a semi-autobiographical novel, 'That Fool of a Woman', was to appear, revealing much about her marital misadventures. 
The duke died in 1913, and on 17 October 1914 Millicent married Percy Desmond Fitzgerald (died 1933), an army officer. On the outbreak of the First World War she organized a Red Cross ambulance unit, and served in France throughout the war. She was captured at Namur in the German advance in 1914, but managed to escape. She became director of No. 9 British Red Cross Hospital at Calais, and moved with it to Roubaix in June 1918, where it became a front-line casualty clearing station. She was awarded the Croix de Guerre, the Belgian Royal Red Cross, and the British Red Cross medal. 
The duchess divorced Fitzgerald, a philanderer, in 1919. Her third marriage, to Colonel George Ernest Hawes (died 1945), on 27 October 1919, was equally unfortunate: he was a homosexual, and she divorced him in 1925. Thereafter she drifted from one house to another in France, and travelled extensively. In 1940 she was living near Angers, and when the French capitulated she found herself once more to be a prisoner in German hands. She escaped, through Spain and Portugal, to the United States, and was one of the first foreign civilians to return to liberated Paris in 1945. To a friend, Princess Marthe Bibesco, she confessed that she now felt she had lost all her usefulness. She died on 20 August 1955 at La Maizou, Orriule, near Sauveterre-de-Bearn, Basses Pyrenees, France, and was cremated at the Pere Lachaise cemetery in Paris. Her ashes were returned to the Sutherland private cemetery at Dunrobin. Her younger son and daughter had predeceased her. 


@@@@@


doc= 40795


Villiers, Sarah Sophia Child-, countess of Jersey (1785-1867), political hostess, was born on 4 March 1785, the second child and eldest of the three daughters of John Fane, tenth earl of Westmorland (1759-1841), and his first wife, Sarah Anne (1764-1793), daughter and sole heir of Robert Child of Osterley Park, Middlesex. Under the terms of her grandfather's will Lady Sarah was the heir to the great Child's Bank fortune, which brought her an income estimated at some $60,000 a year, and Osterley Park, Middlesex. The immensity of her fortune influenced her character: one less well-endowed young woman found her frightening: 'she is so completely a 'maitresse femme' (very naturally, from her immense fortune which always made her superior to everybody she ever lived among) that I feel overpowered by her somehow' (Wyndham, 34-5). Lady Sarah was inevitably much sought after as a bride: Lady Harriet Cavendish observed three suitors (Lord Villiers, Tom Sheridan, and Lord Granville Leveson-Gower) at one house party alone. 'Perhaps', opined Lady Harriet, 'they would not object to sharing her affections, but I doubt whether the division of the rest of their acquisition would be borne as quietly' ('Hary-O', 66). It was George Villiers, Lord Villiers [
Villiers, who was born on 19 August 1773, was the elder son of George Bussy Villiers, fourth earl of Jersey (1735-1805), and his notorious wife, Frances Villiers (1753-1821), daughter of Philip Twysden, bishop of Raphoe, and mistress of the prince of Wales. Educated at Harrow School and St John's College, Cambridge, he succeeded as fifth earl of Jersey the year after his marriage, and took the additional surname Child in 1812. Jersey had nothing of the flamboyance of his wife, and he accepted her activities with complacency. He was a keen foxhunter: Nimrod, in his 'Crack Riders of England', referred to him as 'not only one of the hardest, boldest, and most judicious, but perhaps the most elegant rider to hounds the world ever saw' ('DNB'). He was also a dedicated supporter of horse racing, breeding and training his own horses at Middleton Park, Oxfordshire: among his successes were Cobweb, who won the Oaks in 1824, and three Derby winners: Middleton (1825), Mameluke (1827), and Bay Middleton (1836). He played no active part in politics, but served as lord chamberlain to William IV in the Wellington and Peel ministries of 1830 and 1834-5, and as master of the horse to Queen Victoria, under Peel in 1841-6 and Derby in 1852. 
After some anxiety about her failure to become pregnant early in her marriage, Lady Jersey bore eight children, one of whom died in infancy. But childbearing interfered little with her career as one of the most prominent hostesses and social figures of her generation. She entertained in London at 38 Berkeley Square, at Osterley, and at Middleton, and her houses became centres for the whig party. With her friends, enemies, rivals, and almost exact contemporaries Emily, Lady Cowper and the Russian ambassadress, Princess Lieven, she was one of the lady patronesses of the exclusive Almack's club at Willis's Rooms, and as such exerted huge social influence. Dark-haired and attractive, her volubility was such that she earned the nickname 'Silence' and the ridicule of her detractors, and exhausted even her friends: Lady Granville found her 'remarkably amiable from being more silent than usual' ('Hary-O', 127). Creevey compared her to a mechanical musical bird: 'She begins to sing at eleven o'clock, and, with the interval of the hour she retires to her cage to rest, she sings till 12 at night without a moment's interruption.... Of the 'merits' of her songs I say nothing until we meet. (Maxwell, 296)' More disturbing to the comfort of her friends, however, was her habit of self-dramatization, of excesses of romantic feeling and sensibility, and her perpetual enjoyment of the role of tragedy queen. This romanticism prompted Lady Jersey to become a supporter of Byron during his troubles in 1814-15, and she offered him a refuge at Middleton. 
Like many women of her class and generation Lady Jersey had pronounced political views and did not hesitate to express them, and for some years she was an important whig. Brougham commented in 1816 that 'Lady Jersey's absence is very bad for the party.... Her great influence in society was always honestly and heartily exerted with her usual excellence of disposition' (Maxwell, 259-60). Her love of being at the centre of attention, perhaps, as much as conviction led her to take up the unfashionable cause of Queen Caroline when George IV was seeking to divorce her: she championed the queen with such frenzied fervour that her friends began to doubt her reason. By the end of the 1820s, however, Sarah Jersey had aligned herself with the tories: Wellington and Peel became her great heroes, and in the 1830s and 1840s her parties were held on behalf of the opponents of reform. She fancied herself the confidante of the duke -- who mistrusted her discretion, and was once heard to mutter 'What damned nonsense Lady Jersey talks!' (ibid., 574) -- and her family was linked to Peel's by the marriage of her eldest son to Peel's daughter. Her influence waned considerably in the 1840s, when new faces, such as the duchess of Sutherland, supplanted the older woman, and the marriage of her rival Lady Cowper to Lord Palmerston in 1839 cast her into the shade as a political hostess. 
There was more to Sarah Jersey than the society hostess. Somewhat incongruously, she was the owner and senior partner of Child's Bank, and kept a desk in the office. She was an active partner, and did not delegate her responsibilities to her husband or other men. She also took great interest in the people who lived on the Jersey estates, especially in Oxfordshire, and set up and financed a number of schools for the benefit of the tenants and labourers. As her own children grew up, they were a source of mixed anxiety and pride. The eldest surviving son was in poor health, and his wife was notoriously unfaithful; the second son died in 1837, and the fourth, Francis, was a wastrel whose early death in 1862 was perhaps a mercy. Lady Jersey arranged an ambitious match for her eldest daughter, Lady Sarah Villiers, with the Austrian Prince Nicholas Esterhazy. Although the engagement was announced in 1836, the wedding did not happen until 1842, as the Esterhazys sought to extricate themselves from a match that (to the status-conscious Austrians) was tainted by associations with trade. The princess died in 1853. The second daughter, Lady Clementina, who was a constant companion to her mother and well known in society, died unmarried in 1858, and the third daughter, Lady Adela, died in 1860, having scandalized her family by eloping with a Captain Ibbetson. 
Lord Jersey died at 38 Berkeley Square, London, on 3 October 1859 and was buried at Middleton Stoney. Three weeks later he was followed to the grave by his eldest son, whose own son succeeded as seventh earl of Jersey. Sarah Jersey disdained the excesses of Victorian mourning and continued to entertain, receiving visitors every evening into the 1860s. Her sister-in-law, Lady Westmorland, described her in 1863 as 'still brilliant, talkative, gay, and beautiful, always dressed in the latest fashion in sky blue or rose colour, with flowers in her (own) hair, which is not grey.... She has kept her sight, hearing, and memory, without any change' ('Correspondence of Priscilla, Countess of Westmorland', 445). After a decline of a few weeks Sarah, Lady Jersey died on 26 January 1867 at 38 Berkeley Square, and was buried at Middleton Stoney. Her will aroused some curiosity, but it was uncontroversial. Most of the property went to the seventh earl, with generous provision made for her other grandchildren. Henry Greville considered that 'It was her great zest and gaiety, rather than her cleverness, which constituted her power of attracting remarkable men, many of whom I have seen listen with the greatest complacency to what they would have considered to be egregious nonsense had it emanated from less charming lips. ('Diary of Henry Greville', 4.309-10, 4 Feb 1867)' Lady Jersey's foibles lent themselves to caricature, and she featured in Disraeli's novels as Zenobia and Lady St Julians, and as Lady Augusta in Lady Caroline Lamb's 'Glenarvon'. In her youth she was a beauty and much painted. Mrs Mee included her among her series of miniatures of court beauties for the prince regent in 1814, but he rejected it; Byron wrote her a 'condolatory address' on the occasion. 


@@@@@


doc= 40796


Wolsey, Thomas (d. 1610x12?), separatist leader, was ordained deacon on 6 June 1568 and priest on 1 April 1569 by Bishop John Parkhurst of Norwich. Nothing is known of his parents or his early life, or of his activities during the 1570s. About 1580 he became deeply involved in the emerging East Anglian separatist movement. He may have been a member of Robert Browne's and Robert Harrison's congregation, but this cannot be proven conclusively. However, between 1580 and 1582 he was gaoled on two occasions for his religious beliefs. These periods of incarceration were difficult: by Harrison's account, he was thrust into 'lothsome prison houses' (Harrison, 43). 
During this period Wolsey came into conflict with Edward Fenton, rector of Booton, Norfolk, not far from the town of Aylsham. Fenton was a radical nonconformist who had apparently considered separating from the established church, but eventually decided to remain within it. After several admonitions, Wolsey sent Fenton a letter severely rebuking him for his decision. Fenton replied by writing against both Wolsey and Harrison. Harrison then composed a letter defending both Wolsey (referred to only by his initials) and himself. It was printed eventually as the second portion of 'A treatise of the church and the kingdome of Christ'. 
Wolsey appears to have remained behind in East Anglia when Browne, Harrison, and their followers departed for Middelburg in the spring or summer of 1582. In fact, according to Stephen Offwood, he seems to have spent much, if not all, of the rest of his life in gaol. Thetford assize records indicate that he and four other separatists were sentenced to death on 30 March 1584, but were later reprieved in prison. He was still confined at Thetford in July 1584, and at Norwich in July 1585. He was also listed as a prisoner in Norwich Castle in December 1595. When Offwood visited him in 1602, he was still a prisoner, but 'he had a keye for to lete in unto him [w]home he [w]ould and to goe out as he pleased at a back gate' (Offwood, 40). 
In gaol or out, Wolsey converted sizable numbers of people to his views. Offwood records that 'he perverted many zealous professors, of which I knewe twentie', including Henry Barrow, the greatest of the Elizabethan separatists (Offwood, 40). After reading one of Robert Browne's books, Barrow visited Wolsey, who completed his conversion to separatism. 
Wolsey's subsequent relationship with Barrow did not go smoothly. In the late 1580s and early 1590s, Wolsey was apparently beginning to adhere to several Jewish laws and practices, which Barrow condemned. Among other things, Wolsey maintained that it was unlawful for Christians to eat blood, things strangled, and meats offered to idols. Barrow's death on 6 April 1593 seems to have ended the controversy, but it broke out again when Wolsey sent a letter to Francis Johnson's 'Ancient' separatist congregation at Amsterdam in 1602 reasserting these positions. Writing in the name of the whole church, Johnson and Henry Ainsworth replied on 7 December, rejecting Wolsey's opinions and threatening to discontinue their recognition of him as 'a Preacher of the kingdome of God' if he did not recant ('Seasonable Treatise', 16). 
Wolsey stands alongside Browne and Harrison as one of the founders of East Anglian separatism. He was one of its earliest exponents and one of its most effective spokesmen. Nevertheless, as Offwood observed, he was a 'harshe spirit', who rejected or excommunicated almost all of his followers at one time or another. After 1602 Wolsey's life is unknown, but Offwood claimed that he held his 'Jewishe errours' until his death (Offwood, 40). Since by Offwood's calculation his imprisonment lasted about thirty years, he probably died between about 1610 and 1612. 


@@@@@


doc= 40799


Egerton, Sir Philip (d. 1698), politician, was the fifth but second surviving son of Sir Rowland Egerton, first baronet (died 1646), of Oulton, Cheshire, and his wife, Bridget Egerton (d. 1648), daughter of Arthur Grey, fourteenth Baron Grey of Wilton. Egerton inherited the Oulton estate on his father's death, while his elder brother, John, inherited the baronetcy and estates in Staffordshire and Northamptonshire. In 1656 he married Catherine (died 1707), daughter and heir of Piers Conway of Hendre, Flintshire. They had seven children, two of whom survived to adulthood, John Egerton and Philip Egerton (died 1726), rector of Astbury, Cheshire. During his career Egerton acquired more land for the estate; his business interests included (by 1685) the long-established ironworks at Tib Green, near Nantwich, Cheshire. Egerton's father had lent Charles I money at the start of the civil war, but later co-operated with parliament, which voted him thanks for bringing news of the surrender of Pontefract in 1645. 
In 1659 Egerton's career took a decisively royalist path when he raised and equipped a troop of horse in Sir George Booth's rising in favour of Charles II, for which the king rewarded him with a knighthood on 23 June 1660. That April Egerton had become a captain of the militia horse, and from 1661 was a lieutenant-colonel; he took a part in investigating and suppressing any indications of rebellion as well as enforcing the penal laws against dissenters in Cheshire. Egerton stood as a country candidate at the 1670 by-election in Cheshire against Thomas Cholmondeley of Vale Royal, the court candidate, following unsuccessful negotiations among the gentry aimed at agreeing a single candidate. Cholmondeley had also taken part in Booth's rising and had been appointed sheriff of Cheshire at the Restoration. Egerton stood down after a three-day poll, conceding the election to Cholmondeley. 
In 1673 Egerton was appointed deputy lieutenant of Cheshire when his relation John Egerton, second earl of Bridgewater, was appointed lord lieutenant. Egerton continued to serve as a deputy lieutenant following the appointment of William George Richard Stanley, ninth earl of Derby, as lord lieutenant of Cheshire in 1676. 
Egerton did not run in the 1678 by-election, where Henry Booth was elected without opposition. Booth, like his father, Sir George Booth, by then first Baron Delamer, had become a vocal opponent of the government. In the elections for the first Exclusion Parliament in 1679, the Cheshire gentry met and agreed that Egerton and Booth would sit without opposition. Although Shaftesbury had listed Egerton as 'Honest', Egerton voted against the 'Exclusion Bill' and was an active member sitting on fifteen committees, including the committees on the bills for protecting the country against popery and a bill which limited the importation of Irish cattle, which was very important to Cheshire. 
It is not clear whether Egerton stood for the second Exclusion Parliament, but Sir Robert Cotton, an ally of Booth and a supporter of the 'Exclusion Bill', was returned in his place. In the 1681 election Robert Cholmondeley, first Viscount Cholmondeley, unsuccessfully tried to organize the Cheshire gentry to support Egerton and another court candidate, Sir Robert Leycester. He ordered that his cousin Francis Cholmondeley (the brother of Thomas, whose election Egerton had contested in 1670) make sure that Cholmondeley's tenants got out to vote. Egerton was described to the king as a 'very good man' ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 152). Both Egerton and Leycester were defeated. Lord Cholmondeley complained after the election that Booth and Cotton spent vast sums during the election. Booth in turn branded Egerton's supporters 'Papists', and noted with satisfaction that during the election Booth and Cotton had received respectively 1500 and 1200 votes while Leycester had about 340 and Egerton only 280 votes. 
After Charles II dissolved the Oxford parliament his illegitimate son James Scott, duke of Monmouth, arranged a tour of the north-west. Egerton's rivals, such as Booth, organized demonstrations in favour of Monmouth. Egerton helped the government gather intelligence about these activities, and took part in competing 'loyal gentry meeting[s] at a hunting and other sports in the forest', with his son winning a 'tumbler' at a foot-race ('CSP dom.', '1682', 393). 
The next major local contest was the mayoral election in Chester in 1682. One of Booth's allies, Colonel Roger Whitley, lost the race, and in response the 'mobile' ('CSP dom.', '1682', 471) rioted and broke out the windows of Egerton's new Chester house. In 1683, after the discovery of the Rye House plot, Egerton, in his role as deputy lieutenant, was active in the harassment of the local whig gentry, including searching their houses for allegedly concealed arms. Egerton also supported the replacement of the charter for the city of Chester. During the delivery of the new charter Egerton joined the mayor, Sir Thomas Grosvenor, and 'a great many other gentlemen' (Hughes, 41-2) in a great celebration. Numerous whigs, such as the former mayor Whitley, were expressly excluded from being able to hold office under the new charter. 
After James II's accession Egerton was again appointed deputy lieutenant for Cheshire, and stood as a court candidate at the hotly contested 1685 election. Booth had succeeded his father as second Baron Delamer, and the whigs advanced Booth's old ally, Sir Robert Cotton, together with John Mainwaring. Egerton was paired with his rival from the 1670 election, Thomas Cholmondeley (who was already or was to be the father-in-law of Egerton's oldest surviving son, John). Mainwaring's father in his diary complained bitterly that the sheriff manipulated the election by closing the poll early. Egerton and Cholmondeley were elected with 1966 and 2099 votes, compared to Mainwaring and Cotton getting 1682 and 1552. Egerton was again an active member of the Commons, where he served on eleven committees. 
Egerton retained his militia command under James II, but it is not clear whether he was removed from his post as deputy lieutenant when Derby was removed in 1687. When Derby was restored to the lord lieutenancy of Cheshire, Egerton was either confirmed or reappointed by James on 3 November 1688. 
Egerton did not sit in the Convention, and instead his 1685 rivals Sir Robert Cotton and John Mainwaring represented Cheshire. He became a nonjuror and in 1690 was imprisoned in Chester Castle as a Jacobite suspect. He was implicated in the 1694 'Lancashire plot' as being prepared to rise in support of James's restoration. He was not, however, tried for treason, and died at his home at Oulton, Cheshire, on 15 August 1698. He was buried at Little Budworth, Cheshire, and was survived by his wife and two sons. At her death in 1707, his wife left money to build a school at Oulton, which she endowed with $21 per annum to support the education of eight children. 


@@@@@


doc= 40801


Baldwin, Alfred (1841-1908), industrialist and politician, was born at Stourport, Worcestershire, on 4 June 1841, the youngest of twelve children of George Pearce Baldwin (1789-1840), a small-scale iron founder and businessman, and his second wife, Sarah Chalkley Stanley (1801-1874), the eldest daughter of the Revd Jacob Stanley, a distinguished Wesleyan Methodist minister who was president of the Methodist conference in 1845. Alfred's father died eight months prior to his birth, and he was brought up by his mother. 
After being educated at the Wesleyan Collegiate Institution at Taunton, Baldwin, at the age of sixteen, became a partner in the main family firm, Baldwin, Son & Co. of Stourport. By the 1860s this was a relatively big firm, making ironwork of all kinds, and there were worsted spinning mills at Stourport, a carpet manufactory at Bridgnorth, and a tin-plate works at Wolverhampton. On 9 August 1866, at Wolverhampton parish church, Baldwin married Louisa Macdonald (1845-1925) ['see 'Baldwin, Louisa, 'under' Macdonald sisters (act. 1837-1925)], one of the famous daughters of the Revd George Browne Macdonald, a Wesleyan minister, and his second wife, Hannah, 'nee' Jones. Louisa's eldest sister Alice was the mother of Rudyard Kipling; the second, Georgiana, married Edward Burne-Jones, and the next, Agnes, married Edward Poynter. The Baldwins had only one child, Stanley Baldwin, who succeeded his father as MP for Bewdley and later became prime minister. A devout woman obsessed with death, Louisa Baldwin developed during her pregnancy a prolonged and never fully diagnosed illness; over the next sixteen years she spent much time at continental spas. Alfred Baldwin bought Lower Park, Bewdley, as his family residence. 
In the 1860s the family business was split, with Baldwin assisting in running the operations of E. P. and W. Baldwin Ltd at the Wilden forge. Following a financial crisis and the death of certain members of the family in the late 1860s, Alfred bought out the remaining partners and secured control in September 1870. He moved to Wilden House overlooking the forge. Responsible for a rapid growth of the firm, he soon established a reputation as a benevolent employer and as a patriarch of the Wilden district. On the former count, by 1890 he had introduced a works medical service, a friendly society, a scheme for the encouragement of the education of workers' children, and the maintenance of high standards of safety and cleanliness, and on the latter he was responsible for the building of a school, a church (with stained glass by Burne-Jones), and a vicarage at Wilden. 
During the 1870s and 1880s Baldwin's horizons began to expand. In 1873 the Swindon tin-plate works near Dudley was acquired and in 1886 a separate company, Alfred Baldwin & Co. Ltd, was established to erect and operate a tin-plate works near Pontypool, Monmouthshire. Further developments in the Pontypool region followed in 1892, when the Pont-y-moel tin-plate works was restarted in conjunction with Wright, Butler & Co. The links with this concern, and the business relationship between Baldwin and Colonel Roper Wright, led to a fusion of their business interests. 
On 7 April 1902 the various interests of the two parties were brought together under unified control through the formation of Baldwins Ltd. Baldwin became chairman and his only son, Stanley, and Colonel Wright were among the original directors of the company. Following Baldwin's death in 1908, Colonel Wright succeeded him as chairman and Stanley became second in command. At the time of its formation Baldwins took over five concerns: E. P. and W. Baldwin Ltd; Wright, Butler & Co.; the Bryn Navigation Colliery Ltd; Alfred Baldwin & Co. Ltd; and the Blackwall Galvanised Iron Company Ltd. Baldwins Ltd was to become one of the giants of the British steel industry in the first half of the twentieth century, particularly following the acquisition and re-opening of the Port Talbot steel works, Glamorgan, in 1906. 
Although his business interests were concentrated on iron, steel, and tin-plate manufacture, Baldwin also played a much wider role through directorships of a number of other concerns. Most notable among these were those of the Great Western Railway and the Metropolitan Bank (of England and Wales). At the former he was unanimously elected chairman in March 1905 following the resignation of F. A. V. Campbell, third earl of Cawdor (1847-1911), on taking up the post of first lord of the Admiralty, while at the latter, under his chairmanship from 1896, the bank was transformed from a local Birmingham bank into a successful national one. 
While the centre of Baldwin's business interests gradually moved away from the midlands, most notably into south Wales, at the time of his death he could still be described as ranking as 'one of the commercial kings of the Metropolis of the Midlands' ('Western Mail'). As befitted somebody with a strong yeoman background, and living for much of his married life at Wilden House, Baldwin also played a significant role in local affairs. By the end of the nineteenth century he had been made a JP for both Staffordshire and Worcestershire, and a deputy lieutenant for Worcestershire. 
Although having been raised as a Wesleyan, Baldwin had become a high Anglican by his mid-twenties. A widely and deeply read man, he was an ardent believer in the strenuous life and devoted himself wholly to commerce and politics. In 1892 he entered parliament, unopposed, as the Unionist member for Bewdley (West Worcestershire). He was re-elected, again unopposed, in 1895 and 1900, and represented the constituency until his death. Although he rarely spoke in parliament, he was an ardent supporter of Joseph Chamberlain's tariff reform policy, and an equally vehement opponent of home rule for Ireland, of the disestablishment of the Church of England, and of local option in abolishing public houses. While his responsibilities as an MP meant spending time in London, he disliked the vulgarity of life in the capital. Alfred Baldwin died suddenly of cardiac failure on 13 February 1908, having returned home to Kensington Palace Mansions, De Vere Gardens, London, after a board meeting of the Great Western Railway. 


@@@@@


doc= 40803


Stanley, William George Richard, ninth earl of Derby (1655-1702), nobleman, was born in March 1655, the third of nine sons and five daughters of Charles Stanley, eighth earl of Derby (1628-1672), and his wife, Dorothea Helena de Rupa (died 1703), daughter of Jan van der Kerchhove, lord of Heenvlies, Zeeland, and maid of honour to Elizabeth, queen of Bohemia. The Stanleys were royalists: William's grandfather James Stanley, the 'martyr earl of Derby', was executed after the battle of Worcester, and his father, the eighth earl, was imprisoned in the Tower after he joined Sir George Booth in the unsuccessful 1659 Cheshire rising. After the Restoration the eighth earl worked to recover the family's sequestered estates and restore the Stanleys' historical authority and political position in the north-west. He was partially successful, regaining his family's control of the government of the Isle of Man and the lord lieutenancies of Lancashire and Cheshire, but failed to recover all the family estates. William, after his father's death on 21 December 1672, continued throughout his life to press his family's legal claims to their former estates. 
Stanley was only seventeen when he became the ninth earl of Derby, and some six months later, on 10 July 1673, he married Lady Elizabeth (1660-1717), daughter of Thomas Butler, earl of Ossory, and granddaughter of James Butler, first duke of Ormond. They had one son and two surviving daughters. Ormond served as Derby's guardian for the rest of his minority, and immediately after the marriage the duchess of Ormond described him as 'well natured'. Opinions were soon less favourable, however. In August 1673 Ormond sent Derby on the customary grand tour. He travelled through France and Italy before returning to England about July 1675. Thomas Fairfax, Derby's companion and tutor during the tour, complained of him: 'I must confess I think it very necessary for him to be there [Paris] to learn something which hitherto we have made but a slender progress in. I hope we may persuade him to do something of reason till he comes to be of age; but what may happen after, God knows. ('Ormonde MSS', 4.366)' Derby's father-in-law Ossory later described him as ill-natured and obstinate, and accused him of brutality to his daughter. 
In religion Derby was, according to his protege Roger Kenyon, committed to the Church of England and steered a middle course, for the 'high flyers of either side find no hearty entertainment with him!' (Bagley, 116). In May 1676 Derby succeeded to his father's former offices of lord lieutenant for Cheshire and Lancashire, and in 1682, as lord lieutenant, he signed an address to the king which emphasized the significance of the Church of England as the 'true Protestant Church'. 
Derby took part in the debates in the House of Lords on the three bills for excluding the Roman Catholic duke of York from the succession. He was, however, undoubtedly well aware that there was strong support for the exclusion bills in the north-west and, consistent with his later political approach, kept a somewhat ambiguous course during this political crisis. Ormond noted that Derby 'did not side with the better party (those opposing exclusions)' (Coward, 148). In 1682 James, duke of Monmouth, the king's illegitimate son, arranged for a tour of the north-west. As lord lieutenant, Derby was in a dilemma during Monmouth's 'progress'. He could not ignore the various spectacles that had been arranged, but he did not want to be grouped among those who advocated that Charles II should make Monmouth his heir. As a result, he attended the Wallasey races, but tried not to interact with Monmouth. The government's informers grumbled over Derby's ambiguous conduct, reporting that he had bought a tent to entertain Monmouth at the races but did not arrive until after dinner, and then 'did not go to his Grace, but his grace rode up to him and they only civilly saluted each other' ('CSP dom.', '1682'). 
After the Rye House plot in 1683, Derby, joined by the local tories, sent Charles II an address offering him congratulations for having avoided the danger but treating somewhat cautiously the exclusion question. In the same year Derby encouraged a demonstration of the tory gentry in Delamer Forest, to counter whig demonstrations. He was rewarded with inclusion in the new list of aldermen for Chester after the borough voluntarily surrendered and was regranted its charter. 
In preparation for James's first parliament in 1685, Derby reported to the secretary of state that he was very 'diligent in employing my interest for the election of good members' to the Commons for both Cheshire and Lancashire ('CSP dom.', '1685'). His efforts were successful, and tory candidates were elected for the most part. When he learned of Monmouth's rebellion, Derby worked to keep the peace in Cheshire and Lancashire. He raised troops for the king who described themselves as 'true sons of the Church of England' opposed to this 'horrid rebellion' ('Kenyon MSS', 181). Acting under the government's direction, Derby arrested the prominent whig Henry Booth, second Baron Delamer. Later acquitted of treason, Delamer remained Derby's political rival for the rest of his life. 
Despite Derby's support of the king, he was replaced as lord lieutenant in Cheshire and Lancashire by Roman Catholic appointees, and also lost his positions as 'custos rotulorum' and JP for Lancashire. Realizing that his policies were causing turmoil, James II summoned Derby to London in mid-October 1688 and told him he would be restored to the lord lieutenancies. Derby's wife reported to him, 'Last night I saw the King in the draweing room. He came and told me you had offered your service, whch he took very kindly, and thanked you for it' ('Kenyon MSS', 197). Derby apparently agreed to accept the return of his offices 'to gain and preserve a power to secure the quiet of those counties, and having raised the militia, who were eager to follow him, he might raise, upon occasion, those and the more northerne counties'. He again met with the king, reminding him that he 'was a Stanley, that his ancestors were ever loyal' (ibid., 199). 
It appears that Derby initially believed the king's concessions had decreased the chance of an invasion by the prince of Orange, but none the less he cautiously kept his options open and met with peers belonging to the 'Cockpit circle', individuals associated with William, prince of Orange, and Princess Anne. At some point he decided to take further action and met his former antagonist Lord Delamer, an ally of the prince of Orange, on 1 November for 'some time in secret discourse'. According to Roger Kenyon, 'my lord Delamer declared his great satisfaction with that meeting' ('Kenyon MSS', 200). Their secret agreement quickly unravelled when, after William's landing, Delamer openly declared both his and Derby's support. Derby then refused to join Delamer and complained that Delamer's disclosure had been premature. Even Derby's claims that he tried to mitigate the chance of any open conflict by secretly negotiating with the governor of Chester Castle and ordering the militia to the castle appear to have been largely illusory. He took no action to prevent fresh forces from moving into Chester, and the garrison did not disarm until after James's flight. 
Only after William entered London did Derby proclaim his support. Delamer denounced Derby for not keeping his word and railed against him that 'your Lordship must think you cannot be esteemed by the Prince, or those with him as a man that has given any assistance to the cause, and I believe the nation will have the same opinion of you' ('Kenyon MSS', 206). Derby did attend the Convention Parliament but again pursued a cautious course. Consequently, while his wife, a close friend of Mary, was given precedence as the new queen's groomess of the stole, Derby himself was not given any national office. Delamer, however, was appointed lord lieutenant of Cheshire, which so upset Derby that he refused the appointment for Lancashire. Derby's friends petitioned the king, but William held firm in his appointment of Delamer. 
Derby struggled without any official position at court in William's reign. In 1691 he took brief residence on the Isle of Man, appointing Roger Kenyon as governor. He skirmished with the commissioner of the customs, asserting that the king's rights there were limited, and he sought to improve the economy of the island, obtaining permission to issue some currency and taking steps to promote the manufacture of linen. In 1694 Delamer died and Derby tried unsuccessfully to regain his lord lieutenancies. His promotion of tory candidates for the Commons had only limited success. Kenyon noted that during this period 'my lord is uneasy under his disappointment, and quarrelsome with everyone that is concerned with him' (Bagley, 124). 
When Queen Anne succeeded in 1702, Derby was at last restored to both lieutenancies and his office of 'custos rotulorum'. He was also made lord lieutenant of north Wales. His renewed service, however, was short-lived. He died on 5 November 1702, and was buried at Ormskirk in Lancashire. His wife, Elizabeth, died on 5 July 1717, and was buried at Westminster Abbey on 12 July. Derby's only son having predeceased him, the earldom passed to his brother James Stanley. 


@@@@@


doc= 40804


Louisa Perina Courtauld (1729-1807)], the youngest daughter of Peter Ogier [ii] (died 1740), a silk weaver, and his wife, Catherine Rabaud, of Sigournay in Poitou. They had five sons, including Peter [iii] who carried on the family business in Spitalfields and was joint executor of Samuel [ii]'s will. Louisa is supposed to have been smuggled into England in a barrel of potatoes in 1729. Her father had come over earlier and set up as a silk weaver in Spitalfields. 
It was probably Louisa's family connections with the City and the East End that contributed to Samuel [i]'s move. Their son George was apprenticed in 1761 to a Peter Merzeau, a silk throwster in Spitalfields, and began the family connection with the silk industry from which Courtaulds plc and Courtaulds Textiles plc ultimately grew. Her mother's will left money for her 'maintenance and education until she shall attain the age of 21 years' ('Daily Mail Weekend', 12). Her father, despite his past as a refugee, left $2560 to her and to each of her siblings. Only two years after being made a liveryman of the Goldsmiths' Company, Samuel [i] died suddenly in February 1765 at the age of forty-five and was buried at Chelsea on 24 February. He left all his property to his wife, who succeeded as head of the business. She appears, from the presence of an unregistered joint mark of 1768, to have been in partnership with one of her husband's former apprentices, George Cowles (died 1811), with whom she appears in the parliamentary report list of 1773. In the same year, 1768, George Cowles married Samuel [i] Courtauld's niece Judith Jacob. It was during this period that Louisa had her portrait painted, according to family tradition by Zoffany, a tenant of Augustin Jacobs, but more probably by Nathaniel Dance. The partnership, according to an advertisement in the 'Gloucester Journal' of 29 September, was dissolved in 1777 when Cowles moved to Lombard Street. A printed billhead for Louisa Courtauld used for invoicing four second-hand dessert spoons in the 1760s is signed by her shop assistant Judith Touzeau, a fellow Huguenot and parishioner of her mistress. 
Louisa's eldest and only other surviving son, 


@@@@@


doc= 40805


Whitley, Roger (1618-1697), royalist army officer and politician, was the son of Thomas Whitley (died 1651) of Hawarden in Flintshire and his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1668), the daughter of Roger Brereton of Haughton, Flintshire. He entered Christ Church, Oxford, on 29 November 1633 before going to Gray's Inn in 1637. In 1642 he joined the king's forces, serving under his brother-in-law Charles Gerard, later the earl of Macclesfield; by late 1644 he was a colonel and governor of Aberystwyth, which he was forced to surrender in April 1646. 
Whitley's two brothers died in the king's cause, but he fought on, joining an abortive Welsh rising and other plots until he was imprisoned briefly in March 1650. He fought at Worcester in 1651 and then spent the 1650s as an enthusiastic royalist conspirator. He had married Charlotte Gerard by 1653 and he worked with his Gerard family connections outside the orbit of the Sealed Knot, the body created to oversee royalist plotting. He played a prominent part in the failed Ship tavern conspiracy, an effort to spark a general rising in early 1654. Within weeks he was plotting again, now leading an attempt to assassinate Cromwell. He continued such work throughout the 1650s -- moving constantly between England, Ireland, Wales, the Channel Islands, and the continent. Over time he entered more closely into royal counsels, and by 1657 was a gentleman of the privy chamber. His notebooks from this period reveal a keen interest in contemporary politics, military management, and the techniques of conspiracy, including how one may hide incriminating writings in the body without risking discovery. In 1658, now expert in plotting, he drew up a detailed if unrealistic scheme for organizing royalist forces in England. His chance for insurrection came in August 1659, when he garrisoned Hawarden Castle and led a troop of horse in Booth's rising. After the rising's collapse Whitley gathered more forces and maintained constant contact with the king's advisers, to whom he counselled another rising, until the Restoration in May 1660. He sat for the Flintshire boroughs in the Convention and in each parliament thereafter through 1679, after which he represented Chester. 
Whitley now profited from his loyalty, receiving the mastership of a Chester hospital and becoming receiver of royal aids, receiver of the hearth tax, and excise farmer for north Wales; he was also made a gentleman usher of the privy chamber. He lived largely in London in this period. His wife, Charlotte Gerard, died there in 1662 and was buried in Westminster Abbey, before which time she had borne three sons and six daughters. In 1668 Whitley became knight harbinger, the person who managed the king's travels, and from 1672 to 1677 served as deputy postmaster, using his position to improve the post's efficiency. With the income from these offices he began purchasing East India stock in 1671, becoming a company freeman in 1674. But increasingly his cash went into land, especially from 1679 to 1682, when he acquired extensive properties in north Wales and Cheshire. He also bought Peele Hall, outside Chester, where he cultivated a regional political interest. 
Whitley was now prominent among supporters of the duke of York's exclusion from the succession. In 1682 he was one of those Chester leaders who entertained the duke of Monmouth during his politically provocative visit there. Whitley's foes alleged that he flirted with sedition in Monmouth's interest; boisterous Chester crowds shouted Whitley's and Monmouth's names together. Whitley enjoyed great popularity, and that autumn was prevented from becoming Chester's mayor only by a voting process that gave final choice to the twenty-four aldermen. Once famously loyal, he was now suspect at court and had lost all preferment there. The final blow came late in 1684 when he was sued for $30,000 that he had not forwarded to royal accounts while postmaster, of which he was later ordered to pay nearly $20,000. Next came an attack on his political base, Chester, where he and his allies lost their offices when local tories, led by Sir Thomas Grosvenor, won a new charter in February 1685 that installed themselves in power in Chester. 
When the duke of Monmouth launched his rebellion that summer Whitley dismissed it as 'foolish and mad' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. hist. c. 711, Whitley diary, fol. 36'v'). A committed Anglican, he was ambivalent about King James's promotion of non-Anglicans to prominence. Along with others Whitley refused to serve when reappointed to Chester's corporation by another new charter in September 1688, though he resumed his alderman's place when the pre-1685 charter was restored the following month. Civil war memories made him doubt the wisdom of the prince of Orange's intended invasion. But he readily accepted the revolution once it occurred and sat in the convention of 1689, having easily beaten Grosvenor for one of Chester's seats. In 1690 Grosvenor defeated Whitley by a handful of votes, though only after Grosvenor's supporters allegedly employed illegal tactics. His petition against the election ended in the Commons deciding by a majority of one to seat Grosvenor instead. 
Whitley now set about restoring his political foundations in Chester. At mayoral elections in 1690 and in 1691 he achieved a great majority among the freemen in the early rounds, but lost each time before the aldermen, whose votes concluded the process. In 1692 he at last prevailed. Thus began Whitley's extraordinary efforts to transform the city's constitution to maintain his authority by boosting the power of the freemen, changes he made with the advice of his ally, the city's recorder, Sir William Williams. By these means he held the mayor's chair for four successive years. In 1695, he regained his seat at Westminster by abandoning Williams on the hustings, and joining instead with his old foe, Grosvenor. 
In 1696 Whitley gave up the mayoralty, perhaps because of increasing health problems; he attended no more corporation meetings thereafter, though he continued struggles to control the construction of a new city hall, a project begun during his mayoralty. He made the last entry in his diary on 15 July 1697, two days before he died at either Chester or Peele Hall. He was buried at Hawarden church. At the time of his death Whitley and his Chester allies had a petition before the privy council attacking the new mayor for reversing Whitley's popular constitutional changes. He left a large entailed estate principally to his daughter Lady Elizabeth Mainwaring, his son Roger, and their heirs. 
Whitley's papers, largely in the Bodleian Library, include numerous notebooks and commonplace books revealing a meticulous and wide-ranging mind. His diary provides a fascinating account of a regional political network by one of its chief members, and suggests a sociable personality, even with those outside his partisan circle. Whitley rarely figured prominently in parliamentary debates and never achieved high office or a knighthood, despite his enormous energy in the royal cause before 1660. But his loyalty helped him obtain a number of lucrative posts, the income from which funded the regional political influence he developed so successfully in later decades. 


@@@@@


doc= 40808


Dyer, Henry (1848-1918), engineer and educationist, was born on 16 August 1848 at Muirmaden in the parish of Bothwell, Lanarkshire, the son of John Dyer, a foundry labourer born in co. Cork, and Margaret Morton. Dyer attended evening classes at Anderson's University (later Anderson's College), Glasgow, and served his apprenticeship as a student engineer under Thomas Kennedy and A. C. Kirk at James Aitken & Co., Cranstonhill, Glasgow. In 1868 he won a Whitworth exhibition as a 'workman', and then in 1870 a Whitworth scholarship. Early in 1873, newly graduated from the University of Glasgow as a BSc, he was appointed, at the age of twenty-five, principal of the Imperial College of Engineering in Tokyo. This new institution under the authority of the ministry of public works was designed to train the first generation of modern engineers for the newly opened Japan. 
'Dyer's College', as the Imperial College of Engineering was sometimes called in Tokyo at the time, in Toranomon, in central Tokyo, was a remarkable institution, the building and equipment of which were generously funded. Dyer, in consultation with Yozo Yamao, who had lived in Glasgow (1866-8) and had worked in Napier's shipyard on the Clyde and studied at evening courses at Anderson's University, worked out a six-year course during which students alternated practical and theoretical classes. All the teaching was done in English. The first- and second-year courses, which all students attended, included English (language and composition), geography, mathematics, mechanics (theoretical and applied), physics, chemistry, and drawing (geometrical and mechanical). At the beginning of the third year each student chose to specialize in one of six options -- civil, mechanical, or telegraph engineering, architecture, chemistry and metallurgy, or mining and engineering. 
The students were almost all from the samurai class and engineering as a subject was alien; they found it difficult to comprehend the idea of getting their hands dirty. As William Ayrton, who was later professor of physics at Imperial College, London, but in the 1870s was teaching at the Imperial College of Engineering, noted, 'the Japanese boy is not observant' ('General Report', 77). Notwithstanding the difficulties, most of the Japanese students were hard-working, enthusiastic, and dedicated. 
Dyer left the college, and Japan, in July 1882. The Japanese government was generous in its praise of him, appointed him to the order of the Rising Sun (third class), and made him honorary principal of the college. Times were changing; the Akabane engineering works was to become an Imperial Japanese Navy facility, and in 1886 the college itself was taken out of the hands of the ministry of public works and united with other colleges to become the faculty of engineering of the University of Tokyo, under the ministry of education. On his return to Glasgow, Dyer failed, both in 1883 and in 1886, in attempts to obtain the newly established chair of naval architecture in the University of Glasgow. He remained actively involved in advisory roles at Anderson's College and became an important, if unofficial, confidant and friend of the many Japanese who flocked to Glasgow at this time to study engineering technology in both the university and the college, and practical shipbuilding on the Clyde. From 1901, at Dyer's request, the court of the University of Glasgow agreed that Japanese should qualify as a foreign language for those seeking admission to the university. 
In 1874 Henry Dyer married Marie Euphemie Aquart Ferguson (1848-1921). They had four sons, one of whom died four months after birth, and a daughter. In Glasgow Henry Dyer became a prolific writer, first of pamphlets and later of more substantial, wide-ranging works. His first major book was 'The Evolution of Industry' (1895). Later his pro-Japanese stance resulted in his writing 'Dai Nippon: the Britain of the East' (1905), and also 'Japan in World Politics: a Study in International Dynamics' (1909). 
Henry Dyer died of pneumonia on 25 September 1918 at his home, 8 Highburgh Terrace, Dowanhill, Glasgow, aged seventy, and was buried at the Glasgow necropolis. He left an estate of over $9000, a fine achievement for the son of an Irish labourer. His main earnings had been in Japan where for nearly a decade he was paid, as principal of the Imperial College of Engineering, the remarkably high salary of 660 yen per month. 
It was William John McQuorn Rankine (1820-1872), then professor of engineering at the University of Glasgow, who proposed Henry Dyer to Hirobumi Ito as first principal of the imperial college. Rankine, who believed that 'in theoretical science the question is what are we to think? But in practical science the question is -- 'what are we to do?'' (Rankine, 8), recommended him as one who could combine theory and practice. Henry Dyer's achievement was the introduction of high quality heuristic engineering education into Japan, a country previously committed to Confucianism and learning by rote. At home in Glasgow, his constant and eloquent advocacy of engineering education as well as his service to the Glasgow school board were highly regarded. He became DSc in 1890, and the University of Glasgow, for his services to education, honoured him with an LLD in 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 40809


Young, George Frederick (1791-1870), shipbuilder and politician, was born at 4 Torrington Street, Ratcliffe Highway, London, the second son of thirteen children of Vice-Admiral William Young (1761-1847) and Ann, daughter of Robert Curling, shipbuilder. Young's father, after service in the American and Napoleonic wars, acted as inspecting agent for transports in the Thames (1805-30), but was also the partner of Robert Curling in the firm Curling, Young & Co. Young was mainly educated at home, and in 1814 he married Mary ('c'.1790-1876), youngest daughter of John Abbot, brewer, of Canterbury. The couple had eight children. 
By the 1820s Young had become the leading partner in Curling, Young & Co., by then one of the most prominent firms in the London shipping industry. Having specialized in building East Indiamen, it went on, in the 1830s, to produce some of Britain's most notable passenger steamships, including the 'Victoria' (later 'British Queen'), as well as gunships during the South African War. Young played an important part in the master shipbuilders' conflicts with John Gast's shipwrights' union in the mid-1820s, although his paternalist strain was seen in his support for a worker's pension scheme with over 1000 members by 1830. Besides shipbuilding, Young acquired extensive interests in colonial trade and shipping, especially in whaling. He was also an enthusiastic traveller in Britain and Europe. 
A zealous administrator, Young was a member of the committee at Lloyd's (Shipping Register) 1824-34, helped to amalgamate the two shipping registers in 1834, and served on Lloyd's new permanent committee, 1835-67, its longest-serving founder member. He was also a driving force in the General London Ship Owners' Society, which in 1834 he chaired for the first of an unprecedented six occasions. This was a period when, following the relaxation of the navigation laws introduced by William Huskisson, shipping questions were of growing political importance, and it was largely as a spokesman of the shipping interest that Young was elected MP for the new constituency of Tynemouth in 1832. 
Young proved a vigorous defender of the shipping interest in and outside the House of Commons, for example, sternly resisting (and seeking to reverse) the liberalization of the navigation laws, but supporting the ending of impressment, and advocating marine schools. According to Dickens, he earned the reputation of 'a prodigious bore in Parliament, by speaking immediately before every division, great or small, to the anguish and horror of all parties' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 5.6-8). Associated at times with Joseph Hume, and in Tower Hamlets with the idiosyncratic naval reformer and novelist Captain Frederick Marryat, Young mostly took the whig whip, although he opposed the new poor law. He joined the 'Derby Dilly' in 1834-5, but subsequently supported the whigs on the appropriation of Irish church revenues. He continued to stand as a 'moderate' and 'independent' Liberal/whig at Tynemouth, drawing on cross-party support, but was not inaccurately described by one of his radical opponents as 'in heart a tory' ('Tynemouth Leaflets', 26 June 1832, British Library). Having been unopposed in 1835, his narrow re-election in 1837 was followed by his unseating on technical grounds in 1838. 
By the 1840s Young's shipping connections and his growing interest in colonial reform led him to join tory shipowners and radical Wakefieldians in the colonization of New Zealand. Young himself purchased land there, looking to New Zealand as 'a colony, better calculated than any belonging to the British Crown, to prove a blessing to our poor countrymen, and a mine of wealth and a source of power to the nation' (G. F. Young to F. Yeldham, 22 May 1846, Young MSS, BL). He was a leading working director of the New Zealand Company, chairing its shipping committee. Under its auspices, Young's son William Curling travelled to New Zealand but died soon after arrival in 1842. Ironically, he was soon to have been joined there by the poet and future prime minister of New Zealand, Alfred Domett, a close friend, and member, with Robert Browning and Christopher Dowson (1807-1848), of the 'Colloquials' who met regularly at the Young home, conscientiously managed by his wife. 
A critic of Conservative colonial policy under Sir Robert Peel and Stanley, Young's domestic politics now led him away from both main parties towards advocacy of 'Young England' principles in the poorest districts of London, supporting for example, baths and washhouses as a means towards the reconciliation of classes. Unlike many of his fellow shipowners, Young lived near to his yards, and was intimately involved in the local community. He acted as chairman of the house committee of the London Hospital (1842-4), helped to create Victoria Park, and, for many years, chaired the Stepney board of guardians. Under its aegis, he was instrumental in setting up the Limehouse children's establishment (1838-73), much visited by educational reformers and philanthropists, and recommended by Dickens as a model to Angela Burdett Coutts. Young was also active as a JP (and deputy lieutenant) for Middlesex. 
Young's concern for 'the producing classes' as well as for shipping and the empire as the fulcrums of national power led him, in the late 1840s, to become one of the most active, as well as the most bitter, of the opponents of free trade, especially of the repeal of the 'Navigation Acts'. To resisting the latter he devoted indefatigable energies, giving influential evidence to the select committees of 1847, writing extensively in pamphlets and the press, and seeking to construct an alliance of the disparate opponents of free trade among shipowners, agriculturists, colonial merchants, and working men. Setting up the National Association for the Protection of British Industry and Capital in May 1849, he was ready to woo earls, dukes, farmers, seamen, and the Chartist National Association of Organised Trades. He forced Benjamin Disraeli on to the defensive (over his apparently dwindling support for protection) and became for a time a vital force in the protectionist politics of the late 1840s and early 1850s. In 1851 he was elected protectionist MP for Scarborough and, had his health not broken under the strain of his political advocacy, he would have become vice-president of the Board of Trade in Derby's administration of 1852. For some contemporaries, Young's 'absurd protectionist views' did the shipping interest 'much more harm than good' (W. S. Lindsay, journal IA, fol. 622, Lindsay MSS, NMM), but modern judgements have treated more sympathetically the protectionist ideology which Young so vigorously espoused. 
Defeated in the general election of 1852, Young largely faded into obscurity, although in 1860 he characteristically opposed the Anglo-French commercial treaty as an imprudent and humiliating sacrifice of British power. With the erosion of protection in the early 1840s, he had already begun to abandon shipowning, especially since the whaling trade was now exposed to growing American competition, while his shipbuilding business found itself very much at the declining end of the industry, with the onset of iron-building and the consequent moving of this industry from the Thames to the north of England. But Young retained his links with the shipping interest through Lloyd's Register and the General London Ship Owners' Society, which he chaired for the last time in 1862. 
Young had left Limehouse in the late 1840s, firstly for Walthamstow, but subsequently, in straitened circumstances, for Reigate, where he died on 23 February 1870 at Wray Park Road. He was buried in the churchyard of Reigate parish church. His wife survived him. Among his eight children, his eldest surviving son, Sir Frederick Young (1817-1913), inherited his colonial enthusiasm, becoming a leading member of the Royal Colonial Institute and an early publicist of imperial federation, while Sidney (1821-1915), having taken over the family firm, later became merchant assessor for the Admiralty division of the royal courts, where his arbitrations included the 'Alabama' claims. 


@@@@@


doc= 40810


Thompson, William (1793-1854), ironmaster and financier, was born at Grayrigg Head, near Kendal, Westmorland, the second son of James Thompson. He was educated at Charterhouse before joining the business of his uncle William Thompson, who had been a partner with Richard Crawshay (1744-1799) in the leading firm of iron merchants in the City of London. After Crawshay's death Thompson's uncle formed a new merchant house with Samuel Homfray (1762-1822) ['see under 'Homfray family (per. 1702-1833)] and William Henry Forman (died 1869) of the Penydarren ironworks at Merthyr Tudful in Wales. 
The elder William Thompson, like the Crawshay family, had major interests in south Wales iron furnaces. In 1799 he leased the Tintern ironworks, and in 1806 he purchased three-tenth shares of the Redbrook and Lydbrook ironworks. Most important was his involvement with Homfray, one of the leading south Wales ironmasters at the end of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth. In 1800 Homfray leased coal and iron ore from the Tredegar estate and formed a partnership with Thompson and others to establish the Tredegar ironworks with a capital of $30,000. Homfray was also involved in establishing the Aberdar works in 1801 and was a partner in the Penydarren company at Merthyr Tudful where Thompson acquired an interest. The younger William inherited his uncle's fortune, and in 1817 he married Amelia (died 1861), the second daughter of Homfray and niece of Sir Charles Morgan of Tredegar. By the early 1820s he was the sole owner of Penydarren; he seems to have left day-to-day operations to managers at Merthyr Tudful, and he concentrated on more general issues such as leases and, possibly, marketing. 
Lady Charlotte Guest, the wife of Sir Josiah John Guest of the Dowlais works, commented in 1836 that Thompson 'is the 'Alderman' in every sense, and has not the uprightness which I should have been inclined to give most City merchants credit for' ('Guest: Extracts', 41). Her comment probably reflects the simmering boundary dispute between the two works, but in 1846 Sir Josiah Guest and Thompson were willing to submerge their differences in hostility to a greater foe, namely, John Crichton-Stuart, the second marquess of Bute, who was demanding more realistic terms for the renewal of leases. They proposed to form a single joint-stock company in order to negotiate with Bute, but this was declared inadmissible under the lease. In 1848 the Bute estate attempted to make terms with Thompson to take over the Dowlais works. By this stage the south Wales works were past their peak, and Penydarren was in decline. On his death in 1854, Thompson's interests in the south Wales iron industry and related canals and tramways went, in trust, to the younger sons of his brother James as tenants-in-common. The trustees were to manage the works with full rights as owners, including the power to sell; Penydarren was sold to the Dowlais Iron Company for $59,875 in 1859. 
Although the iron industry formed the basis of Thompson's fortune, his interests were diverse. The centre of his business career was in London. Through his interests in marine insurance, he was most actively and publicly involved in shipping. In 1720 the Royal Exchange Assurance and London Assurance were granted a monopoly of marine insurance by corporations, and the act also prohibited underwriting by partnerships. The result was to stimulate individual underwriting, which was organized at Lloyd's Coffee House. An attack on the monopoly of the Royal Exchange and London assurance companies was, therefore, an indirect attack on Lloyd's. In 1806 and 1810 assaults on the monopoly failed; in 1824 the outlook was less auspicious when Nathan Mayer Rothschild (1777-1836) and other City figures, including Alexander Baring, Samuel Gurney, and Moses Montefiore, launched the Alliance British and Foreign Fire and Life Insurance Company. The Alliance was, in the opinion of one critic, 'the whole united money interest of the empire' ('Hansard 2', 11, 1824, 928), and it had the support of the government. William Huskisson, for example, was prepared to see Lloyd's destroyed. 'Unquestionably, the public would go wherever they could get their business done in the best and cheapest manner. And why, he begged to ask, ought they not to be permitted to do so?' ('Hansard 2', 11, 1824, 772). Such a view was firmly opposed by Thompson, who had entered parliament in 1820 as member for Callington in Cornwall: 'So far from creating competition, the present bill, when passed, will only give rise to a new monopoly in the establishment of a huge, all-absorbing joint-stock undertaking. Everybody knows that it is impossible to have more and sharper competition in marine insurance than exists at present. There are more than a thousand underwriters at Lloyd's, and competition is as open to the insurer who goes to the Royal Exchange as Mark Lane is open to the corn merchants and Mincing Lane to the sugar dealers. (Martin, 295)' In the event, most marine insurance continued to be effected at Lloyd's, and Thompson served as chairman of its committee from 1825 until he was obliged to resign as a result of criticism of his joining the Sunderland Shipowners' Mutual Assurance Association. Unfortunately, it is not possible to establish how active he was in underwriting and how far this contributed to his considerable fortune. 
Thompson's subsequent parliamentary career was marked by his staunch defence of the navigation laws. He followed the line of London shipowners such as Joseph Somes and G. F. Young that shipping had been in decline since Huskisson's reforms in the 1820s. Although the navigation laws might be modified, Thompson was opposed to their repeal which could destroy British shipping and the security of the country. The question of repeal, he informed the Commons, was 'one of the greatest national questions which had been discussed in modern times' ('Hansard 3', 99, 1848, 35-43). He may also have invested in shipping, as was common for many merchants in the first half of the nineteenth century. 
Thompson was a leading figure in the City and public life from the 1820s. In 1821 he became an alderman of the City; he retained the position to his death, and was lord mayor in 1828-9. He was active in his livery company, the Ironmongers' Company, of which he was master in 1829 and 1841. He was also president of Christ's Hospital from 1829 until his death; treasurer of King's College; and colonel of the Royal London militia from 1851 to 1854. He became a director of the Bank of England in 1829, and remained on the court until his death. His standing in the City was confirmed by his election, at the head of the poll, as one of its MPs in 1826. He was, nominally, a whig and moderate reformer, but he received tory support as a result of his opposition to Catholic emancipation. He was re-elected in 1830 and 1831, but in 1832 he stood for Sunderland as a moderate whig and advocate of the repeal of the corn laws. He came bottom of the poll, but was elected in 1833 and was again returned in 1837. 
By this time, Thompson was associated with the tories and by 1841 had shifted to support agricultural protection. Although re-elected for Sunderland in 1841, he resigned his seat in order to stand for Westmorland, which he represented from that year until his death. He opposed the 'Bank Charter Act', and he voted against repeal of the corn laws which he considered a concession to the unconstitutional power of the Anti-Corn Law League. He was a leader of City Conservatism, and part of the world of protection which was overturned in the 1840s as the City was remade in an open, competitive form with which he had little sympathy. At the same time, the south Wales iron industry was passing its peak of prosperity. 
Thompson, one of the wealthiest and most important figures in the City, owned a fortune considered to be on a par with James Morrison (1790-1857) and Nathan Mayer Rothschild. The comparison with Morrison is more apt than that with Rothschild, for Thompson did not create a continuing presence in the City. In association with Isaac Lyon Goldsmid (1778-1859) Thompson was involved in managing remittances for the payment of the dividends on the Brazilian debt to Portugal, which was taken over by the Rothschilds on his death. He was almost certainly involved in various other City ventures, as a director or investor: there is, for example, a passing reference to his involvement in the Santiago Mining Company. However, Thompson, like James Morrison and Morrison's son Charles, increasingly concentrated on accumulating railway stocks (he acted as chairman of the Cambrian and the Gloucester and London railways) and, above all, land. The explanation was, in part, that his only child was a daughter, Amelia (died 1864). In 1842 she married the earl of Bective (1822-1894), who became third marquess of Headfort; his family held considerable landed estates in Ireland. 
It was claimed by the 'Gentleman's Magazine' after Thompson's death in 1854 that Thompson lived well below his means, and he certainly invested heavily in both land and railway shares. A few months before his death he purchased the Barnacre estate from the duke of Hamilton for $98,000, and he also owned the Underley estate at Kirkby Lonsdale. In the new 'Domesday' survey of 1883 the estates were recorded as being held by his son-in-law and amounted to 12,851 acres in Westmorland with a gross annual value of $13,686; 4534 acres in Yorkshire with a gross annual value of $2305; 3393 acres in Lancashire with a gross annual value of $4198; and 178 acres in Glamorgan with a gross annual value of $42 (Bateman, 214). The Headfort estates in Ireland had by this time a gross annual value of $19,372 and the land accumulated by Thompson in England and Wales $20,234. 
Thompson died on 10 March 1854 at Bedwellty House, Monmouthshire. His estate was sworn at under $900,000 in Canterbury, $60,000 in York, and $16,000 in Ireland, which excluded the investment in land. He had been one of the greatest figures in the City of London in the 1830s, and a significant ironmaster in south Wales. His wife died in 1861 and his daughter in 1864, and his considerable fortune disappeared -- in common with the Crawshays and his partner William Henry Forman -- into the landed elite without leaving any apparent dynastic trace. 


@@@@@


doc= 40811


Matheson, Sir Alexander, first baronet (1805-1886), merchant and banker, was born on 16 January 1805 at Attadale, Ross-shire, the eldest of the seven children of John Matheson and Catherine, daughter of Captain Donald Matheson of Shinness, and sister of Sir James Matheson, first baronet (1796-1878). 
Following his education at the University of Edinburgh, Matheson pursued a career in commerce in Asia, first at Calcutta, and subsequently at Canton (Guangzhou), where he joined his uncle James's firm of Jardine, Matheson & Co. Founded in 1832, that partnership was an agency house of major importance, undertaking marketing for correspondent merchants in Britain, India, and parts of south-east Asia. As the firm developed, it was also active in finance, insurance, and shipping. Its most profitable commodity was opium, which was sold, illegally, both at Canton, and along the coast of China; but the firm avoided drawing on its own account for large-scale speculation in opium. 
A partner in the firm from 1835, Matheson found himself in the midst of the incidents which led to the First Opium War (1839-42). In the late 1830s the Chinese imperial government was determined to crush the opium trade, and for that purpose it appointed Lin Zexu imperial commissioner at Canton. Arriving in March 1839, Lin demanded the surrender of all the opium stocks of foreign merchants, and he held as hostages James Matheson and fifteen other merchants. James sent Alexander down to the Gulf of Canton to manage the firm's opium fleet during the crisis. Thus, when the British superintendent of trade, under severe pressure from Lin, directed the merchants to surrender their opium supplies, Alexander Matheson was responsible for gathering Jardine Matheson's quantity (7000 chests) for destruction by Chinese officials. 
Not long after the release of the hostages in May 1839, Matheson returned to London to pursue the company's claim for compensation from the British government. He and his partner, William Jardine (1784-1843), lobbied for a forceful response by the government, and both men testified before the parliamentary committee on China. During this stay in Britain, Matheson married, in 1840, Mary, the daughter of James Macleod, a neighbour of the Mathesons in Ross-shire. However, his young wife died early in 1841. 
By the spring of 1841, Matheson was 'en route' for China, accompanying the new British plenipotentiary, Sir Henry Pottinger. He returned to the Far East a lonely man. Often experiencing poor health, he was also characteristically dyspeptic in temperament. Arriving at Macau in August 1841, Matheson resumed his role in the firm's business. In the course of the First Opium War, British forces had taken possession of Hong Kong, and as early as the spring of 1842, Matheson was writing to a London correspondent that Hong Kong 'has already thrown Macao into the Shade' (Matheson to T. C. Smith, 10 May 1842, CUL, letter-book C6/2). The island was formally acquired by the treaty of Nanking (Nanjing; 1842). Two years later, Jardine Matheson moved its headquarters to Hong Kong, and the staff celebrated their first night there with a dinner at Alexander's bungalow in Happy Valley. 
In the aftermath of the war, Britain's trade opportunities in China expanded dramatically, but opium itself remained an illegal commodity. Alexander Matheson hoped that Pottinger would not succeed in getting the opium trade legalized. He wrote to a major supplier in India: 'You may rest assured that if ever the trade is legalized, it will cease to be profitable from that time. The more difficulties attend it, the better for you and us' (Matheson to Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy, 10 Sept 1843, CUL, letter-book C6/3). With the trade in opium increasing after the war, he was contemptuous of those at home who objected to it on moral grounds. 'The cry against the drug trade in England is certainly very absurd, & I sincerely hope the saints will fail in their attempt to interfere with it' (ibid., 28 March 1843). 
Following James Matheson's departure from China early in 1842 Alexander Matheson became the 'taipan' of Jardine Matheson, dividing his time between Hong Kong and Macau. He remained the senior partner until 1852, but he left China in 1847, arriving in London as a banking crisis was about to jeopardize many of the major financial institutions in the City. Upon discovering that the firm of Magniac Jardine was vulnerable, Matheson engineered the rescue of that firm, with financial assistance from his uncle and from the portion of William Jardine's estate inherited by Andrew Jardine. In the following year the firm was reorganized as a new partnership, Matheson & Co., which was to function as the agency house in London for Jardine Matheson. Alexander Matheson served as senior partner of Matheson & Co. into the 1870s. Under his leadership that firm was vital to the growth of Jardine, Matheson & Co. as a commercial giant in the Far East. As Jardine's London representatives, Matheson & Co. imported into Britain a broad range of commodities, including teas and silks, and exported to the Far East coal, machinery, metals, wines, and liquors. Moreover, they recruited personnel to staff the expanding Jardine enterprises. 
Just after his return from China in 1847, Matheson was elected MP for the Inverness burghs, and held that seat until 1868, when his uncle retired from the Commons. He thereupon succeeded his uncle as MP for the county of Ross and Cromarty, which he represented as a Liberal until 1884. He served as a deputy lieutenant for Ross and Cromarty, for Inverness, and for the City of London. 
Matheson's purchases of Scottish estates had begun during his brief return home in 1840-41, with the acquisition of 6000 acres south of Lochalsh. The ancestral lands of his family at Lochalsh, Ross-shire, were added in 1851, and ten years later he purchased the ancestral properties at Attadale. He spent nearly $0.75 million buying estates in Ross-shire, where he held over 220,000 acres; the total purchase and improvement costs of his Scottish estates exceeded $1.46 million. 
Matheson served as a director of the Bank of England, 1847-84; he was also for many years chairman of the Highland Railway, and was credited with a central role in the construction of the railways throughout northern Scotland. In 1882, in reward for his public service, he was awarded a baronetcy. His second marriage, in 1853, was to Lavinia Mary (died 1855), the youngest daughter of Thomas Stapleton of Carlton, Yorkshire. They had a son and a daughter. In 1860 Matheson married his third wife, Eleanor Irving (died 1879), the daughter of Spencer Perceval and Anna Macleod. This marriage produced three sons and four daughters. 
Although he left China in 1847, Alexander Matheson was head of the firm from 1842 to 1852. When his cousin, Donald Matheson, resigned on conscience grounds in 1848, Matheson participation in the senior management on site in China effectively ended. None of Alexander's sons pursued a business career in the Far East. The Mathesons focused their attention on Matheson & Co. in London for another thirty years until the Jardine family became predominant in that firm. Matheson apparently experienced financial problems in his last four years, but it is not known whether these were caused by ill-judged investments or the effect of the agricultural depression on his vast land holdings. He nevertheless left estate in the UK worth over $600,000 at his death on 26 July 1886, at 38 Hill Street, off Berkeley Square, London. Sir Kenneth Matheson, his son and heir, was required to part with the greater portion of the lands, but the family was able to retain possession of the ancestral estates in Ross-shire including Attadale. 


@@@@@


doc= 40812


Cazalet, Edward (1827-1883), merchant and industrialist, was born on 9 November 1827 at Brighton, the youngest of the seven children of Peter Clement Cazalet (1785-1859), merchant and Russian consul, and his wife, Olympia (died 1848). Of Huguenot extraction the Cazalets had established strong business connections in Russia in the late eighteenth century, and, after education in England, Edward Cazalet joined the family firm in St Petersburg in the mid-1840s. He became one of a closely knit group of English merchants who not only dominated the Baltic trade but increasingly invested in the domestic economy. The Cazalet firm, from its original base in silk weaving and rope manufacturing, grew under Edward's aegis to include a prosperous candle factory (with a monopoly contract for the imperial palaces), together with interests in the Neva Stearin Candle and Soap Factory, the Kalinkin brewery (one of Russia's largest), and a mineral water plant. 
Following his father's death in 1859 and his own marriage on 15 March 1860 to Elizabeth Sutherland Marshall (died 1888), daughter and heir of William Marshall, doctor and Danish consul at Edinburgh, Cazalet also joined William Miller & Co., a shipping firm controlled by his wife's uncle, the Russian merchant and future Liberal MP William Miller (1809-1887). Under Cazalet's guidance this firm exported herrings, coal, and Singer sewing machines from Scotland to Russia. Cazalet took a keen interest in working-class education in St Petersburg, and he also acted as treasurer of the Russia Company's 'English factory' from 1864 to 1865. His profitable ventures enabled him to leave Russia in 1870, having transferred his business concerns to managers under whom they continued to provide the basis of the family's fortunes until confiscation in 1917. 
Back in Britain, combining generosity and broad sympathies, Cazalet made his mark in a number of diverse ways. First, he acquired the 1500 acre Fairlawne estate in Kent of Joseph Ridgway, paying in 1872 some $100,000 at the peak of nineteenth-century land prices. He not only transformed the house, gardens, and stables, but also the surrounding village of Shipbourne, raising much local discontent but leaving in its wake a new church, an inn, a modernized estate village, and improved schools. He also provided a building for the Plaxtol Working Men's Club and a ground for its cricket club at Fairlawne, and he was noted for his benevolence locally and nationally (contributing generously, for example, to Oxford's Indian Institute). Cazalet was soon accepted into county society; he acted as JP and deputy lieutenant for Kent, and in 1880 he contested (unsuccessfully) the mid-Kent seat for the Liberals. Untrammelled by local prejudices he supported the first channel tunnel scheme and provided $10,000 to modernize part of Tonbridge (Judd's) School. Cazalet later acquired 4 Whitehall Gardens, London, the former home of Sir Robert Peel, and, reflecting his growing interest in agriculture, he became one of the proprietors of the 'Mark Lane Express'. 
Secondly, Cazalet's experience of international trade, and perhaps especially the problems of the volatile currency of the Russian empire, led him to become an early advocate in Britain of the bimetallic (gold and silver) standard. Bimetallism, he believed, would provide monetary stability in the world and also help to promote harmony among nations, such that monetary arrangements between the powers would achieve more than 'the most successful foreign war' (E. Cazalet, 'Bimetallism and its Connection with Commerce', 1879, 35). Following private discussions at Fairlawne, Cazalet chaired the first meeting of the International Monetary Standard Association at the India Office on 12 November 1881, and it was from this influential group that the Bimetallic League later emerged. 
Thirdly, Cazalet became a leading advocate of the Euphrates Valley Railway, a long-running scheme to complete the shortest route from Turkey to India and one whose construction would benefit the trade and security of British India while providing a bulwark against Russian expansionism. It was also to make Britain independent of the Suez Canal. Cazalet also saw this proposal in two wider contexts, for against the backcloth of the re-emergence of the Eastern question he believed that Britain and a liberalizing Russia could become natural allies. The latter would be allowed to expand at the expense of the Ottoman empire, while Britain would take responsibility for Syria, a country 'which possesses peculiar attractions for the minds and sympathies of the English race' (E. Cazalet, 'The Eastern Question: an Address to Working Men', 1878, 39). Cazalet believed that such a redirection of interest would deflect Britain from further intervention in Egypt, which might safely be left to Italian trusteeship. But even more imaginatively Cazalet proposed that the oppressed Jews of Europe, especially from Russia and Romania, should be resettled on either side of the railway, providing them with a homeland but also promoting the regeneration of Syria -- a duty Britain had neglected since Palmerston's day. This scheme, like that of Laurence Oliphant, proved wholly visionary, but it acted as an important contribution to the projection of a Jewish homeland. Cazalet gained the interest of princes and working men, statesmen and diplomatists, notably that of Odo Russell, British ambassador at Berlin, where Cazalet canvassed his scheme in 1882. In partnership with Sir Thomas Selby Tancred (1840-1910), the future contractor for the Forth Bridge and builder of the Delagoa Bay Railway, he continued enthusiastically to seek support, and it was on his way to further the scheme with the Ottoman Porte that he caught typhus and died at the Hotel d'Angleterre, Constantinople, on 21 April 1883, survived by his wife. He was buried at St Giles's Church, Shipbourne, Kent, on 7 May 1883. 
Cazalet left a substantial fortune in Britain as well as assets in Russia and Villa Liserb, near Nice, from which he had campaigned against the gaming houses of Monte Carlo. His only child, William Marshall (1865-1932), was a talented real-tennis player (Cazalet had built a court at Fairlawne for the purpose). William was the father of Victor Cazalet (1896-1943), Conservative MP and political liaison officer to General Sikorski, of Peter Cazalet (1907-1973), the racehorse trainer, and of Thelma Cazalet-Keir (1899-1989), feminist and Conservative MP. 


@@@@@


doc= 40813


Houldsworth, Sir William Henry, first baronet (1834-1917), cotton industrialist and politician, was born on 20 August 1834 at Ardwick, Manchester, the fourth son of Henry Houldsworth (1797-1868), cotton spinner, and his first wife, Helen, daughter of James Hamilton of Glasgow and his wife, Ann. He was educated at Mr Jackson's school, Broughton, and in 1852 matriculated at St Andrews University. On 20 August 1862 Houldsworth married Elisabeth Graham Crum (died 1923), daughter of Walter Crum FRS, calico printer; they had three daughters and two surviving sons. 
Houldsworth's early business life was spent in the family's fine-cotton spinning mills in central Manchester. Then, having taken over the firm, he conducted an unusual experiment in community building: he erected two new mills in 1865 and 1872 at Reddish, near Stockport, around which were added over the next twenty years some houses and a school, together with a working men's club, a parsonage, and a church (the work of Alfred Waterhouse and a reflection of Houldsworth's deeply felt high-church sentiments). As a community Houldsworth's scheme was at best a limited success, but his firm now led Manchester's fine-spinning trade, employing more than 1000 workers and owning some 296,000 spindles. 
Entrepreneurial prominence proved a vital asset to Houldsworth's political ambitions. For, although abandoning his father's dissenting Liberalism, he followed other Anglican cotton masters in seeking to create a working-class base for toryism in Manchester. As president of its Conservative Association, he did much to reorganize the party locally. He stood for parliament unsuccessfully in 1880 before winning a Manchester seat at a by-election in 1883; thereafter he held Manchester North-West from 1885 until 1906. Although his advocacy of a democratic national organization proved fruitless, his contribution to the growing tory ascendancy in Lancashire was suitably recognized by a baronetcy in 1887. 
Within parliament Houldsworth proved a capable advocate of local and national concerns, the chief of which became monetary reform. For, believing that the bimetallic standard offered the most eligible remedy for the widely perceived 'depression' in British industry in the 1880s, Houldsworth participated in a vigorous nationwide campaign, energizing the Manchester Bimetallic League (based on the old Anti-Corn Law model), speaking volubly, and writing expertly on this exotic theme. In 1892 he was the most avid bimetallist among the British delegation to the Brussels International Monetary Conference. Houldsworth also represented Britain at the Berlin Labour Conference of 1890 and, as one of the most widely respected businessmen within the Conservative Party, he was often spoken of as a potential minister of commerce. Interestingly, after 1903 Houldsworth became one of the minority of cotton magnates ready to lend his name to Chamberlain's tariff reform campaign; this entailed bitter local controversy and his own retirement from active politics in 1906. Closely involved with the National Conservative Temperance Union and the Church of England Temperance Society, Houldsworth also pursued the cause of sobriety with a vigour unusual in the tory party. 
Politics had not in any way diminished Houldsworth's business enthusiasm. Beyond his cotton interests, he reorganized the affairs of his family's Scottish ironworks and coalmines in the early twentieth century. But above all, in 1898 he led what resulted in the most successful early merger in the English cotton industry, from which the Fine Spinners and Doublers Association was formed and of which his own firm was the largest founder member. Even if the creative energies lay elsewhere, Houldsworth's masterly business diplomacy contributed much to the success of this business venture, which on his retirement as chairman in 1908 was Britain's largest manufacturing company with more than 30,000 employees. 
Popular, shrewd, kindly, and energetic, Houldsworth also served on the Lancashire county council, the Manchester chamber of commerce, the Manchester diocesan board of education, and the court of Manchester University, which made him an honorary LLD. He was granted the freedom of the city of Manchester in 1905. In his later years he moved from his Cheshire home at Norbury Booth's Hall to his Coodham estate near Kilmarnock in Scotland, where he had erected a fine chapel, embellished with windows by F. J. Shields. Here he continued to enjoy organ playing as well as golf, fishing, and shooting. Houldsworth's Lancashire links were now largely severed, as his sons had turned towards Scottish acres and Highland regiments. 
Houldsworth died on 18 April 1917 at Coodham, and he was interred three days later in the burial-ground on the estate. He was also commemorated by a clock tower within the Houldsworth conservation area set up in Stockport in the 1980s. 


@@@@@


doc= 40814


Simms, Frederick Richard (1863-1944), mechanical engineer and businessman, was born on 12 August 1863 in Hamburg (where his grandfather had established a business), the son of Frederick Louis Simms and his wife, Antonia, 'nee' Herman. Simms was educated in Germany and London and also attended the Polytechnisches Verein in Berlin after serving his apprenticeship with the AG fur Automatischen Verkauf in Hamburg and Berlin. Simms was twice married. His first wife was Austrian, but nothing else is known about her; there were two daughters of his second marriage, in 1910, to Mabel Louise, daughter of Joseph Worsley, a cotton merchant. 
Simms's European background and contacts contributed to his role as mediator of developments in his chosen fields of activity, the internal combustion engine and its components, and the motor vehicle. A key event was his meeting with Gottlieb Daimler when Simms was superintending the erection of an aerial cableway of his own design at the Bremen Exhibition in 1889. Simms negotiated British patent rights for Daimler engines and in 1890 founded Simms & Co., consulting engineers, which introduced Daimler engines into the United Kingdom, applying them to launches, rather than road vehicles. This work was carried out by the Daimler Motor Syndicate, which Simms founded in 1893 and sold to the financier H. J. Lawson in 1895. This proved to be Lawson's most significant acquisition and led to the foundation of the British motor industry, in the shape of the Daimler works at Coventry Motor Mills. Simms was, however, sufficiently foresighted to keep his own business affairs distinct from those of Lawson. Between 1898 and 1900 Simms operated the Motor Carriage Supply Company Ltd and was in contact with such well-known motoring contemporaries as Emil Jellinek, who stimulated the development of the Mercedes car, and Count Zborowski. 
In 1900 Simms became a vehicle manufacturer, with the establishment of the Simms Manufacturing Company Ltd. This produced cars and commercial vehicles in small quantities at the Welbeck Works, Kilburn, from 1904 to 1907-8, as well as engines for other manufacturers. Simms was interested in the military application of the motor vehicle, mounting a Maxim machine gun and an armoured shield on a De Dion quadricycle as the Simms Motor Scout and designing a heavier Motor War Car. They foreshadowed later armoured vehicles, but given the stage reached by automotive technology at the turn of the century, did not directly lead to a line of military vehicles. 
Simms's principal legacy to the automotive world was in the field of components, especially magnetos. The Simms Magneto Company Ltd was established in 1907, after he had obtained UK manufacturing rights from Robert Bosch, the German electrical engineer, but small production runs could not compete with the foreign product and the company closed early in 1913. It had been preceded by the joint Compagnie des Magnetos Simms-Bosch ('c'.1899-1906), which foundered on the personal differences of the principals. Yet Simms may be considered to have played a significant role in magneto development, by his stimulus to Bosch and his colleagues to develop their product, and by opening up the important French market for Bosch. 
In 1913 Simms started another business, Simms Motor Units Ltd, initially as a sales and repair organization for motor components, especially dynamos and magnetos. Manufacture was initially undertaken by others on behalf of the firm, an important source in the First World War being the Simms Magneto Company Ltd, of New Jersey, established by Simms in 1910. The English workforce, however, grew from twelve in 1913 to more than 300 by early 1919 and a subsidiary, the Standard Insulator Company Ltd, was established in 1915. 
To build on his wartime success, Simms established Simms Motor Units (1920) Ltd in extensive premises in East Finchley. The virtual destruction by fire of the Kilburn works in 1920 and the slump of 1920-21 in the engineering industry brought about the cessation of manufacture until 1926. The Finchley factory was retained, however, trading profits improved, and a separate concern was established in Lyons to produce the Simms-Vernier coupling. In 1930, five years before Simms's retirement, the company moved in new directions to match changing automotive technology, moves culminating in the joint development, with Leyland Motors, of the Uniflow injection pump (1937). In his later years Simms's interests widened to include a tour of inspection of southern Africa in 1928 on behalf of the British motor trade and experimentation in compound metals for electrical contacts, with the establishment of Compound Electro Metals Ltd. 
As well as being a businessman, Simms was also a man of affairs in the motor world. Concerned at the close involvement of H. J. Lawson's business interests with his Motor Car Club, Simms launched the Automobile Club of Great Britain and Ireland in 1897. This was joined by Sir David Salomons's Self-Propelled Traffic Association in 1898 and became the Royal Automobile Club in 1907. The problem of trade shows, exacerbated by cycle manufacturers' attempts to include cars in their shows, was met by Simms's foundation in 1902 of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, which elected him as its first president. With an interest in aviation, Simms also contributed to what was to become the Royal Aero Club. 
In a long, active life Simms touched many aspects of the evolving motor industry, perhaps spreading his talents too thinly for a single, wholly outstanding, achievement. However, the importance of his contribution to the establishment of the motor and component industry and to motoring in the UK should not be under-rated. It is in his role as a catalyst and intermediary between the UK and Europe and, to a lesser extent, the United States that his lasting significance lies. 
Simms's wife predeceased him, and his own death occurred on 22 April 1944 at Dunbarty, Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire. He was cremated at Streatham Vale, London, and his ashes were placed in the Annunciation churchyard beside those of his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 40816


Young, Sir Arthur Edwin (1907-1979), policeman, was born at 55 Chamberlayne Road, Eastleigh, Hampshire, on 15 February 1907, one of four children of Edwin Young (1878-1936), a builder, and his wife, Gertrude Mary Brown (1880-1945). He attended Portsmouth grammar school and when aged sixteen joined the city's police against his family's wishes. For a non-Hendon graduate Young's promotion was meteoric: by 1938 he was the youngest ever chief constable (Leamington Spa). Seconded to Coventry after its blitz he introduced the good neighbour scheme for bombed out civilians later adopted by the Home Office. In 1941 he was selected as senior assistant chief constable, Birmingham, and in 1943 was chosen to establish the training school for policemen who would maintain law and order in liberated axis territory. Within ten weeks Young found himself director of public safety (Italy) in the first functioning military government. The models developed were applied across allied occupied western Europe, but his proudest achievement was the restoration of the 'carabinieri'. 
Appointed chief constable of Hertfordshire in 1944 (but released from the army only in 1945), Young set the pace in revitalizing long-debilitated county forces, encouraging major expenditure on officers' welfare and modern efficiency. So impressed was the home secretary that in 1947 Young was posted assistant commissioner of the Metropolitan Police. To appoint an outsider to such a rank was an unprecedented step and senior colleagues cold-shouldered him. But the Met proved the stepping-stone to a post whose authority and independence allowed him to exercise a powerful influence on police affairs: as commissioner of the City of London police from 1950 to 1971. The first beat bobby made a commissioner, Young became known as the policeman's policeman. Improved pay and professional standards remained his constant preoccupations. He engineered a national recruitment revolution, running command courses and seeing through a fast-track graduate entry: Young was the first senior officer wedded to Sir Robert Peel's intention that the police be 'filled from the bottom up'. His sure-footed lobby of the 1960 royal commission overcame Home Office objections to a strengthened inspectorate (although Sir Charles Cunningham blocked his selection as inaugural chief inspector). 
Young undertook three missions to remodel colonial policing: the Gold Coast (1951), Malaya (1952-3), and Kenya (1954). He set out to introduce the colonies to the common law status of English constables and the philosophy of policing as a public service. Colonial gendarmeries, he proposed, ought to be eradicated, and the police released from executive control. Young thus challenged orthodoxies in storm centres of imperial discontent, but the first two secondments proved dazzling successes. The Gold Coast embraced fundamental reform and Young's report moulded Ghana's policing after independence. To save Malaya a new high commissioner and police commissioner were dispatched simultaneously: Gerald Templer and Arthur Young. 'No one disagreed with Templer more or got on with him better than I' Young wrote. Templer acknowledged Young's 'astounding innovations' in converting a militia into a constabulary. 'The police are the friends of the public whom they wish to serve' was the ethos of the cultural revolution which the federation police inhaled. Detention without trial ceased. Martial law was never introduced; Young talked Templer round. It was Young who was primarily responsible for Templer's success in tackling the emergency through policing, thereby conciliating local opinion. J. Edgar Hoover invited him in 1953 to brief the Federal Bureau of Investigation directorate on the methodology of defeating communist insurgency. 
The cabinet sent Young to Kenya, torn by the Mau Mau uprising, to work another transformation. Everything went wrong. Nairobi resented his presence and dismissed his contention that civil disorders be resolved by civil principles. Young curtailed police use of guns and physical force. The CID was resuscitated. The first training for African constables began and, in the Church Missionary Society's opinion, he quickly improved the police's conduct towards the African population. But he could not break what he termed 'the rule of fear'. Executive interference in policing was endemic. Brutality was institutionalized in the Home Guard and condoned by district officers. Matters came to a head in November-December 1954 when the governor, (Charles) Evelyn Baring, refused to act on dossiers detailing official attempts to obstruct prosecutions of Home Guard personnel for murder; the governor's general amnesty of January 1955 was a subsequent device to cover the administration's tracks. When Baring simultaneously rejected his renewed plea for the structural safeguard of day-to-day policing free from the executive's control, Young resigned in December 1954, expecting to 'attract the attention of those in authority in London who had the means to put things right'. But Whitehall suppressed his resignation letter, which was packed with seismic details, while Young himself stayed silent out of a misplaced sense of duty. A sense of unfinished business led him, however, to advise Jomo Kenyatta's delegations at the pre-independence constitutional conferences. 
Vetoed for Cyprus in 1956, Young's troubleshooting had ended until James Callaghan sent him to Ireland in 1969 to implement the Hunt report: his brief was to disband the B specials, demilitarize the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), and create a police service. Young liberated Ulster's police from Stormont's and the army's operational control. Stormont's cabinet judged him a political liability and Unionist street graffiti declared 'Sir Arthur Young -- Traitor!' Ian Paisley was a vituperative critic. But there was no way back; Young enjoyed Callaghan's confidence. With nationalists, by contrast, this imposed Englishman, an impartial and approachable policeman, was an immediate success. Falls Road residents told him 'we have waited fifty years for you'. Although he never convinced London of the need to abolish the 'Special Powers Act', the first steps away from aggressive policing were taken and the first moves made to heal the fateful split between Catholics and the RUC. 
Autocratic and a strict disciplinarian, Young was famous for his loyalty to his men. He was married three times. On 11 March 1939 he married a nurse, Ivy Ada May Hammond (1908-1956); they had a son. His second wife was Margaret Furnival Dolphin (died 1966), whom he married in 1957; they subsequently separated. On 16 August 1970 he married Ileen Fryer Turner, 'nee' Rayner. Although Young twice contemplated Anglican ordination, he was driven by a mission to make the police a respected profession. Young was 6 feet 4 inches tall and possessed of a formidable charm; his anti-Masonic, anti-capital punishment Christian socialist politics set him apart among post-war British police chiefs. He was appointed CMG (1953), CVO (1962), knight bachelor (1965), and KBE (1971); colleagues attempted unsuccessfully to secure him a life peerage. 
Young died at St Thomas's Hospital, London, on 20 January 1979. His ashes were subsequently scattered at Beachy Head. 


@@@@@


doc= 40817


Jermy, Robert (1600-1677), politician, was the son of John Jermy (1555-1630), lawyer, of Gunton, Norfolk, and his wife, Helen ('nee' Jermy). John Jermy was master of the Middle Temple and chancellor of Norwich. Jermy was educated at Christ's College, Cambridge, entered the Middle Temple in 1621, and was called to the bar in 1629. He married Christian Cock (or Cooke). The details of his career may have been obscured by his descendants, squires of Bayfield, who may have sought to distance themselves from the civil war parliamentarianism of Jermy and his brother Francis. 
From 1643 Jermy was a member of several Norfolk committees and commissions, including those for raising money for the parliamentarian cause, for sequestering the estates of delinquents, and for removal of scandalous clergy, and was a militia commissioner in 1648 and 1659. In 1648 he was probably the Major Jermy sent to suppress royalist stirrings at Great Yarmouth. In 1650 the royalist 'winter rising' saw a gathering on Easton Heath, mainly of tradesmen, husbandmen, and artisans, intending to march upon Norwich. It was dispersed without bloodshed or violence, being a smaller and less powerful affair than expected, but the Commonwealth authorities wished to make much of it. Jermy was instrumental in the setting up of a high court of justice to deal with the royalists concerned, and was a member of this court. Thirty-four people were sentenced to death, including the Revd Thomas Cooper, an usher at Gresham's School, Holt, and William Hobart, son of the lord of the manor at Holt. 
Jermy acted as a justice of the peace and in 1656 was one of those named to maintain the security of the lord protector, as well as serving as captain of the Norfolk militia. His son-in-law, Thomas Toll, recorder of King's Lynn and husband of his daughter Eleanor, also served on local committees. Jermy was chosen by the army council to represent Norfolk in the Barebones Parliament of 1653; in 1659 he was involved in the disputed parliamentary election for Castle Rising, but was admitted a member under a new writ in 1660 after the first election had been declared void. In March 1659 passes were issued for Jermy and Toll to travel 'beyond the seas', that is, to visit New England. 
By now local hostility to Jermy was emerging. An anonymous 'loyal song' attacked him for being 'a pitiful soldier', 'a cruel man', 'a rascal', and 'a coward', and accused him of corrupting the burghers of Castle Rising and having fled to New England. About the same time one John Armiger issued a proclamation addressed to the commissioners of the great seal, dealing with matters proved to a jury at Guildhall on 21 June 1656. This accused Jermy of showing preferential leniency to various people charged before him, of issuing violent prosecutions against Katherine Foxe, a widow whom he had helped materially but who refused to surrender her virtue to him, and of bringing an action against Armiger for saying 'You sit upon the Bench... to maintain roguery and villainy', which statement had been found to be justified by a jury sitting for the lord chief justice. Then, on 14 July 1660, Armiger petitioned the House of Lords for wrongs by Colonel Jermy who, after the previous jury had found for Armiger, had had him arrested on a trumped-up charge and sent as a slave to Jamaica, from whence he had escaped. Taking advantage of the restoration of Charles II, Armiger now sought reparation. 
By 1661, however, Jermy had returned from abroad and taken up his manor of Bayfield, as seen by his presentations to the livings of Bayfield, Calthorp, and Letheringsett. In 1663, by command of Charles II, a letter was drafted for conferring a baronetcy on him, but the bill was never signed. His will, dated 4 April 1677, provides for his wife and several children but not for one of his sons, Revd John Jermy, from whom he was estranged for political reasons; Robert Jermy died in 1677. Coming from a privileged background, Jermy had been ambitious, seeking the powers of office. These he obtained under Cromwell, but he used his position unwisely, some of his actions being indiscreet and others even more questionable. 


@@@@@


doc= 40819


Nash, Vaughan Robinson (1861-1932), journalist and public servant, was born on 5 October 1861 at 7 Buckingham Villas, Clifton, Bristol, the son of Charles Nash (died 1901), a timber merchant, and his wife, Sarah Ann, 'nee' Wilson. Privately educated, he was not sent to university, though he became a resident for two years (1887-9) in Toynbee Hall, the university settlement in the East End of London. In collaboration with his fellow resident Hubert Llewellyn Smith he wrote 'The Story of the Dockers' Strike' (1889), an account of the celebrated strike in which Cardinal Manning intervened. He also composed 'The Relation of Cooperative to Competitive Trading' (1887). This settlement experience led him to specialize in writing about organized labour. He married, on 29 June 1892, Rosalind Frances Mary Shore Smith ['see below'], who was also a journalist with an interest in labour issues, and with whom he had three children. From 1893 to 1899 he was on the staff of the 'Daily Chronicle'. Like his colleague on that newspaper H. J. Massingham he appears to have been dismissed from his post because of his support for the Boers in South Africa. In 1900 he was a correspondent for the 'Manchester Guardian', which published his regular reports from India. An edited collection of these reports was published as 'The Great Famine and its Causes' (1900). In 1901 he joined the editorial staff of the 'Daily News'. He was among the members of the New Reform Club who in 1903 helped to persuade the Liberal Party chief whip to leave openings for the election of Labour parliamentary candidates. 
In December 1905 Nash was brought into 10 Downing Street by the new prime minister, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, as an assistant private secretary under Arthur Ponsonby. As the more experienced of the two secretaries to the prime minister, with a background in journalism, Nash advised on policy and public questions, but 'his incurable modesty and self-effacement' ('The Times', 20 Dec 1932) made him diffident among the social trappings of high office. H. H. Asquith retained his services on succeeding Campbell-Bannerman on 5 April 1908, and promoted him to be the principal private secretary in December 1908. Nash was therefore at the centre of government during the general election of 1906, which gave the Liberals a large majority in the House of Commons, and during the elections and controversies about the future of the House of Lords in 1910. Many of his surviving letters were written on behalf of the prime minister, including those sent to the king's private secretary. He was succeeded in 1912 as the principal private secretary by his wife Rosalind's second cousin, Maurice Bonham-Carter (1880-1960), an assistant private secretary since 1910. 
In 1912 Asquith appointed Nash to be an unpaid commissioner and then in 1913 the second vice-chairman of the Development Commission, a post carrying the salary of $1000 a year as that body's principal official. The commission, a product of Lloyd George's budget of 1909, and comprising eight unpaid commissioners under the chairmanship of Lord Richard Cavendish, was designed to make recommendations for Treasury grants that would assist rural industries and help voluntary bodies providing services to the countryside. It also promoted harbours, forestry, and fisheries. 
In August 1915 Asquith brought Nash back into 10 Downing Street to help with the extra burdens of managing the war effort. Valued for his tact and hard work, Nash played an important role in helping Asquith to keep Liberal ministers within the coalition government during the conscription crisis at the end of 1915. In March 1916 Nash was appointed to the secretariat of the reconstruction committee of the cabinet, which was regarded as writing the 'peace book', preparing for demobilization and the end of war. The team of civil servants and other advisers gathered around Nash, which included several member of the Romney Street group, was kept in being when Lloyd George became the prime minister of a coalition government on 6 December 1916. It formed the embryo of the staff of the Ministry of Reconstruction under Christopher Addison that was formed by Lloyd George on 17 July 1917. 
Nash returned to the vice-chairmanship of the Development Commission in January 1919, when Addison was moved by the prime minister. During the next ten years (1919-29), as vice-chairman, Nash was highly regarded for the contributions he made to the improvement of the English village. In 1915-16 he had been a member of the government committee that had prepared the scheme to settle demobilized soldiers on the land. Like another member of the Romney Street group, Clough Williams-Ellis, he was close to those who wished to preserve the rural landscape. Although for much of his working life he lived in Hampstead, he always kept a foothold in the countryside. Around 1900 he brought up his family in a house at Headley, near Box Hill in Surrey. He owned a farm at Froxfield, near Petersfield in Hampshire, and a house in Loughton, Essex. In 1929, on retirement from the vice-chairmanship but remaining an unpaid commissioner, he decided to move to the New Forest in Hampshire. He became a man of influence in rural affairs by pointing the Development Commission in the direction of providing facilities for villages, such as village halls, in collaboration with national and local voluntary bodies. The scheme sponsored by the National Council of Social Service to promote rural community councils received initial funding from the Carnegie UK Trust. Nash was instrumental in establishing the Country Industries Ltd and the Rural Industries Bureau, and in getting voluntary bodies to work together. The article he published in 'The Times' ('The awakened village', 28 Sept 1932) shortly before his death summarized some of his achievements, including the creation of twenty rural community councils. In later life he gave the impression of being a philanthropist who used public funds, because as the vice-chairman of the Development Commission he controlled its recommendations to the Treasury for grants made to non-profitmaking organizations. 
Nash died of bronchopneumonia on 16 December 1932 at Langtree House, Wood Green, near Fordingbridge, Hampshire, and was buried on 19 December in the churchyard of St Margaret's, East Wellow, Hampshire, where he had been married forty years earlier. After he died his former colleagues set up a memorial fund to help the advancement of village crafts and industries. His wife and a son survived him: his other two children had died in accidents, a daughter in 1920 and a son in 1923. Drawn into journalism through his concern for the poor and into public service through the patronage of three successive prime ministers, Campbell-Bannerman, Asquith, and Lloyd George, Nash was regarded by Sir Alfred Zimmern as 'the embodiment of post-laissez-faire Liberalism at its best' (Johnson, 23-4). But Beatrice Webb saw him as 'woolly minded, easily frightened off any decisive step' and surrounded by 'a set of dreamy cultivated amateurs' ('Diary of Beatrice Webb', 3.279-80). 
Nash's wife 


@@@@@


doc= 40822


Braithwaite, William John (1875-1938), civil servant, was born at the rectory, Great Waldingfield, Suffolk, on 1 June 1875, the second son of the Revd Francis Joseph Braithwaite (died 1889), rector of Great Waldingfield, and his wife, Mary Hopkinson. He was educated at Winchester College and at New College, Oxford, where he held a scholarship and won first classes in classical moderations (1896) and 'literae humaniores' (1898). He took a very high place (sixth) in the civil-service examinations in 1898 and entered the Inland Revenue. Here he established himself as a first-rate official, preparing the work for the innovative land taxes introduced in the budget of 1909, and conducting an inquiry into local income taxes in Switzerland and Germany in 1910. He was made assistant secretary of the Board of Inland Revenue in 1910, and was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1911. He married on 2 June 1908 Lilian Grace, daughter of Andrew Duncan of Chislehurst, with whom he had one son and one daughter. 
The high point of Braithwaite's career was his work on the national health insurance scheme which formed part 1 of the 'National Insurance Act' of 1911. The scheme instigated the first state-organized programme to provide for the health needs of a workforce vastly changed by nineteenth-century industrialization and urbanization. A large part of the workforce was compelled to pay regular contributions into an insurance fund. These contributions were matched by employers and the Treasury to underpin a fund which could pay out a range of health benefits on sickness, disablement, medical treatment, maternity care, and sanatorium attendance. As a former resident (1898-1903) at Toynbee Hall, the university settlement in the East End of London, Braithwaite had, like his friend and near contemporary, William Beveridge, a familiarity with social problems. He was picked by Lloyd George, then chancellor of the exchequer, to go to Germany to carry out the initial investigation of how social insurance schemes operated there. In November 1910 he became Lloyd George's principal assistant in devising the detail of a scheme for Britain. His skills assisted Lloyd George in developing practicable working arrangements in which approved insurance societies were retained as the main local administrative agents. He also bolstered the chancellor in pressing on with the reform despite a lack of clear support from elsewhere within either the government or the civil service. 
In conducting this work Braithwaite was deeply committed to state-organized social improvement but simultaneously constrained by respect for the principles of self-help, operating through voluntary associations, and limited government. As the editor of his memoirs later put it, he was a 'philosophic radical' who 'had an idealist's belief that the keenness and zeal in the cause of self-government found in the small country Friendly Society in which he was interested could be developed in the whole working-population' ('Ambulance Wagon', 14). Unfortunately for Braithwaite, he was deemed too young and inexperienced to be appointed chairman of the National Health Insurance Commission, that oversaw the implementation of the scheme. This role fell to Sir Robert Morant who, following the Fabian views of the Webbs, would have preferred a non-contributory state-funded scheme and one which was directly managed by government agencies rather than by the non-governmental insurance societies. Braithwaite was made secretary to the joint committee responsible for initial implementation in 1912, but his relations with Morant were deeply strained. Overworked and on the verge of a breakdown, he was persuaded to take a holiday, and on his return he was induced to take the post of special commissioner of income tax in 1913. He held this post until his retirement in 1937. 
Throughout his career Braithwaite was a respected public official. He was rather slow in his speech and paternal in manner but overall amiable and well liked. He 'had an immense capacity for work, marked organizing ability, and possessed in a high degree the quality of carrying through to a finish any task he had begun' ('Ambulance Wagon', 14). In 1937 he was appointed a CB. In practice, however, Braithwaite was sidelined from an involvement in central policy for a considerable portion of his career. He was also denied recognition for his major role in what proved one of the key landmarks in the origins of the twentieth-century British welfare state. Not until the publication in 1957 of his memoirs, based on his diaries, which provide an invaluable insight into the creation of national insurance, did he receive thorough recognition of his achievements. This has been confirmed by the work of later historians researching into the public records. 
In his spare time Braithwaite's major commitment was to the Northeyites' Boys' and Men's Club in Limehouse. This dated back to his residence in Toynbee Hall, when he helped the club's founder, Cyril Jackson. Braithwaite later took over the club's management, a role he kept for the rest of his life. His major contribution was a 12 acre sports ground at Hainault, comprising football and cricket pitches, a swimming pool, and pavilions. He organized both the fund-raising and the construction of the facilities. These were later passed to the London Playing Fields Society. His retirement came to a tragically abrupt end when he died at the British Hospital, Port Said, Egypt, on 14 March 1938 on his way home from the Far East. 


@@@@@


doc= 40825


Pedersen, Mikael (1855-1929), engineer and designer of bicycles, was born on 25 October 1855 at Marbjerg, near Roskilde in Denmark, the eldest of six children of Peder Hansen, farmer, and his wife, Karen Mathiasdatter. His parents were both Danish. 
Pedersen was known in Marbjerg as an ingenious and musical child. After schooling in Flong, he became apprenticed to the Maglekilde machinery factory in Roskilde where in 1878 he produced important improvements to cream separators. By 1878 he had moved to the Roskilde machinery factory where again he improved the separator design to create the famous Alexandra model. In 1889, Robert Lister of R. A. Lister & Co. Ltd, agricultural engineers of Dursley in Gloucestershire, acquired the selling rights of this model. However, the design was still imperfect, and after an accident in which the rotating bowl broke and killed a man, Lister invited Pedersen to Dursley to sort out the problem. Manufacture then began in Dursley itself. In 1893 Pedersen settled in Dursley. 
At about this time Pedersen, who was a cycling enthusiast, invented a hammock saddle to make riding more comfortable and also designed a triangulated cycle frame to support it. In a small former woollen mill at the bottom of his garden in Dursley he refined his cycle design and attempted, unsuccessfully, to interest established cycle makers in manufacturing it. In consequence of this failure he opened his own factory in Dursley in 1899 under the name of the Dursley Pedersen Cycle Company. 
Pedersen's talent as a designer flowered during this period. He built multi-seat cycles and produced new designs for many cycle parts and accessories. These latter included one of the first variable gears, a folding cycle which he vainly hoped would be of use in the South African War, and also a motorcycle. In 1905, because of financial problems, the company was taken over by R. A. Lister; cycle production continued until 1914. During the First World War Pedersen made thread gauges used in munitions production and is credited with the invention of the ML magneto which was used in most British aircraft of this time. 
Like many inventors, Pedersen was obsessive and moody. He could be seen, lost in thought, striding the streets of Dursley, with his head down in his beard. At other times he was highly sociable, enjoying parties and holding musical evenings at which instruments of his own invention were played. He was said to be generous to his workforce and their families. Although involved with three women, it is not known whether he married any of them. With the last, Ingeborg, the relationship produced three boys and a girl. 
In 1920 Pedersen returned penniless to Denmark where in 1928 he entered Den Gamle By, an old people's home in Copenhagen. There he died of old age on 22 October 1929. He was buried in Bispebjerg cemetery, Copenhagen. In 1995 the remains from his unmarked grave were brought to England and on 21 September reinterred in Dursley cemetery. 
Although Pedersen's cycle had no real influence on the mass production cycle industry, his designs later became famed for their elegance and eccentricity. In the late 1970s interest in the Pedersen frame revived, when new machines to his designs were built, first in Denmark, then in England and Germany. 


@@@@@


doc= 40826


Cullwick, Hannah (1833-1909), diarist, was born in Shifnal, Shropshire, on 26 May 1833. She was a working-class woman from a then still predominantly peasant area of Britain. The daughter of a saddler and a former housemaid, later a lady's maid, she had a large number of siblings, of whom the closest were her older brother James (Jim) and her younger sisters Mary Ann (Polly) and Ellen. Cullwick worked first in Shifnal, then other parts of the country, and later in Shifnal again, as a domestic servant. Her employment included being pot-girl, under-maid, kitchen maid, cook, scullion, housekeeper, and maid of all work, and she worked for most sectors of the Victorian employing classes. However, she preferred being a maid of all work, as this gave most control over work routines and the greatest scope for exercising her considerable talents and energies. 
Having led one of the 'lives of the obscure', Hannah Cullwick aroused public interest in 1950 when the Munby collection at Trinity College, Cambridge, was opened. Attention focused initially on her clandestine relationship with and later marriage to the diarist and minor civil servant Arthur Joseph Munby (1828-1910), but has increasingly centred upon her own diary, which forms part of the Munby collection. It commences in 1854 (before Munby's starts in 1859) and was kept, albeit with some interruptions, until 1873. It provides unparalleled information about the routines and skills of that most typical of Victorian employment, female domestic service, and also of the complex reactions of servants to their exacting and often overbearing employers. The picture provided bears little resemblance to the often romanticized 'upstairs, downstairs' world, but is rather one of hard, dirty, relentless work for sixteen or seventeen hours a day, with minimal time off each month or quarter. It was also work that required difficult transformations at different stages of the day, between performing extremely dirty 'backstairs' work and making neat and clean public presentations for the family and their guests. 
Cullwick met Munby in 1854. They had a long and largely clandestine relationship in which the demands of service meant that they met relatively infrequently. They married at St James's, Clerkenwell, on 14 January 1873, for a long period living as 'servant and master' except when they travelled as a 'lady and gentleman' married couple. However, Cullwick increasingly resented her enforced ladyhood, wanting them to live openly as a married upper-class gentleman and lower-class woman. The disagreements engendered led to her departure from London in 1877 followed by a period in which contact was minimal. The relationship later resumed, although Cullwick remained bitter that Munby continued to keep her place in his life secret from his upper-class friends and acquaintances. She died of heart failure at Shifnal on 9 July 1909, and was buried in the parish church there; Munby died six months later. 
Cullwick's diary was begun at Munby's request as a means of keeping him in touch with her life and activities as well as satisfying his need to have these represented. Her diary, however, transcends these origins in a number of important ways. It is almost unique in the detailed account it gives of practices and changes in early and mid-Victorian domestic service, in particular regarding its most common example of the maid of all work. It provides equally rare detailed information on the last remnants of peasant England, for example regarding harvesting activities and peasant Shropshire dress. The diary also demonstrates the complexities of supposed 'illiteracy', for Cullwick could read proficiently and became increasingly at her ease as a writer. As well as inscribing the changing course of a cross-class relationship that was by no means as uncommon as Munby supposed, the diary displays Cullwick's increasing ability to influence or shame Munby in directions desired by her, and acts as a fascinating counter-voice to that inscribed in Munby's own diary. Although unlikely to be seen as one of the 'great' Victorian diaries, it provides a fascinating window on these aspects and more, and has become standard reading for researchers interested in working-class women's work and lives over this period. 


@@@@@


doc= 40827


Higham, Sir Charles Frederick (1876-1938), advertising agent and publicist, was born at South Grove, Walthamstow, Essex, on 17 January 1876, the eldest of three sons of Charles Higham (1851-1885), a clerk in the Custom House, who became a solicitor's clerk, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Trigg ('b'. 1851/2). He attended school in St Albans. Following his father's death his family emigrated to America. He left home at thirteen and endured a pell-mell existence in the United States where, as he was wont to boast, he held as many jobs as Heinz had varieties. After returning to England he held down three more, one with W. H. Smith, newsagents. He then went on to sell space on theatre curtains and other novelties and soon found that he had effectively become manager of an agency. This became Charles F. Higham Ltd and by 1914 could claim such choice clients as Waring and Gillow, Austin Reed, and Marshall and Snelgrove, all high-class retail outlets. On 15 December 1911, described as a widower (though no detail of the earlier marriage is known), he married Jessie Stuart Macintosh Simpson Munro (1882/3-1925), daughter of John Munro, farmer. 
Higham was a rumbustious, fiercely energetic, and indefatigable self-publicist, but though he understood the power of advertising, he failed to accept the growing trend for sophisticated market research. The aggregate of his thinking was expressed in numerous publications, including 'Scientific Distribution' (1916), 'Advertising: its Use and Abuse' (1931), and 'Higham's Magazine', a business and sales monthly, first issued from Imperial House, Kingsway, in March 1914. 
During the First World War Higham's expertise was channelled to government use. With Thomas Russell and others, he sat on the voluntary committee on recruiting, dedicated to fostering patriotism. Posters were transformed from purely commercial art to a potent means of propaganda of unlimited stimulative possibilities, Alfred Leete's 'Your Country Needs You' being the best known. Higham started the 1st battalion of volunteers at the outbreak of war. 'The Optimists Corps' had little concern with advertising, but provided businessmen who, for one reason or another -- age, health, or priority business -- could not enlist, with the chance of learning the rudiments of soldiering. He also restored the faltering momentum of the second war loan (1915) and as director of the National War Savings Committee helped organize the victory loan campaign of 1917. 
Higham's organizational capacity was boundless, embracing the War Shrine Movement for 'Remembrance Day', 4 August 1917, the Red Cross, the Star and Garter Fund, recruiting for the Royal Irish Constabulary, and the national tribute to Lord Roberts. Having spent millions of the taxpayers' money, leading advertising men felt they had done their bit. The award of a knighthood in 1921, a vote of thanks in the House of Commons, and presentation in 1930 of the Publicity Club cup for sustained creative output seemed no more than Higham's due. A parliamentary career seemed inevitable. From 1918 to 1922 Higham sat as MP for South Islington, representing the coalition Unionists, having been chairman of the coalition publicity committee in the 1918 general election. The novelist Ethel Mannin, who worked for Higham from 1915 until 1919 as typist, copywriter, and associate editor of his theatrical journal 'The Pelican', recalled his unique force of personality, singleness of purpose, and energy ('Confessions and Impressions', 1930, 131-6). 
Certainly the finest public orator in his field and a unique force in dynamic publicity, Higham led a campaign in America in 1924 to popularize tea-drinking. It took that country by storm, and within weeks tea-shops were opening across the continent. He was an ardent believer in federations of advertising clubs, and he was president in 1920 of the Thirty Club (motto: 'For the Betterment of Advertising') when the first plans were made for the great advertising exhibition at the White City in 1921. In 1922, following up an earlier initiative in transatlantic lobbying aborted by war, he led a delegation on a barnstorming mission to the Associated Advertising Clubs of the World convention in Milwaukee, urging American media personnel to hold their 1924 meeting in London. This duly took place and from it was born in 1926 what came to be known as the Advertising Association. 
Shortly after the death of his wife, Jessie, Higham married, on 20 August 1925, Eloise Rowe Ellis ('b'. 1895/6), the divorced wife of Robert Lee Ellis and daughter of John Charles Rowe, tobacco merchant, of Buffalo, USA. This marriage was dissolved in 1930, and on 17 July 1930 he married Josephine Janet Keuchenius ('b'. 1903/4), divorced wife of Adrian Keuchenius and daughter of Harold Arthur Webb, coal merchant. They had one son. This marriage was dissolved in April 1934, and he married on 30 July 1936 Ruth Agnes Marian Neligan ('b'. 1910/11), a widow, daughter of Reginald Newton Dawes Smith, captain in the Royal Artillery. They had a daughter. Higham died of pneumonia and cancer of the mouth on 24 December 1938 at his home, The Mount, South Godstone, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 40828


Crawford, Sir William Smith (1878-1950), advertising agent, was born in Glasgow on 17 December 1878, son of Robert Crawford (died 1916), merchant, wholesaler, and newspaper proprietor, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Smith. His younger brother Archibald Crawford (1882-1960) became a prominent barrister. He was educated at Lenzie Academy, Blair Lodge, and then in Neuwied am Rhein and Frankfurt am Main. Though unhappy in Germany, he gained an international outlook and linguistic abilities that were crucial to his later success. 
On his return to Scotland Crawford worked briefly for his father before joining Lizar's opticians in 1902. In 1903 the job took him to Liverpool, where he struck up a lifelong friendship with George Jones of the Meccano model firm. When Crawford abruptly decided to move to London to pursue a career in advertising, he crucially brought the Meccano account with him. Crawford joined the De Wynter company in 1906 and while working as a space canvasser met and then married, on 30 March 1907, Marion Stewart, daughter of William Whitelaw, doctor of medicine, and sister of the cartoonist George Whitelaw. They had two daughters and one son, (Robert) Stewart Crawford (1913-2002), who went on to pursue a distinguished career in the diplomatic service and to receive a knighthood. 
After De Wynters was declared bankrupt in 1910, Crawford went to the Frederick E. Potter agency, where he began to specialize in luxury goods and holidays. Brash, gregarious, and heavily jowled, Crawford won the confidence of several clients, most prominently Herbert Morgan of W. H. Smith. This esteem prompted Crawford to rent two rooms on the Kingsway and set up his own agency in April 1914. Having narrowly survived the war, the firm captured the prestigious W. H. Smith account in 1919, before the International Advertising Exhibition at White City in 1920 stimulated a decade of rapid growth. The exhibition served as a forum for American firms looking to move into the British market, but whereas the majority of British advertising firms became tied into unequal associations with much larger American companies, Crawford invested in offices in Berlin and then Paris with the aim of creating a pan-European operation. 
Crawford's internationalist vision was matched by unusual organizational sophistication. He established a market intelligence unit in 1921, and his firm was among the first to abandon the advertising 'all-rounder' in favour of specialist copywriters and graphic designers. These staffing arrangements allowed W. H. Crawford Ltd to pursue such innovations as the development of new typefaces and to broaden the practice of advertising into a form of design consultancy. In addition to buying newspaper space, W. H. Crawford Ltd offered to redesign letter-headings, stationery, packaging, and the layout of offices and workspaces. 
In 1927 Frederick Etchells encased the firm's new premises at 233 High Holborn in a Le Corbusier-style shell of black marble, concrete, glass, and stainless steel. This much discussed extravagance confirmed Crawford's reputation as a lavish patron of modernism. Although Crawford professed to be following in the footsteps of Frank Pick's sponsorship of modern art on London's public transport system, his largesse was also seemingly part of a calculated plan of tax avoidance. Taken to court by the Inland Revenue, Crawford defended the building's grandeur to the prosecutor, 'Sir, is it perhaps necessary for you yourself to dress in your present attire -- to create an impression?' (Havinden, 91). 
By the late 1920s Crawford's agency was synonymous with a stark visual idiom. This distinctive style was developed by gifted commercial artists like Ashley Havinden and Terence Prentis, who drew inspiration from European modernism and the work of Edward McKnight Kauffer, the most acclaimed and innovative graphic designer of the inter-war period. Indeed Havinden later persuaded Crawford to recruit Kauffer on a part-time basis and to commission such artists as Jean Cocteau, Eric Gill, and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy. This was an almost accidental corporate enthusiasm. The general strike of 1926 prompted Crawford to switch his printing work to Germany and Holland and thus further exposed him to the 'continental' style. Also influential was the realization that fussy pictorial imagery rarely transcended cultural boundaries or survived the 'abominable paper and printing characteristics of most of the foreign newspapers' (Saxon-Mills, 82). Unlike the idealistic Pick, Crawford had arguably merely made a noisy virtue out of a necessity. 
The depression temporarily halted the expansion of American firms in Europe and pushed Crawford towards the public sector. As an adviser to the Empire Marketing Board from 1926 to 1931, Crawford came to exert considerable influence over the board's energetic secretary, Sir Stephen Tallents. Crawford's contribution to the board's promotional campaigns led to his being knighted in 1927. The secretary for the dominions, Leopold Amery, joked that in Crawford's case KBE stood for 'Keep Buying Empire' ('The Times', 28 June 1927). In 1931 he directed the board's Buy British campaign, which attempted to persuade the public that discriminating shopping could spend the nation out of the slump. A giant neon sign was erected in Trafalgar Square, while the aviator Amy Johnson and the train carriages of the Great Western Railway were also enlisted in the cause. 
In 1931 Crawford was appointed chairman of the Post Office publicity committee and, following Tallents's transfer to the General Post Office, played an influential part in the rebranding of the Post Office. This role, coupled with consultancy to the Ministry of Health, the Imperial Economic Committee, and the Ministry of Agriculture, cemented his place in the establishment. Accordingly W. H. Crawford Ltd prospered during the Second World War, when it was responsible for many Ministry of Information campaigns, and in the immediate post-war era, when the British state became the largest advertiser. 
William Crawford played an important role in reforming the advertising industry. He was a member of the executive council of the Advertising Association from its foundation in 1926. He was a member of the council of the Association of British Advertising Agents and president of the Institute of Incorporated Practitioners in Advertising (1937-40). Crawford tirelessly wrote guidelines and statements of best practice, and facilitated the creation of regulatory bodies such as the Audit Bureau of Circulation in 1931. 
Crawford held an apparently genuine desire to reclaim the profession from the 'quacks and charlatans' and made strenuous efforts to raise the status of advertising in public life. He used the World Advertising Convention at Wembley in 1924 to lobby such luminaries as the prince of Wales and Winston Churchill, and repeatedly stressed the importance of advertising to national wellbeing in the columns of the 'Yorkshire Evening News' and in books like 'How to Succeed in Advertising' (1931). Crawford also contributed to a variety of co-operative inter-war campaigns to encourage the consumption of milk and fruit, co-writing 'The People's Food' (1938) to popularize the claims of nutritional science. He died at his home, 5 Chesterfield House, Audley Street, Westminster, London, on 19 November 1950. 
W. S. Crawford Ltd was one of the few British advertising agencies in the early twentieth century with an international reach; by the time of Crawford's death the firm had established a global network of thirty-seven offices. Under his direction the agency was instrumental in importing, appropriating, and developing advertising techniques in Britain. Ironically, although the founder of the modern agency, Crawford was fond of 'bons mots' like 'I know nothing about advertising', 'You are not proposing to spend enough money', and 'I warn you that you won't like what I am now going to show you!' It was to Crawford's sixth sense and his 'remarkable and in some degree mysterious qualities' that Sir Stephen Tallents paid tribute on his death (Saxon-Mills, 175). W. S. Crawford Ltd later became part of the Dorland Group and was subsumed into Saatchi and Saatchi in 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 40829


Russell, Thomas Baron (1865-1931), advertising consultant, was born on 15 November 1865 at 12 Avenue Terrace, Avenue Road, Camberwell, London, the son of Thomas Russell, librarian of a circulating library, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Everett. Russell's father encouraged the boy's reading and he developed a love of literature which he intended to pursue at university, but was prevented by his father's serious illness. He was obliged to leave school and, after several jobs, in January 1882 obtained a post with John Morgan Richards Ltd, a firm of importing chemists. 
Morgan Richards was an importer of American patent medicines and the firm's success depended on advertising. In his twenty-three years with the firm, Russell gained practical experience in this side of their business, both at home and on his business trips to the USA, Canada, India, and Australia. He created the memorable advertisements for Carter's Little Liver Pills. Aware of the influence of advertising magazines, he wrote regularly for the American 'Printer's Ink', under the editorship of his friend John Irving Romer, and from 1901 in the new 'Advertising World' edited by William Ewert Berry. Russell disapproved of the way in which the advertising business was then organized, with agents receiving commission from the newspaper, the vendor of space, rather than from the advertiser. He urged that advertisers should pay a net rate, free of all discounts and commissions, and that the agents should receive an agreed fee. 
In 1905 Russell was persuaded by Horace Hooper, the paper's new advertising director, to join 'The Times' as its advertising manager. During his three years at the newspaper, Russell inaugurated the Times Book Club and increased the amount of illustrated display advertising. He was the originator of 'The Times''s 'gold brick' advertisements, whose information, having been researched by 'Times' staff, was held up as reliable. When Hooper bought the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' from Adam and Charles Black, Russell cultivated a new readership by selling it in instalments and by mail order. After he left 'The Times' he organized the promotion of other books and encyclopaedias. 
In 1910 Russell set himself up as an advertising consultant -- arguably the first such in Britain. In contrast to agents, who bought advertising space on behalf of their clients, the consultant was paid by fee or annual retainer to prepare the advertising material and generally advise on aspects of the business -- in Russell's words, 'functioning exactly as a consulting physician' (Nevett, 108). The Incorporated Society of Advertisement Consultants, which he founded in 1910 and presided over for twenty-one years, prescribed the codes of conduct and standards expected of its members. He was later involved with the Publicity Club, and was the first recipient of its cup, awarded for distinguished services to advertising. 
Respected for his high standards and personal integrity, Russell was often hired to arbitrate on disputes in the advertising field. He was one of the first professionals to venture into the political arena: the Liberal Party hired him in 1910, and during the First World War he advised a government committee on recruiting campaigns and was also involved with advertising the War Loan of 1915. After the war he delivered the first lectures on advertising to be delivered as a university course at the London School of Economics. Ill health forced his retirement in 1931. He died at his home, Highwood, Batts Corner, Binsted Road, near Farnham, Surrey, on 31 December 1931. He was survived by his wife, Olga Hutteman, and by their three sons and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 40832


Docker, (Frank) Dudley (1862-1944), industrialist and financier, was born at Paxton House, South Street, Smethwick, on 26 August 1862, youngest son of Ralph Docker (1809-1887), a solicitor who was for many years coroner for East Worcestershire and clerk of Smethwick's board of health, and Sarah Maria (1830-1900), daughter of Richard Sankey, horse dealer, and sister of Ralph Docker's deceased first wife. Dudley Docker, as he was known, had four brothers, four sisters, and three half-sisters. He was educated privately and at King Edward VI's Grammar School, Birmingham (where he was bottom of his class), before joining his father's law firm. Legal work proved to be uncongenial, and he often subsequently expressed contempt for lawyers. 
In 1881 Docker joined in forming Docker Brothers, dealers in varnish for blacking stoves. After a few years the company began making its own varnish and it prospered in the 1890s. It was through the firm's connections that in 1902 Docker masterminded the merger of five of the largest British rolling-stock companies to form the Metropolitan Amalgamated Carriage and Wagon Company. The name of the business was changed in 1912 to the Metropolitan Carriage, Wagon and Finance Company (MCWF). Docker became chairman of this new combine, which was the second largest employer in the midlands. He was resourceful and effective in all its operations, but his financial dexterity was specially notable. Through MCWF he became interested in electrical engineering trusts, and he led the wartime merger movement by negotiating in 1918 the joint purchase for $1.2 million by MCWF and Vickers of the British Westinghouse Electrical Company, subsequently known as Metropolitan-Vickers. 
In 1919 Docker persuaded Vickers to buy MCWF at the inflated price of $12.1 million. He was a director of Vickers in 1919-20, and through warehoused shareholdings and nominee directors exercised a critical influence on its fortunes in the 1920s. His role as intermediary in the transfer of control of Metropolitan-Vickers to the General Electric Company of America in 1928 was regarded as unforgivable by some colleagues. 
Docker also had a prodigious range of other business interests. In 1906 he became a director of Birmingham Small Arms (BSA), and as deputy chairman in 1909-12 he masterminded its purchase of Daimler Motors in 1910. Though he had left the board, he made crucial interventions in BSA in the early 1930s and rejoined its board in 1943. As a director of the Midland Bank from 1912 until his death he had a powerful influence on banking policy both inside the bank and nationally; his internal influence was pervasive and from 1923 he dominated the bank's Birmingham advisory committee. He was a director of several railway companies, notably the Metropolitan Railway (1915-34) and the Southern Railway (1922-38). He was one of the promoters of the British Trade Corporation, formed under royal charter in 1917, but he resigned from its board in 1920. The following year he formed the Electric and Railway Finance Corporation which acted as his private financial house until his death. Through it he exerted considerable power in two Belgian-based trusts, Sofina, which had worldwide interests in public utilities and electrical engineering, and the International Sleeping Car Syndicate associated with Davison Dalziel. 
From 1906 Docker was keenly interested in midlands constituency politics and had contacts with Unionist, Liberal, and Labour candidates. He also had confidential financial arrangements with the 'Midland Advertiser' and possibly the 'Birmingham Gazette'. Believing in the superiority of businessmen over professional politicians and administrators he launched in 1910 the Business League Movement in the midlands working for a 'business government' of businessmen. He was a founder of the Midlands Employers Federation in 1913, and in 1914 bought a London evening newspaper, 'The Globe', to agitate for a business policy. This brought him into conflict with the government and the paper was briefly suppressed in 1915 under the 'Defence of the Realm Act'. It also led Docker into association with right-wing publicists such as Leo Maxse, to whose 'National Review' he contributed. 
Docker was founder president in 1916 of the Federation of British Industries, which he intended to act as a 'business parliament' supplanting the responsibilities of the Westminster parliament in commercial, fiscal, and labour matters. In 1922-5 he was president of the British Commonwealth Union, which confidentially funded the parliamentary candidatures of business-minded acquaintances. Some of the details of his dealings with politicians would have embarrassed them if published: Philip Cunliffe-Lister and Arthur Steel-Maitland were perhaps his most important contacts. 
Docker was a Warwickshire magistrate from 1909 and became a companion of the Bath in 1911 after donating a heavy artillery battery for the use of his factory workers in the Territorial Army. He hated Germans and was a zealot in trying to destroy German prosperity and establish a British business hegemony. He was first chairman of the Birmingham Munitions Output Organization in 1915, and his rolling-stock company was the chief manufacturer of tanks in the First World War. His advice was solicited by government departments, and he served on several government committees, including those chaired by Alexander Henderson, first Baron Faringdon, on financial facilities for trade (1916) and the reorganization of commercial intelligence (1916-17). The offer of a barony by the Baldwin government in 1929 was withdrawn after protests from the City of London. 
Docker married in 1895 Lucy Constance (died 1947), daughter of John Benbow Hebbert (1809-1887), clerk to the Birmingham justices. Their only child, Bernard Docker, usually referred to his father as 'the chief'. Dudley Docker served on the committee of Warwickshire County Cricket Club until 1892, having been the highest scoring batsman at the inaugural match of the Edgbaston ground in 1886 and playing for his county against Australia in 1887. He was a keen shot, and usually spent time in Scotland each year, and a member of the Royal Thames Yacht Squadron. 
Docker was tall and well built, with a big nose. As a young man he seemed jovial and frank, although he could be intimidating: his small, intense, unblinking eyes quelled dissidence. He was always mercenary, and had an unbeatable understanding of other mercenary men. He disliked others being in authority over him, and resented politicians or officials whom he could not bribe or browbeat. In business he was always bold, flexible, persuasive, ruthless, and opportunistic; from 1918 onwards he might be judged unscrupulous. At committee meetings Docker was taciturn and even inarticulate, but he was so shrewd and calculating that he was often able to direct deliberations by informal pressure. Increasingly he liked to operate through nominees, and was usually a good delegator. He had a retentive memory, and an acuity in financial affairs that was hard to surpass. The least gullible of men, some of his political enthusiasms were nevertheless unrealistic. Apparently he suffered from nervous strains which made him increasingly pessimistic and aggressive; he may have developed claustrophobia, and about 1916 came to dislike crowded meetings or public attention. Latterly he was secretive. 
Docker died of Ludwig's angina and tonsillitis on 8 July 1944, at his home, Coleshill House, near Amersham, Buckinghamshire, and was buried at Coleshill. 


@@@@@


doc= 40834


Reilly, Sidney George (1874-1925), spy, dubbed the Ace of Spies, was born Shlomo (Solomon) ben Hersh Rozenblium on 24 March 1874 in Bedzin, Piotrkow Guberniia, Russian Poland, the only son of Hersh (Grigory) ben Yakov Rozenblium and his wife, Paulina Bramson. He had two sisters, Elena and Mariam. His father was a contractor and minor landowner active in the Jewish emancipation movement. Among his ancestors was the Jewish theologian Elijah ben Solomon, gaon of Vilna (1720-1797). 
Details of Reilly's education are uncertain. Despite later claims, he did not attend Heidelberg or Cambridge universities or the Royal School of Mines. Nevertheless he demonstrated sufficient knowledge of chemistry to gain membership in the Chemical Society in 1896 and the Institute of Chemistry in 1897. He had an exceptional command of languages, including English, Russian, Polish, German, and French. 
As Sigmund Salomon Georgjevitch Rosenblum he arrived in London in 1895. In 1899 he became Sidney George Reilly by receiving a passport in that name, though he never legally adopted it or became a British subject. A patron, possibly his entree into British intelligence, was Sir Henry Hozier (1838-1907), powerful secretary of Lloyds connected to the War Office intelligence branch. With his strong Jewish features and accented English, Reilly was an unconvincing Englishman, but this became his favourite of many alternative identities. 
Reilly was married at least four times but never divorced. His first marriage in 1898 was to Margaret Callahan Thomas (1874-1933), a governess and the widow of the Revd Hugh Thomas, from whom he separated by 1904. Between 1904 and 1908 he was married to a Russian woman with whom he maintained a relationship through the mid-1920s. Two children were produced by this union, a son and a daughter, but their names and fates are unknown. In 1910 Reilly took another Russian bride, Nadya Petrovna Zalessky (1888- 'c'.1949), the former wife of a tsarist naval official; they separated in 1919. He married a British actress, Pepita Bobadilla 
('nee' Nelly Louise Burton; 1894- 'c'.1970)
, widow of playwright Charles Haddon Chambers, in 1923. 
Reilly was a collector of books and artwork, particularly Napoleona. He was an aviation enthusiast and helped found one of the first aviation firms in Russia, Krylya, in 1910. He also was a member of the Imperial All-Russian Aero Club. He was a freemason. 
Reilly's espionage career, as much commercial as political, was long and complex. From 1899 to 1905 he was mostly in the Far East. In 1904 he directed the trading firm M. A. Ginsburg & Co. in Port Arthur, China, and supplied information to both Japan and Russia. The years 1906-14 found him based in St Petersburg, where he developed a wide array of personal and professional contacts extending from the revolutionary underground to the imperial court. In 1914 he went to New York as a war contractor and became a powerful influence in Russian purchasing. His ruthless business tactics earned him a fortune and many enemies. Reilly entered the Royal Flying Corps as second lieutenant in October 1917 and served at that rank until demobilization in April 1920. He received the Military Cross in 1919. An effort to secure his honorary commission as a major in the army failed, in part due to political objections. 
The First World War saw Reilly become a formal agent of the British Secret Intelligence Service in whose employ he remained until 1922. In 1918 he spearheaded a bold if unsuccessful plot to topple Lenin's regime, the misnamed Lockhart plot. Thereafter he ostensibly devoted himself to the anti-Bolshevik cause and became the key adviser to one of the Soviets' militant opponents, Boris Savinkov (1879-1924). In 1924 Reilly was a charter member of the International League to Combat the III International and in the same year helped found the American affiliate, the Anti-Bolshevik League. However, Reilly's memoranda to the SIS and various British officials reveal a measured approach to the Soviet regime. He judged the abrupt and total overthrow of the Bolsheviks as unwise and unnecessary and advocated policies aimed at shifting leadership from ideologues to more pragmatic hands. Economic incentives played a vital role in these plans. In pursuit of this goal he returned to Soviet Russia in late 1925 and was captured by Soviet police. Russian records suggest that Reilly was executed in Moscow on 5 November 1925 but this, as with previous contradictory statements on his demise, is by no means definitive. He is said to have been buried in Moscow on 9 November. 
Estimates of Reilly's character vary widely. Some saw in him Baron Munchausen, others Mephistopheles. The official verdict, as rendered by the Foreign Office's Sir Nevile Bland, was that Reilly was 'a man of great courage... coupled with a somewhat unscrupulous temperament, [making] him a rather double edged tool' (FO 371/12605). An American business rival, Samuel Vauclain, observed that he was 'not only a keen-witted and resourceful businessman, but, when in a tight place, proved... an ingenious diplomat' (Office of Naval Intelligence, file 21010, 34). Reilly, however, had his champions, among them his wartime SIS chief and later business partner Sir William Wiseman, Sir Robert Nathan, and perhaps most notably Sir Winston Churchill. There remains a division among those who regard Reilly as a martyr to the anti-communist cause (Brook-Shepherd) and those who see him as a devious Soviet double agent (Lockhart, 'First Man'). He was all that and more. Reilly was indifferent to matters of ideology; his only true loyalty was to himself. 


@@@@@


doc= 40835


Hodgson, Kirkman Daniel (1814-1879), financier, was born in London, the first son of John Hodgson (died 1857), of Hampstead, and his wife, Caroline (died 1884), daughter of Jean Delamain. His ancestors had been sugar refiners in eighteenth-century London. He was educated at Charterhouse School, and became a partner in the firm of Hodgson, general and commission merchants. Under its articles of partnership, dated 1859, he and his brother, and sole partner, James Stewart Hodgson each provided capital of $80,000. In 1865 their firm merged with Kay, Finlay & Co. of London, and Thomson, Finlay & Co. of Liverpool, to form the new firm of Finlay Hodgson, with capital of $360,000 divided into seventy-two shares, of which Kirkman Hodgson held fourteen. Finlay Hodgson acted as general and commission merchants until 1867, when it was absorbed by the merchant bank of Barings. 
Thomas Baring (1799-1873) was Hodgson's colleague on the board of the Grand Trunk Railway of Canada, and knowing him as a careful, clever, discreet man, Baring hoped that he would steady the bank's impulsive younger partners, E. C. Baring and Russell Sturgis. As Hodgson made only a limited impact at Barings, and is not associated with any particular achievement or responsibility, there was possibly an internal alliance to negate his influence. He was a partner from 1 July 1867 until his retirement, in consequence of illness, on 31 December 1878. 
Hodgson was elected to the Political Economy Club in 1853, and gave evidence to House of Commons committees, such as those investigating commercial distress (1848) and the commercial crisis (1857-8). It was at the suggestion in 1863 of Hodgson and Robert Crawford that G. J. Goschen (1831-1907) stood for the City of London constituency, and forty years later Goschen described his two political sponsors as 'splendid specimens of the British Merchant, cultivated, versed in all the higher questions both of commercial and banking finance, and wielding an exceptional influence in the City' (Elliot, 47). 
Hodgson was a director of the Bank of England from 1840 until 1878. He served as deputy governor in 1861-3, and by rotation was governor in 1863-5 during a difficult period in the American Civil War. His place in the bank's history is unostentatious. He was one of three financial experts who examined the accounts of the joint-stock bankers Overend and Gurney after its failure in 1866, and advised against attempting a rescue. As a result of his family's investments, Hodgson was a director from 1841 until his death of the Pelican Life Office, the life assurance company associated with the Phoenix Fire Insurance Office. Hodgson joined Phoenix's board in 1846, serving until his death. No particular policy or success is associated with him at Pelican or Phoenix, which in the mid-nineteenth century were both characterized by cautious and even stultified enterprise. 
In politics he was an advanced Liberal whose judgement was respected by Gladstone. He was elected without contest as MP for Bridport, Dorset, in March 1857, and held the seat until November 1868, when he stood unsuccessfully at Penryn in Cornwall. He was elected for Bristol in June 1870, and was returned again at the head of the poll there in 1874. His health began to fail in the autumn of 1877, and in the winter session of 1878 he retired from parliament. 
For many years Hodgson had a house near Watford, and was a magistrate, deputy lieutenant, and in 1845 high sheriff, of Hertfordshire. In London he lived at 67 Brook Street. He married, in 1843, Frances (died 1851), daughter of John Laforey Butler, of Southgate, Middlesex, and had a son and daughter. In later life he acquired a seat at Ash Grove, Sevenoaks, Kent, where he died on 11 September 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 40836


Pam, Albert Samuel (1875-1955), natural historian and financier, was born on 26 June 1875 at Clapham, London, eldest of three sons of Leopold Pam (1838-1909), merchant and rentier, and his wife, Philippine (1851-1938), who had Anglicized her Austrian maiden name of Furth (or Fuerth) to Firth. He was educated at the City of London School (1889-92) and then spent two years at a 'Gymnasium' at Frankfurt am Main and a year at Ouchy near Lausanne perfecting his languages. He began his career working for a sugar merchant in Mincing Lane, London; shortly afterwards he joined a voluntary brigade of the Royal Fusiliers, which he commanded both at the diamond jubilee and at the funeral of Queen Victoria. In 1907 he married Maude le Clerc (1872-1960), divorced wife of Walter Fowle and daughter of Surgeon Major-General John George Faught. They had one daughter. 
From an early age Pam was interested in ornithology, zoology, and horticulture. He first visited South America in 1900 with his maternal uncle, who had business interests in the Amazon basin. Thereafter he returned frequently on visits which combined capitalism with natural history, and he became possibly the leading English authority on the plants, birds, and animals of South America. He was a member of the council of the Zoological Society of London from 1907; he received its silver medal in 1914 and served as treasurer from 1932 to 1945. In 1912 he bought the Wormley Bury estate at Broxbourne, Hertfordshire, including its derelict gardens, which contained rare specimens planted by Sir Abraham Hume. Pam cultivated a large collection of South American flora and fauna, especially bulbous plants, in the grounds and glasshouses at Wormley Bury; he also had a menagerie and an aviary there. A plant of the daffodil family (Amaryllidaceae) discovered by him in Peru in 1926 was named 'Pamianthe peruviana', the generic name meaning Pam's flower. He was a fellow of the Linnean Society from 1939 and was awarded a medal of honour by the Royal Horticultural Society in 1944. He often contributed to the 'Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society', and he wrote on aviculture, botany, and zoology in scientific periodicals. His achievements as a natural historian were recognized in 1944 by an honorary MA from Oxford University, with special rights at Wadham College. 
Pam became a stockbroker with Vivian Gray and specialized in South American securities. During the Edwardian period he was the most active member of the Ethelburga syndicate, a group of rich men including Arthur Stanley, which speculated in risky overseas ventures carrying the possibility of large profits. After visiting Venezuela in 1905, Pam was granted a monopoly on salt in that country, and he transferred his rights to the Ethelburga syndicate. Through Pam's contacts, the syndicate also obtained match monopolies in Venezuela (1905) and Bolivia (1907) which it sold in 1927 to the Swedish Match Company. Pam also represented a syndicate led by Lord Howard de Walden, which in 1910 secured a contract to build the Chilean Longitudinal Railway. 
Few men in the City of London knew South America more intimately than Pam. Sir Vincent Corbett described him as 'a keen businessman, used to fishing in troubled waters', who 'does not hesitate to push his own interests by any means that may come to hand' but who 'acted quite frankly in his dealings' (Corbett to Hardinge, 2 May 1908, TNA: PRO, FO 368/241). In December 1914 Pam was sent to Chile by the director of naval intelligence, and later he undertook espionage on the German community in Bolivia. He served at army headquarters in France in 1916-18, reaching the rank of major, which title he thereafter bore in business life. He became an OBE, was decorated with the Belgian Croix de Guerre, and was made a member of the French Legion d'honneur. From November 1918 until April 1919 he was a British member of the International Armistice Commission at Spa, negotiating Germany's surrender. 
In 1919 Pam was recruited as an associate partner in the merchant banking firm of J. Henry Schroder and was thereafter instrumental in several advances in British institutional finance. Schroders was the first major London issuing house to handle domestic industrial issues, and Pam was critical in this innovation. From its inception in 1926 he had charge of Schroders' investment department, which by the 1930s was providing one-fifth of the firm's revenues. His expertise in industrial finance was recognized by the Bank of England, which consulted him on the rationalization of declining staple industries. Most notably the Lancashire Steel Corporation was formed in 1930 with a substantial Bank of England holding as a result of his plans and negotiations. The co-operation among financial institutions obtained by Pam on this occasion was perpetuated, at his suggestion, by the formation of the Bankers' Industrial Development Corporation to support industrial rationalization. Pam also supervised the work of Leadenhall Securities Corporation, formed by Schroders in 1935, to finance medium and small industrial companies. Leadenhall's usual method was to invest in redeemable preference shares and to take some ordinary shares for a fixed term. 
As a result of his position at Schroders, Pam was instrumental, with William Morris (Viscount Nuffield), in forming the Pressed Steel Company of Great Britain, whose products were chiefly used in the motor-car industry. He was a director of this company from 1926, and chairman from 1930 until his death in 1955. Pam was also active in Schroders' eastern European interests. He was managing director (1924-40) and then chairman of the Continental and Industrial Trust, which was formed to specialize in advances to German companies and in underwriting their securities. This trust also held extensive investments in Europe and the Americas. As members of the Schroder family became ill or died in the 1930s, Pam's importance in their merchant bank increased. It reached its apogee during the Second World War. 
Pam had interests outside Schroders. As a young man he joined the board of the Marmite Food Extract Company, and he served briefly as managing director and became chairman after the armistice. He also had a long connection with Sena Sugar estates, which controlled extensive properties in Portuguese East Africa. 
Pam was energetic, crisp, and observant, with fierce, sharp features and a small, dark moustache. Piercing eyes indicated his acuity both as a natural historian and as a financier. He combined physical fortitude with analytical intelligence. His nickname Pamski was an allusion to his foreign antecedents, and the prejudice which he encountered may have aggravated his well-attested prickliness. He was an inveterate traveller for pleasure and a gastronome, whose personal motto was 'Labor ipse voluptas'. His memoirs, entitled 'Adventures and Recollections', which were privately printed by Oxford University Press in 1945, mainly describe his South American travels. 
Pam died on 2 September 1955 at Wormley Bury. He left bequests to Wadham College and to the Oxford Botanic Garden. 


@@@@@


doc= 40837


Montagu, Lilian Helen (1873-1963), feminist and social worker, was born at 96 Lancaster Gate, London, on 22 December 1873, the sixth of the ten children of Samuel Montagu, first Baron Swaythling (1832-1911), and his wife, Ellen Cohen (1848-1919). Her father, Liberal MP for Whitechapel (1885-1900), was a staunchly Orthodox Jew, uncompromising in his beliefs and in his religious practices, which he expected all members of his household to follow without question. The oppressive atmosphere that this engendered reacted upon his children in different ways. Louis, his eldest son, inherited his title but not his religious beliefs, while Edwin Montagu, as a member of Lloyd George's wartime cabinet, did his best to sabotage the Zionist movement. Lily, as she was known, was without doubt the most spiritual and religious of all Samuel's offspring: her reaction took the form of a rebellion against what she perceived to be her father's callous disregard of and contempt for those Jews who were not as religious as him. 'My father', she recalled in a speech in 1950, 'saw all around him the lax Jews, and considered them as dead leaves... I began to worry about the dead leaves' (Alderman, 202). Her sister Henrietta Franklin was of a like mind. 
Lilian Montagu was privately educated. At the age of fifteen she appears to have suffered a mental crisis, from which she emerged convinced that her destiny was to minister to her fellow Jews. Within Jewish Orthodoxy it is not possible for a Jewess to become a rabbi (that is the religious leader of a congregation). Montagu turned instead to social work in the Jewish East End of London; in 1893 she established the West Central Jewish Girls' Club as a place where young Jewish girls from the East End could meet in a friendly and supportive girls-only atmosphere. Meanwhile, at the fashionable New West End Synagogue she began conducting a children's service based upon an English liturgy. Now in her mid-twenties, this excessively plain, nominally Orthodox Jewess was drawn to the personality and the pronouncements of the handsome Claude Goldsmid Montefiore, the gentleman scholar who was in the process of inventing a new form of Judaism, denationalized and devoid of ritual; on 1 February 1896 Montefiore proclaimed the tenets of Liberal Judaism from the pulpit of the West London Reform Synagogue. In the January 1899 issue of the 'Jewish Quarterly Review' (of which Montefiore was co-editor), Montagu published an essay condemning the 'materialism and spiritual lethargy' into which Anglo-Jewry had lapsed, and calling for a new form of Judaism in which 'all that was valuable and lovely in the ancient faith' would be preserved, but in 'forms acceptable to emancipated minds' (Alderman, 204). 
It is clear that Montagu had formed an emotional attachment to Montefiore (then a widower); it is equally clear that this affection was not reciprocated. Montagu spent the better part of the next three years persuading Claude to agree to become president of the Jewish Religious Union (JRU), established on her initiative in February 1902 as a vehicle for energizing debate about the future of Jewish Orthodoxy in Britain. Montagu's amorous advances were rebuffed (Montefiore married his first wife's former tutor at Girton College, Cambridge). But Montefiore agreed to accept the headship of the JRU, with Lily as one of its vice-presidents. 
To begin with, the JRU had leading members of the nominally Orthodox United Synagogue on its governing body -- for example Rabbi Simeon Singer -- thus signalling that its existence was not meant to be schismatic. It began holding Saturday afternoon services at the premises of the West London Synagogue, but rejected a set of conditions demanded by the West London, including the recitation of a number of Hebrew prayers, a prohibition on the employment of hymns not composed by Jews, and the strict separation of sexes. Underlying the insistence of the JRU on the equality of the sexes at prayer, Lily Montagu and Claude Montefiore nurtured a passionate belief in the part that the JRU could play in the emancipation of the Jewish woman. Chief Rabbi Hermann Adler issued a condemnation of the JRU, and was joined in this condemnation by Samuel Montagu, who became estranged from Lily and from her sister Marian, who had joined in her venture. In his will Montagu stipulated that each daughter was to lose three-quarters of her share of his estate should she persist in the promotion of 'a movement known as 'Liberal Judaism' the objects of which I strongly disapprove' (Alderman, 207). It is a tribute to the sincerity of Lily and Marian that neither of them capitulated to this threat. 
In 1909 the JRU became the Jewish Religious Union for the Advancement of Liberal Judaism. Members of Orthodox congregations who had identified with it were induced to resign after Hermann Adler had condemned its form of religious services as contrary to Jewish law. The JRU acquired a former chapel in Hill Street, Marylebone, as its place of worship, and the Liberal Jewish Synagogue, as it was called, came into being in 1911, when it acquired its first minister, Israel Mattuck. Some parts of the service were in Hebrew, but for the most part English was used. A few verses were chanted from the 'Torah' scroll: no one was 'called' to the reading of the law, as in Orthodox synagogues. There was an organ and a mixed-sex choir. Men and women sat together -- of course. Two years later the West Central Club was reorganized as a section of the JRU. In due course affiliate congregations of the JRU were established in other parts of London and in the provinces. Meanwhile, Lily began preaching at the Hill Street place of worship; in 1925 the congregation moved to larger premises in St John's Wood Road, and in 1944 she was formally ordained there as a lay minister. 
Side by side with her work for Liberal Judaism, both in England and worldwide, Lily Montagu pursued a career as a social worker. She was one of the first women to be made a justice of the peace, becoming in time chair of the Westminster magistrates. In 1937 she was appointed OBE. In spite of her many acts of open and proud rebellion against Jewish Orthodoxy, Montagu remained in some respects a remarkably Orthodox Jewess. She adhered throughout her life to the Orthodox dietary laws and recited (at the New West End Synagogue) the memorial prayer for her parents. She died on 22 January 1963 at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, London, and was buried, in strict accordance with Orthodox Jewish practice, beside her parents at the Edmonton cemetery of the Federation of Synagogues, Middlesex. She never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 40839


Ward, Stephen Thomas (1912-1963), osteopath and scapegoat, was born on 19 October 1912 at Lemsford vicarage, Hatfield, Hertfordshire, second of three sons of Arthur Evelyn Ward (1877-1944), clergyman, and his wife, Eileen Esmee (1881-1955), daughter of Thomas Mercer Cliffe Vigors, Anglo-Irish landowner. He was a descendant of the second Baron Castlemaine and first cousin of the traveller Wilfred Thesiger. After schooling at Canford, he worked as a translator in Hamburg (1929-30) and as a Parisian tourist guide while studying at the Sorbonne ('c'.1930-1932). Next he qualified in osteopathy at Kirksville, Missouri (1934-9), which entitled him to practise as a physician in the USA; he henceforth used the prefix of doctor, but had no British medical qualifications. 
After briefly practising osteopathy in Torquay, Ward entered the Royal Armoured Corps as a private, reaching the rank of captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps. Settling in London after the war, his first important patient was the US ambassador Averell Harriman. In 1947 he set up an osteopathic practice in Cavendish Square. Although Lady Gladwyn 'disliked his jaunty conceited manner' ('Diaries of Cynthia Gladwyn', 288), she acknowledged the efficacy of his techniques; her fellow patients (including Sir Winston Churchill, Elizabeth Taylor, Paul Getty, King Peter of Yugoslavia) were more appreciative of Ward's fluent, ingratiating, well-informed conversation. Uninhibited, indiscreet, carefree, kind, plausible, and charming, his voice was rich and resonant. He was an inveterate name-dropper who delighted in crossing social barriers. From early manhood he was fascinated by prostitution and relished the company of beautiful women, but he had a low libido. On 27 July 1949 he married an actress, Patricia Mary ('b'. 1928), daughter of Eric Clifford Kingsley Baines, textiles company director. The marriage failed after six weeks and was ended by divorce three years later. He became more dissolute with age, although his preference was for talking about other people's sexual activity rather than for acting himself. 
Ward attended classes at the Slade School of Art, and a new phase of his career opened with an exhibition of his sketches of patients (12 July 1960). He supplied the 'Illustrated London News' with further celebrity sketches and the 'Daily Telegraph' with drawings of Adolf Eichmann's trial (1961). He hoped to sketch the Politburo, and was introduced by his patient Colin Coote, editor of the 'Daily Telegraph', to Yevgeny Ivanov, the Russian naval attache. Ward was soon enlisted by MI5 in an attempt to entrap Ivanov (June 1961), became a messenger between British and Soviet intelligence, and was an unofficial intermediary during the Cuban missile crisis (1962). Briefly Ward had real utility, but overrated his influence. 
In 1956 the third Viscount Astor, who had been Ward's friend and patient since 1950, allowed him to lease for a peppercorn rent Spring Cottage in his grounds at Cliveden. In July 1961 Astor held a house party attended by John Profumo, minister for war. Ward's guests that weekend included Ivanov and Christine Keeler, with whom Ward had intermittently lived on a non-sexual basis since 1959. For some months until December 1961 Keeler and Profumo had an affair. This need not have caused a public convulsion, but after an interval was exploited by George Wigg MP, whose mischief-making resulted in Profumo making a formal denial in the House of Commons of 'impropriety... with Miss Keeler' (22 March 1963). This was the first public sensation of the Profumo affair, a moral panic in which fears of foreign espionage were muddled together with political opportunism, prurience, and malice under the cover of cant phrases about maintaining standards in public life. Ward and Keeler both confirmed Profumo's statement, but on 26 March Ward spoke with naive candour to Wigg in an effort to minimize the scandal. Perhaps he was shadowed to his meeting with the Labour MP, for the next day the Conservative home secretary, Henry Brooke (1903-1984), who wanted Ward discredited or silenced, asked the commissioner of police if there was police interest in Ward. A wide investigation was launched on 1 April to see if Ward could be caught for a crime. Up to 140 of his friends and patients were repeatedly interviewed in a campaign of harassment (Keeler was interviewed twenty-four times). The police pressurized and intimidated witnesses in a fishing operation which destroyed Ward's osteopathic practice. Initially Ward was co-operative, believing that his intelligence work would secure his immunity from this persecution, but when he realized that he was being set up as a scapegoat he contacted journalists, and at a meeting with the prime minister's private secretary and a representative of the Security Service declared that Profumo's Commons denial had been untrue. Profumo resigned on 4 June. 
On 8 June, in an act of political revenge, Ward was arrested and charged under the 'Sexual Offences Act' of 1956 with living on immoral earnings. He had introduced men and women who had subsequently slept together, but the allegation that he was a pimp would have been impossible to sustain in a less politically hysterical atmosphere. Ward's trial, which was hurriedly opened at the Old Bailey on 22 July, was one of historic injustice. It established him as the British Dreyfus. The charges were dubious; the testimony of prostitutes dredged up by the police was never reliable. But the prosecuting counsel, Mervyn Griffith-Jones (who in 1960 had been the senior prosecuting counsel in the unsuccessful prosecution of Penguin Books for publishing an unexpurgated version of D. H. Lawrence's 'Lady Chatterley's Lover'), blackened Ward's character with a closing speech which presented verdicts of guilty as the jury's patriotic duty. In the early morning of 31 July, before the last day of the trial, Ward took thirty-five grains of Nembutal barbiturate. 'It is really more than I can stand -- the horror day after day at the court and in the streets', he wrote in his suicide note. 'I am sorry to disappoint the vultures.... Delay resuscitation as long as possible' (Knightley and Kennedy, 245; Crawford, 170). The judge having refused to halt the trial, Ward was found guilty, but no sentence was announced before his death, after eighty hours in a coma, on 3 August 1963 at St Stephen's Hospital, Fulham Road, London. He was cremated at Mortlake (9 August). Ward was in fact incidental to the Profumo episode: he was a sacrificial offering. The exorcism of scandal in high places required the facade of his conviction on vice charges. 
John Hurt acted the part of Ward in the film 'Scandal' (1989). 


@@@@@


doc= 40845


Mathew, Sir George Benvenuto Buckley- (1807-1879), politician and diplomatist, was the son of George Mathew (1760-1846), of the Coldstream Guards, and his wife, Euphemia, the daughter of J. Hamilton. In 1835 he substituted the name of Benvenuto for that of Byam and in 1865 he added that of Buckley (on inheriting West Indian estates). Mathew entered the army in 1825, joining the light infantry; by 1833 he was a captain in his father's regiment. He retired from the army in 1841 as captain in the Grenadier Guards. In 1835 he married Anne Hoare (1808-1872), the only child and heir of the banker Henry Hoare of Stourhead and his wife, Charlotte, 'nee' Dering. This marriage, which enabled him to enter politics, was soon in difficulties, ending in what Mathew called a 'Scotch divorce' in 1849 (Disraeli, 253n.). His second wife, whom he married in 1850, was another heiress, Rosina Adelaide Handley, the daughter of J. C. Handley, and his third was the daughter of J. W. Gerard of New York (she was also the niece and coheir of General Sumner of Boston). In 1835 Mathew was elected MP for Athlone, as a tory. In 1838 he became MP for Shaftesbury when J. S. Poulter's election was declared void on petition, but he failed by seventeen votes to hold the seat in 1841. 
Mathew, frustrated in his political career, was appointed governor of the Bahamas in 1844, beginning a long career in the Americas. He was consul at Charleston from 1850 to 1853 and at Philadelphia from 1853 to 1856, when his exequatur was removed by the president of the USA. After serving in the Black Sea (1856-8), he was secretary and then charge d'affaires of the legation first in Mexico and afterwards for the Central American republics, for whom he was minister from 1861 to 1863. He moved to be minister to Colombia (1865-6), Argentina (1866-7), and Brazil (1867 - April 1879). He was made CB in 1863 and KCMG in May 1879, and lived latterly at Leamington Spa. He died at 16 Suffolk Street, London, on 22 October 1879. His various marriages produced at least five sons and two daughters. His was a rather miserable career, with the loss of his seat not compensated by his minor diplomatic appointments, despite the wealth supplied by his marriages. 


@@@@@


doc= 40847


Metcalfe, Sir Thomas Theophilus, fourth baronet (1795-1853), East India Company servant, was born on 2 January 1795, the fourth child of Sir Thomas Theophilus Metcalfe, first baronet (1745-1813), a major in the Bengal army, and his wife, Susannah Sophia, 'nee' Debonnaire (died 1815), who was formerly married to Major John Smith. He was younger brother of Charles Theophilus Metcalfe, third baronet and Baron Metcalfe, successively governor in India, Jamaica, and Canada. Thomas's father, who had made a fortune in India, on his return to England was elected a director of the East India Company, a position which he held from 1789 until his death in 1813. In 1796 Thomas senior was elected a member of parliament, and he was created a baronet in 1802. Thomas junior attended elementary school at Bromley in Kent and may have followed his two older brothers to Eton College. In 1812, when he was seventeen, the family sent him to India. After several months' study at Fort William College, Calcutta, he proceeded to Delhi in October 1813 to work for his brother Charles, recently appointed resident at Delhi. He remained uninterruptedly in Delhi for the next forty years. From 1819 to 1822 he was assistant resident under Sir David Ochterlony; subsequently he served again under his brother Charles during the latter's second term as resident (1825-7). In 1835, after the murder of William Fraser, he became himself civil commissioner and agent to the governor-general, as the post of resident was then called. In this position, which he retained until his death in 1853, he not only conducted the company's diplomatic relations with the Mughal court, but was responsible for the civil administration of the Delhi territory. 
Metcalfe's early years were troubled by a series of personal crises. A spendthrift as a youth, he squandered an inheritance of $10,000, and left his father and then his brother Charles to pay his bills. His first wife, Grace Clarke, whom he married on 7 June 1815, died in Delhi in 1824, and their two sons died in infancy. He then married, on 13 July 1826, Felicity Anne Browne, with whom he had two sons, including Theophilus John Metcalfe, and four daughters, before her death at Simla on 26 September 1842. About 1830 Thomas built as his residence the famed Metcalfe House on the banks of the Jumna, adjacent to the old city of Delhi. The house was a spacious flat-roofed bungalow with a columned veranda and curved portico surrounded by lakes and gardens. Lavishly furnished, the house contained Metcalfe's extensive library and art collection, including an entire room devoted to memorabilia of Napoleon Bonaparte. At the extreme opposite end of Delhi, near the Qutb Minar, Metcalfe converted a small domed octagonal Muslim tomb into a country garden house. Beside it he erected a small guest house known as Dilkusha ('heart's delight'). Within these residences Metcalfe lived the life at once of nabob and of squire. His daughter Emily Bayley ['see below'] remembered him as a man meticulous in personal habits, who every morning, punctually at ten o'clock, on his way to his carriage, 'passed through a row of servants, one holding his hat, another his gloves, another his handkerchief, another his gold-headed cane, and another his despatch-box'. A patron of Indian arts, and a student of Mughal architecture, Metcalfe in 1844 commissioned a Delhi artist to produce a set of illustrations entitled 'Reminiscences of Imperial Dehlie' ['sic']. When his brother Charles died in 1846, Metcalfe inherited the baronetcy and the family estate, but chose to remain at his post in Delhi. On 3 November 1853, aged fifty-eight, he died under mysterious circumstances. His family believed that he had been poisoned by the Mughal queen Zinat Mahal Begam in revenge for his part in the exclusion of her son Jivan Bahkt from the imperial title. 




@@@@@


doc= 40848


Agar, Augustus Willington Shelton (1890-1968), naval officer, was born in Kandy, Ceylon, on 4 January 1890, the son of John Shelton Agar, an Irish tea planter from co. Kerry. He was the youngest of thirteen children, and his Austrian mother, whose maiden name was Cruwell, died shortly after his birth. He was sent to England when he was eight years old. He was educated at Framlingham College, Suffolk, and at Eastman's naval academy, Southsea, Hampshire, and entered the training ship 'Britannia' as a cadet in May 1905. 
In September 1906 Agar was appointed midshipman to the battleship 'Prince of Wales', with the Mediterranean Fleet. Successive appointments as midshipman to battleships followed. In January 1910 he was promoted sub-lieutenant, and he continued training and examinations at Portsmouth and at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. In April 1911 he joined the destroyer 'Ruby', with the Home Fleet. In June 1912 he was promoted lieutenant, and in April 1913 he attended the Central Flying School at Upavon, where he gained his pilot's licence. 
In August 1913 Agar was appointed to the battleship 'Hibernia', which formed part of the 3rd battle squadron, the Grand Fleet, at the outbreak of war in August 1914. In 1915 'Hibernia' was deployed to the Dardanelles, and ultimately covered the Gallipoli evacuations in January 1916. In December of that year Agar joined the old cruiser 'Iphigenia', which had been converted into a headquarters and repair ship for minesweeping trawlers covering the approaches and supply routes to Murmansk and Archangel in north Russia. 'Iphigenia' arrived at Busta Voe in late February 1917, remained on station for a year, and returned to Chatham in February 1918. 
By May 1918 Agar was operating from Osea Island, Essex, with a flotilla of light coastal motor boats (CMBs), armed with torpedoes or mines and capable of nearly 40 knots. After the armistice he was employed by the Admiralty, in conjunction with the Foreign Office and MI5, on intelligence duties against Bolshevik Russia. Operating as agent ST 34 he contacted other British agents in Helsinki. Communications were maintained by two 40 foot CMBs based at Terijoki, near the Finnish border and 25 miles by sea from St Petersburg. Agar's CMBs ran a courier service to and from St Petersburg, linking with British agents who included ST 25, Paul Dukes, who became famous after he published a book about his experiences. 
Agar participated in more orthodox naval operations with units of the Baltic fleet commanded by Rear-Admiral Sir Walter Cowan. On the night of 17 June 1919 Agar penetrated Kronstadt harbour in CMB 4 and sank the 6650 ton Bolshevik cruiser 'Oleg' with a single torpedo. The CMB's three-man crew were decorated, Agar himself being awarded the Victoria Cross. He resumed his courier duties but also, on the night of 18 August 1919, participated in operation RK, the raid by eight CMBs on Kronstadt. This brilliant but hazardous action resulted in the sinking of two Bolshevik battleships and a submarine depot ship. All the CMB crews were decorated; two VCs were awarded and Agar received the DSO. 
In September 1919 Agar returned to England, and in January 1920 he was again posted to Osea Island. On 20 July 1920 he married Mary Frances Katherine Petre, seventeenth Baroness Furnivall (1900-1968), daughter of Bernard Henry Philip Petre, fourteenth Baron Petre. In September he was appointed to the cruiser HMS 'Chatham', New Zealand station, and promoted lieutenant-commander. In December 1923, after his return to England, he was appointed to the royal yacht 'Victoria and Albert' for two years, and promoted commander in December 1925. In April 1926 he was appointed to the destroyer 'Witch', division leader of the third destroyer flotilla, Mediterranean Fleet, commanded by Admiral Sir Roger Keyes. In September 1927 he attended the Royal Naval Staff College, Greenwich, followed by a course at the Army Staff College, Camberley. He also separated from his wife, who initiated divorce proceedings. The couple were formally divorced in 1931. In January 1930 he was selected as naval adviser to the high commissioner for New Zealand, who was attending the London naval conference, and in September he was appointed to command the new sloop 'Scarborough' on the North American and West Indies station, for a three-year commission. In February 1932 he married Ina Margaret Lindner in Bermuda. 
Agar returned to England in 1933, and in October attended the senior officers' war course at Greenwich. Having been promoted captain in December 1933 he undertook a short course at the tactical school at Portsmouth, and then studied at the Imperial Defence College for a year. His next seagoing appointment was to the anti-aircraft cruiser 'Curlew', in January 1936. The following January he was appointed to the cruiser 'Emerald', his favourite ship, which sailed in June from Chatham to the East India station, and returned in July 1938. The ship was prepared for the Reserve Fleet, a process briefly interrupted by the Munich crisis in September 1938. Agar remained on 'Emerald' for six months, and was next appointed captain of the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. 
In July 1939 Agar was reappointed to 'Emerald', joining the Home Fleet at Scapa Flow in August. After the outbreak of the Second World War, on 3 September, the ship was assigned to the northern patrol, to carry out blockade duties against Nazi Germany. In October, with her sister ship 'Enterprise', she transported 5 tons of gold bullion from England to Nova Scotia, to pay for war materials. She was subsequently deployed on gruelling Atlantic convoy duties during the harsh winter of 1939-40. In June 1940 Agar was appointed to command the sixteenth destroyer flotilla at Harwich, escorting coastal convoys. A succession of shore appointments followed, culminating in his appointment as chief staff officer, coastal forces. 
In August 1941 Agar was made captain of the cruiser 'Dorsetshire', which was deployed to the south Atlantic on search and escort duties. After Japan's invasion of Malaya on 8 December 'Dorsetshire' was engaged in various duties, including escorting the last convoys from doomed Singapore and Rangoon (which fell on 15 February and 8 March 1942 respectively). On 5 April she and the cruiser 'Cornwall', ordered to rendezvous with Admiral Sir James Somerville's Eastern Fleet, were caught and sunk in the Indian Ocean by a powerful force of Japanese naval dive-bombers. This was Agar's last seagoing command; in 1943 he was declared unfit for further active sea service. Placed on the retired list, he was offered, as commodore, the combined office of president and captain of the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, a position that he held until 1946. In retirement he took up farming at Alton, Hampshire. 
Agar never achieved flag rank. He states in his biography, 'Footprints in the Sea' (1959), that he was not driven by ambition, and his divorce may have led to prejudice in certain quarters. Yet he epitomized the 'sea dog' of British naval tradition: honourable, extremely brave, and totally dedicated to king, country, and the Royal Navy. He was appointed a younger brother of Trinity House (1936) and vice-president of the Sailors' Home and Red Ensign Club (1957); his clubs included the Athenaeum and the Royal Yacht Squadron (naval member). He died at his home, Anstey Park House, Alton, on 30 December 1968. He had at least one stepdaughter, who registered his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 40851


Gregory, Arthur John Peter Michael Maundy (1877-1941), honours broker, was born on 1 July 1877 at 9 Portland Terrace, Southampton, second of three sons of Francis Maundy Gregory (1849-1899), clergyman, and his wife, Elizabeth Ursula Wynell, 'nee' Mayow (1847-1936), cousin of third Baron Lyveden. After attending Banister Court School for the sons of merchant marine officers, where he was nicknamed Bum Cheeks, he passed the Oxford University entrance examination and went into residence there as a non-collegiate student in 1895. Intended for holy orders, he left Oxford shortly before his finals and began appearing professionally as a drawing-room entertainer. During 1900 he acted in the theatrical company of Ben Greet; his first sizeable role was as a comic butler in a tour of 'The Brixton Burglary' (1902). He became manager of Frank Benson's company (1903) but was dismissed for fraud (1906). In 1908 he made his earliest known attempt at blackmail. Harold Davidson, afterwards notorious as the vicar of Stiffkey, who had been his boyhood friend, induced Lord Howard de Walden and other rich men to finance Maundy-Gregory (as he then called himself) in the Combine Attractions Syndicate which crashed in 1909. Gregory next edited a gossip sheet, 'Mayfair' (1910-14). As a sideline he ran a detective agency specializing in credit rating based on information supplied by hoteliers and restaurateurs. Gregory claimed that after 'Mayfair' folded he was engaged in espionage. Conscripted in July 1917, he became a private in the Irish Guards. 
In 1918 Lord Murray of Elibank introduced Gregory to his successor as Liberal chief whip, Frederick Guest, as a potential intermediary between rich men who wanted honours and the Lloyd George coalition which needed money. Guest and his successor, Charles McCurdy, together with Lloyd George's press agent Sir William Sutherland, used Gregory as a tout to build up the Lloyd George political fund by the sale of honours. Between $1 million and $2 million were raised by this device in 1919-22 (with Gregory receiving commission of perhaps $30,000 a year). Knighthoods cost about $10,000 and baronetcies $40,000. Gregory occupied resplendent headquarters in Parliament Street replete with dispatch boxes and autographed photographs of royalty. As an accessory to this business Gregory in August 1919 founded the 'Westminster Gazette and St James's Review', which masqueraded as a government publication and was circulated gratis on a mailing list of 1000; Gregory duped foreign embassies into paying for special supplements in the belief that they would be influential and also wrote puffing profiles of prominent men for a fee. His editorial policy was reactionary and antisemitic. He financed White Russian intrigues through his Anglo-Ukrainian Council and believed that his life was threatened by Comintern agents. However the outcry at the flagitiously corrupt birthday honours of 1922 precipitated the fall of the Lloyd George coalition. The 'Honours (Prevention of Abuses) Act' (1925) checked but did not stop Gregory's fouling of the fount of honour. J. C. C. Davidson, on becoming chairman of the Unionist Party in 1927, determined to break Gregory by excluding from all honours lists anyone known to have been a client of Gregory's. This slowly wrecked Gregory's credibility as an honours broker. 
In 1927 Gregory acquired the Ambassador Club at 26 Conduit Street in London's Mayfair, where, with ingratiating flamboyance, he entertained prospective clients, collected gossip, and planted stories. He displayed a gold cigarette case given him by the duke of York, afterwards George VI, at whose wedding he was a steward. In 1929 Gregory bought 'Burke's Landed Gentry'. In 1931 he leased Deepdene Hotel near Dorking, which became a favourite assignation for rich Londoners desiring a dirty weekend. As his traffic in British honours petered out, he diversified into the less profitable market of foreign decorations, and after being received into the Roman Catholic church in 1932 did brisk business in papal honours. 
Gregory was confronted by the necessity in 1932-3 to repay to the executors of Sir George Watson $30,000 advanced for a barony never received. For a decade he had lived platonically with a tipsy retired musical actress, Mrs Edith Marion Rosse. She died mysteriously (14 September 1932) bequeathing $18,000 to Gregory, who ensured her burial in an unsealed coffin only a few inches below the surface of a water-sodden cemetery on the banks of the Thames. Still desperate for funds Gregory rashly sought $10,000 from Commander E. W. Billyard-Leake in return for procuring a knighthood. Following Billyard-Leake's complaint to the authorities, Gregory was arrested (4 February 1933). He initially pleaded not guilty, and political party organizers feared that he would air his activities together with the names of those implicated (half of the proceeds of Lloyd George's political fund had reached the Conservative Party). J. C. C. Davidson's organization accordingly approached him, warned that he could not avoid conviction, but undertook that if he kept silent the authorities would be lenient. After a discreet trial he changed his plea on 21 February and received the lightest possible sentence of two months and a fine of $50. On his release from Wormwood Scrubs (12 April) he was met at the prison gates by a friend of Davidson who took him to France, gave him a down payment, and promised him an annual pension of $2000. Rosse's corpse was exhumed (28 April 1933), but it was impossible to ascertain the cause of her death. Gregory did not return from France for her inquest, but was suspected of murder by some policemen. 
Gregory was short, paunchy, bald, rubicund, monocled, and epicene. He wore ostentatious jewellery, including a green scarab ring he claimed had been Wilde's, and used to fidget with a rose-coloured diamond carried in his waistcoat pocket which supposedly had belonged to Catherine the Great. His manner was grandiose, mysterious, watchful, and confidential. Lord Birkenhead, whom he exploited in the late 1920s, interested him in rare books. His passion for collecting bronze, porcelain, and terracotta statues of the beautiful boy Narcissus indicates his sexual preferences. Arrested by the Germans in November 1940, Gregory was confined in their camp at Drancy, where his health deteriorated without the whisky upon which he depended. He died of cardiac failure, aggravated by a swollen liver, on 3 October (possibly 28 September) 1941, at Val de Grace Hospital, Paris. He was buried in Ivry-Paris new cemetery, but five years later his bones were removed to an ossuary. 


@@@@@


doc= 40853


Smyth, John Hugh (1852-1927), Agapemonite leader, was born at Brockley Court, near Weston-super-Mare, Somerset, on 1 August 1852, the third son of Henry Thomas Coward Smyth Pigott (1823-1858), formerly a captain in the Royal Scots Greys, and his wife, Elizabeth Drummond, 'nee' Nairne (died 1898). He attended Rossall School, Fleetwood, Lancashire, and matriculated from Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he remained for no more than a year (1871-2). After a restless period, first in the merchant navy, later in Queensland, Australia (as a gold prospector), and in North America, he experienced an evangelical conversion through the preaching of Jerry McAuley of the Water Street Mission in New York. In 1879 he began to study for the Anglican ministry at the London College of Divinity, Highbury. Ordained a deacon in 1882 (and a priest in 1883), he served as a curate at St Jude's, Mildmay Park, but in 1884, seeking a platform better suited to zealous evangelism, he became a staff captain in the Salvation Army, taking part in a mission to Cambridge University (his account of which appeared in 'War Cry', 13 December 1884). He resigned from the Salvation Army in September-October 1885. His engagement and marriage (14 August 1886) to the daughter of Henry Bion Reynolds, Catharine (1852-1936), whose brother Alfred was vicar of Kingsley, Cheshire, may have encouraged his reconciliation with the Church of England. Earlier in 1886 he had returned to Cambridge, where his espousal of an extreme form of Christian perfectionism had been divisive in student evangelical circles. In November he was appointed as a curate at the Church of Ireland mission in Townsend Street, Dublin, but very soon his vicar, W. H. Fiske, 'turned him out' because of his extreme views. In 1887 or soon after, Smyth-Pigott renewed his association with Douglas Hamilton, whom he had known at Cambridge but who had recently joined H. J. Prince's sect, the Agapemone at Spaxton, Somerset. Hamilton appears to have persuaded him that he too was called to work with, and possibly even succeed, Prince as the sect's leader. 
Almost certainly Smyth-Pigott visited Spaxton and met Henry Prince but he soon moved back to his former haunts in London. By May 1889 he was living in Stoke Newington and was recognized by Prince as the sect's pastor in Clapton. In 1896 an Agapemonite chapel, known as the Ark of the New Covenant, was opened in Rookwood Road. Here, to the delight of his flock, Smyth-Pigott announced on 7 September 1902 that he was the Messiah. A more public proclamation the following Sunday evoked a scornful reaction from an indignant crowd. Shortly afterwards he moved to Spaxton, where he explained that he was the fulfilment of a process in which Prince had been the herald (or John the Baptist). Smyth-Pigott, the Messiah, had conveniently been born in 1852, just after Prince had rallied his followers with the proclamation 'Behold he Cometh'. 
Established as the new head, or 'heavenly bridegroom', of the community, Smyth-Pigott appears to have adopted Prince's dictatorial and arbitrary role, but the lethargy which had characterized the Agapemone in Prince's later years was transformed by the more active lifestyle of several younger recruits who, impressed by Smyth-Pigott's earlier ministry, brought to the community some fresh energy. Though enjoined to secrecy about the community's activities, members were encouraged to have some contact with their neighbours in Spaxton and to engage in charitable work. The need for secrecy was occasioned, at least in part, by the fact that Smyth-Pigott required his followers, including his wife, to abstain from sexual relations, but, like his predecessor, insisted that some of the female members were to be an order of 'soul-brides', from whose number he would be able to choose 'the bride of the Lamb'. In the summer of 1904 Ruth Ann(e) Preece was designated as Smyth-Pigott's 'chief spiritual bride' and it soon became apparent that the relationship was other than platonic. During the next six years she gave birth to three children, of whom Smyth-Pigott was the acknowledged father. 
In January 1909, after a trial in the consistory court in Wells Cathedral on charges of improper behaviour, Smyth-Pigott, who had ignored the summons, was degraded from holy orders in his absence. The extent of Smyth-Pigott's promiscuity in subsequent years may have been exaggerated, but it was said that he abandoned Ruth Preece in favour of other soul-brides. In an attempt to regularize the status of his children, deeds were executed in 1914 whereby Smyth-Pigott and Ruth Preece both changed their surname to Smyth, while his legal wife became known as Mrs Pigott. Although these developments led to some indignant resignations from the community, Smyth did not confine his preaching to Spaxton, and his charm enabled him to retain a significant following in other Agapemonite centres in London and elsewhere, notably in Christiania, Norway, which he visited at least eight times between 1902 and 1926. By 1925, however, his health was failing, and on medical advice he remained abroad for some time. On his return a projected campaign in London had to be shelved, but he initiated some improvements to the buildings of the Abode at Spaxton. Smyth died there on 20 March 1927 and was buried in the grounds of the Agapemone. 


@@@@@


doc= 40855


Shakespear, William Henry Irvine (1878-1915), diplomat and explorer, was born at Multan, in what is now Pakistan, on 29 October 1878, the eldest son of William Henry Sullivan Shakespear, of the Indian forestry service, and his wife, Anne Caroline, 'nee' Davidson. A natural athlete throughout his school career, he was educated at Portsmouth grammar school (1889-1893) and King William's College in the Isle of Man (1893-1896), and passed out of Sandhurst early in 1898. He never married. 
After some six years' service in the Indian army, mostly in Rawalpindi and Bombay, during which he learnt Arabic, Persian, Pushtu, and Urdu, Shakespear transferred to the political department of the government of India. In 1904 he was appointed consul at Bandar-e- 'Abbas and assistant to the political resident in the Persian Gulf, Sir Percy Cox; at the time of his appointment he was the youngest consul in the Indian administration. 
Although Shakespear is best known for his explorations of Arabia, he was also a pioneer motorist. Early in 1907 he bought an 8-horsepower single-cylinder Rover, and left Bushehr in April to drive to England through Persia, Turkey, Greece, Macedonia, Montenegro, and Croatia to Italy. Only one European had made part of this journey by car before, a Romanian driving from Bucharest to Tehran two years earlier. There were no paved roads between Persia and Italy. 
In April 1909 Shakespear was appointed political agent in Kuwait, the official position which he held for most of the rest of his life. The years immediately before the First World War were a complex period in the politics of the Arabian peninsula and the gulf. First, Mubarak al-Sabah, amir of Kuwait between 1896 and 1916, who had come to power after assassinating his brother, signed a fairly loose agreement with Britain in 1899 in which he agreed not to grant any part of his territory to a third party without Britain's consent. Second, in January 1902, 'Abd al- 'Aziz ibn 'Abd al-Rahman al-Sa'ud (Ibn Sa'ud), who, together with his family, had long enjoyed the friendship and protection of the amir of Kuwait, recaptured Riyadh from his rivals, the al-Rashid, setting off a chain of events which culminated in the foundation of the modern state of Saudi Arabia some thirty years later. In 1905 the Ottoman state appointed Ibn Sa'ud 'qa'immaqam' of southern Najd; in 1906 a raiding party under his leadership killed his main rival, the Ottomans' principal ally 'Abd al-Aziz ibn al-Rashid, and in consequence Turkish forces withdrew from most of northern and north-western Najd. 
In 1906 and 1907 Ibn Sa'ud made a number of overtures to the government of India through various intermediaries, indicating that he too would value British protection in some form or other. After his appointment to Kuwait in 1909, Shakespear was involved in conveying these wishes to his superiors in India and in the British legation in Constantinople, although both Ibn Sa'ud's appeals and Shakespear's tenacious if measured support of them tended to fall on deaf ears. 
In February 1910 Shakespear met Ibn Sa'ud for the first time, at the palace of Mubarak of Kuwait, and took the first recorded photograph of him. The two men seem to have developed an immediate liking for one another, and the amir invited the political agent to visit him in Riyadh the following year. The meeting took place at Thaj in eastern Arabia, since Ibn Sa'ud was on campaign, still intent both on the complete reduction of the al-Rashid, who were still a force to be reckoned with in northern Najd, and on driving the Turks out of Arabia altogether, which had begun to seem more feasible after the Young Turk revolution in 1909. By mid-1913 Ibn Sa'ud, in spite of a renewed warning from Shakespear in May that he could expect no support from Britain, dispatched his forces to al-Hasa and ejected the Ottoman garrison. Again Ibn Sa'ud asked for British recognition as ruler of the area; again Shakespear was obliged to tell him in December 1913 that this could not be granted. In May 1914 Ibn Sa'ud accepted the title of 'wali' of Najd (including al-Hasa) from the Ottomans. 
In addition to his officially sanctioned political activities Shakespear is known for his meticulously recorded excursions to the interior of Arabia between 1909 and 1914. Each journey was registered with camera and sextant, and with entries in a daily log. His longest journey was undertaken between January and May 1914, from Kuwait to the Suez Canal via Riyadh (where he was the guest of Ibn Sa'ud), Burayda, and Jauf, a distance of just over 1800 miles in 111 days, across what was mostly previously uncharted country. 
From Egypt, Shakespear went to England in a final attempt to convince his superiors to take Ibn Sa'ud more seriously; for a while, it remained an uphill task. However, a few weeks after the outbreak of war it dawned on the India Office that there might, after all, be some value in cultivating an Arabian ruler whose hostility to the Turks was not in doubt. Shakespear was sent back from England to Kuwait to transmit an urgent message to Ibn Sa'ud, in effect an offer of the treaty of alliance which he had been seeking for so long. Shakespear left Kuwait on 12 December, and met Ibn Sa'ud 200 miles north of Riyadh, where he was campaigning against the Shammar (still firm allies of the Turks) on 31 December. The task of convincing his friend was complicated by the indifference with which the government of India had treated him in the past; nevertheless, Shakespear managed to draft a treaty that Ibn Sa'ud agreed to sign, though he could not be sure that it would be acceptable to his own superiors in Simla and London. 
On 24 January 1915 Ibn Sa'ud's forces fought the Shammar at Jarrab; Shakespear, who refused, as always, to exchange his military uniform for desert dress, was killed by a stray bullet while on a ridge overlooking the battlefield. Ibn Sa'ud wrote to Sir Percy Cox: 'our beloved friend Captain Shakespear was hit from a distance by one of the enemy's shots and died. I offer my sincere condolences... We pressed him to leave us before the battle, but he refused to do so and was insistent on being with us. (Winstone, 211)' In December 1915 a treaty between Ibn Sa'ud and the government of the United Kingdom was concluded, along the lines of Shakespear's draft (Leatherdale, 372-3). As it turned out, Ibn Sa'ud played no great part in the First World War, and the most significant (although perhaps somewhat exaggerated) Arab participation came from the western part of the Arabian peninsula. Subsequently British support was crucial to Ibn Sa'ud's survival in the late 1920s (especially to his victory over those of his erstwhile tribal supporters whose growing fanaticism nearly cost him his life) and also to his emergence by the beginning of the 1930s as ruler of the state that bears his family's name. 
Much like his contemporary Gerard Leachman, Shakespear was a loner, a poor diplomat and administrator, but a gallant and intrepid soldier and explorer. Although his Arabic was fluent and idiomatic, he remained the quintessential British officer, resisting the temptation (if he ever felt it) to wear Arab dress in the desert. He also lacked the starry-eyed faith of some of his contemporaries in the possible effectiveness of tribal forces in modern warfare. On the other hand, his shrewd assessment of the waning of Ottoman authority in the northern Arabia peninsula, and his understanding of Ibn Sa'ud's potential in the politics of the region, cannot be faulted. Had Shakespear lived, and had he in fact succeeded in harnessing Ibn Sa'ud's energies more thoroughly to the imperial war effort, a very different post-war Arab world might well have emerged. 


@@@@@


doc= 40857


Starkie, Enid Mary (1897-1970), French scholar, was born on 18 August 1897 in Dublin, the daughter of the Rt Hon. William Joseph Myles Starkie (1860-1920), classical scholar and last resident commissioner of national education in Ireland under British rule, and his wife, May ('b'. 'c'.1876), daughter of Cornelius Walsh, a Dublin solicitor. She had three younger sisters and two brothers, one of whom died in infancy; she was particularly close to her brother Walter Fitzwilliam Starkie (1894-1976), who became a professor in Dublin and an authority on Spanish literature and Gypsy life. She herself, while spending most of her adult life in England, remained very conscious of her 'wild' Irishness. 
Starkie's life up to 1921 is evoked, in its pleasures and its unhappiness, in her memoir 'A Lady's Child' (1941). Much of the unhappiness was caused by a French governess, who nevertheless gave her an early acquaintance with the French culture she came to love. She then attended Alexandra School and Alexandra College in Dublin. Her youthful life was marked by a passion for music (which she considered as a career) and by a period of religious fervour. The later fading of her faith left a strong spiritual need, and she sometimes described herself as a 'bad Catholic'. In her adolescent years, however, she discovered in Andre Gide's 'Nourritures terrestres' the 'key of the gate of freedom' and 'an explanation of [my] revolt and its justification' (Starkie, 227). 
The freedom and revolt were in evidence when in 1916 Starkie went to Somerville College, Oxford, with an open scholarship in modern languages. Her student years were marked by spiritual and intellectual exploration, and by the cultivation of a flamboyant lifestyle which fascinated her contemporaries and brought her into conflict with her parents. She graduated with first-class honours in 1920. 
After a brief period as a schoolteacher, Starkie went to Paris to study for a doctorate at the Sorbonne in 1921. After her father's death in 1920, a financial crisis had hit her family, and she lived in great poverty, taking menial jobs to survive, but made many valuable friends, notably the writer Charles Du Bos. She began a thesis on the Belgian poet Verhaeren, which she published and defended successfully in 1927; 'Les sources du lyrisme dans la poesie d'Emile Verhaeren' was crowned by the French Academy and won the prix Narcisse Michaut. 
From 1925 to 1928 Starkie lectured at the University College of the South-West, Exeter. At this time she wrote an autobiographical novel (never published) and experienced her first major love affair. She was to have a number of intense, often unhappy, relationships with both men and women, and was in the 1920s briefly engaged to a French diplomatist, but broke off the engagement. She never married. 
In 1928 Starkie was appointed the first Sarah Smithson lecturer in French literature at Somerville. Although she often expressed impatience with Oxford and did not feel at home in the academic world, she remained there for the rest of her career, becoming a fellow of Somerville in 1934 and university reader in French literature in 1946. In 1939 she was awarded the first DLitt to be given in her faculty. Subsequently she was elected a member of the Irish Academy of Letters and fellow of the Royal Society of Literature, and received honorary degrees from Trinity College, Dublin, and the universities of Exeter and Aix-en-Provence. 
At different times Starkie was a visiting professor or guest lecturer in universities in America and Europe. In Oxford, she played an active part in university life and society, bringing Gide on a memorable lecture visit, obtaining an honorary degree for Jean Cocteau, and campaigning successfully on behalf of Cecil Day Lewis, W. H. Auden, and Edmund Blunden for the chair of poetry, to which she herself twice failed to be elected. 
Although Starkie once wrote to a friend: 'I've never felt any desire to teach anyone anything' (Richardson, 93), she inspired great affection in some of her pupils, whom she liked to treat as friends. She led a very sociable life and was a striking presence, both in her mercurial and passionate character and in her unorthodox appearance. Her biographer Joanna Richardson saw her as 'a small, electric figure in scarlet and royal blue, a voluble, flamboyant humming bird' ('Sunday Times', 14 Oct 1956). She normally wore reefer jackets, trousers, and a matelot cap, but would dress splendidly on formal occasions, and was a stickler for etiquette. Her room was gorgeously decorated, and while retaining the frugal habits she had acquired in Paris, she was a connoisseur of wine. 
Starkie's teaching and writing were marked by her love of France and French culture. Although students were surprised by her disregard for French pronunciation, she spoke and wrote the language fluently and loved being in France, which she described in 'From Gautier to Eliot: the Influence of France on English Literature, 1851-1939' (1960) as 'the repository of the great general ideas by which man lives' (p. 213). Her services to France were rewarded when she was appointed chevalier (1948) and officier (1958) in the Legion d'honneur. 
Starkie valued in French literature the maturity and honesty with which writers such as Pascal, Baudelaire, or Gide faced the unpalatable truths of human life. Her writings were devoted to understanding the inner struggles and achievements of such writers. She was not greatly concerned with specifically literary questions; her aim was rather to find the vital thread linking the inner life of a writer with the work. Her two most influential books were both rewritten as she came nearer to the understanding she was seeking. 'Baudelaire', written with great empathy and stressing the spiritual quest at the heart of the poet's life, was sceptically received in 1933, but her argument had come to command general acceptance when a new version appeared in 1957. 
Starkie was the first person to lecture in Oxford on both Baudelaire and Rimbaud. Her 'Arthur Rimbaud' (1938, 1947, 1961), again the life of a 'poete maudit', had its starting point in early archival work on Rimbaud's African years ('Rimbaud in Abyssinia', 1938), and was modified to record her growing conviction of the importance of magic and alchemy for the young poet. While writing with sympathy for Rimbaud's rebellious impulses, she admired him less than Baudelaire and presented his abandonment of literature as a tragic mistake. 
In addition to these major works, Starkie wrote shorter studies on the eccentric romantic Petrus Borel, and on Andre Gide. In the last ten years of her life, however, she devoted her efforts to Flaubert. 'Flaubert: the Making of a Master' (1967) is a comprehensive account of the early years of the novelist, up to 'Madame Bovary'; whereas the posthumous 'Flaubert the Master' (1971) is a rather less successful study of the later works. 
The two Flaubert studies were written under the shadow of illness. In 1965 Starkie was diagnosed as suffering from lung cancer, and knew that she might not have long to live. She resigned her readership, but continued to write, to lecture, and to travel (she was visiting professor at Columbia University during the student rebellions of 1968). In 1967 she was appointed CBE. She died in Oxford (where her home was 23 Walton Street) on 22 April 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 40858


Anson, Peter Frederick (1889-1975), monk, writer, and artist, was born Frederick Charles Anson on 22 August 1889 at 32 South Parade, Southsea, the son of Charles Eustace Anson (1858-1940), subsequently rear-admiral, and his wife, (Maria) Evelyn, 'nee' Ross (1863-1904). His father came from a family with strong connections to the Church of England and to the monarchy: his grandfather Frederick Anson (1811-1885) and great-grandfather Frederic Anson (1779-1867) had been a canon of Windsor and dean of Chester respectively, while his uncle Harold Anson (1867-1954) became master of the Temple. His mother was passionately devoted to Scotland, where she had been born. It was striking that Anson was born within sight and sound of the English Channel and with an ecclesiastical background, for those themes, the sea and the church, were to dominate his adult life and the attempt to synthesize them was to cause him much anguish. 
The young Anson was educated locally on the Isle of Wight, and then at Wixenford preparatory school, where he remained until just before his fifteenth birthday. He never proceeded to public school because of ill health, which plagued him throughout his life, and he then failed to pass the entrance examination for Christ Church, Oxford. In 1908 he went to study at the Architectural Association school in London. His talent for drawing was apparent from an early age and by this time he had begun to display the obsessive interest in churches and their rituals that continued all his life. 
The pivotal period in Anson's long life was 1910-13, when he was a member of the Anglican Benedictine community on Caldy Island, Pembrokeshire, founded by Aelred Carlyle (1874-1955). In 1913 a majority of the community, including Anson, was received into the Roman Catholic church, a move he never regretted. His life thereafter was marked by a restless spirit which left him unable to settle for too long in one situation, and, particularly in his later years, led to his moving from place to place without any great warning or forethought. It was that characteristic, together with his variety of undefined ailments, some of mental rather than physical origin, that led to the failure of his many attempts to adopt a monastic way of life after his first departure from Caldy shortly after the secession. 
In 1920 Anson made an attempt to unite his various interests with the establishment of a worldwide Catholic organization for seamen, to be known as the Apostleship of the Sea, but after a short time his health broke down again and he relinquished the work to others. He began, however, to paint and draw maritime and ecclesiastical subjects and his output in those fields was enormous. He had an idiosyncratic style of drawing with an obsessive regard for accuracy. In 1924 he was received into the third order of Franciscans in Italy and adopted the name Peter, under which all his books were published. 
By 1927 Anson had decided to make his living from art and writing and he had about forty books published. These ranged from specialist studies of fishermen in Scotland to work on churches and ecclesiastical history, many of which drew on his own experiences on Caldy. In 1936 he moved to north-east Scotland, where he lived for most of his remaining years. Resident from 1938 until 1952 at Harbour Head, Low Shore, Macduff, Banffshire, he became involved with the early stirrings of Scottish nationalism and numbered Neil Gunn and Compton Mackenzie among his circle. This period of unusual stability did not result in major works apart from 'The Benedictines of Caldey' (1940). 
In 1952 Anson began wandering again, but the period of personal restlessness which followed was marked by the publication of a number of important works, including 'The Call of the Cloister' (1953), a pioneering study of Anglican monasticism, 'Abbot Extraordinary' (1958), a biography of Aelred Carlyle that revealed the ambivalence of the respect he had always held for his mentor, and then his masterpiece, 'Fashions in Church Furnishings, 1840-1940' (1960), a quirky book that incorporates a great deal of material not discoverable elsewhere. Only Anson could have written and illustrated that volume, which referred to some of the thousands of churches he had visited and depicted the interiors of many, with period fashions among the congregation. In 1964 he had no fewer than four books published, including 'Bishops at Large', a detailed description of 'episcopi vagantes' never equalled, which has acquired cult status. 
In 1966 Anson's contribution to ecclesiastical history was marked when he was honoured by Pope Paul VI, who made him a knight of the order of St Gregory. In 1970 he returned once more to live on Caldy Island (which was by then occupied by Cistercians) and acquired the status of choir-oblate. His literary work continued and 'Building up the Waste Places' (1973) returned to familiar themes of Caldy and elsewhere. 
Anson left Caldy for Sancta Maria Abbey at Nunraw, East Lothian, when increasing infirmity made it impossible for him to remain on the island that meant so much to him. Eventually the brothers there were unable to care for him any more, and he died at St Raphael's Hospital, Edinburgh, on 10 July 1975. He was buried at Nunraw. 
Peter Anson's dual preoccupations with monasticism and with the sea were reflected in his two autobiographies: 'Harbour Head' (1944) dealt with maritime matters, while 'A Roving Recluse' (1946) related his ecclesiastical experiences. Many of his drawings of ships are in the National Maritime Museum, and with his books on fishing and fishermen they provide a picture of a world that all but disappeared in the late twentieth century. He would be worthy of respect if they were all he produced, but his ecclesiastical work, although variable in quality, has not only chronicled episodes in which he himself was directly involved but has illuminated a number of diverse areas left unexplored by others. No more recent books have superseded his studies of Anglican monasticism or of church furnishings in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The production of this large corpus of work is even more impressive when seen against the instability of Anson's life, with his frequent changes of residence and of direction, which did not cease once he finally abandoned his attempts to take on the religious life. 


@@@@@


doc= 40861


Simpson, George Walter Gillow (1901-1972), naval officer and sheep farmer, was born on 6 June 1901, the second son of the Revd Robert Henry Bridges Simpson (1862-1935), vicar of Oakwood, Surrey, and his wife, Sophie, nee Thomson. He became widely known by his sobriquet, Shrimp, throughout a naval career spanning nearly forty years from cadet to rear-admiral. The nickname was justified by his bare 5 feet and 2 inches; but it did not prepare unknowing challengers for the crackling blue eyes set in craggy features surmounting a sturdy figure -- a figure that was liable to sway back on its heels before delivering a pungent comment beginning, good-naturedly enough, 'I say, old chap...'. Simpson attended the Royal Naval College at Osborne and Dartmouth from 1915 for two and a half years before he was promoted midshipman early, with his term-mates, and sent to sea at the age of sixteen in accordance with Admiralty directives for young gentlemen in the First World War. 
Simpson was thrilled at the thought of active service, but became disillusioned after arriving in one of the sadistically administered gunrooms of the period to be bullied and beaten as a junior wart. The experience scarred; but it forced Simpson to reflect on the cause of stultifying conditions, unrelieved boredom, and poor morale in generally idle capital ships. It was a situation engendered, in his opinion, by tradition -- a word he described as the harlot of vocabulary, and which he resisted thereafter when proposing policies that did not always suit the Whitehall hierarchy. However, while railing against the worst aspects of tradition Simpson ignored the best, which he himself so well exemplified. And, as he proved in his professional autobiography 'Periscope View' (1972), the Royal Navy demonstrated superb fighting qualities in the Second World War. 
The Submarine Service, more vigorous and less traditional than the surface fleet, was a natural choice for Simpson's career: he joined it in 1921, but an anticipated early command was delayed by his studying to become a Russian interpreter and a spell as first lieutenant of the big submarine 'Thames' (which required a qualified commanding officer as second in command) followed by a staff course. He commanded 'L27' briefly in 1935 and, for some fifteen months from August 1938, the large mine-laying and general purpose submarine 'Porpoise' where he made a somewhat contentious mark by stressing the effectiveness of torpedo attacks compared (by implication) with big-ship gunnery. However, Simpson's greatest service to the navy was compressed into two strenuous years from January 1941 to January 1943 while he commanded the flotilla of submarines (to become famous as the Fighting Tenth) based on the beleaguered island of Malta. 
Malta, in the centre of the Mediterranean and the only British harbour between Gibraltar and Alexandria, had long been crucial to the Royal Navy's strategy; but now the small island, wholly reliant on seaborne supplies for its military and civilian needs, was susceptible to siege by air forces and very difficult to defend. Grand harbour could not safely be used by surface ships, but submarines were able to lie in Marsamxett where the solid old Lazaretto isolation hospital offered protection for personnel and some shelter for submarines alongside. None the less, several submarines were destroyed or damaged by bombing in Maltese harbours; and Simpson sometimes had to order boats to dive by day, albeit jeopardizing maintenance and relaxation between patrols. He noted that pre-war excavation of cave-like pens had been halted for the sake of economy: the entire project would have cost the same as one medium-sized submarine. 
Admiral A. B. Cunningham, commander-in-chief, Mediterranean, assigned Simpson the prime task of preventing supplies and reinforcements from Italy reaching axis armies in north Africa. The enemy supply lines could be reached in a day or so by the slow, small U-class submarines which constituted the flotilla proper: temporary visitors of other classes were generally employed further afield. Proximity permitted three or four regulars to be on patrol at any one time; but wartime dangers were exacerbated by confined and revealingly clear waters, a shortage of torpedoes, and increasingly expert enemy counter-measures. Submarine casualties were heavy throughout the Mediterranean. Twenty-three boats were sunk during his time at Malta: twelve had sailed from his flotilla and two were bombed in harbour. But Simpson, with a cheerfully unpretentious brand of leadership and an absurdly small staff, consistently ran the show at peak efficiency despite daunting discouragements. More to the point his tenth flotilla did all that was required of it, and more. 
Simpson was relieved by George Phillips in January 1943 and was taking passage in HMS 'Welshman' when she was sunk by 'U-617'; but he was able to take up an appointment at Londonderry in the battle against U-boats, and he went on to command the cruiser 'Birmingham'. He became first naval member and chief of New Zealand navy staff in 1948, flag officer, Germany, in 1951, and he was flag officer, submarines, from 1952 until he retired in 1954. He had married, in 1945, Alison, daughter of Captain L. J. Hall. They had two sons and a daughter. In retirement, with his wife and young family, he took up a new and physically demanding sheep-farming life in New Zealand. He died there on 2 March 1972, at 70 Kiripaka Road, Whangarei, Northland, New Zealand. 
Simpson was utterly dependable. In a memorial address Admiral Sammy Woods recalled his strength: 'Looking back... I am chiefly struck by the man's rock-like stability' (Woods). 


@@@@@


doc= 40863


Etheridge, Richard Albert (1909-1985), trade unionist, was born on 27 December 1909 in Halesowen, son of Alfred and Berthie, 'nee' Rudge. Shortly afterwards the family moved to Birmingham, where Alfred ran a cafe. Dick attended St Thomas's School and Handsworth Technical School. His first job was with a chemist; in 1928 he moved to a garage, but when this closed during the depression, he moved into the family cafe business. In 1933 he married Lily May Thomas. They set up home in Halesowen and had three children. 
In 1933 Etheridge became a clandestine communist. The typical Black Country combination of radicalism, economic enterprise, and deep alienation that formed his cultural inheritance seems to have been transmitted largely by his grandmother, a second-hand clothes dealer. During the 1930s he was secretary of the Halesowen Trades Council and a Labour Party member. He became an open communist about 1938. 
In 1940 Etheridge went to work at Austin's Longbridge works as a lathe operator. He joined the Amalgamated Engineering Union (AEU) and in 1941 was elected a shop steward. During the war years he took correspondence courses with the National Council of Labour Colleges. These taught him committee and secretarial skills. In 1945 he became convener of the shop stewards' works committee. After the war, despite a considerable increase in union membership, the works committee was still not strongly established. There was a continuing conflict between the AEU and the Transport and General Workers Union (TGWU), and the latter withdrew its shop stewards from the works committee. The 1951 'Pegg and Bills' strike over the dismissal of two National Union of Vehicle Builders (NUVB) shop stewards foundered on the rock of inter-union strife. TGWU members returned to work, saying that Etheridge was only interested in his communist 'comrade', Sid Pegg: TGWU leaders disregarded the fact that Bills, the other NUVB shop steward dismissed, was not a communist. Etheridge, as convener, involved the works committee in campaigns that emphasized the common interests of the workforce. One related to canteen facilities and another to transport to work. More fundamental was the reduction of working hours to forty-two per week. 
Etheridge was active in the Communist Party's Halesowen branch and on the Birmingham and midland committees. In 1950 he stood unsuccessfully for parliament in Birmingham, Northfield. He played a major part in formulating Communist policy on the motor industry. From 1961 to 1973 he was a member of the national executive committee. In the AEU he served on the Birmingham district committee and as a member of no. 16 divisional committee. In 1958 and on five occasions subsequently he was elected to the union's annual policy-making national committee. From 1963 to 1974 he was a member of the AEU's delegation to the TUC. From 1965 until 1975 he was president of the Birmingham west district. 
In 1956 there were major strikes at Norton, Standard Motors, and British Motor Corporation (BMC) concerning automation and redundancies. Etheridge played a major role in the BMC strike. To him the partial victory achieved was less important than the simple fact of united action by members of all unions. 
When the controversy over Hungary broke out in 1956, Etheridge's first priority was to maintain the unity of the Austin works committee. He persuaded them to refuse to discuss the issue on the grounds that it was political. Etheridge's position at Longbridge was not entirely secure in his first ten years as convener. His communist views naturally provoked hostility on the part of supervisors and senior management. None the less, his role in mediating between rival unions (particularly in brokering a labour mobility agreement under the terms of which only tiny parts of the plant were to be the exclusive preserve of any one union) and in articulating grievances before they reached a critical phase was sufficiently appreciated to protect him from dismissal. From the late 1950s his employers provided him with an ever greater degree of recognition within the plant and with steadily enhanced facilities. In the late 1940s he had had to obtain permission every time he wished to leave his machine; by the 1960s he was a full-time convener with an office, telephone, and unrestricted access to all areas of the plant. Contemporaries commented that his was the best-known face at Longbridge. 
During the 1960s Etheridge and the works committee faced a recurring crisis of confidence in respect of labourers, storemen, and other 'indirect' workers (those not employed directly on the production lines) at Longbridge. The indirect workers repeatedly ignored the plant's internal procedures and committee. Etheridge was unable to resolve this problem. In 1968 he became co-chairman of the federal British Leyland Motor Corporation (BLMC) shop stewards' committee. Two matters dominated the remainder of his working life. One was the negotiation of a new BLMC wage structure, a variant of measured day work. Only when the principle of mutuality was introduced did the shop stewards accept the new system. The second was industrial relations legislation. 
As Longbridge convener, Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers district president and TUC delegate, and Communist national executive committee member, Etheridge played a significant role in the campaign which eventually made the 'Industrial Relations Act' of 1971 inoperable. He and the Longbridge works committee supported the unofficial Liaison Committee for the Defence of Trade Unions which played an important role in co-ordinating and stimulating the activities of shop stewards and rank-and-file opponents. 
Etheridge retired on 21 February 1975. Over the years he devoted much time and effort to writing, broadcasting, public speaking, and lecturing. Much of his public speaking was undertaken at AEU branch dinners and socials. From the early 1960s he was regularly invited to rotary clubs, discussion groups, and, increasingly, colleges (to lecture on industrial relations). During the 1960s and 1970s he was frequently interviewed on television and radio. 
A teetotaller, non-smoker, and non-gambler but a great trencherman, Etheridge was fascinated by Black Country lore. His favourite authors were Gorky, Jerome K. Jerome, and Kipling. For many years he took family holidays near Aberystwyth in a caravan that he built himself. He also travelled overseas, visiting Cuba, Romania, the Soviet Union, and Germany. Over 6 feet tall, broad-shouldered, and robust, Etheridge was accustomed to good health. For many years, however, he had to wear spectacles and his eyesight began to fail several years before his death. He died at Halesowen on 17 March 1985, following two severe strokes. 


@@@@@


doc= 40864


Payne, Ernest Alexander (1902-1980), Baptist minister and ecumenist, was born on 19 February 1902 at 38 Ickburgh Road, Upper Clapton, London, the eldest of the three children of Alexander Payne (1862-1941), partner in an accountancy firm bearing his name, and his wife, Catherine Griffiths (1863-1943). The family became deeply involved in the life of the Downs Baptist Church in Clapton. It was in this church that Ernest Payne was baptized as a believer in July 1917. 
Two further children were born to Alexander and Catherine Payne, Margaret in 1903 and Philip in 1905. In September 1911 Ernest Payne became a pupil at Hackney Downs secondary school. In spite of the difficulties of the war years he achieved well academically, so much so that in October 1919 he entered King's College, London, to study for a general arts degree in Latin, English, history, and philosophy. He graduated after two years and spent the next year studying for an honours degree in philosophy, which he gained in June 1922. 
Payne became convinced that his future lay in full-time service within the Baptist denomination -- very possibly abroad with the Baptist Missionary Society. He applied successfully for entrance to Regent's Park College, a Baptist ministerial training college in London. Here he studied from October 1922 to July 1925, gaining the degree of bachelor of divinity of London University. In 1923 he attended the first of his many Student Christian Movement conferences at Swanwick. These experiences introduced him to the early development of the ecumenical movement. 
Payne's college years were increasingly clouded by the health problems of his younger brother and sister. Both developed early symptoms of Friedreich's ataxia, a disease which was thought to run in families. This raised questions as to the wisdom of his serving overseas with the Baptist Missionary Society. As an interim measure in October 1925 he took up a place at Mansfield College, Oxford. Here he studied Sanskrit and wrote a thesis on the Saka movement in Hinduism, for which he was awarded in 1927 the degree of bachelor of letters. He was granted a scholarship by Mansfield College which enabled him to spend a semester at Marburg University. On his return to England in March 1928 he decided to seek settlement as a Baptist minister. 
On 23 October 1928 Payne was ordained to the ministry and inducted to the pastorate of Bugbrooke Baptist Church in Northamptonshire. Here he met and married, on 28 October 1930, Freda Davies (1905-1997). In 1932 he accepted an invitation to join the staff of the Baptist Missionary Society and in 1936 he became its editorial secretary. During his tenure of this office he developed his considerable talent for writing, including for the 'Baptist Quarterly', the journal of the Baptist Historical Society to which he contributed ultimately more than seventy articles. Late in 1939 he was invited to join the staff of Regent's Park College. The college had, in 1927, moved to Oxford, and since 1933 Ernest Payne had been acting as secretary to the college council. So in June 1940 he moved to Oxford, where he stayed for eleven years. At the college he taught Christian doctrine, comparative religion, and church history, becoming an acknowledged expert on the Anabaptists. For six years he was university lecturer in comparative religion and history of modern mission. He was a popular tutor, enjoying the stimulus of teaching and discussion. He produced three significant books: 'The Church Awakes' (1942), which is an outline history of the modern missionary movement, 'The Free Church Tradition in the Life of England' (1944), and 'The Fellowship of Believers: Baptist Thought and Practice Yesterday and Today' (1952). He became involved in the World Council of Churches, attending in 1948, as a Baptist Union delegate, the inaugural assembly of the World Council of Churches in Amsterdam. 
In 1950 Payne was invited to succeed M. E. Aubrey as general secretary of the Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland. He left Oxford reluctantly. When he was asked by his students if they could congratulate him on his move his reply was typical 'You may not congratulate me, but you may wish me well'. From 1951 to 1967 he led the Baptist Union. It was a period of reconstruction. He continued and developed the policies of his predecessor in the reconstruction of bombed church buildings. He encouraged the development of new churches, particularly through special grants for initial pastorates in new areas of building development. He helped to enlarge the union's finances and brought into action a new Home Work Fund Scheme for support of ministers in smaller churches. He called the denomination to celebrate the ter-jubilee of the union in 1962, which included the raising of a $300,000 Ter-Jubilee Fund. In preparation for these celebrations he wrote 'The Baptist Union: a Short History' (1959), which in spite of its title was a significant and substantial contribution to Baptist history. 
Payne's Baptist interests were worldwide: he served the Baptist World Alliance as a vice-president; he helped to develop European federation; ecumenically he served the Free Church Federal Council, being its moderator in 1958-9. He was involved in the British Council of Churches from its inception in 1942, holding office from 1962 to 1971 as chairman of its executive committee, and finally as its honorary president. 
For twenty-seven years Payne shared in the work of the World Council of Churches. He was a member of the faith and order commission from 1947 to 1962. He was elected to the central committee of the world council in 1954 and immediately to its vice-chairmanship. His contributions to its deliberations were considerable, most particularly because of his negotiating skills in difficult situations and his drafting ability in preparing complex resolutions on divisive issues. He believed in pragmatism, but never adopted it as a principle. He was elected a president of the world council on his resignation from the central committee in 1968 and held that office until he retired from the council itself in 1975. 
When he retired in 1967 Payne was elected to honorary membership of the Baptist Union council, and in 1977 he was president of the Baptist Union. His retirement years were spent at Pitsford, in Northamptonshire, and then back in Oxford. In the new year's honours list of 1968 he was made a Companion of Honour to mark his services not only to Baptists but also to the wider Christian church. Payne died suddenly at the Bonnington Hotel in Southampton Row, London, of heart failure on 14 January 1980; he was cremated in Oxford on 21 January and his ashes were interred in Bugbrooke parish church. 
Ernest Payne was small in stature and somewhat shy in disposition. He never sought office, but accepted it when it came. He had an incisive mind and balanced judgement. Ecumenically, he was acknowledged as a leader of outstanding quality. On the initiative of the dean of Westminster a thanksgiving service for him was held in Westminster Abbey. On 27 February 1980 the abbey was filled to capacity by a congregation which was representative of the world church. All had come to honour the memory of one who was a faithful Baptist, a profound ecumenist, a learned scholar, and a humble man. 


@@@@@


doc= 40868


O'Flaherty, Liam (1896-1984), novelist and short-story writer, was born on 28 August 1896 at Gort na gCapall on Inishmore, the largest of the Aran Islands, the second son of Michael O'Flaherty ('b'. 1846), farmer and fisherman, and Margaret Ganly ('b'. 1856?). His father was a nationalist who had been active in the Land League and his mother was descended from Plymouth Brethren who had moved from co. Antrim early in the century to build lighthouses. The boy grew up speaking English and Irish, and wrote short stories in both languages. His last published work was 'Duil' (1953), a collection of stories in the Irish language. 
O'Flaherty received his early education at Oatquarter national school, close to the family cottage, but in the autumn of 1908, through the influence of a visiting priest, Thomas Naughton of the Holy Ghost order, he was sent to Rockwell College in co. Tipperary to complete his secondary education. Naughton's hope was that this bright Aran Island youth would study for the priesthood with a view to working as a missionary priest in Africa. He did well at school, but when the time came for him to assume the clerical soutane, appropriate dress for a priestly novice, he flatly refused to do so and went home to Inishmore. Father Naughton then arranged for him to enter the order's college at Blackrock, near Dublin, in September 1913. He won an entrance scholarship in classics to University College, Dublin, but in reaction to the strict Thomism of his university lecturers began to read the writings of Karl Marx and other works of social revolution. Claiming that he was tired of waiting for revolution to break out in Ireland, he withdrew from the university and on 1 February 1916 enlisted in the Irish Guards. He signed on as William Ganly, choosing to use his mother's maiden name for what his family might regard as a surprising decision to renege on his Irish nationalist background by joining the British army. After training at Caterham barracks, he went with his regiment to France. His experiences at the front informed one of his poorest fictional works, 'The Return of the Brute', the grossly realistic semi-documentary which he published in 1929. In September 1917, while working with a transport unit between the canal at Boesinghe and the front, he was wounded in the head by an exploding shell and suffered severe shell-shock. Diagnosed as suffering from melancholia acuta, he was invalided out of the army on 7 May 1918, received a small pension, and was placed in his father's care. In the autobiographical 'Shame the Devil' (1934) he wrote, 'You have to go through life with that shell bursting in your head', and for the rest of his life he suffered periodic bouts of depression as a result of his war injuries. 
There followed a period of wandering worldwide. This took O'Flaherty as an ordinary seaman to South America in 1920. He subsequently visited Greece, Turkey, Canada, and the United States and took such work as he could find -- sometimes in factories, at other times as a lumberjack. When he gradually tired of all this restless travelling, he returned to Ireland. In the savage civil war which followed the signing of the treaty and the establishment of the Irish Free State, he fought on the unsuccessful republican side. In January 1922 he enacted his own eccentric mini-revolution when, with a handful of unemployed dockers, he seized the Rotunda building at the northern end of Dublin's O'Connell Street and raised a red flag over it. He gave himself the title of 'Chairman of the Council of the Unemployed' but after three days he abandoned this rather absurd effort at social rebellion and fled to Cork. From there he went to London and began trying to write. After numerous rejections he embarked on his first serious effort at a novel about his native island, 'Thy Neighbour's Wife' (1923). This was accepted by Jonathan Cape on the recommendation of their reader Edward Garnett, who became for a time O'Flaherty's friend and literary mentor. Garnett's wife, Constance, a celebrated translator of numerous Russian classics, was also to exert considerable influence on O'Flaherty, many of whose tormented, guilt-ridden characters owe a debt to such Russian predecessors as Dostoyevsky's Raskolnikov. The decade and a half from 1922 to 1937 proved O'Flaherty's most prolific period and saw the publication of more than a dozen novels and four collections of short stories. On 8 March 1926 he married Margaret Louise Curtis, 'nee' Barrington (1895/6-1982), a fellow writer. They had one daughter. 
Broadly speaking, O'Flaherty's novels, with the exception of the historical trilogy 'Famine' (1937), 'Land' (1946), and 'Insurrection' (1950), choose as setting either his native Inishmore or the Dublin which provided his main urban experience. Both the Aran and Dublin novels show him as a caustic, indeed corrosive, critic of the social pressures which shaped early twentieth-century Ireland and, in particular, the new Ireland which emerged with the founding of the Irish Free State. His principal target was the Catholic church, whose clerics figure prominently as villains in his fiction, and he excoriated them memorably in the satirical 'A Tourist's Guide to Ireland' (1929). 
In his novels O'Flaherty generally discarded the disciplines of style in favour of energy and passion. 'In order to be a work of genius', he once wrote, 'a novel must offer something more than a perfect style... It must be a relentless picture of life' ('Irish Statesman', 7 March 1925). Accordingly, his fictional protagonists tend to be powerful figures mired in violence. His 'oeuvre' offers an impressive gallery of such types: Gypo Nolan in his greatest popular success, 'The Informer' (1925); Fergus O'Connor in 'The Black Soul' (1924); the eponymous heroes of 'Mr Gilhooley' (1926) and 'Skerrett' (1932); Ramon Moore in 'The House of Gold' (1929). His second novel, 'The Black Soul' (1924), was inspired largely by the author's own experience of depression and near despair after his war injuries. In this novel Fergus O'Connor flees to 'Inverara' where he eventually finds solace in the arms of the wife of an islandman. The pair finally elope to the mainland after a climactic cliff-top adventure in which O'Connor saves the life of the cuckolded husband. O'Flaherty had hoped for a great success with this intensely personal novel and was disappointed by the lukewarm critical response. He reacted by abandoning the intensity and Lawrentian sensuality of 'The Black Soul' and embarked instead on his first thriller, which ironically proved his greatest popular success. 'The Informer' (1925) is the story of Gypo Nolan, a stupid giant who betrays a comrade and is hunted to his death as an informer. The novel, filmed for the first time in 1929 and again by John Ford in 1935 with Victor MacLaglen in the title role, was the work by which most people knew O'Flaherty. While the murky Dublin first depicted in this contrived thriller continued to provide an appropriately Dostoyevskian locale for morbid novels -- such as 'Mr Gilhooley' (1926), 'The Assassin' (1928), and 'The Puritan' (1932) -- O'Flaherty located his more convincing fictions in the Aran Islands, where he was in every sense more at home. 'Skerrett' (1932), based on a real-life story of conflict between the island's schoolteacher and an arrogantly authoritarian priest, in which Skerrett is subjected to a Lear-like process of suffering and utter frustration, is one of O'Flaherty's most considerable achievements. Only in 'Famine' (1937), the first novel of his historical trilogy, did O'Flaherty again find a theme huge and horrible enough to sustain his intense sense of human suffering. This memorable study of the anguish of the Irish people in the great famine of 1845-8 is focused on the destruction of the Kilmartin family by hunger and disease. In Mary Kilmartin the author achieved his finest portrait of female heroism and endurance. Regrettably, the other two novels of the trilogy, 'Land' (1946) and 'Insurrection' (1950), failed to match the opening volume. 'Insurrection', a sentimental and melodramatic version of the Easter rising of 1916, was O'Flaherty's last novel. Critics have speculated on the reasons for his creative decline, but no definitive biography which might throw light on this problem has yet appeared. 
In sharp contrast to the violent complexity of the novels, O'Flaherty's short stories, now seen by critics as his most enduring legacy, were often models of forceful brevity. Many are vivid, minutely observed sketches of the world of nature, in which he manifests a remarkable empathy with animals, birds, and even fish. Other stories depict the harsh world of his native island. Some of the stories adopt an anti-romantic, even satirical, stance. Young love is given its 'conge' in 'The Touch', where two lovers are parted when the girl is given in marriage to a suitor selected by her mean-spirited father. In 'The Fairy Goose', which, according to O'Flaherty's celebrated contemporary Frank O'Connor (in 'The Lonely Voice'), contains in its few pages the 'whole history of religion', superstition and rustic intolerance are portrayed with bleakly comic vigour. In his finest stories O'Flaherty achieves a marvellous detachment which contrasts sharply with his very evident personal involvement in the tormented lives of the protagonists of his novels. Where the violence of the novels suggests (in the words of his friend Sean O'Faolain in 'Don Quixote O'Flaherty', 'London Mercury', 37, 1937, 170-75), 'the scream of a safety valve', the short stories generally present the author as a wisely detached observer of nature and of man in nature. George Russell (AE) summed up this contrast by saying, 'When O'Flaherty thinks, he's a goose, when he feels, he's a genius' (F. O'Connor, 'The Lonely Voice', 38). 
In addition to his novels and short stories O'Flaherty published two idiosyncratic autobiographies: 'Two Years' (1930) and 'Shame the Devil' (1934). In 1930 he visited Russia, and the following year published an account of his trip entitled 'I Went to Russia'. While scriptwriting in Hollywood in 1934, he met a young divorcee, Kitty Harding Tailer (died 1990), who remained his companion for the rest of his life. O'Flaherty's marriage ended in separation in 1936. He spent the Second World War in America with Kitty, sometimes working in Hollywood, and visiting Arizona, Florida, and Connecticut. In 1952 he rented an apartment in Dublin at 9 Wilton Court. This was one of the first apartment blocks in Dublin and was O'Flaherty's home for the rest of his life. His letters, many to Kitty Tailer, offer a painfully revealing glimpse of his life during this period when his creative powers declined and he suffered from protracted writer's block. He embarked on a novel, 'The Gamblers', to which he occasionally refers in his letters, but it remained unfinished and exists now only as a 40,000 word typescript. He was seen at occasional public events in Dublin and still visited Europe from time to time until his health began to fail. In the 1970s Wolfhound Press began to reissue some of his novels which had long been out of print. University College, Galway, awarded him an honorary degree in 1974. He made a final visit to his native island in the summer of 1980. He died in St Vincent's Hospital, Elm Park, Dublin, on 7 September 1984. The funeral service at the university church on St Stephen's Green on 10 September was followed by cremation at Glasnevin cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 40869


Dukes, Sir Paul (1889-1967), intelligence officer and author, was born on 10 February 1889 at North Field, Bridgwater, the son of Edwin Joshua Dukes, a Congregational minister, and his wife, Edith Mary Pope. Dukes was educated at Caterham School before travelling to St Petersburg to study music, and he was to write in his memoirs that 'I felt at home from the moment of arrival in the city' (Dukes, 'The Story of 'ST 25'', 14). He worked at the Marinsky Theatre with the conductor Albert Coates, and was convinced for a time that he was destined to pursue a musical career. The outbreak of war upset his plans, though, and at the start of 1916 Dukes joined the Anglo-Russian commission established the previous year. For the next two years he was involved in promoting the somewhat nebulous range of propaganda activities carried out by the commission, serving both in the Russian capital and at the Foreign Office in London. 
In the summer of 1918 Dukes was summoned back to Britain where he was recruited into the Secret Intelligence Service. Allied military intervention in post-revolutionary Russia was already under way, and the British authorities were keen to place an agent in the country before it was sealed off from the outside world. At the end of 1918 Dukes (using the codename ST 25) crossed the Finnish border and travelled to Petrograd, equipped with the false papers he needed to carry out his work. Dukes already spoke fluent Russian and boasted a formidable range of contacts in the Russian capital. During his time in Russia he passed himself off as a member of the secret police (the 'Cheka'), and later enlisted in the Red Army. He also joined the Bolshevik Party and developed links with at least one individual who had good access to some of its leading figures. Dukes showed himself to be a master of disguises during his time in Russia, frequently changing his appearance and using more than a dozen names to conceal his identity. He recounted some of his extraordinary adventures in his books 'Red Dusk and the Morrow' (1922) and 'The Story of 'ST 25'' (1938), which remain among the most gripping examples of real-life espionage literature. 
Dukes was deliberately vague when describing his activities in Russia, implying in his memoirs that he spent his time collecting information about a wide range of social and political developments. The most valuable material he obtained was in fact concerned with the operational effectiveness and morale of Bolshevik naval forces in the eastern Baltic, a subject of vital concern to British military planners during the time of allied intervention. Many of Dukes's reports were smuggled out of Russia by couriers transported on the boats of a special naval unit headed by Captain Augustus Agar, who later won the Victoria Cross for his activities. A mission by Agar's unit to extract Dukes himself failed, however, with the result that ST 25 was forced to make his own escape across the Latvian border. 
Dukes and Agar met in person only after they had returned to London. George V was deeply impressed by the bravery and daring of the two men, and awarded Dukes a KBE in 1920 since he was not, as a civilian, eligible to receive the Victoria Cross. Despite the success of his activities in Russia the Secret Intelligence Service appeared unwilling to make further use of Dukes between the wars. This may have been a consequence of the cuts in the organization's budget that followed the end of the First World War, though it probably also reflected unease among its senior members about Dukes's somewhat eccentric interest in various forms of eastern mysticism. About 1922 he joined a tantric community at Nyack, 15 miles from New York, led by Dr Pierre Arnold Bernard (known as the 'Omnipotent Oom'). While living there Dukes married Margaret Rutherford, but the couple were divorced in 1929. He married Diana Fitzgerald in 1959. 
Dukes engaged in a good deal of journalistic work after returning to Britain from Russia, serving as a special correspondent of 'The Times', as well as lecturing widely in the United States and Canada. He was chairman of British Continental Press from 1930 to 1937. On the eve of the Second World War he was asked by some acquaintances to visit Germany in order to trace the whereabouts of a wealthy Czech businessman who had fled from house arrest following his imprisonment by the Nazis. He described his adventures in 'An Epic of the Gestapo' (1940), in which he argued that there were clear parallels between soviet communism and German Nazism, but the book lacked the drama of his earlier works. In the Second World War, Dukes lectured on behalf of the Ministry of Information, and served as a director of companies involved in aircraft production. In later years he developed his interest in yoga, writing a number of books on the subject, including 'Yoga for the Western World' (1955), and 'The Yoga of Health, Youth and Joy' (1960), as well as making a series of broadcasts for the BBC. 
Paul Dukes possessed many of the qualities that helped to forge the reputation of members of the Secret Intelligence Service in the public mind. His arrival in Russia on secret service took place soon after several other British agents, including Sidney Reilly, had been forced to flee the country following their involvement in an abortive plot to destroy the youthful Bolshevik regime. Dukes's role in Russia during 1919 was essentially the more modest one of observer and reporter, but he played his part with a high degree of courage and intelligence. 
Sir Paul Dukes died in Cape Town, South Africa, on 27 August 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 40870


Magnus, Sir Philip, first baronet (1842-1933), educationist and politician, was born on 7 October 1842 at 160 High Holborn, London, the second of the five children of Jacob Magnus (1805-1888), a tailor and later a wine merchant, and his wife, Caroline Barnett (1808/9-1894). Jacob Magnus had moved from Chatham to London, where his business enabled him to leave an estate valued at $6800 at his death in 1888. The marriage, though it produced five children, was not a happy one and ended in separation. Laurie, the eldest son, born in 1840, died of meningitis in 1863; Edward, the youngest child, emigrated to Sydney, Australia, where he died in 1922. The two daughters, Sarah and Josephine, did not marry. 
Laurie and Philip Magnus began their education at Poland Street Academy (preparatory school, 1850-54), from which they progressed to University College School, London (1854-8). This school had been established in 1829 to provide an efficient middle-class education for Jewish and nonconformist boys at moderate cost. The curriculum emphasized modern studies -- mathematics, languages, and science -- which at the time were not taught in more traditionally organized schools for the middle classes. A further aim of the school was to prepare boys for entry to its parent, University College, which Magnus entered in autumn 1858. He graduated in 1863 with a first-class degree in arts and the following year with similar distinction in science. 
Magnus was a regular attender at the West London Reform Synagogue and, having determined to dedicate his life to the service of God, spent the next three years at Berlin University, the centre of Jewish Reform, the movement which gave rise to the West London Synagogue. In 1866 he was appointed assistant minister at the Reform synagogue, Margaret Street, Portland Place, London, at a salary of $150 p.a. He served as rabbi in the synagogue for fourteen years, first in Margaret Street and later in its new premises in Upper Berkeley Street. His duties were to preach, teach, and to organize, and he became involved in the affairs of the synagogue and other Jewish causes and enterprises. To supplement his income he began to tutor private students in mathematics, mechanics, and physics. As his reputation grew so his involvement with educational institutions and associations widened. He lectured at University College, its school, and hospital, was appointed visiting lecturer in the theory and practice of education at Stockwell Training College, and was an examiner for the College of Preceptors. As a member of convocation he was drawn into the recurring discussions there for the reform of the University of London. In 1875 he published his first textbook, 'Lessons in Elementary Mechanics', which became a best-seller and the first of a series of elementary science textbooks published by Longmans. 
Any tensions between Magnus's duties at the synagogue and his extensive educational commitments were resolved in 1880 when he was appointed director and organizing secretary of the newly created City and Guilds of London Institute for the Advancement of Technical Education. The institute had been set up two years previously by a few of the leading livery companies of the City of London in response to pressure from critics of the unreformed corporation and the privileged companies. Many of these critics were associated with the Liberal Party. They argued that the companies should spend some of their wealth on technical education on account of their historical association with apprenticeship. These Liberal attacks on the companies, including threats of a royal commission to reveal their wealth, stimulated a few companies to take steps to establish the institute of which Magnus was the principal administrator for thirty-five years. Led by the Clothworkers' Company, the companies formed a defence committee which produced in 1878 a 'Report on technical education' containing a detailed plan for action on three fronts: a central institution for the training of technologists; two 'model' trade or technical schools; and a national scheme of technical examinations driven by the principle of 'payment by results'. 
Under Magnus's leadership these plans were put into effect. The examinations in trade and technical subjects of the Society of Arts were taken over in 1879; the Finsbury Technical College and the School of Art in Kennington were opened in the 1880s; and the Central Institute or City and Guilds Engineering College was established at South Kensington. As the activities of the institute matured -- notably with the increase in entries for its widening prospectus of trade and technical certificates -- it came to be seen as a private ministry of technical education with Magnus as its nationally known chief spokesman and representative. At times this gave rise to jealousy on the part of liverymen who resented large expenditure on the Central Institute located outside the City of London. Also, when in 1899 a central authority for all sectors of public education was finally established, officers of the new Board of Education were affronted by the influence over the technical sector of education of what was in effect a private agency. 
Now a national figure in technical education, Magnus was a member of the royal commission on technical instruction appointed by the Liberal government in 1881. Chaired by Bernhard Samuelson, the commissioners surveyed technical education at home and abroad and made recommendations for reforms. Magnus reported on the systems in France, Germany, Italy, Austria, and Switzerland and for his work was awarded a knighthood (1886), an early instance of that honour being conferred for services to education. Thereafter he was involved in every important movement for technical education up to 1914. He was a member of the executive committee of the National Association for the Promotion of Technical and Secondary Education, one key source of pressure for educational reform at the time. From 1893 he served on the London school board, where his 'three planks' were the abolition of fees for elementary education, the ending of payment by results, and the broadening of the curriculum by the introduction of instruction in practical arts and skills. He served too on the committee which reported in favour of the creation of the Imperial College of Science and Technology through the combination of the Royal School of Mines, the Royal College of Science, and the City and Guilds College. 
In 1910 Magnus published 'Educational Aims and Efforts, 1880-1910', which summarized his many activities promoting 'technical education', at a time when the term referred to modern studies and curricula in general as well as to trade and technical subjects. He retired from the City and Guilds Institute in 1915 after thirty-five years' service which saw the institute established as a body of national and international importance. In this he was acknowledged by colleagues in the technical education movement to have played a major part. His position as the greatest living authority on the subject led to him being asked to contribute the entry on technical education in the famous eleventh edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. This survey, occupying twenty-three columns, is a rich source for students of the formative period of English technical education. 
From 1906 to 1922 Magnus represented London University as a Unionist MP, the first Jew to serve as a representative for one of the university seats. This was a fitting position for Magnus, who had maintained his commitment to the development of the university, notably as a member of convocation active in unsuccessful attempts to reform its structure. In 1917 he accepted a baronetcy. 
On 29 March 1870, in the same year that he joined the institute, Magnus married Katie (1844-1924) ['see 'Magnus, Katie], daughter of the goldsmith Emanuel Emanuel of Southsea; they lived first in London, then in 1893 moved to Tangley Hill, Chilworth, Surrey. There were five children of the marriage of whom three survived. As the children grew, Katie Magnus became active in Jewish educational and social causes, especially in the East End of London. She was a regular contributor to journals and is remembered for her 'Outlines of Jewish History' (1886; rev. edns, 1924 and 1958). 
Magnus, too, was proud of his Jewishness but was not a Zionist. He served the community as chairman of the Jewish war memorial council, and as a vice-president of the Jewish board of deputies, of the Anglo-Jewish association, and of Jews' College. He died at his home, Tangley Hill, on 29 August 1933 and was buried on 31 August at Golders Green cemetery. His two sons predeceased him; the eldest, Laurie Magnus (1872-1933), was a publisher and chairman of the Girls' Public Day School Trust. Philip Magnus was succeeded as second baronet by his grandson, the historian Sir Philip Montefiore Magnus (1906-1988). 


@@@@@


doc= 40872


Willcocks, Sir William (1852-1932), civil engineer, was born on 27 August 1852, 'in a tent in the Dehra Doon', India (Willcocks, 13), and was baptized a year later on 13 September 1853, also in India. He was one of four sons and a daughter of Captain William Willcocks ('c'.1817-1878), irrigation engineer, and his wife, Mary, formerly Martin. Sir James Willcocks (1857-1926), soldier, was his younger brother. From Devon his parents had migrated to London; his father joined the East India Company and they sailed to India in 1837. Willcocks spent eleven years at Mossoorie School, and at eighteen progressed to Thomason Civil Engineering College at Roorkee, passing out first of his year and carrying off various prizes and medals. 
Assigned to construction work on the Ganges Canal in 1872, Willcocks was promoted in 1874-5 to be personal assistant to Colin Scott-Moncrieff, superintending engineer. In December 1876 he married Susan Anne, daughter of the Revd Edward Scott-Moncrieff; they had two sons and two daughters. His wife accompanied Willcocks on many of his tours of inspection, but when he moved to the Betwa River dam, conditions there were so hot that in 1883 she took the children to England. 
When Scott-Moncrieff became director of irrigation in Egypt in 1883 there were no experienced engineers in the country and he invited Willcocks, William Garstin, and Murdoch MacDonald to leave India and join him. In January 1884 Willcocks was put in charge of rebuilding the ruined barrage at the head of the Rosetta Nile. With meagre equipment and forced labour Willcocks repaired the barrage sufficiently to improve the cotton crop that winter, with immediate benefit to the peasant farmers. 
In Egypt, Willcocks had to contend with a variety of nations and languages, and the ingrained practice of bribery, against which he resolutely turned his face. Eccentric, voluble, and excitable by temperament, he found it difficult to agree to differ with his chiefs and colleagues, and in his thirteen years in Egypt he was not promoted. His family joined him 1884 for about six years before returning again to England. During this period Willcocks surveyed and levelled from Cairo to Wadi Halfa, explored the upper Nile for possible sites for reservoir dams, and lectured on irrigation and applied mechanics at the Polytechnical School where he also presided over examinations. 
Before Scott-Moncrieff left Egypt in 1892 Willcocks and the other British engineers had built barrages, and created or improved a network of canals and drains in the delta and in Upper Egypt, significantly increasing the acreage of agricultural land and adding to the prosperity of peasant and nation. Such were the improvements brought about by the engineers that Willcocks was twice the object of thanksgiving prayers in a mosque. By 1890 Willcocks had decided that a dam across the Nile would provide the best reservoir, and he toured Europe to inspect other irrigation works. His great contribution to the subject was his 'Report on Perennial Irrigation and Flood Protection for Egypt' (1894). 
Willcocks proposed to erect a high dam across the granite base of the first cataract at Aswan, capable of storing 85 billion cubic feet of water. During flood the silt laden waters would pass unchecked; the gates would be closed only when the water was clear. His plan was fiercely opposed by British and French archaeologists who pointed out that it would drown the great temple of Philae immediately upstream of the cataract. Eventually a compromise was reached whereby the height of the dam was reduced and some protection given to the temple. Work began in 1898 to Willcocks's design, although he overlooked the need for concrete aprons below the sluices to avoid scour. It was MacDonald who pointed to this defect, thereby incurring Willcocks's enmity. Completed in 1902 at a cost of $2.4 million, the dam was one of the finest achievements of all time. Locally quarried granite stood to the unprecedented length of 6400 feet, while 180 low level sluices controlled the river down to the next barrage at Asyut. But within a few years the supply was inadequate. Against the renewed opposition of the archaeologists, and of Willcocks who saw it as a waste of public money, in 1907-10 the dam was raised to increase its capacity. 
Willcocks meanwhile was manager of the Cairo Water Company from 1897 to 1899, then until 1905 managing director of the Daira Sania Land Company, which acquired 250,000 acres of land which were surveyed, divided, and sold for agricultural purposes. In 1901 he spent three months in south Africa, during the South African War, advising on irrigation schemes. He travelled far up the Nile into Uganda where near Kampala he fell ill with blood poisoning and was nursed back to health by his wife and a daughter. He was made CMG in 1898, and knighted in 1902. In the winter of 1904-5 he went to Mesopotamia, then under Turkish rule, where in 1908-10 he achieved the remarkable feat of surveying the water resources of the whole country and drew up plans to revitalize once more the lands of the 'two rivers'. He was back at the family home in the Gezira Island suburb of Cairo by 1911 but undertook lecture tours, in Canada in 1912 and in the USA in 1914. 
Willcocks regarded himself as the sole Nile authority; he was a nuisance to his successors, and intimidated younger men who dared to challenge his opinions. This arrogance and eccentricity led him into troubled water in 1919 when he and Lieutenant Ralston Kennedy accused MacDonald of having falsified Nile gauge readings in connection with an irrigation scheme; Willcocks also published two defamatory pamphlets. A Nile commission examined the charges and vindicated MacDonald. The two accusers were charged with libel and sedition. Kennedy fled to France where he shortly died; Willcocks stood trial in the supreme consular court from January to March 1920. He was found guilty, but in view of his age and eccentricity, escaped imprisonment and was bound over for a year not to repeat the libel. 
After his disgrace Willcocks, never one to show affection for England, found himself ostracized by the British community. He sought comfort in religion and during his remaining years composed a number of religious tracts and translated extracts from the gospels into colloquial Egyptian, and he served as a voluntary worker at the British hospital. After a brief illness Willcocks died of pneumonia in Cairo on 29 July 1932. He was survived by his wife. A modest road in the Gezira commemorates his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 40874


Hyde, Harford Montgomery (1907-1989), politician and historian, was born on 14 August 1907 at Ranelagh, Malone Road, Belfast, the son of James Johnstone Hyde JP, linen merchant, and his wife, Isobel Greenfield, 'nee' Montgomery. He was later very proud of the part played by his family in developing the Ulster linen industry. His great-grandfather, he told the House of Commons, had in the 1840s spent several years in the USA in 'a not unsuccessful endeavour to stimulate the export of Irish linen', and Hyde himself during the First World War spent part of the school holidays in helping to pull flax. From Sedbergh School (1921-5) he went to Queen's University, Belfast, where he graduated in 1928 with a first-class degree in history. Encouraged by J. E. Todd, the professor of history, who 'lectured in the grand manner', he proceeded to Oxford, entering Magdalen College as an exhibitioner, and in 1930 obtained a second-class degree in jurisprudence. A member of the Middle Temple, he was called to the bar in 1934 and practised for a short time on the north-east circuit. He also travelled widely, visiting, among other countries, the Soviet Union. In 1933 he published his first book, 'The Early Life of Castlereagh', swiftly followed by 'The Russian Journals of Martha and Catherine Wilmot' (1934) and 'More Letters from Martha Wilmot' (1935), both with the marchioness of Londonderry. In 1935 he became librarian and then private secretary to Charles Stewart Henry Vane-Tempest-Stewart, seventh marquess of Londonderry, Conservative politician. Hyde became very attached to the Londonderry family and was the author of several further books on the family and their possessions. On 15 April 1939 he married Dorothy Mabel Brayshaw Crofts ('b'. 1903/4), daughter of James Murray Crofts, secretary to the joint matriculation board of the northern universities. 
After the outbreak of the Second World War Hyde worked as a censor in Gibraltar. In 1940 he was commissioned in the intelligence corps and after serving in Bermuda was engaged in counter-espionage work in the United States under Sir William Stephenson, 'the quiet Canadian', whose life he published in 1962. He also described his own war experiences in his lively 'Secret Intelligence Agent' (1982). In 1944 he was attached to Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force, and in 1944-5 he worked for the Allied Control Commission for Austria, retiring with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
After short stints as an adviser to Alexander Korda's film company and as an assistant editor of the 'Law Reports' Hyde was in 1950 elected as Ulster Unionist MP for East Belfast. For ten years he was an energetic back-bencher, concerned especially with the economic development of Northern Ireland. He sat on standing committees dealing with copyright and the Public Record Office and was a member of the United Kingdom delegation to the Council of Europe consultative assembly. On two issues, which cut across party lines, he intervened vigorously: in 1956 he seconded a measure for the abolition of capital punishment, and in 1957 he strongly supported the recommendations of the Wolfenden committee, 'a humanitarian document'. Hyde's attitude on these highly controversial issues, together with the feeling that he was not seen often enough in his constituency, contributed to his losing his seat in 1959. The constituency selection committee by a small majority readopted him but the association rejected him at a meeting from which Hyde was absent, being in the West Indies on parliamentary business. After leaving parliament he held, from 1959 to 1961, an academic post as professor of history and political science in the University of the Punjab, Lahore. He and his first wife, Dorothy, were divorced in 1952, and in 1955 he married Mary Eleanor, daughter of Colonel L. G. Fischer, of the Indian Medical Service. This marriage also ended in divorce, in 1966, and on 28 October in the same year he married Rosalind (Rose) Roberts ('b'. 1908/9), daughter of Commander James Francis William Dimond, naval officer. 
Though Hyde practised many avocations, all of which provided him with experience and expertise, he was essentially a man of letters, with a prolific and varied output. His 'British Air Policy between the Wars' (1976) was a balanced and lucid survey of a complex subject. He produced numerous biographies, his subjects ranging from the Emperor Maximilian of Mexico to Mrs Beeton, and including several eminent lawyers. From his undergraduate days, when he occupied Oscar Wilde's rooms in Magdalen, he was interested in Wilde and built up a valuable collection of Wildeana. He published a life of Wilde (1975), an edition of his trials (1948), a detailed account of his imprisonment and last years (1963), an edition of his plays (1988), and a life of Lord Alfred Douglas (1984). He had an intense, dispassionate interest in the homosexual world. His 'The Other Love' (1970) was a history of homosexuality in England from the sixteenth century which fused legal knowledge with illustrative anecdotage; and 'The Cleveland Street Scandal' (1976) was a full and enthralling account of a Victorian 'cause celebre', involving all levels of society. He also published several works dealing with another secretive world, that of espionage. 
Versatility, it is sometimes suggested, implies superficiality. This was certainly not so as regards Hyde. He was diligent, widely and thoroughly read, and assiduous in tracking down manuscript material: when the PRO released files on a subject in which he was interested he was first in the queue. His books were carefully crafted and very readable. Though chained to his desk for long stretches he enjoyed congenial company, conversation, and his clubs. A hospitable host, he encouraged and helped other writers, and was a splendid raconteur and a good listener (two roles which do not always go together). For many years he lived in Rye, where he wrote 'Henry James at Home' (1969), but in his closing years he lived at Westwell House, Tenterden, Kent. He died at the William Harvey Hospital, Ashford, Kent, of acute pulmonary oedema and ischaemic heart disease on 10 August 1989. He was survived by his third wife, Rosalind, who bequeathed $10,000 to Queen's University, Belfast, to provide an annual Dr Harford Montgomery Hyde award for the top history graduate. 


@@@@@


doc= 40875


Levett, William (d. 1554), Church of England clergyman and gun-founder, was the son of a substantial landowner in the Hollington area of Hastings, where he was born, and the brother of John Levett of Little Horsted, gentleman and ironmaster. He obtained an Oxford degree in canon law and was rector of Guestling in 1528 and of West Dean by 1529. He became rector of Buxted in April 1533, and the same year obtained the living of Stamford Ryvers in Essex. As deputy receiver of the king's revenue in Sussex in 1533, he would have had knowledge of Newbridge ironworks on the duchy of Lancaster estate in Ashdown Forest. 
His executorship of the will of his brother John, proved in May 1535, involved Levett more closely in the iron trade. The executors were to lease John's iron mills and furnaces, the profits going, after payment of the debts and legacies, to John's son, who was not to occupy the ironworks himself. They included Stumbletts furnace, newly erected on the duchy estate in 1534, and it must be supposed that the executors leased these ironworks to William Levett himself. Levett's first supplies to the ordnance date from 1539 and in August 1540 he provided 15 tons of iron shot or 'gunstones'. In March 1541 he was appointed 'goonstone maker' to the king and received $200 towards the casting of shot. 
Henry VIII urgently needed cannon for his new coastal forts, but casting these in bronze would have been a formidable expense. Cast iron had already been used in the Weald to manufacture ordnance, but with separate barrels and breeches, after the fashion of wrought-iron guns. The bulk of Levett's new guns were muzzle-loaders, cast in one piece on the pattern of the latest bronze ordnance. By 1543 falconets were being made. The cascabel pattern and dodecagonal barrel of the Padstow gun, a demi-culverin perhaps cast in 1544, indicate the correctness of the tradition that royal gun-founders assisted at Levett's Buxted furnace. However, circular-sectioned, strictly functional designs with few embellishments soon evolved and between July 1545 and 1553 over three hundred guns of up to demi-cannon in size were supplied. The new guns were too heavy to find favour with the navy, but bronze was ten times more costly, so in fortifications and for arming merchant ships iron guns were preferred. Gradually, owing to their 'toughness and validitie', an important export trade in wealden guns built up and they remained dominant on the Amsterdam market until displaced by Swedish guns around 1620. 
Metallurgically Levett needed to cast culverins and demi-cannon of 1500 to 2000 kg, but contemporary furnace hearths produced only around 500 kg of metal at one tapping. A larger hearth was clearly needed, but when appointed to oversee the ironworks at Worth in December 1546, after the attainder of the duke of Norfolk, Levett soon had a double furnace built there, the first known example in the metallurgy of iron. How can the exceptional quality of wealden guns be accounted for? Like their bronze counterparts, they were cast vertically, breech downwards, in pits. But since vertical casting of iron guns was also practised on the continent, other factors, such as the phosphoric nature of some wealden ores and the use of loam rather than sand for the moulds, have been adduced. 
The unlikely story that Levett was a recusant, that he was deprived of his benefices in 1545, and that he was not restored to Buxted until after the accession of Mary I, was based on the particular meaning which the word began to acquire only following the Elizabethan church settlement of 1563. In this instance a collector 'certified Levett recusant', possibly for the 'refusal' of a clerical subsidy, but the rector of the neighbouring parish of Rotherfield, Richard Collier, used this and Levett's frequent absence from home to induce the Canterbury authorities to declare the rectory vacant on 31 May 1545, and to install Collier in Levett's stead. This came exactly at a time when Levett was preparing his first major delivery of guns for the ordnance, and this expansion from being a simple supplier of wrought iron, iron artefacts, and cast-iron shot, into becoming England's first major manufacturer of cast-iron cannon, would have caused him the most severe financial pressure. The king's council at once made interventions on 3, 24, and 30 June, ordering Collier to desist and reprimanding the collector. Levett did indeed ultimately relinquish his distant rectory at Stamford Ryvers in Essex and some other preferments, but his continuing acceptability to the ecclesiastical authorities was shown in September when he was admitted to the rectory of Herstmonceux, which lay nearer to his home. Levett's deprivation from Buxted probably lasted no more than a few weeks. 
Levett continued as 'one of the Mynisters of the Kinges Majestyes ordynaunce' during Edward VI's reign, though the penury of the crown meant that the demand for guns declined. He died, unmarried, at some point between March and July 1554. His will provided for more than forty bequests, including $6 13's'. 4died to the poor of Buxted and 6 tons of cast iron to Levett's servant Ralph Hogge (died 1585), who in 1559 succeeded him as royal gunstone founder. 


@@@@@


doc= 40881


Maunder, Edward Walter (1851-1928), astronomer, was born at 5 Chesterfield Street, St Pancras, London, on 12 April 1851, the fourth of seven children and the youngest of the three sons of George Peter Maunder (1813-1878), a Wesleyan minister, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Frid. He was educated at University College School in Gower Street and afterwards attended classes in science at King's College, London. Having been employed for a while with a bank in London, he was appointed in 1873 by civil service examination to a newly instituted post at the Royal Greenwich Observatory, that of photographic and spectroscopic assistant, with principal responsibility for the solar department. 
In the field of solar physics Maunder extended observations beyond the required daily photography of the sun to include the positions, sizes, and movements of sunspots. His statistical analyses of these unique records after several decades led to some important results: the famous 'butterfly diagram' demonstrating the latitude drift of sunspots during the sunspot cycle (1904) and the correlation of geomagnetic disturbances with the occurrence of individual large sunspots on the solar disc (also 1904). His later study (1922) using data from various sources of the dearth of sunspots in the sixteenth century, the so-called Maunder minimum, assumed significance later in theoretical research on the sun's variability. Maunder's work in spectroscopy, including visual measurements of radial velocities of stars made in association with W. M. Christie, was less spectacular, though useful at the time. 
Maunder was an active fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society, to which he was elected in 1875; he served as a member of council, as secretary, and as vice-president successively between 1885 and 1897. At the same time he was an enthusiastic supporter of amateur astronomy. He was the founder in 1890 of the British Astronomical Association, the first editor of its publications, and its president from 1894 to 1896. He led a group of members on a total solar eclipse expedition to the Scandinavian Arctic in 1896 which, though frustrated by bad weather, provided valuable experience for later successful expeditions to India in 1898 and to Algeria in 1900. In his professional capacity Maunder also observed eclipses in the West Indies in 1886 and in Mauritius in 1901, obtaining photographs and spectra of the corona. 
Maunder was the author of numerous popular articles and books and completed editing stints on the magazines 'The Observatory' (1881-7) and 'Knowledge' (1895-1904). Among his books were a history of the Greenwich observatory (1900) and 'The Astronomy of the Bible' (1908, reprinted 1922), in which he brought together his extensive biblical and astronomical knowledge. 
Maunder's first wife, Edith Hannah, 'nee' Bustin, whom he married on 11 September 1875, died in 1888 leaving him with a family of three sons and two daughters. On 28 December 1895 he married the astronomer Annie Scott Dill Russell (1868-1947) ['see 'Maunder, Annie Scott Dill]. There were no children of this marriage. His obituarist H. P. Hollis recalled his popularity as a lecturer, with 'his silver tongue' and 'his amiability of manner' (Hollis, 229), while the children of a colleague remembered him 'with his long beard, very much the picture-book astronomer' (M. Wilson, 'Ninth Astronomer Royal: the Life of Frank Watson Dyson', 1951). He retired in 1913 after forty years of service, but, with his wife, resumed his duties during the First World War, when many of the Greenwich staff were absent on military service. He died at his home, 8 Maze Hill, Greenwich Park, London, on 21 March 1928, one month short of his seventy-seventh birthday. 


@@@@@


doc= 40883


Church, Richard Thomas (1893-1972), poet and writer, was born in Battersea, London, on 26 March 1893, the younger son of Thomas Church, a postal worker, and Lavinia, 'nee' Orton, a schoolteacher. He was educated at Dulwich Hamlet School, and his early ambition was to be a painter, but economic necessity dictated that he join the civil service. He served in various clerical grades between 1909 and 1933, working in a laboratory belonging to customs, and, subsequently, in the Ministry of Labour. He described his experiences in a trilogy of novels beginning with 'The Porch' (1937), which won the Femina Vie Heureuse prize for the most distinctive novel of the year. Three volumes of autobiography also draw on these early experiences, although they exhibit less of a Dickensian flourish: 'Over the Bridge' (1955), 'The Golden Sovereign' (1957), and 'The Voyage Home' (1964). 
All this time, Church was assiduously writing poems, mainly in a subdued late-Georgian mode. Though never formally a pupil, he was encouraged by Professor Israel Gollancz, of King's College, London, and by a senior colleague in the custom house, who subsidized A. C. Fifield in the publication of Church's first book, 'Flood of Life' (1917). Through the poet Humbert Wolfe, his chief at the Ministry of Labour, Church improved his literary acquaintance, meeting Herbert Read, F. S. Flint, T. S. Eliot, and Clifford Bax. This last, in due course, supplemented Church's civil service income with a small pension. 'The Spectator', which had printed most of the poems Church had submitted to it, engaged him as a regular reviewer, from 1922 onwards. This put him on the fringes of the Bloomsbury group, and enabled him also to contribute to such periodicals as the 'New Statesman', 'The Nation', and the 'Westminster Gazette'. In 1915 he had married Caroline Jessica, 'nee' Parfett ('b'. 'c'.1893), a connection of his father's. He was commuting to Whitehall from Limpsfield in Surrey, where he had been advised to live for the sake of his somewhat uncertain health. He was also the father of a small daughter. 
In the effort to maintain his family, Church ventured into prose fiction. His first novel, 'Oliver's Daughter', was published in 1930 by Dent. Oliver is an intellectual grocer, whose daughter runs off with a distinguished musician. Here, as in other novels, Church was able to draw on the multifarious people he had met, and also on his deep and abiding love for music. His first marriage ended in divorce, and on 19 November 1930 he married Catherina Anna Schimmer (1897/8-1965), a silversmith with whom he was to have three children. His second novel with Dent, 'High Summer', was published in 1932, and led to a contract as advisory editor. Church was thus brought into contact with a younger generation of writers; he was instrumental in the publication of, among others, Dylan Thomas, Clifford Dyment, Margot Ruddock, and Hal Summers. The post also gave him a greater degree of financial stability, and he was now able to leave the civil service. He settled his family in Kent, an area about which Church was to write atmospherically in several books: 'Kent' (1948), 'A Window on a Hill' (1951), and 'A Country Window' (1955). 
Church's reputation as a poet had grown steadily, with collections of lyrics such as 'A Glance Backward' (1930), 'News from the Mountain' (1932), and 'The Solitary Man' (1941), together with a narrative poem, 'The Lamp' (1946). If that reputation has tended to wane in recent years, it is probably because his ear for verse, although true in itself, operated over a limited range. His best individual poems are 'Solstices', 'A House in Wartime', 'The Man without Faith', and 'The Wrong Road'. He had the good sense to put these into an anthology he edited for Dent with Mildred Boznan: 'Poems of our Time' (1945). There is a distinct family resemblance to both Robert Graves and W. H. Davies: '
Say this when you return, 

'I came by the wrong road, 

And saw the starved woods burn. 

I stopped, bewildered, lost, 

And of a sudden heard 

The red-throated bird, 

The holy bird, the ghost...' 

' But readers have tended to prefer the style of Graves and Davies as deployed by those original masters. 
It is significant that Church could see little merit in the work of Gerard Manley Hopkins and Eliot. He appears to have been conscious of no more than their sonic properties. This goes along with the nature of his interest in performance, as evinced in 'Poems for Speaking' (1950). The book is dedicated to that lyrical actor, Robert Donat, and has, among its specimens of (for example) the ballad, Rossetti's 'The Blessed Damozel', and Mangan's 'Dark Rosaleen', rather than the brusque productions of the Scottish border. Church himself had a singularly beautiful speaking voice, bass-baritone rather than bass, somewhat incongruously emerging from his spare, professorial frame. This may suggest at once the qualities and the economies of his sensibility. 
Church wrote a book on the English novel in 1951, but his most concerted critical effort is 'Eight for Immortality' (1941). These 'eight' are the modern poets he is most prepared to support. He finds himself out of his depth with Yeats and Eliot, makes a persuasive case for Blunden and Victoria Sackville-West, but predictably is most at home with Graves and Davies. The essay on the latter, in fact, is probably the most discerning written so far: 'He has a child's particularity which is yet such an oddly unscientific power, because it has no sense of relationship or classification... Search his poems and you will find a thousand references to the robin, that 'feathered bully' the sparrow, or to the nightingale with 'the moon's white beams across her throat'.' Church's writing spanned a range of genres; in 1941 he produced a children's book called 'Rufus' (printed in America as 'A Squirrel called Rufus'), which dealt with a war between native English red squirrels and the invading grey squirrels, the allegorical implications of which were unmistakable. He also wrote some works of travel literature, but it is likely that Church's most enduring work will be his three autobiographies. They evoke poignant reminiscences of his energetic father and his charismatic elder brother, a tactile sense of shabby gentility in Battersea and Dulwich, and a positively olfactory evocation of the civil service laboratory in which he worked for so many years. 
Church was appointed CBE in 1953. His second wife died in 1965, and on 25 February 1967 he married Dorothy Mary Beale (1896-1989), the widowed daughter of John Booker. He died at his home, the Priest's House, Sissinghurst, Cranbrook, Kent, on 4 March 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 40885


Oengus of Tallaght (fl. c.830), bishop and writer, was the son of Oengoba, but was more commonly known as the grandson of Oiblen who, according to a late pedigree, belonged to the Dal nAraidi, who controlled a territory corresponding to the north of modern co. Down and much of co. Antrim. Little that can be trusted is known of Oengus's career. In the late preface to the martyrology attributed to him, he is said to have been raised at Cluain Eidnech (now Clonenagh in the barony of Maryborough West, Laois), where he is also supposed to have been buried. However, this is not supported by the internal evidence of the martyrology, which, for example, relegates the feast of St Fintan, patron of Cluain Eidnech, to second place in the list for his day. What is clear from the martyrology is that Oengus was a cleric -- he uses 'pauperan' and 'deidblen', both meaning 'pauper' (that is, cleric), to describe himself. He belonged to the community of St Mael Ruain at Tallaght, a few miles south of the modern city of Dublin. To this coincidence is owed his possibly bogus title of Ceile De, or Culdee, which has been commonly assigned to him since the seventeenth century. As a centre of the ascetic reform of the late eighth and early ninth century, Tallaght was closely associated with the new emphasis on the role of the 'ceile De' (literally, 'God's client'). 
The office more properly Oengus's, however, appears to have been that of bishop. He is so described, for instance, in an addition to the list of saints commemorated on 11 March in the martyrology of Tallaght, a work composed at about the same time and in the same place as his. Therefore, he would have occupied a very important position, with primary responsibility for many liturgical functions, not only within his own monastery, but also possibly within the whole group of reformed churches associated with Tallaght. Many of these were new foundations and Oengus seems to have been directly involved in at least two of them, both named Disert Oengusa ('Oengus's Hermitage') after him; one is in what is now co. Limerick, the other in Laois. 
As a bishop, with primary responsibility for liturgical matters, and as a reformer, Oengus would have been well qualified to undertake the composition of a martyrology. The text attributed to him, the martyrology (or 'Feilire') of Oengus, survives in some ten manuscripts, the earliest of which, the 'Leabhar Breac' ('Speckled book'), now MS 23 P 16 (or 1230) in the Royal Irish Academy, dates to the early fifteenth century. Previously thought to have been composed between 797 and 808, the martyrology has recently been redated to between 828 and 833. It remains, however, the earliest extant vernacular metrical martyrology, consisting of 365 quatrains in strict metre preceded by a prologue of 340 lines and followed by an epilogue of 566 lines. A prose preface was added to the text at a later stage, together with extensive notes and glosses. 
When composing his martyrology, Oengus used as his only source the martyrology of Tallaght, a shortened version of the Hieronymian martyrology with extensive added lists of Irish saints for each day of the year. This survives incompletely in three manuscripts, the earliest of which, the 'Book of Leinster', now Dublin, Trinity College, MS 1339, was begun about 1151. Based on an exemplar which has been shown to have reached Ireland from Northumbria, passing on the way from Lindisfarne to Iona, this text can be dated to about the same time as that attributed to Oengus. 
There are cogent grounds for believing that Oengus may also have been the author or compiler of his source, the martyrology of Tallaght. A priori, it is extremely unlikely that anyone else would have been as experienced as he in these matters in the monastery of Tallaght at this time. Also, the assumption that he had recently compiled the much more substantial text of his one and only source would make greater sense of the claim in the epilogue to his metrical work that he had used several other named sources including 'the antigraph of Jerome, the martyrology of Eusebius' and 'Ireland's host of books' ('Felire Oengusso Celi De', ll. 137-41). And, most importantly, having 'reckoned their feasts' he went on in his epilogue (ibid., ll. 229ff.) to number the troops of his saints, referring by name in the process to several figures excluded from his own martyrology but included in the martyrology of Tallaght. Cases in point are Noah, Isaiah, Abraham, Honoratus, and Benedict. 
If, as is suggested here, Oengus was the author not only of the metrical martyrology called after him but also of its source, the martyrology of Tallaght, then he has the distinction of standing at the very beginning of the extant Irish martyrological tradition. The influence of his texts can be seen at work in all later martyrologies belonging in this tradition, which ended with the compilation of the martyrology of Donegal by Micheal O Cleirigh in 1630. Few if any early medieval Irish authors can have been more influential than Oengus over a period of almost exactly eight hundred years. 


@@@@@


doc= 40888


Bullett, Gerald William (1893-1958), writer and broadcaster, was born on 30 December 1893 at 107 Brockley Rise, Forest Hill, London, the third of the three sons of Robert Bullett (1851-1914), a schoolmaster, later a coal agent, and Ellen, 'nee' Pegg (1848-1904), a farmer's daughter from Ullesthorpe, Leicestershire. In 1895 the family moved to Muswell Hill in north London, where Gerald was educated at a small private day school. His mother died when he was ten, and at sixteen he became a bank clerk. He wrote his first novel (unpublished and later destroyed) at eighteen. His second, 'The Progress of Kay', a study of suburban adolescence, was immediately accepted by Constable, and published in 1916, when he was serving with the Royal Flying Corps in France. 
On demobilization Bullett applied for entry to Cambridge as an ex-serviceman, and sent some poems and a copy of 'The Progress of Kay' to Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch, who persuaded Jesus College to accept him. He read English, graduated with first-class honours in 1921, and married Edith Marion (Rosalind) Barker, 'nee' Gould (1887-1982) on 5 December the same year. Their marriage proved fulfilling and purposeful, Rosalind acting as housekeeper, hostess, and secretary. Since both preferred country life, they lived frugally in a succession of rented houses in the home counties, finally settling in an Elizabethan farmhouse at East Harting in Sussex. They had one daughter. 
After Cambridge Bullett began reviewing for the 'Times Literary Supplement' and other journals, and then embarked on a career as an assiduous short-story writer and poet, small-time publisher, and editor and author of some forty published books. 
In 1923 Bullett published a critical study of G. K. Chesterton. In April 1926 he was the first author to broadcast his own short story, 'The Baker's Cart', from the BBC's 2LO station, and thereafter he frequently adapted and performed his own work for radio. From 1926 to 1934 he acted as reader for the publishing firm of Gerald Howe, and served on the selection committee of the Book Society. He published a number of novels during this period including 'The History of Egg Pandervil' (1928) and 'Nicky, Son of Egg' (1929), which chronicle the impact of the First World War on a rural family. In the 1930s he brought out 'Helen's Lovers' (1932), a collection of short stories, 'I'll Tell you Everything' (1932), a detective novel written jointly with J. B. Priestley, 'The English Galaxy' (1933), an anthology of short poems, 'The Bubble' (1934), one of a few selections of his own poetry, 'The Happy Mariners' (1935), a story for children, and 'The Jury' (1935), which has a neat plot, delicate character drawing, and an engaging style. 'The Snare of the Fowler' (1936), a retelling of the Oedipus legend in a contemporary setting, created a stir among his regular readers and prompted some reviews which made him apprehensive for his future as a writer. Although Alfred Knopf enthused over its fine qualities, publishing it in the USA in the same year, and Quiller-Couch and E. M. W. Tillyard, to whom Bullett turned for reassurance, did their best to rebuild his confidence by pointing out the book's many merits, he never again attempted such a problematic or ambitious theme. The regular annual appearance of Bullett's novels was interrupted only by the Second World War. From 1940 to 1943 he was employed by the BBC Overseas Service as a talks producer. He broadcast a series of talks entitled 'Life at Home', describing everyday activities, and the unassuming heroism of the civilian population. After 1945 he chaired literary discussions and reviewed novels and poetry, giving succinct assessments of Elizabeth Gaskell and George Eliot (he published a biography of her in 1947). In 1946, in collaboration with Tsui Chi Lai, he made a 'rendering' of a sequence of poems by Fan Cheng-ta written in 1186. Although attacked by serious English scholars of Chinese poetry, it reads well (it was reprinted in Hong Kong, with the original Chinese text interleaved, in 1980). Of his post-war novels 'The Elderbrook Brothers' (1945), 'The Alderman's Son' (1954), 'The Daughters of Mrs Peacock' (1957), and 'The Peacock Brides' (1958) are among the most interesting. He also wrote two detective novels, 'One Man's Poison' (1956) and 'Odd Woman Out' (1958) under the pen name Sebastian Fox. 
Bullett's fiction is pervaded by feeling for his maternal midland roots, and memories of his Edwardian childhood in Muswell Hill among the 'middle middle-class' (Kunitz and Colby). The contentment of his thirty productive years in Sussex, from where he was lured to London only by agents or publishers, never quite obliterated his 'terror of being at the world's mercy'. He disliked intrusions into his private life from any quarter, saying: 'On the rare occasions when I pick up a book of my own and glance through it, the intimacy of the revelation almost makes me blush. There I am, written down. What more can the most inquisitive reader demand?' He remained, in Storm Jameson's words, 'one of God's honest stubborn... eternally youthful English'. 
Storm Jameson, who knew Bullett as a young man, said that his 'clumsy head and body housed a poet of extreme elegance'. His novels pay a measured tribute to the decency, obstinacy, and compassion with which ordinary English men and women attempted to order their lives during the first troubled decades of the twentieth century. 
Bullett died on 3 January 1958 in the Royal West Sussex Hospital, Chichester, and was cremated on 8 January in Brighton. His posthumous 'Collected Poems' was published in 1959, and contains many attractive lyrics. 


@@@@@


doc= 40889


Leonowens, Anna Harriette (1831-1915), educator and travel writer, was born in Ahmadnagar, India, on 6 November 1831, the younger daughter of Thomas Edwards ('c'.1803-1831), formerly a cabinet maker of St George the Martyr parish, London, then a sergeant in the sappers and miners, and his wife, Mary Anne (1815/16-1873), who was possibly the illegitimate Eurasian daughter of William Vawdrey Glasscott (died 1821), lieutenant in the Bombay army. Anna's father died before her birth, leaving the family penniless. On 9 January 1832 her mother married Patrick Donohoe, a corporal in the engineers, soon seconded to the public works department where he served successively as sergeant overseer (in Deesa), assistant supervisor (in Aden) and deputy commissary (in Poona). 
It is likely that Anna first met the Irish-born Thomas Lean Owens ('bap'. 1823, died 1859), in the mid-1840s, when he was paymaster sergeant with the 28th regiment at Deesa. Her parents opposed the connection which was temporarily broken when Donohoe was transferred to Aden in 1847, taking his by then large family with him. There they encountered the resident chaplain, the Revd George Percy Badger, and his wife, Maria, a missionary schoolmistress. When the Badgers embarked on an extended tour of Egypt and Palestine, probably in 1849, Anna accompanied them. Her intellectual curiosity was stimulated by Badger, a noted orientalist and keen observer of colonial imperialism in the Middle East. It was he who introduced Anna to the study of languages (she eventually mastered eight), encouraged her interest in Eastern culture and religion, and sharpened her skills of observation and analysis. 
Upon her return to India, Anna married 'Leon' Owens on Christmas day 1849, in Poona; he was then a clerk in the commissary general's office at Bombay, but by May 1852, when their first child, Selina, died, he was employed by R. Frith & Co., Bombay mess agents. At about this time Anna broke completely with her family, and the couple, their surname now conflated to Leonowens, went to Perth, Western Australia. There they had a second child, who died after only a few months; a third child, Avis, was born in 1854, and a fourth, Louis, in 1856. Anna, then known as Harriet, advertised a Young Ladies' School, at Perth in 1854. In February 1857 the family sailed from Perth to Singapore and went thence to Prince of Wales Island (later Penang) where Thomas ran a hotel. He died of apoplexy in Penang on 8 May 1859 and was buried in Northam Road cemetery. 
Left impoverished with children to support, his widow opened a school in Singapore. Then in 1862 she took an appointment arranged by the Borneo Company to teach the wives and children of Rama IV of Siam, popularly known as King Mongkut. The king fathered some thirty-nine sons and forty-three daughters, procreation being a royal duty which he took seriously. The children and their mothers, along with several thousand other women and retainers (most of whom were given to the king by those seeking royal favour), lived in seclusion in Nang Harm, a walled city within the royal palace. Mongkut, an enlightened modernizer who had fostered contacts with both Americans and Europeans, wanted his children to receive a Western education, but the missionary wives whom he engaged initially had as their main object the conversion of their pupils to Christianity. Leonowens, the first Western woman to live in the palace, was contracted to 'do [her] best endeavour for knowledge of English language, science and literature and not for conversion to Christianity' (King Mongkut, letter of 26 Feb 1862, in A. Leonowens, 'Governess at the Siamese Court', 1954 edn, vii). 
Taking Louis with her (but sending Avis to a London boarding-school), Leonowens served Mongkut for nearly six years, first as teacher and latterly as one of his foreign language secretaries. In her first role she is best remembered for tutoring the future King Chulalongkorn, and for intervening on behalf of the women of Nang Harm, whom she saw as enslaved and oppressed; in her second she was important to Mongkut's strategy of opening Siam to Western influence, while at the same time frustrating the territorial ambitions of France, America, and Britain. Her decidedly ambiguous position at court fed palace intrigue and fostered animosity from the Anglo-French diplomatic community. In consequence she mixed mainly with American missionaries, assimilating their professional antipathy to the heathen and polygamous king, and this later coloured her published accounts of life in Siam. Overwork, poor pay, unrelenting stress, and recurring tropical illnesses led her to secure a furlough and sail for England in July 1867. In his farewell speech Mongkut remarked: 'You ought to know you are [a] difficult woman and more difficult than generality' (King Mongkut, in A. Leonowens, 'Governess at the Siamese Court', 1954 edn, xv). Nevertheless, they seem to have respected and even perhaps liked each other. 
After a brief sojourn in England and Ireland, where Louis was installed in a boarding-school, Leonowens sailed with Avis for New York in November 1867, in search of the bracing climate which her health was thought to need, and in anticipation of renewed contact with various American friends. Efforts to renegotiate her post at the Siamese court were unsuccessful, and Mongkut's death on 1 October 1868 terminated any ideas of return. Contact with the royal family, however, continued over many years, facilitated by correspondence, occasional meetings (including a memorable one with Chulalongkorn in London, in August 1897), and the considerable business success of Louis Leonowens in Siam, under Chulalongkorn's patronage, beginning in the 1880s. 
Leonowens decided to remain in the United States where, again needing to support herself and her family, she opened a school on Staten Island; more significantly, she began to write about her life in Siam. An article in the 'Atlantic Monthly' in 1869 was the prelude to two books, 'The English Governess at the Siamese Court' (1870; English edn as 'Governess at the Siamese Court', 1870) and 'The Romance of the Harem' (1873; English edn as 'The Romance of Siamese Harem Life', 1873). Both, but especially the second, are a mixture of biography and snippets of history and myth, frequently misrepresented. Almost immediately Leonowens was accused of having invented salacious and barbaric incidents of life in Siam, in order to titillate her audience and thus increase sales. Her books and the lecture engagements to which they gave rise did, however, bring her an income (always precarious) and an entree into the literary circles of New York and Boston, where her many friends included James T. Fields, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Sarah Orne Jewett, and Harriet Beecher Stowe. 
Her daughter's marriage in 1878 to Thomas Fyshe, a Scottish banker, greatly improved Leonowens's financial situation. She subsequently made her home with them in Halifax, Nova Scotia, but continued to work, notably as a writer for the 'Youth's Companion', an American periodical as whose correspondent she visited Russia in 1881. Her 'Life and Travels in India' (1884), a competent travel work with little biography, was less successful than the earlier books, and her final study, 'Our Asiatic Cousins' (1889), was barely noticed. Leonowens is best remembered in Halifax for her leadership in art education initiatives, social activism, and women's suffrage. From the late 1880s she spent two extended periods in Germany, supervising the education of her grandchildren; after 1901 she lived with the Fyshe family in Montreal, Canada, where she was active in arts and crafts advocacy and hospital charity work. Blinded by a stroke in 1912 and confused by age, she lingered until 19 January 1915, when her death went largely unnoticed. She was buried two days later in Mount Royal cemetery, Montreal. 
Leonowens would probably have been entirely forgotten had Margaret Landon not published a romanticized biography, 'Anna and the King of Siam' (1944), with a shorter version, 'Anna and the King' (1952), on which were based a theatrical musical and films, 'Anna and the King of Siam' (1946), 'The King and I' (stage, 1951; screen 1956), and 'Anna and the King' (Twentieth Century Fox, 1999). The stage and screen versions present an even more fanciful picture of Siam than did Leonowens's books, but are less offensive (although still patronizing) about Mongkut, who is depicted as endearing but childlike. These productions in turn led to several accounts in English by Thai and Western scholars on the true nature of the king and his reign. These did little, however, to alter the Hollywood image and have themselves been criticized for their condoning of slavery and general repression of women and children. Direct attacks on Leonowens also failed to subvert her influence. A. B. Griswold, in 'King Mongkut of Siam' (1961), undermined her claim to historical accuracy and questioned her emotional stability; Ian Grimble called her 'a mischief-maker, a squalid little girl... one of those awful little English governesses, a sex-starved widow' ('New York Times', 8 Aug 1970, p. 25); while W. S. Bristowe, in 'Louis and the King of Siam', revealed how far she had invented the story of her ancestry and early life. New research has strengthened the argument for mixed ancestry and various family secrets, but has refuted much of Bristowe's genealogical research, his claim that Leonowens was raised in squalor and deprivation, and his insinuation that she travelled unchaperoned and alone with the unmarried Revd Badger. Despite, or perhaps because of, their shortcomings, her life and writings captured the imagination of the Western public, although the strident and unflattering portrayal of one of their greatest kings has continued to offend the Thai people. As one of the first westerners to write about Siam, and as one in unique contact with the king at a critical juncture in the country's history, Leonowens is remembered for having created an enduring if inaccurate image of Siam in the eyes of the West. 


@@@@@


doc= 40890


Gilliam, Laurence Duval (1907-1964), radio producer, was born on 4 March 1907 in Fulham, London, the younger son of Ernest William Gilliam (died 1943), a businessman, and his wife, Beatrice Bishop (died 1946). Educated at the City of London School (1918-25) and Peterhouse, Cambridge (1925-8), Laurence Gilliam worked first with the Gramophone Company in various capacities, and later as a freelance journalist, actor, and producer before joining the editorial staff of the 'Radio Times' in 1932. He transferred to the BBC drama department a year later, where he worked on the development of special feature programmes which wove sound, words, and music together to create an aural picture. From 1933 until the end of his life he was responsible for the world-wide Christmas day programmes which preceded the monarch's address. These programmes were the BBC's technically most complicated assignment, linking the Commonwealth outposts with Broadcasting House in London via elaborate world-wide link-ups. Another notable example of Gilliam's early technical ambition was ''Opping 'Oliday' -- a 'sound picture' of hop picking in Kent -- which he produced in 1934 using the newly established mobile recording van. 
Val Gielgud, head of drama, transferred responsibility for features to Gilliam in May 1936, though features really came into their own during the Second World War. While much of the BBC saw broadcasting as a means of escaping from the blitz, Gilliam saw the possibilities for the medium to reflect the reality of war. In his major topical series 'The Shadow of the Swastika', which documented the rise of Nazism, Gilliam demonstrated the power of the factual documentary for propaganda purposes and offered the first challenging piece of work from the BBC since the outbreak of war. Gilliam had a natural sympathy for the journalistic approach to broadcasting, and his war work reflected these instincts. As one of the two editors (with Donald Boyd) of 'War Report', he helped to create a revolutionary technique on which all news reporting has since been based, taking the microphone to the fighting line to report back to the people at home nightly, in record time. In recognition of this outstanding war record, features became a separate department at the end of the war, with Laurence Gilliam as its head, and Gilliam himself was appointed OBE. 
Throughout the post-war period -- the 'golden age of radio' -- Gilliam did more than anyone in the BBC to recruit and encourage poets and writers to contribute work for the BBC features department. He maintained proudly that the feature was the one unique form that radio had achieved in its short history; and it was largely due to him that features came to stand for so much that was vital, contemporary, experimental, and above all 'pure radio'. He showed a gift for leadership which inspired devoted loyalty in a group of the most talented writers and producers in radio history, including Louis MacNeice, Douglas Cleverdon, Leonard Cottrell, Jennifer Wayne, Christopher Sykes, W. R. Rodgers, Francis Dillon, Nesta Pain, Wynford Vaughan Thomas, Alan Burgess, and D. G. Bridson. As Douglas Cleverdon discovered, Gilliam would always rather back a project that had a chance of success than reject one that might fail: 'He was also a 'bon viveur', unpunctual, extremely good company, and a tower of strength to his subordinates' (Cleverdon, 'The art of radio'). 
Large, ebullient, and generous-minded, with his wiry grey hair Gilliam was broad in every sense of the word, a man of inspiring integrity whose approach to programme making, as to all things, was larger than life. There was a flamboyance about Gilliam which impressed everyone who came into contact with him and quickly earned him the nickname Lorenzo the Magnificent. He combined a lack of respect for authority with a supreme confidence in the value of the work for which he was responsible. While his tastes were catholic and he enjoyed the good things of life, he was always more interested in people than in things. 
In 1940 Gilliam married Marianne Helweg (1914-1976), a Dane whose father, Jacob Helweg, had immigrated to Britain in the 1920s to take up a lecturing position at the University of London. The couple met at the BBC, where Marianne had been a plays reader. She and Laurence had three sons and one daughter; the eldest was found at the age of four to have a mental handicap and was committed to a mental home soon after the war. They lived in Highgate, Middlesex, until the marriage was dissolved in 1952, when Marianne moved in with Bertie (W. R.) Rodgers, who worked for Gilliam. Rodgers, the engaging poet-minister from Armagh who had become a features producer in 1946, resigned from the features department in 1952 as a result of the relationship. 
By the early 1960s the features department was under threat from the BBC managers as television began to encroach upon radio and Gilliam was offered early retirement. For twenty years he had acted as the buffer between his team of idiosyncratic producers and the administrators, keeping his team on a very loose rein. Gilliam still maintained his faith in radio, but as the end of features department was being discussed, his health was deteriorating. Laurence Gilliam died of cancer of the kidneys on 15 November 1964 in St Andrew's Hospital, Dollis Hill, Middlesex, where he was convalescing after an operation. 
The development of features by the BBC, if not actually the creation of Laurence Gilliam, owed more to him than to any other single individual. In the early days of broadcasting he was among those who championed the possibilities of the medium as new, exciting, almost limitless in its possibilities. And throughout his life he maintained his belief in radio and its importance in linking world-wide communities. The establishment and direction of BBC features were Gilliam's life's work -- and became very largely his life. Unfortunately, early in 1965, a few months after his death, the BBC's features department was disbanded. 


@@@@@


doc= 40893


Mogg, Mary (1698/9-1766), celebrated beauty, was one of two daughters born to John Mogg (died 1736), landlord of The Rose inn at Wokingham in Berkshire. Little is known of Molly other than that she worked in her father's tavern and that her exceptional beauty inspired John Gay, in company with Alexander Pope and Jonathan Swift, to write a poem about her entitled 'Molly Mogg, or, The Fair Maid of the Inn', which quickly became a popular song. However, even these bare details have been the subject of disagreement. 

'Notes and Queries', in quoting from the 'Quarterly Review' for 1859, claims that Molly's sister Sally was in fact the great beauty and the subject of the song. It suggests that Gay and his friends had been too drunk to distinguish between the sisters and that thus the tributes had been paid to Molly erroneously ('N&Q', 84-5). This version of events is denied in the 'Gentleman's Magazine': listing Molly among the deaths for 1766 aged sixty-seven (she died a spinster at Wokingham on 7 March), the entry states unequivocally that she was the person about whom Gay had written the song 'Molly Mogg' ('GM', 36.151). Similarly in the 'London Daily Post' for 21 October 1736 notice was given that Mr Mogg, who was confirmed as having kept The Rose inn for several years, had died a few days previously. He was described as 'Father of Molly Mogg on whom the famous song was made' ('N&Q', 175). 
The other area of disagreement concerns authorship and whether the poem was the result of the collaborative efforts of Swift, Gay, and Pope, or written solely by Gay or by Pope. What is not contested is that the poem was probably written in the summer of 1726, a couple of months after Swift had arrived in England to arrange publication of 'Gulliver's Travels'. It is generally accepted that about this time Pope, Swift, and Gay had gone together to Wokingham and to nearby Binfield, where Pope had lived ten years earlier. It has been suggested that Pope was taking his fellow wits on a nostalgic journey into his past and possibly to meet his old Binfield friends the Doncastles ('N&Q', 172). 
AAA, a contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for June 1755, claims that Pope had written the original poem, the eleven stanzas of which were reprinted in the issue in French, at the age of seventeen. However, as J. Yeowell notes, when Pope was seventeen, in 1705, Molly Mogg would have been only about six years old ('N&Q', 173). Other evidence points to Gay as the author, and the poem is generally attributed to him. Vinton Dearing says that Swift referred to 'Molly Mogg' as Gay's, and that Gay authorized the printing of the full fifteen stanzas under his own name in the fifth edition of Lintot's 'Miscellany' (2, 1727, 617). However, Dearing also makes the valuable point that since 'Molly Mogg' is a 'crambo' poem (one designed to exhaust all possible rhymes on a given name) it was likely to have been a collaborative effort. Indeed when the poem was first published, in 'Mist's Weekly Journal' on 27 August 1726, authorship was attributed to 'Two or Three Men of Wit'. Furthermore the inclusion of stanzas 8 and 13 in the full version of the poem was the result of a challenge thrown down by Incog, in 'Mist's Weekly Journal' for 20 August 1726, to 'furnish another Rhime' on Molly Mogg. 
The poem, which had probably been handed about privately before appearing in 'Mist's Weekly Journal', enjoyed immense success and soon acquired a couple of tunes to add to its popularity. The full text of fifteen four-line stanzas was printed in Dublin in two broadsides; another version, without stanzas 8 and 13, was reprinted in 'The Choice' in 1729 and 1732. Another broadside appeared in 'Musical Miscellany', 'Read's Weekly Journal', and 'The Hive'. In addition four other broadsides were published between 1726 and 1732 which omitted stanza 13 and arranged the remaining fourteen stanzas into pairs to make seven verses in order to fit them beneath the musical scores of different tunes. 


@@@@@


doc= 40895


Cavalcanti, Alberto de Almeida (1897-1982), film director and producer, was born in Dona Marciana Street, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on 6 February 1897, the youngest son of Captain Manoel de Almeida Cavalcanti (died 'c'.1920) and his wife, Dona Ana Olinda do Rego Rangel (died 1945). His father, of Italian descent, taught mathematics at the military school of Praia Vermelha. His mother came from an artistic family; an uncle, Alberto Rangel, was a leading novelist of the period. 
Like his elder brothers, Cavalcanti was sent to military school in Rio de Janeiro, but he showed little aptitude for army life. Nor did law suit him: in 1913 he was enrolled at the law faculty of the Rio de Janeiro Polytechnic College, but after less than a year he quarrelled with his professor and quit. Aged seventeen, he left for Geneva to study architecture, and spent three years there before moving to Paris and the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in 1918. Having graduated, he joined an architectural practice, but found the work boring and poorly paid. On both counts the cinema offered greater attractions. Around this time Cavalcanti's father died. He had always been closer to his mother, who now became his frequent companion until her death in 1945. Thirty years later he dedicated his book 'Film and Reality' to her memory. A homosexual, Cavalcanti never married. 
Cavalcanti entered films as art director on Marcel l'Herbier's unfinished version of Tolstoy's 'Resurrection' (1922), and made his directorial debut with 'Le train sans yeux' (1925). This was impounded when the producers ran out of money. To replace it, Cavalcanti hastily improvised 'Rien que les heures' (1926), an impressionistic study of twenty-four hours in the life of Paris. Poetic, quirky, and humorous, it made his reputation and influenced other 'city films' of the period, such as Walter Ruttmann's 'Berlin: Symphony of a Great City' and Dziga Vertov's 'The Man with a Movie Camera'. Cavalcanti followed it up with 'En rade' (1927), a feature about a young man wandering through a busy seaport which in mood and treatment anticipated the 'poetic realism' of the 1930s. Now rated one of the foremost avant-garde directors, he completed several more features and short films before the coming of sound disrupted his career. 
'The producers thought that [sound] films should be made by stage directors', Cavalcanti later recalled. 'The results were pitiful and we were called back to the studios very quickly' (Hillier, Lovell, and Rohdie, 36). But the only work he could find was at Paramount's Paris studios, directing French and Portuguese-language versions of Hollywood comedies. After a few years of this soulless toil, 'I did what I have done many times in my long life, I said I was sick and I came to London to recover' (ibid.). There he met John Grierson, leader of the British documentary school and head of the General Post Office (GPO) film unit. Cavalcanti's stint at Paramount had given him expertise in sound technique, which the GPO unit lacked; Grierson invited him to join them at their Blackheath studio 'for a few months'. In the event he stayed for seven years, working as director, producer, and, above all, mentor to the other film-makers in the unit. 
According to Harry Watt, the arrival of Cavalcanti was 'the turning point of British documentary. If I've had any success in films I put it down to my training from Cavalcanti and I think a lot of other people should say the same thing' (Sussex, 'Cavalcanti', 207). Others who benefited from Cavalcanti's enthusiasm and professional expertise included Humphrey Jennings, Basil Wright, Len Lye, and Norman McLaren. Exact credits for the films Cavalcanti contributed to are hard to establish, since the GPO unit worked collaboratively; besides, Cavalcanti later claimed, he was often denied credit by the aesthetically austere Grierson, who looked with suspicion on Cavalcanti's playful, surrealist-tinged approach. Relations between the two men were edgy: according to Cavalcanti, Grierson 'only came to the studios to upset my work' (ibid.). 
None the less, Cavalcanti soon settled in. 'The GPO was a very nice place to work... The atmosphere was much better than it had been in France' (Hillier, Lovell, and Rohdie, 43). He took directorial credit on some of the unit's less remembered films: 'Pett and Pott' (1934), a jokey fantasy supposedly promoting thrift; 'Coalface' (1936), which with poetry by W. H. Auden and music by Benjamin Britten acted as a dry run for 'Night Mail'; and 'Line to Tcherva Hut' (1937), about phone services in the Alps. But Cavalcanti was closely involved, as producer and sound supervisor, on many of the unit's most famous productions, such as 'Song of Ceylon' (1934) and 'Night Mail' (1936). Basil Wright, credited director on both, paid him grateful tribute: 'His ideas about the use of sound were so liberating that they would liberate in you about a thousand other ideas' (Sussex, 'Cavalcanti', 207). 
When Grierson left in 1937 to join the Film Centre (advising Commonwealth governments on film), Cavalcanti took over as head of the unit. Under his guidance the centre produced some fifteen films, including Harry Watt's best pre-war work, 'North Sea' (1938), and the first of Humphrey Jennings's masterpieces of documentary poetry, 'Spare Time' (1939). When war broke out the GPO unit was transferred to the Ministry of Information and renamed the Crown Film Unit. Since the ministry had little idea what the unit should do, Cavalcanti led his staff out into the streets to capture the sights and sounds of London as it adjusted to the coming of war. 'The First Days' (1939), with its quiet, understated air of determination, set the tone of 'the people's war' that would become the main theme of British wartime propaganda. 
Unfortunately Cavalcanti, who lacked Grierson's skill at dealing with officialdom, found himself in an equivocal position as a foreign national. Pressure was put on him to relinquish his Brazilian citizenship; instead he quit the unit in 1940, and accepted an invitation from Michael Balcon to join Ealing Studios. Though a commercial studio, Ealing was to Cavalcanti 'an absolute parallel to the GPO' (Hillier, Lovell, and Rohdie, 45). Under Balcon's benevolent rule he continued to direct and produce documentaries such as 'Yellow Caesar' (1941), a virulent attack on Mussolini. He also resumed directing feature films for the first time since leaving France. 'Went the Day Well?' (1942), based loosely on a short story by Graham Greene, vividly imagined a sleepy English village taken over by undercover German paratroopers. By contrast, 'Champagne Charlie' (1944) celebrated the robust culture of the Victorian music-halls. Cavalcanti masterminded, and part-directed, 'Dead of Night' (1945), a chilling anthology of ghost stories. His last feature for Ealing, 'Nicholas Nickleby' (1947), was a workmanlike adaptation of Dickens that paled beside David Lean's two masterpieces. 
As at the GPO, Cavalcanti's significance at Ealing extended far beyond the films he himself directed; the character of the studio in its most famous manifestation was as much his creation as Balcon's. Several members of the unit followed him to Ealing, notably Harry Watt and Robert Hamer, and he acted as mentor to other young recruits such as Charles Crichton, Charles Frend, and the cinematographer Douglas Slocombe. His influence on Ealing's wartime output was crucial: the switch from the stilted, stagey films produced early in the war to gritty, realist works such as 'Next of Kin' and 'San Demetrio London' owed much to his inspiration. Monia Danischewsky, Ealing's publicity officer turned producer, wrote 'If Mick [Balcon] was the father figure, Cavalcanti was the Nanny who brought us up... a natural if inarticulate teacher' (Danischewsky, 134). At moments of excitement, Cavalcanti's strong Brazilian accent and fractured syntax could run wild; on one occasion, accused of underlighting a scene, he retorted, 'I 'ave been making films in France for years and years when nobody could see nothing and everybody was delighted' (ibid.). 
Balcon, generous with opportunities, was frugal with money, and in 1946 Cavalcanti left Ealing, hoping for richer pickings as a freelance film-maker. His first independent film, 'They Made me a Fugitive' (1947), was a remarkably tough crime drama about a bored former serviceman (Trevor Howard) drawn into the Soho gang world, a rare example of British 'film noir'. But his next two films -- 'The First Gentleman' (1947), a costume drama about the prince regent, and another crime drama, 'For them that Trespass' (1948) -- did poorly. When a deal with the Rank Organisation fell through in 1950, Cavalcanti accepted an invitation from Brazil to lecture at the Museum of Modern Art in Sao Paulo. 
There followed what Cavalcanti called 'an unhappy adventure' (Sussex, 'Cavalcanti', 211). Hoping to create his native country's first film industry, he became production chief of the newly formed Vera Cruz film company. But he encountered hostility and obstruction on all sides, not least from powerful Hollywood interests who whispered that he was a communist. He struggled on for four years, directing three films -- of which the best was 'O canto de mar' ('The Song of the Sea', 1954), a compassionate study of impoverished peasants -- before giving up and returning to Europe. From then on Cavalcanti worked as a peripatetic film-maker in Austria, East Germany, Romania, Britain, Israel, and France. His films included: a Brecht adaptation, 'Herr Puntila und sein Knecht Matti' (1955), which Brecht called the only faithful version of his work ever filmed; a children's film in Britain, 'The Monster of Highgate Pond' (1960); and 'Thus Spake Theodor Herzl' (1967), a tribute to the founder of Israel. In his later years Cavalcanti settled in Paris, where he directed for television and the stage. He died there, at a clinic in rue de Passy, from a cardiac seizure on 23 August 1982. 


@@@@@


doc= 40896


Moriarty, Cecil Charles Hudson (1877-1958), police officer, was born at Tralee, co. Kerry, on 28 January 1877, the son of Thomas Alexander Moriarty, rector of Millstreet, co. Cork, in the then disestablished Church of Ireland, and his wife, Rosa, 'nee' Hickson. He was a grandson of Thomas Moriarty, dean of Ardfert, co. Kerry. He graduated BA (senior moderator in history, law, and political economy) at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1898, winning the Large gold medal. He entered the Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC) in 1899, coming first in the open examination for cadetships and officer entry. A rugby football forward, he represented Ireland against Wales at Cardiff in March 1899, when Ireland won the triple crown. He also reputedly played hockey to a good standard. On 25 April 1906 he married, at Kensington, London, Muriel Una (1881/2-1965), elder daughter of George Tilson Shaen-Carter JP, of Belmullet, co. Mayo. There were three daughters of the marriage. 
Moriarty's RIC career followed the customary pattern of the officer recruit. He became a first-class district inspector in 1902, serving variously in Derry, co. Mayo, co. Longford, co. Clare, and Queen's county, and in 1912 gained the degree of LLB from Trinity College, Dublin. In 1913 he was called to work at RIC headquarters. 
In 1918 Moriarty was among eighty applicants for the newly established and sole post of assistant chief constable of the Birmingham city force, one of the larger English borough forces of the day but still not quite one-fifth the size of the RIC. He was one of two RIC officers among the final five candidates, the other three being military officers. Moriarty was successful and was appointed in June 1918, a particularly warm testimonial about his qualities from the RIC's inspector-general having been sent to Birmingham's chief constable, Charles Rafter (also formerly of the RIC). The decision to create the post of assistant chief constable was taken as part of a watch committee review of the organization of the force's headquarters and was supported and possibly prompted, local legend has it, by the inspector of constabulary, though not with any enthusiasm on the part of the chief constable, who had ruled alone since his appointment in 1899. 
Circumstances after the First World War delivered to Moriarty an important responsibility for police training for which he proved especially well suited, and a responsibility moreover that had to be exercised in the new environment created by the 'Police Act' 1919. At that time there were still more than 200 forces in England and Wales. Some of them were very small and few aspired to offer more than the most rudimentary training for their recruits. Often officers were in effect briefly apprenticed to older, more experienced constables, and given some class instruction based on the force's standing orders before being released to sink or swim on their own beats. The 'Police Act' 1919 created more standard conditions of employment, including promotion and discipline, which moved the forces in the direction of a national police service, albeit still well short of becoming a national police force. 
In Birmingham an authorized strength of 1431 had declined to 853 effectives by 1918 as a result of the manpower demands of the war (disregarding further temporary reductions, as officers were used even to bring in the harvests). Not only was it necessary to train recruits to fill the gaps resulting from the war and a later increase in the size of the Birmingham force's establishment to 1586 in 1921, but Birmingham's training facilities in Digbeth (later expanded under Moriarty) also gave Birmingham the capacity to train the officers of other forces, including some from abroad. By 1939, 3710 officers from 77 different English and Welsh forces had passed through Digbeth. 
Partly perhaps because of his background in the RIC, whose strength of 10,000 was second only to that of the Metropolitan Police and which had acquired more sophisticated management than the run of forces in England and Wales, Moriarty was quick to understand what the changes of 1919 implied for the heightened professional ethic of the police. He was the guiding force behind the development of an intensive training curriculum at Digbeth, both at recruit and other, continuing, levels. The system not only paid attention to the specific police knowledge that officers needed but strove also to raise the level of general educational attainment of the men, most of whom had only an elementary education up to the age of thirteen. He insisted that the post-war legislation meant that the police was to be regarded as a profession and required commensurate training. 
Moriarty explained his philosophy and practice in detailed articles in 1929 in the inaugural volume of the 'Police Journal' and in the more popular weekly 'Police Review'. However, his most significant and lasting contribution to police training and professionalization lay in his publication in the same year of 'Police Law: an Arrangement of Law and Regulations for the Use of Police Officers'. While the development of modern policing had been accompanied by various attempts at primers for policemen, none had been so ambitious or thorough. Moriarty would have been familiar with his predecessors: a former RIC inspector-general, Andrew Reed, had produced 'The Irish Constable's Guide' in the 1880s and Howard Vincent, the first director of criminal investigation at Scotland Yard, was responsible for the long-running 'Police Code' from 1881. Both were summary, limited, and to an extent hortatory manuals of conduct, arranged alphabetically. There were also more localized initiatives based essentially on the experience of particular forces, in London reliant on internal publications like 'Duty Hints' (1907), which related to the Metropolitan Police's 'General Orders' and 'Instruction Book'. 
Moriarty's 'Police Law' was instantly recognized as a classic. In a full-page article in the 'Police Review' F. J. O. Coddington, a barrister, writer on police law, and later stipendiary magistrate in Bradford, had no doubt: 'This book will at once take rank as the standard textbook for the education of the Policeman.' It drew on and generalized for England and Wales the experience of the Birmingham training regime in the context of the post-war police service, both to assist with training and to underpin the national police promotion system. In 1930 Moriarty followed up 'Police Law' with 'Police Procedure and Administration', a work directed more towards explaining the historical and legal background to the functions of the service than to setting out the criminal law itself. 'Questions and Answers on Police Duties' appeared in 1935. The final editions of all the works for which Moriarty was personally responsible -- including the fourteenth edition of 'Police Law' -- were published in 1954. By then Moriarty had expanded and deepened 'Police Law' and thereafter the editorship was taken over by successive chief constables until the book's last, twenty-fourth edition in 1981. For over fifty years 'Moriarty' (as 'Police Law' became known) was a staple of recruit training in the national system of district training centres set up after the Second World War, of which Digbeth had been a precursor. 
Moriarty himself stayed at Birmingham, becoming chief constable in 1935 on the death (at the age of seventy-five) of his predecessor. He oversaw the expansion of the force and its facilities, and the introduction of a continuous duty system where his predecessor had adamantly favoured a split-shift system hated by the men. Moriarty also played important roles nationally. He was involved in the re-establishment of the Police Mutual Assurance Association on a sound footing as the Police Mutual Assurance Society after the crisis of 1920-21, continuing as a trustee and later as a vice-president. He was the sole member not of chief-constable rank who was appointed to the ground-breaking Dixon committee on detective work and procedure, which was appointed in 1933 and reported in 1939. It led among other things to the establishment in Birmingham of one of the two national detective training schools outside London. The records show Moriarty taking a full part in the committee's work, with a knowledge of the law more than equal to that of his chief-constable colleagues and always pressing for practical solutions to problems. 
Moriarty was appointed OBE in 1925, received the king's police medal in 1929, was advanced LLD (by Trinity College, Dublin) in 1932, and appointed CBE in 1938. Moriarty retired at the age of sixty-four in 1941, making way -- probably with a push from the watch committee -- for a much younger man to face up to the rigours of wartime policing. Continuing to update his books, he retired to Tenbury Wells, Worcestershire, where he died at his home, Albyns, Bromyard Road, on 7 April 1958. That none of Moriarty's works ever -- properly -- featured as prizes awarded to the best Birmingham performers in national promotion examinations is one thing. That nowhere in the records of the watch committee was his authorship of any of his publications ever mentioned or acknowledged seems quite another. 


@@@@@


doc= 40899


MacLean, Sorley (1911-1996), poet, was born on 26 October 1911 at Oscaig, Raasay, Inverness-shire, the second of the seven children of Malcolm MacLean (1880-1951), a tailor, and his wife, Christina (1886-1974), daughter of Sorley Nicolson of Braes, Skye, and his wife, Isobel. 
MacLean received his early education at Raasay primary school (1918-24) and then at Portree High School, on Skye (1924-9), where he had a very good grounding in such subjects as Latin (he became a great lover of Virgil) and French (including Corneille, Racine, Villon, and Verlaine). Much seventeenth- and eighteenth-century poetry in Gaelic was read, and he also took a great interest in English and history. 
However, as with many poets and other writers it was not what he was taught in school that influenced MacLean's work (though of course it was important); he was also greatly influenced by the historical evidence of the clearances, and communicated especially by oral tradition. He had been born into a family of traditional singers and pipers. The first great artistic impression on MacLean was made by his father's mother, who sang some of the very greatest of Gaelic songs. His father, too, had a fine voice and was very interested in Gaelic poetry. Other relatives were also good singers and his brother John was a player of pibroch. Thus the poet grew up in an environment that was rich with Gaelic culture of all kinds, particularly song. This had an immense influence. Indeed so great an impression did these songs have on MacLean that he later wrote: 'Even to this day, I sometimes think that if I had been a singer I would have written no verse, but perhaps if I had been a singer I would have tried to create original melodies' (MacLean, 9). These great songs of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries had for him, above all, intense passion -- of love and grief and hate and other emotions -- and they were a powerful influence. 
MacLean was brought up in the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland which, according to him, believed that 'not only were the secular arts dangerous vanities but also that the great bulk of humanity, and the great bulk of Free Presbyterians as well, were to spend an eternity of physical and mental torture' (MacLean, 10). The small number of the elect who could be saved made MacLean anti-elitist. In a letter to Douglas Young written in 1941 he stated: 'Perhaps my obsession with the 'cause' of the unhappy, the unsuccessful, the oppressed comes ultimately from this. I preferred the multitude of my friends who [were] certain to be 'lost' to those few who were to be saved. In fact there was no-one of my own family who on form showed any potentiality for salvation. I disliked many of the obvious 'elect' not because of their good fortune, but because most of them were unlovable people and I regarded their preoccupation with salvation much as I regard the careerist at present. (Whyte, 141)' Even so MacLean was influenced constructively by his Free Presbyterian background, admitting that he was 'very familiar with Seceder metaphysics and imagery and vocabulary' (ibid., 3). The theme of choice, with free will pitted against constricting circumstances, which generates much of the creative tension in MacLean's work, can perhaps be seen as a reflex of the religious debate about election. He was also ready to acknowledge his debt to the great Gaelic preachers within the Free Presbyterian tradition, like the Revd Ewen MacQueen, whose powerful rhetoric moved him. He also retained warm friendships with clergymen of different churches throughout his life. Although he is sometimes regarded as antipathetic to the church in the highlands his views need to be read carefully. His well-known poem 'Ban-ghaidheal' ('Highland woman'), in which he condemns Christ and his church for failing to address the oppression of highland women, weighed down by burdens in their creels and the demands of the rent, should not be taken as a blanket dismissal of the whole church in the highlands. It is a comment on the church's general lack of social conscience. MacLean's indictment foreshadows the critique at the heart of 'liberation theology' in Latin America, Africa, and the Third World in the second half of the twentieth century. 
From sixteen or so MacLean had been writing some verse in English and in Gaelic. Moreover from the age of twelve he had been 'an idealist democratic revolutionary' (MacLean, 9), fancying his future as a politician who would help to change the world. In his later teens 'a dichotomy' took him: 'my pure aesthetic idols of old Gaelic songs, and my humano-aesthetic idols of Blake and Shelley' (ibid., 10). His English verse became more influenced by Donne, Eliot, and Pound. Though he came from a thoroughly Gaelic environment it seemed economically sensible to study English. The great Herbert Grierson, who was doing so much to make Donne influential, was professor at Edinburgh University when MacLean began his studies there aged seventeen. 
In 1933 MacLean met James B. Caird, who introduced him to the poetry of Christopher Murray Grieve 
(known as Hugh MacDiarmid, 1892-1978)
. So overwhelmed was he by that poet's early lyrics that it almost destroyed his chance of writing poetry himself. MacDiarmid's work seemed to him to be 'the unattainable summit of the lyric, and the lyric is the summit of all poetry' (MacLean, 11). In it he found a combination of timeless and modern sensibility. MacDiarmid's 'A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle' also suggested to him the idea of a song medley with lyric peaks, an idea that would bear fruit later in his long poem 'An Cuilithionn' ('The Cuillin', 1939). Caird recalls discussions with MacLean that ranged over Greek, Latin, French, English, and Scottish poetry; he describes MacLean as passionate and eloquent when his interest was aroused. They were both devoted to MacDiarmid and to Yeats. At this time MacLean was becoming discontented with his own poems in English, feeling that they did not express his authentic self, and in 1932 he wrote a Gaelic poem, 'The Heron', which shows quite clearly that a new poetic power had entered Gaelic literature. This is the first work in his 'Collected Poems' (1989) and shows that he himself felt that it was here that he found his voice. It is a very modern poem, troubled in its thought but decisive in the expression of that thought. 
After four years at Edinburgh University, where he achieved a first-class honours degree in English, MacLean undertook a year of teacher training at Moray House College of Education, in Edinburgh. By 1934 he had met MacDiarmid, and the two men remained in close contact thereafter. Together with George Campbell Hay (1915-1984), MacLean and MacDiarmid formed part of a literary circle whose presiding genius was Douglas Young (1913-1973), himself a poet and a lecturer in Latin and Greek at several Scottish universities before his emigration to Canada and, later, the USA. Young's passionate commitment to Scottish nationalism and to a modern renaissance of Scottish verse encouraged all within the group: 'He cemented the relationships between Hugh MacDiarmid and Sorley MacLean' (Byrne, 3). 
MacLean's professional life was spent as a teacher, beginning at Portree High School, on Skye, in 1934 and ending at Plockton High School, Ross-shire, where he was headmaster until his retirement, in 1972. He could not be a 'professional poet' and wrote only when intensely moved to do so. His life in education, first as teacher, then principal teacher of English, and finally headmaster, prevented him, as he himself would say, from writing poetry for long periods. 
Though not published until 1943 the poems in 'Dain do Eimhir agus dain eile' ('Poems to Eimhir and Other Poems') were mostly written in the thirties. They are for the most part love poems set against the background of the Spanish Civil War. The Eimhir of the title is the name of the wife of the Ulster hero, Cu Chulainn, and it covers the identity of four young ladies who attracted MacLean's attention to varying degrees and who had a catalytic role in the creation of the poems. MacLean wrote: 'My mother's long illness in 1936, its recurrence in 1938, the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936, the progressive decline of my father's business in the Thirties... made these years for me years of difficult choice and the tension of these years confirmed self-expression in poetry not in action. (MacLean, 12)' Thus MacLean did not go to the Spanish Civil War, because he was needed to support his family. However, what comes across in 'Dain do Eimhir' is a conflict between private love and public duty: it seems that he did not go because of a passionate and, in historical terms, selfish love affair. In effect what we have here is the key book of Gaelic twentieth-century poetry in the same way as 'A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle' and Eliot's 'The Waste Land' are key texts in Scots and English, respectively. Many of the poems have a lovely musical quality, as one would expect from a poet who loved the great Gaelic songs of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, but this is at the same time infused with an urgent political content. It was unusual to find, in Gaelic, poetry that dealt so urgently with contemporary issues that lay outside the highlands, an issue that was in fact at the centre of history. MacLean had himself been dismissive of nineteenth-century Gaelic poetry: 'in the main, [it] is an expression of a somewhat romantic nostalgia for a hopelessly gone past rather than a realist examination of the change' (MacLean, 45). It had for the most part not faced the clearances directly. His own poetry in 'Dain do Eimhir' certainly has an urgent political tone. 
However, it is MacLean's love poetry that makes the greatest impact. Behind it is the influence of William Ross, the great eighteenth-century Gaelic love poet, and almost certainly of Yeats. The influence of Donne can perhaps be found in 'The Selling of a Soul'. In these poems there are references to the doomed miner of Spain fighting 'the brute and brigand at the head of Europe'. Sometimes, as in 'The Choice', the poet shows contempt for himself that he did not fight in Spain. There are references to Francis Cornford, Julian Bell, and Federico Garcia Lorca. 
From a Marxist standpoint there are attacks in the love poems on the bourgeoisie and on religion. A whole complex of ideas is brought together in a longish work, 'Prayer', which describes the agony of seeing Spain 'lost' while MacLean himself did nothing. Should he ask that his 'heart be purified' from the 'weakness' of his 'pure-white love' so that he could become as 'brave as Dmitrov or Connolly'? He calls his own life 'the death-like life' because he preferred 'a woman to crescent History'. He recognizes that his prayer is not sincere and that his spirit is not 'one-fold'. There are poems with metaphysical imagery and ones of surrealism. Such poetry was quite new in Gaelic, but these works were to be found alongside lovely lyrical poems like 'Under Sail'. All the love poems, however, resonate from a common centre and with the same intensity and personal rhythm. There is a mixture of the traditional and the new, as this Marxist highlander is remade by an existential experience. 

'An Cuilithionn' is the long poem that MacLean started in 1939. The idea for it had probably been generated by a reading of MacDiarmid's 'A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle'. He had left Portree High School in 1937 and gone to teach in Mull, and that island, with its desolation, had made him aware of the highland clearances. He was also obsessed with the approaching war and the idea that Nazism and fascism would conquer Europe. The poem stopped in late May or June 1939 and was not resumed until late October or November of that year; it was concluded in December. 
The 'Cuilithionn' are the Cuillin mountains of Skye, which in the poem become a symbol for a human ideal. The poem has much in it about the highland clearances, which are combined with the sufferings of Spain. In the poem MacLean was able to see, by means of Marxist theory, the clearances as part of a European capitalist aggrandizement. Other highland poets had been more naive and not equipped with that analysis. In this long poem MacLean attacks the bourgeoisie, and Scotland itself, among many other nations including England, France, and of course Germany. They are all part of the morass at the foot of the Cuillins -- the quagmire that has swallowed so many of the poor and oppressed. This morass even swallowed the French Revolution, and swallowed the heroism of Spain. The poet has no hope of ever ascending 'to the high hunting ground of the moorland'. He says that there is so much of the morass in his spirit that his 'courage has taken the grey hue'. It may be that this hatred of the self came about because he did not fight in the Spanish Civil War. 
Under the personification of Clio, the muse of history, there is a long catalogue of the sufferings of populations, beginning in Skye and spreading outwards to Ireland, England, Spain, France, Italy, Greece, Germany, India, and China. However, as well as mention of these sufferings there is mention of heroes who fought for freedom -- Connolly and Pearse, Wat Tyler and John Ball, Spartacus, Nehru and Gandhi, among others -- as well as writers such as Rousseau, Voltaire, and Cobbett. 
Two particular men stand out in the catalogue of the heroic. One is John MacLean, a man of his own clan of whom he felt very proud and to whom he dedicated a poem. John MacLean was a schoolmaster and member of the Social Democratic Federation. He believed passionately in workers' education. He was anti-militarist and was imprisoned four times between 1911 and 1921. He died at the age of forty-four. The other outstanding figure was Dmitrov, a Bulgarian communist who was arrested in 1933 on a trumped-up charge of having set fire to the Reichstag. He conducted his own defence, making a fool of Goering, his prosecutor. 

'An Cuilithionn' is not as fine a poem as 'A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle'. There is not enough variation of tone nor are there any of the comic passages and philosophic bravura with which MacDiarmid enlivened his poem. MacLean's best poetry has always been passionately lyrical, for he does not have the same interest in ideas as MacDiarmid. What we get from 'An Cuilithionn' is the passionate cry of a sensitive mind against deeply felt oppression. 
MacDiarmid and MacLean continued to encourage one another, MacLean by providing translations of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Gaelic verse for MacDiarmid's 'Golden Treasury of Scottish Verse' (1940) and MacDiarmid by saluting and affirming MacLean's verse when his first volume, 'Seventeen Poems for Sixpence', produced in collaboration with the poet Robert Garioch, who hand-printed it, was published in 1940. MacDiarmid found MacLean's support invaluable in his ongoing crusade against parochialism and Anglocentrism. 
MacLean volunteered for the army in September 1939 but, having learned that he would lose his teaching salary, he waited for conscription, which came in September 1940, when he was enlisted into the signal corps. In the meantime he taught evacuees at Hawick between October 1939 and June 1940. His army training took place at Catterick Camp, Yorkshire, and from there he corresponded with Young on the preparation of 'Dain do Eimhir' for publication. Young typed and edited the drafts, checking every difficult point with MacLean. In December 1941 MacLean was sent to Egypt on active service. He wrote to MacDiarmid: 'My fear and hatred of the Nazis [is] even more than my hatred of the English Empire... I support the British Empire because it is the weakest and therefore not as great a threat to Europe and the rest of the world as a German victory. (Ross and Hendry, 27)' He served in north Africa and was wounded three times. The last time was in 1942, during the battle of El Alamein. He was seriously injured when a land mine exploded near him, shattering many of the bones in his feet and heels. The following nine months he spent in military hospitals, until his discharge from Raigmore Hospital, Inverness, in August 1943. For many years parts of 'An Cuilithionn' were published here and there in magazines and journals. When MacLean was invalided out of the army he says that there was some talk of publishing it in full, but production was delayed until 'the behaviour of the Russian government to the Polish insurrection in 1944 made me politically as well as aesthetically disgusted with most of it' (S. MacLean, 'Collected Poems', 1989, 63). 
It seems that MacLean lost his faith in the USSR as the political saviour of the working classes, and in 1946 he was writing to MacDiarmid that he was 'utterly at sea in politics these days, having for the past year and a half, come to the conclusion that the Communist Party is no use for me' and that he had gone back to 'social democracy and swithering between Labour and S.N.P' (Ross and Hendry, 28). 
In 1944 he met (Catherine) Renee Stewart Cameron ('b'. 1920), whom he married on 24 July 1946. They had three daughters: Ishbel, Catriona, and Mary. 
Six poems from the war period are to be found in MacLean's 'Collected Poems'. 'Going Westwards' shows his general attitude to the war and the enemy. However, he says there is no avoidance of the struggle and he reflects in the last verse on his own heroic ancestors. 'Heroes' is an interesting poem in which he describes an Englishman who fought with him in Egypt. Unlike the handsome highland chiefs commemorated in Gaelic poetry this is: '
a poor little chap with chubby cheeks 

and knees grinding each other, 

pimply unattractive face. 

' Nevertheless this is 'a lion against the breast of battle'. Though he was killed while firing into the German tanks he did not receive any medals. One of the most powerful of the war poems is 'Death Valley', where the poet finds a dead soldier: '
a boy with his forelock down about his cheek 

and his face slate-grey. 

' As he observes the 'flies about grey corpses' he wonders about the 'right and joy' that this German got from his 'Fuhrer' and whether the boy had in his lifetime abused the Jews or communists. In 'Autumn Day' there is an interesting reference to the Free Presbyterian doctrine of the elect. Six men are killed beside MacLean quite suddenly. He concludes: '
One Election took them 

and did not take me, 

without asking us 

which was better or worse. 

' Of MacLean's other poems one might single out the lovely 'The Woods of Raasay', in some ways one of his most traditional pieces, with its many adjectives, such as one finds for instance in the great eighteenth-century poem 'Ben Dorain', by Duncan Ban Macintyre. However, though 'The Woods of Raasay' has a lovely freshness it is also shot through with sexual imagery, disturbances, and anguished reflections on love. Another poem, 'Hallaig', about one of the cleared townships in Raasay, may be his best single poem. The tone is quiet and eerie, elegiac and gentle. He sees the dead people in the shape of a wood going up beside the stream. He writes of the young girls going to church as they did when they were alive. But now it is a 'Sabbath of the dead'. It is a heart-breaking poetic vision in which MacLean reaches the very heart of the highland experience of desolation and lost community and beauty, Hallaig's ghostly history and its suffering. And yet it is also a resurrection. 
Two of MacLean's poems about Ireland are worth mentioning: first, 'The National Museum of Ireland', a poem about the great Irish hero Connolly, on whose shirt the poet sees 'the rusty red spot of blood'. Connolly is the hero 'who is dearest to me of them all'. In the other poem, 'At Yeats' Grave', MacLean says that 'courage and beauty had their flagpoles through your side'. Another fine poem is his elegy on his brother Calum (1915-1960), who died of cancer and by whose bravery in enduring the disease MacLean was greatly struck. Calum was a very distinguished folklorist who had done a spectacular thing, being converted to Catholicism from Free Presbyterianism. MacLean writes: '
You dearly bought the pride 

that we bought in your death. 

' MacLean also spent a long time on the poem 'The Cave of Gold'. Apart from 'The Woods of Raasay' all these poems were written during that period, one of which is called 'Screapadal'. Screapadal is a deserted township in the north of Raasay, which like Hallaig was cleared of its people. Screapadal is again threatened, this time by a new enemy, a submarine off the sound of Skye. The poet imagines the 'sudden holocaust' and the 'poisonous bracken'. 

'Ris a' bhruthaich' ('Up the brae') is subtitled 'The criticism and prose writings of Sorley MacLean'. It consists of occasional papers and articles, and three Gaelic short stories, and was published in 1985. The papers were given to the Gaelic Society of Inverness and published in their 'Transactions'. Other criticism and articles written by MacLean between 1934 and 1976 were published in magazines such as 'Scottish Art and Letters', 'Gairm', and 'Chapman'. MacLean's criticism was of foundational importance in the Gaelic context, since very little in the way of properly critical analysis of Gaelic literature had been attempted previously. Much of what existed tended to summarize and to affirm the literature, often in a romantic vein. A critical engagement that assessed the weaknesses as well as the strengths of the material was hardly known; Gaelic scholars of the time tended to be more concerned with language than literature. MacLean was not, however, alone in reacting against the prevailing shallowness and the worship of romantic idols. MacDiarmid had reacted in a similar manner to the romantic reconstructions of Marjory Kennedy Fraser in the 1920s. A Lewisman, Murdo Murray (1890-1964), also began to assess nineteenth-century Gaelic literature in a critical light at much the same time as MacLean, and independently of him. Both MacLean and Murray reacted against the type of romanticism found in the songs and verse of Neil MacLeod and other nineteenth-century sentimentalists, and both wrote critical essays that rehabilitated the verse of Mary MacPherson 
(Mairi Mhor nan Oran; 1821-1898)
, the poet of the highland land agitation of the 1870s and 1880s. MacPherson's verbosity and unvarnished realism offended the romantic practitioners of the late nineteenth century and the earlier twentieth century, including MacLean's maternal uncle Alexander Nicolson, who dismissed her verse on Skye as a 'glorified tourist guide'. 
MacLean, like MacDiarmid, attacked the 'Celtic twilight' idea, and much of his criticism was in praise of the great sixteenth- and seventeenth-century songs. The best Gaelic poetry, MacLean pointed out, is hard and clear and objective: 'Great poetry may cry in despair for one thing that exists or that it would like to exist, but it never assumes the existence of something which it knows perfectly well doesn't exist' (MacLean, 17). Again and again in the best Gaelic poetry he showed either the existence of real passion or authentic detail as well as sharp visual imagery. However, he found nineteenth-century poetry 'flabby and anaemic: it lacks power, gusto, spontaneity, joie de vivre' (ibid., 57). He wrote a seminal paper, 'The poetry of the clearances', and he found with some notable exceptions that such poetry suffers from 'intellectual weakness' (ibid., 61). To some extent MacLean overstated his case, and his criticism has helped to darken the pall that still hangs over nineteenth-century Gaelic verse. Nevertheless his analysis demonstrated some of the real strengths of the period, displayed notably in the work of John Smith of Lewis, Mary MacPherson of Skye, and William Livingston of Islay. All three poets had voiced disapproval of the 'status quo' of their own time, and to an extent MacLean's affirmation of their political robustness echoed the sentiments of Hugh MacDiarmid, although it also reflected his admiration for the stand of highland crofters against landlordism in the 1870s and 1880s and the radical socialism that had shaped his own world view in the 1930s. Moving beyond the Gaelic world, MacLean sometimes compared Gaelic poets to English ones. Thus, while Wordsworth infected nature with philosophy, Duncan Ban Macintyre had physical exactness. Similarly he preferred the eighteenth-century love poet William Ross to Keats. Here too what now appears to be a deliberate and probably over-argued attempt to rescue Gaelic literature from the thrall of English perspectives can be detected, reminiscent of MacDiarmid's campaign. Nevertheless MacLean's essays provided the first consistent body of modern analytical writing that took Gaelic literature seriously and applied critical yardsticks to it. There is therefore a clear parallel between his work as a poet who brought Gaelic verse firmly into the twentieth century and as a critic who laid new foundations for Gaelic literary criticism. 
Though by their occasional nature these essays tend to be repetitive they are valuable in that they show quite clearly MacLean's grasp of the strengths and weaknesses of Gaelic poetry, and the prolific examples he quotes undoubtedly strengthen his case. Also, to him, the visual and audible were very important, as was 'the great lyrical cry' that he found time and again in the passionate songs that he admired. (It is interesting, for instance, that in connection with the Spanish Civil War his favourite poem was Cornford's 'Heart of the Heartless World', a poignant love lyric, rather than, for example, anything by Auden.) In their enthusiasms and clear-headedness these essays show quite clearly the influences on MacLean's poetry. 
In appearance Sorley MacLean was tall and well-built. Indeed he himself says in his poem 'Going Westwards': '
And be what was as it was, 

I am of the big men of Braes, 

of the heroic Raasay Macleods. 

' In his youth he played much shinty and was a university blue. He restarted shinty in his period as headmaster at Plockton High School and was a highly competitive instructor to the pupils. He writes too of rowing when he was young and having political arguments with an aunt as he rowed the boat. Later the Cuillins seduced him from the sea. 
MacLean admired heroism, and was very proud of his clan and of Gaelic culture, about which he was very knowledgeable. He had a very strong memory and was extremely interested in genealogy. He was friendly and approachable, very much appreciated wit in others, and had a highly developed sense of humour, which was never revealed in his writing. The fact was that as he became older he sometimes fell asleep in company. He did this once, late at night, in the company of fellow poet Norman MacCaig, and to excuse himself he said 'he had now got to the stage that he could not guarantee keeping awake, even if he had the company of Voltaire on one side, and Helen of Troy on the other' (private information). One could imagine him passionate in argument in his youth, one whom the ills of the world would not let rest. 
MacLean was in great demand as a reader of his poetry from the time that he retired from teaching, in 1972. He read often in Scotland, England, Wales, Ireland, and in Europe. His wife, Renee, accompanied him to many of his readings. He read with passion, though it often seemed that he did not regard his translations very highly in comparison with the original poems. Often in Ireland, MacLean was venerated there as a great Celtic poet. In 1973 he made an album recording of a selection of his poems, 'Barran agus Asbhuain', while acting (to 1975) as creative writer in residence at Edinburgh University. 
MacLean's final 'Collected Poems' (1989) contains 313 pages composed of Gaelic poems with English translations. His output therefore is not large; he was one of those poets who wrote only under compulsion. As a teacher he was highly conscientious, and it was perhaps because of this that he wrote so little in his latter years. He received many honours, including honorary degrees from eight universities as well as prestigious prizes, especially the queen's medal for poetry. He was also made a freeman of Skye and Lochalsh. 'Somhairle: dain is deilbh: a Celebration on the 80th Birthday of Sorley MacLean' was published in 1991. Yet in spite of all this recognition he was rooted in Skye. It inspired much of the subject matter and the symbolism of his poetry, and it is this rootedness that gave his work most of its authenticity. 
Sorley MacLean died on 24 November 1996 at Raigmore Hospital, Inverness, of a stroke, and was buried on 28 November at Portree, on the Isle of Skye. By the time of his death his reputation went far beyond Scotland. Increasing interest in his work is evidenced by the numerous articles and critical assessments in academic journals and studies of Scottish and Gaelic literature. A corrected edition of 'From Wood to Ridge', containing both English and Gaelic versions of the poems, was published in 1999. In 2002 Christopher Whyte reconstructed the creation of 'Dain do Eimhir' as a sequence of sixty-one poems, 'Somhairle MacGill-Eain'. He examines in detail the emotional, intellectual, and contextual processes that determined its shape, and he provides many insights into the pressures (and not least the poet's own reservations) that affected its presentation in different collections and editions. Even in the first edition, of 1943, twelve poems were missing from the original sequence, and in Whyte's reconstruction one (no. 7) is still lacking. MacLean's personal view of the sequence was at times despairing, as he indicated to Young, and he himself was prepared to publish only certain parts of it. Latterly he took an aversion to it, and denied as lately as 1989 that it was 'really a sequence' (Whyte, 1). It is interesting to consider whether MacLean would have been content with the recreation and restoration of the sequence and the 'original' forms of the texts. Whatever the poet's personal inhibitions it is beyond doubt that 'Dain do Eimhir' represents a remarkable literary achievement. The edition is a major scholarly contribution to the understanding of MacLean's mind and of the literary world in which he operated in the 1930s and 1940s. 


@@@@@


doc= 40902


Long, Margaret Gabrielle Vere (1885-1952), writer, was born Margaret Gabrielle Vere Campbell on 1 November 1885 at Hayling Island, Hampshire, the second of three daughters (the first died very young) of Vere Douglas Campbell and Josephine Elisabeth Bowen Ellis, writer and daughter of a Moravian clergyman. The poverty, deprivation, verbal denigration, and emotional abuse she experienced in youth are detailed in her autobiographical 'The Debate Continues' (1939). Her parents separated when she was four. Her mother's compromised status as a woman living apart from her husband, her temperament, and her connections to the theatre resulted in a bohemian lifestyle which Margaret despised. Food was often scarce and frequent moves occurred to avoid paying bills. Moreover, the disparaging comparison of Margaret to her attractive and frivolous younger sister undermined her confidence, causing her to withdraw to a life of the mind. 
Margaret was not sent to school but was taught to read and write at home. She voraciously accumulated knowledge, developed her artistic abilities, and by early adolescence had taught herself to read French, Italian, and a bit of Latin. Her mother wanted to send her to the Royal College of Art in South Kensington, but she failed the entrance examination. A second try at formal education was an equally dismal experience. At the Slade School of Fine Art she was isolated from other students by her poverty, often went the entire day without food, and failed the first exam. She worked for a time as a research assistant at the British Museum. Her mother then sent her to Paris to study art but did not send money for board or school fees. Isolated from others because of her poverty, she turned to writing for consolation. After rejection by eleven publishers, the eventual success of 'The Viper of Milan' (1906), a historical fantasy, created further bitterness on the part of her mother, who had long and vainly sought literary fame herself. The book launched a writing career that helped support Margaret's family, and a new identity as Marjorie Bowen. 
On 11 October 1912 Bowen married Zeffirino Emilio Costanzo (1882/3-1916), an employee in an engineering and mining company. Although the marriage offered a socially acceptable escape from the turmoil of life with her mother and sister, it was fraught with difficulty. Bowen continued to send money to her mother and sister, leaving herself and her husband poorly off. They settled for a time in Tuscany before returning to England at the outbreak of the First World War. In Kent her husband embarked on a disastrous venture as a poultry farmer, and their first child, a daughter, died of meningitis at five months. Costanzo, who was suffering from tuberculosis, returned to Italy leaving Bowen pregnant with their second child. She was forced to leave her infant son in England while she nursed her ailing husband in Italy. Bowen fictionalized this episode of her life in 'Stinging Nettles' (1923). After Costanzo's death in 1916 she had a doomed affair with her husband's physician and returned to England. On 4 December 1917 she married Arthur Leonard Long ('b'. 1885/6), an army officer. They had two sons, and in this relationship she seems finally to have achieved the domestic stability she longed for. 
During the decade since 'The Viper of Milan' Marjorie Bowen had been remarkably prolific, publishing about twenty books, including the supernatural gothic novel 'Black Magic: a Tale of the Rise and Fall of the Antichrist' (1909), and numerous historical romances such as 'A Knight of Spain' (1913). Later she turned her hand to novels and short stories with modern situations such as 'Stinging Nettles' and 'The Pagoda' (1927), coinciding with the general shift away from the swashbuckling romance. She began a Renaissance trilogy in the 1920s which comprised 'The Golden Roof' (1928), 'The Triumphant Beast' (1934), and 'Trumpets at Rome' (1936), and a further trilogy in the 1930s of the spiritual life of seventeenth-century England, 'God and the Wedding Dress' (1938) 'Mr. Tyler's Saints' (1939), and 'The Circle in the Water' (1939). In 1920 she adopted the pseudonym George Preedy to write more historical novels, including the best-seller 'General Crack' (1928), made into a film starring John Barrymore in 1929; several biographies, such as 'This Shining Woman' (1937); a life of Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin; and drama. She used pseudonyms throughout her life, she said, in order to demarcate her separate creative personalities. In 1932 she began to use the name Joseph Shearing for reconstructions of nineteenth-century crimes starting with 'Forget-me-Not' (1932), based on the murder of the duchesse de Praslin, and followed by treatment of the Maybrick poisoning in 'Airing in a Closed Carriage' (1943). As Joseph Shearing she was similarly prolific and successful; her identity was not revealed until 1942. As John Winch and Robert Paye she wrote children's literature, and as Margaret Campbell her candid autobiography 'The Debate Continues: being the Autobiography of Marjorie Bowen' (1939). In 'Ethics in Modern Art' (1939) she reflected on the social function of art and the place of women in the literary arena. 
Bowen died in St Charles Hospital, Kensington, London, on 23 December 1952 of haemorrhage due to a fractured skull, the result of a fall at her home at 34 Holland Park, Kensington; her husband survived her. She was cremated on 31 December at Putney Vale, London. 
While Bowen believed she necessarily sacrificed her art to write so prolifically in order to earn a living, she has had her share of supporters who believe she should be taken seriously as a literary writer. Edward Wagenknecht has noted that she was a superb storyteller, presenting rich, accurate, and well-researched background for her historical works he ranked her with Wilkie Collins for her skill in the creation of atmosphere. While Wagenknecht believed she was one of the best writers of stories of the supernatural, Hugh Walpole proclaimed her the most important historical novelist of her generation. Befriended by Mark Twain, she dedicated one of her novels to him. Graham Greene, in 'The Lost Childhood' (1951), credited a reading of 'The Viper of Milan' when he was fourteen with the awakening of his writing career. 


@@@@@


doc= 40904


Wardley, Jane (fl. 1747-1770), a founder of the Shakers, is an elusive figure, as the dates of her birth, marriage, and death, and the names of her parents are unknown. She was a tailor who lived with her husband, James Wardley, also a tailor, in Bolton in the 1740s. In 1747 the Wardleys founded a group of religious enthusiasts influenced by Quakerism, Methodism, and the French prophets. The sect combined fervent millennial theology with bodily manifestations of spiritual ecstasy described by an observer in 1769 as gradually accelerated 'trembling, shaking and screeching... at the same time their features are not distinguishable by reason of the quick motion of their heads' (Morse, 3). According to members of the group they might meditate silently until 'they were seized with a mighty trembling' or 'singing, shouting, and leaping for joy', sometimes 'swiftly passing and repassing each other, like clouds agitated with a mighty wind' (Green and Wells, 5). Outsiders derisively termed them 'Shaking Quakers' or 'Shakers'. Jane Wardley, or 'Mother Jane', was acknowledged as the more spiritually gifted of the couple. She encouraged her followers to practise public confession of sin, and celibacy, or at least celibacy within marriage. 
The Wardleys devoted themselves to the nurture of their band of believers, frequently worshipping several times a day. The sect met first in Bolton and later in Manchester, Maretown, and other locations in Lancashire and Cheshire. At the invitation of one of their followers, a bricklayer named John Townley, the Wardleys moved into his spacious home on Cannon Street in Manchester. In 1758 the thirty-member Shaker group was joined by a 22-year-old woman, Ann Lee (1736-1784). At some time in 1766 Ann Lee approached Mother Jane with a problem: the deaths of her four children bore out her conviction that sexual intercourse was always sinful. Jane Wardley reportedly told Ann Lee 'James and I lodge together: but we do not touch each other any more than two babes. You may return home and do likewise' ('Testimonies', 38). 
Jane Wardley saw the doctrinal ground of Shakerism shift after Ann Lee was released from a prison stay in 1770. While imprisoned Ann Lee had experienced a vision outlining the centrality of celibacy to Shaker theology. After that time the Wardleys deferred to the spiritual leadership of Ann Lee and saw their adherents drift away, discouraged by Lee's more rigorous insistence on public confession and celibacy. Ann Lee and eight followers emigrated to America in 1774, and most remaining English Shakers abandoned the faith, including the Wardleys' patron, John Townley. According to the nineteenth-century historian William Axon the Wardleys moved into an almshouse and died there, at unknown dates. Jane Wardley certainly died before Ann Lee's own death in 1784 because Ann Lee told her American followers 'I have seen Jane in the world of spirits, praising God in the dance' (Evans, 154). By the time the Shaker apostate Thomas Brown published a history of the Shakers in 1812 Jane Wardley was viewed by the Shakers as a female John the Baptist, whose role was 'to prepare the way for the second appearing of Christ, in the order of the female [Ann Lee]' (Brown, 312). 


@@@@@


doc= 40906


Muir, John (1838-1914), naturalist and conservationist, was born in Dunbar, East Lothian, Scotland, on 21 April 1838 to Daniel Muir (1804-1885) and his second wife, Anne Gilrye Muir (1813-1896). John was the third child (of eight) and first son of this deeply religious, poorly educated shopkeeper and grain dealer of longtime Scottish descent. Daniel Muir, a stern Calvinist and lay preacher, eventually abandoned both the Presbyterian and Episcopalian churches to join the yet more zealous Campbellites (later known as the Disciples, or Churches, of Christ), a denomination of scriptural literalists founded primarily in America by Thomas and Alexander Campbell. Returning to Scotland in the famine-plagued 1840s, the Campbells (father and son) persuaded Muir and other followers to emigrate with them back across the Atlantic, cheap land and religious freedom being the main attractions. 
Daniel Muir and his three older children -- the others would come later -- left Dunbar by rail on 19 February 1849 to sail under abject conditions on an overcrowded boat from Glasgow to New York, a difficult voyage requiring more than six weeks. During it Muir was persuaded to settle in Wisconsin, USA, rather than Ontario (a British colony). From New York, therefore, the Muirs continued up the Hudson River to Albany, through the Erie Canal to Buffalo, and across the Great Lakes to Milwaukee -- still very much a frontier town, as Wisconsin had achieved statehood only the year before. 
John Muir, then only eleven, grew to adulthood as a tall, wiry manual labourer on farms his father bought near Portage, some 35 miles north of the state capital at Madison. Like Daniel Muir's other children, John was required to memorize 'Bible' verses daily but forbidden to read anything not having practical or religious merit. When he was fifteen two neighbouring boys surreptitiously introduced him to poetry. Quietly defying Daniel and his whip, John began to read books of all kinds available in their homes. He developed an aptitude for creating mechanical devices and, under his mother's influence, a keen interest in nature. 
In 1860, now of age, John took some of his inventions to the state fair at Madison and, despite his relative lack of formal education (he seems to have attended the grammar school in Dunbar and had further schooling in Wisconsin), was admitted to the recently founded University of Wisconsin, which had a faculty of five. During the two years of his studies, beginning in 1861, Muir was introduced to science by Dr Ezra Slocum Carr, formerly of Massachusetts, and to the value-centred views of nature in the writings of William Wordsworth, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Henry David Thoreau. Carr's wife, Jeanne, became a nurturing adviser and lifelong friend. Muir found no conflict between the geology of Charles Lyell and Louis Agassiz now being taught to him and the indwelling human divinity of the transcendentalists. But he quickly discarded the scriptural literalism and punitive fundamentalism of his father. 
After several years in Canada, where he had gone to avoid the American Civil War of 1861-5, Muir found employment in a machine shop at Indianapolis. He lost the use of his right eye due to an accident and was for a time blind in both, but sight in the left gradually returned. During his period of darkness and recovery, Muir experienced a further conversion, abandoning (as he later wrote) all mechanical inventions in favour of the inventions of God. 
Attempting in 1867 to emulate Alexander von Humboldt (whose comprehensive writings about natural history had become a major influence), Muir walked 1000 miles through the woods from Indianapolis to the Gulf of Mexico, keeping a journal in the manner of Emerson and Thoreau. He had hoped to go to South America, like Humboldt, but got no closer than Cuba. Instead, Muir crossed Panama and went on by ship to San Francisco, near where the Carrs were now living. He then found employment in the foothills of the Sierra Nevada for a time, working as a shepherd. 
From 1869 to 1873 Muir lived in the scenically stunning and recently discovered Yosemite valley, which he explored thoroughly on foot. Finding everywhere traces of the huge but now vanished glaciers that he believed had carved it out of granite, Muir began to communicate his geological views to Mrs Carr by letter and at first hand to the numerous distinguished visitors she sent from the Bay Area to see him. One of these visitors was Therese Yelverton, a former countess escaping from the publicity of her sensational divorce. Her mediocre novel 'Zanita: a Tale of the Yo-Semite' (1872) includes a character who is unquestionably based on Muir. Professor Joseph Le Conte of the University of California (where Carr now also taught) was another visitor; after seeing the evidence for himself, he accepted almost all of Muir's ideas. Like Carr, Le Conte had studied geology under Louis Agassiz (Swiss advocate of the Ice Age) at Harvard. Emerson, making his only journey west from Massachusetts, was a further distinguished visitor; he recognized in Muir a kindred spirit. Yet another was Professor John Daniel Runkle, president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who listened to Muir expound the geological origins of Yosemite valley for five days and was responsible for promulgating his ideas among the east coast establishment. Agassiz himself corresponded with Muir and thought highly of his fieldwork. 
Muir's insistence that Yosemite valley was almost entirely the product of slow glacial erosion directly contradicted a previously published theory by the California state geologist and Harvard professor Josiah D. Whitney, who believed that Yosemite had been created suddenly, by a tectonic cataclysm. Muir's unorthodox ideas were presented most fully in the 'Overland Monthly', a San Francisco periodical in which several of his shorter pieces had previously appeared. The extremely dichotomized Muir-Whitney dispute continued to influence geological analyses of Yosemite well into the twentieth century. 
Though geology was uniquely important to him, as a protracted record of divine creation, Muir also delighted in botany and pursued it with nearly equal fervour. He knew plants very well, described them accurately, and supplied numerous specimens to professional classifiers; at least three species were named for him. Besides Le Conte, he was closely associated with the noted American botanists Asa Gray and John Torrey, as well as with Charles Darwin's close friend Sir Joseph Hooker, president of the Royal Society of London. Like Emerson, Gray, Torrey, and Hooker all came to California on the recently completed transcontinental railroad and were guided round the Sierra Nevada by Muir. Though numerous plant species attracted him, none aroused Muir's admiration so thoroughly as the giant redwoods, some of them more than 2000 years old, that he did much to preserve. 
From 1868 to 1875 Muir was an accomplished mountaineer, probably the best in the United States. Climbing, usually alone, with a minimum of equipment and food, he scaled one Sierra Nevada peak after another, including the highest, Mount Whitney. In 1875 he was trapped for four days atop Mount Shasta by a blizzard and suffered frostbite, permanently damaging his feet. Even so, he made the seventh recorded ascent of Mount Rainier (in Washington state) in 1888 at age fifty, and still climbed occasionally thereafter. 
By 1873, however, encouraged by Mrs Carr on the basis of his letters to her, Muir had begun to turn his attention to writing. For seven years he continued to spend his summers in the mountains but wintered regularly in Oakland or San Francisco, where he began to prepare manuscripts based on his summer excursions. A series of short pieces on his adventures, most extolling the beauty and spirituality of nature, appeared in local publications. In several of them he argued that still-pristine landscapes should be preserved for later generations as national parks, as Yellowstone (the only national park at that time) had been. Through his efforts other parks such as Yosemite, Sequoia, Kings Canyon, Mount Rainier, Grand Canyon, and Petrified Forest eventually came into being, and the idea of national parks spread worldwide. 
After marrying Louisa Strentzel (1847-1905) on 14 April 1880, at the age of forty-two, Muir settled down in Martinez, California, east of San Francisco, to manage a large fruit ranch belonging to his wife. The couple had two daughters. He continued his conservationist efforts, travelled widely, and visited Alaska (with its living glaciers) seven times. His major books, all written at Martinez from earlier journals and publications, were autobiographical, adventurous, and full of rhapsodic descriptions. They included 'The Mountains of California' (1894), 'Our National Parks' (1901), 'Stikeen' (1909; an Alaskan dog story), 'My First Summer in the Sierra' (1911), 'The Yosemite' (1912), and 'The Story of my Boyhood and Youth' (1913). 'Travels in Alaska' (1915), 'A Thousand-Mile Walk to the Gulf' (1916), 'The Cruise of the 'Corwin'' (1917; to Alaska), and 'Steep Trails' (1918) were posthumous, with further collections since. 
In 1892 Muir founded the conservationist Sierra Club, and was its president until his death from pneumonia in Los Angeles on Christmas eve 1914. He left an estate of almost $250,000 and was buried in Martinez at the Strentzel family cemetery. He lived to see the Hetch-Hetchy valley, part of his beloved Yosemite (where he is memorialized), flooded to become a reservoir for the city of San Francisco, despite his efforts to prevent this, but he was spared the agony of world war. In 1903 he had camped out in Yosemite with Theodore Roosevelt, during the latter's presidency of the United States. A well-known photograph shows them together atop Glacier Point. In 1909, still thin, tangle-bearded, and scruffy, Muir served as Yosemite guide to William Howard Taft, also during the latter's presidency. More national parks came into being as a result. Muir received an honorary master's degree from Harvard in 1896 and honorary doctorates from Wisconsin (1897), Yale (1911), and California (1913). During the 1980s Muir was voted the most important person in the history of California; he is commemorated there and in Alaska by dozens of place names. His birthday, 21 April, is a California holiday (with Earth day following). His home at Martinez, 4202 Alhambra Avenue, is now a national historic site. In 1984 a John Muir trust was founded in his home town of Dunbar, Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 40907


Parks, Frances Susanna (1794-1875), author, was born on 8 December 1794 at Conwy in north Wales, the daughter of Captain William Archer, formerly of the 16th lancers, and his wife, Ann, daughter of William Goodhew. The family later moved to Lymington in Hampshire, where on 25 March 1822 she married Charles Crawford Parks (1797/8-1854), a civil servant in the East India Company. Her elder sister Anne Augustine married a clergyman, Henry Allen, and lived in south India during the early years of Fanny's residence in the country. 
Fanny and Charles Parks sailed for Calcutta in June 1822, finally leaving India in August 1845. Her account of her years in India, 'Wanderings of a Pilgrim in Search of the Picturesque', largely based on the journal which she kept for her mother, was published in 1850. The focus of the book was India, its people, and their culture. It thus gains momentum when, in 1826, the Parkses left Calcutta, where life was largely confined to British society, to live 'up country' in Allahabad. Here Charles spent almost all his time. Fanny, however, travelled extensively: she sailed by herself in their pinnace, the 'Seagull', up the Jumna River to Agra, and up the Ganges to Fatehgarh, and spent nearly a year visiting Cawnpore, Meerut, Delhi, and Landour in the Himalayas. Exploring was a delight: 'Oh! the pleasure of vagabondizing over India' (Parks, 2.192). Her husband, whom she describes as kind and considerate, encouraged her travels. The couple had no children, and he probably realized that, in a society which saw a woman's natural focus as her family, she needed an alternative outlet for her energies. These were considerable: she was characterized by remarkable physical stamina, and indefatigable enthusiasm and curiosity about every aspect of Indian life. Everywhere she went she sketched. She studied and noted every aspect of the peoples she met, and the plant, animal, and insect life she encountered, preserving with arsenical soap specimens for her renowned 'cabinet of curiosities', which also housed a heterogeneous assortment of interesting objects, especially Hindu figures. Her fluent Hindustani enabled her to penetrate Indian life, and she adopted some Indian customs, signing her writing and drawings in Persian script (the transliteration of which produced the common misspelling of her surname as Parkes), and playing the sitar. She admired the dignity and grace of Indian life, in which she considered European ways were often an ugly intrusion. Although an Anglican, she was sceptical about attempts at religious conversion and the effect of some European philanthropic endeavours. 
Her friendships with Indian women led to a deeper understanding of Indian life. It had always been her ambition to penetrate the zenana: this she achieved through her friend Colonel William Gardner (1771-1835), who had married a Muslim princess. She also became a close friend of the Baiza Bai, the ex-queen of Gwalior. Such relationships enabled her to take part in marriage and other ceremonies normally barred to Europeans, and to gain first-hand understanding of Indian religious beliefs and practices, particularly Hinduism, in which she had a deep interest. Her knowledge of Indian women's life strengthened her sense of the universal exploitation of women, whether in Asia or England, in which latter she condemned the injustice of the educational and legal systems. 
Her enthusiasms and interest in Indian life were a source of amusement to her friends. Others, through misunderstanding or jealousy, could be hostile. Fanny Eden, travelling with her brother Lord Auckland, the governor-general, recorded in 1838 how intrusive they found her inescapable presence. In the only known description of her appearance in India, Fanny Eden also wrote, 'She has been a beauty and has the remains of it and is abundantly fat and lively' (Dunbar, 'Tigers, Durbars and Kings', 106). 
Fanny Parks's book, which was extensively illustrated with drawings by herself, her friends, and Indian artists, was lavishly produced and won wide acclaim. Reviewers noted the accuracy, detail, and range of observation -- as well as the unusual character of the authoress. She followed it in 1851 with the commentary to a 'Grand Moving Diorama of Hindostan', which was based on sketches by distinguished amateur artists in India. Accompanying the diorama was a museum, which contained items from her 'cabinet of curiosities'. 
The Parks were by then living in London. Charles Parks died there in August 1854. Fanny survived until 21 December 1875, when she died of shingles at her home, 7 Cornwall Terrace, Regent's Park. She was buried on 28 December in Kensal Green cemetery in the same grave as her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 40908


Kable, Henry (1766/7-1846), transported convict and merchant, was born and lived in Suffolk, like his father, Henry Cabell (died 1783). Both were illiterate and unskilled labourers, and little is known of Henry Kable's early life. He joined a rural gang notorious for thefts from farms, and in 1783 he, his father, and an accomplice were found guilty of house burglary and sentenced to death. The elder two were hanged on 5 April 1783, but sixteen-year-old Kable was reprieved on condition of transportation. 
Confined to Norwich Castle gaol, Kable fathered a son, Henry, in 1786. The mother, another convict, Susannah Holmes ('c'.1765-1825), was an illiterate Norfolk spinster of no trade, also reprieved from execution and awaiting transportation. With her baby a few months old, Susannah was ordered to Plymouth to join the first fleet bound for New South Wales. When her baby was refused permission to join her and Kable refused permission to marry her, the English press reported the distress of this young convict family so sympathetically that a public subscription was opened and $20 subscribed to assist the family in their exile. Lord Sydney himself was approached and intervened, personally ordering that both father and son should embark with Susannah. 
After arriving at Sydney Cove in January 1788, Kable married Susannah at the first religious service performed by the colony's chaplain, on 10 February 1788. They subsequently had ten children, all baptized by the Church of England chaplains. Such close family life was both unexpected and unrecognized in a penal colony reputed infamous for the criminality, depravity, and immorality of its convict inhabitants. 
In July 1788 Kable and Susannah issued a writ against the master of the 'Alexander' for withholding the goods that they had bought in England. Their case was the first to be heard in the colony's court of civil jurisdiction. Although convicts were arguably ineligible to sue or be sued, they won their case and the master was ordered to make restitution. It is argued by legal historians that this favourable verdict was Kable's 'greatest impact' (Neal, 177) on England's convict colony, the verdict 'establishing a foothold... for the rule of law tradition' (ibid., 190), thus ensuring that the exercise of power by an arbitrary governor was not automatically dependent on either prison discipline or martial law but rather on legal principles. 
Kable's working life did not conform with the traditionally accepted pattern for convicts. In 1789 Kable and some of his associates established the night watch to maintain law and order. He was overseer of the watch (1791) and chief constable (1794-1802) and was deeply involved in procedures and practices in both civil and criminal cases. Business prospered. By 1800 Kable's colonial-built vessels promoted sealing, whaling, and inter-colonial trade, and by 1807 Cable & Co. owned both colonial and foreign-built ships carrying goods and passengers to England. In 1820 he was one of twenty 'most important emancipist landholders' in New South Wales (TNA: PRO, CO 201/123/D5). 
In 1805 Kable clashed with Governor William Bligh, who refused permission to trans-ship goods between two of Cable & Co.'s vessels. Bligh imprisoned Kable and his wealthy ex-convict partners in Sydney gaol for one month and fined them $100 each for addressing him 'improperly' and in a derogatory manner. After Bligh's deposition (1808) Kable energetically supported the rebels, and, with his two partners, publicly subscribed $500 to assist John Macarthur's English defence against charges of rebellion. (Macarthur later wrote to his wife that this promissory note could not be honoured in England.) During the interregnum (1808-10) Kable continued to increase his land grants and town allotments, and all his grants were confirmed by Governor Macquarie in 1810. By 1819 Kable was one of the colonial emancipists who, describing themselves as the 'wealthy middle class', petitioned the prince regent for civil rights denied them in the colony to whose economic development they had contributed so greatly. The accumulated wealth and landholdings of these ex-convicts far exceeded those of the free settlers. 
After the death of his wife (8 November 1825) Kable lived with his son John at Windsor until his own death, at Hawkesbury, on 16 March 1846. He was buried with Susannah at St Matthew's, Windsor. They had been married for thirty-seven years, during which time Kable, the notorious transported felon, had become the wealthy colonial settler. The text at that first marriage ceremony at Sydney Cove had been: 'What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits towards me?' ('Psalm 116': 12) which would have been more appropriate at his funeral. Despite lack of education or skill, and despite the infamy of being a convict, his positive response to and exploitation of the unique colonial environment was influential on the economic and social development of early Australia. As an entrepreneur, a businessman, and a family man, Kable, the ex-convict first fleeter, helped to lay the foundations for the new and respectable society which was to become Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 40910


Westerman, Percy Francis (1876-1959), children's writer and journalist, was born at 41 Kensington Terrace, Portsea, Portsmouth, Hampshire, on 18 May 1876, the son of William Francis Westerman, a master of arms in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Lavinia Anne Colborne. Educated at Portsmouth grammar school, Westerman was keen to go to sea when he left school at the age of eighteen, but poor eyesight prevented him from being commissioned in the Royal Navy, and he obtained a clerical appointment in Portsmouth Dockyard. He used his leisure time for sailing and travelling, and began to write articles for magazines about his experiences. On 23 April 1900 Westerman married Florence Emily, daughter of John Wager, ship's steward, and a son, John Francis Cyril Westerman, was born in 1901. Westerman continued to combine freelance journalism with his clerical duties, his articles appearing in such periodicals as the 'Motor Boat Magazine' and 'Yachting Weekly'. As well as proving a useful supplement to his salary, which at the time of his marriage was only $90 a year, Westerman's journalism also provided him with a literary apprenticeship before, almost accidentally, he stumbled into writing more substantially. 
According to family legend, Westerman's first book, 'A Lad of Grit', published by Blackie in 1908 (but dated 1909), originated in a 6died bet made by Westerman with his wife that he could write a better boys' story than the 'tosh' he was reading to his small son. On his wife's retort that the book was better than he could manage, the bet was made and in due course 'A Lad of Grit', a tale of Restoration times, appeared. In 1911 Westerman resigned from his Admiralty appointment to devote himself to full-time writing, and other books followed, not only historical fiction, but tales about sea scouts, and contemporary adventure stories, exploiting the emerging technology of submarines, airships, and the wireless. During the First World War Westerman was for a time employed on coastal duties with the Royal Navy, and he later held a commission in the newly formed Royal Flying Corps, these experiences doubtless helping to provide the background for such books as 'Rounding up the Raider: a Naval Story of the Great War' (1916) and 'Winning his Wings: a Story of the R.A.F.' (1919). 
After the war Westerman and his family lived on a houseboat on the River Frome at Wareham, Dorset, and he consolidated his reputation as one of the best adventure-story writers of the day. Although previously his works had appeared under various publishers' imprints, from 1927 his books were published exclusively by Blackie, who contracted Westerman to produce three books a year. Most were written in the evenings in a beautiful longhand which was then typed before submission to the publisher. By the 1930s Westerman's reputation was at its peak. Although he had never settled on any particular locale or group of characters, he had built up a considerable following for his thrilling and well-told tales in a variety of styles, and a new series of books about a recurring hero, Standish of the air police, reinforced his earlier success. He was acclaimed as the most popular boys' author in a referendum run by the 'Daily Sketch', and was the subject of a film made by Pathe Gazette. 
During the Second World War Westerman served with the Home Guard in Dorset, and continued writing, 'War Cargo' (1941), the story of a transatlantic voyage, being a typical example. Books continued to appear after the war, but an accident forced Westerman to leave his houseboat in the late forties, and he and Florence moved to lodgings in Wareham. Poor health eventually slowed down his writing, but he still had books published in each of the last four years of his life. A keen sailor and an enthusiastic supporter of the scouting movement, Westerman became a well-known local personality with his nautical figure and peaked yachting cap. By the time he died at St Leonards Hospital, Dorset, on 22 February 1959, he had written over 170 books, which had been translated in half a dozen European languages with total sales of over 1.5 million copies. His son was also a writer of boys' stories. 
Although his tales of the sea retain some 'aficionados', Westerman's books remain of interest largely for cultural reasons. His historical novels, such as 'A Lad of Grit', illustrate the survival of the tradition of G. A. Henty into the twentieth century, and tales such as 'The Airship 'Golden Hind'' (1920) show how the fascination with aspects of the new technology developed from the onset of the First World War. Westerman's fiction, in general, despite such limitations as a rather pedestrian style, with its emphasis on patriotism, discipline, and tenacity, offers a revealing picture of British character and culture as enjoyed by many in the first half of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 40912


Devas, (Thomas) Anthony (1911-1958), portrait, still-life, and landscape painter, was born on 8 January 1911 in Bromley, Kent, the second son of the four children of Thomas Gronow Devas, chairman of the City of London wholesale textile firm Devas Routledge, and his wife, Marjorie Cecilia Wilson. While at Repton School, Devas sought solace from his unhappiness there in the school art studio, and he was encouraged by the art master, Arthur Norris, to leave at sixteen to pursue his painting at the Slade School of Fine Art in London. From 1927 he studied there under Henry Tonks and Philip Wilson Steer, made lifelong friends with Rodrigo Moynihan, Robin Darwin, and William Coldstream, and fell in love with Nicolette Macnamara (1911-1987) ['see 'Devas, Nicolette], daughter of the Irish poet-philosopher Francis Macnamara and sister of Caitlin, the future wife of Dylan Thomas. 
The pattern of both Devas's artistic and personal life was thus effectively already established by the time he left the Slade and married Nicolette, on 25 June 1931. Through her he was drawn into the orbit of Augustus John, in whose menage the Macnamara girls had been raised, and whose influence can be felt in the portraits of both Nicolette and Caitlin (Tate collection), painted during the war years when, owing to ill health, Devas was serving as an air raid warden in Chelsea. Like portraits of close friends from this period, such as the poet Laurie Lee (1944 version on loan to the National Portrait Gallery, London), they are now generally accepted as being among his best work. 
Devas had initially been associated in the public mind with his friends in the Euston Road School, partly because of shared subject matter such as gently realist portraits and figure subjects, but also through the subdued colours and soft focus of his early work. By 1941, when he had his first major exhibition at Thomas Agnew & Sons Ltd, he had built up a small but enlightened portrait clientele who favoured the informality of his approach and greater freedom of brushwork than that offered by other members of the Royal Society of Portrait Painters, of which he became a member in 1945. Official commissions included portraits for the War Artists' Advisory Committee and one of Sir George Dyson for the Royal College of Music in 1952. That same year his portrait of Count Benckendorff helped to secure his election as associate of the Royal Academy, where he had been exhibiting regularly since showing 'Flowers in a Yellow Jug' there in 1940. 
Portraits of Devas's three children, including 'Emma Dressed Up' (Museum and Art Gallery, Derby), were influential in securing a demand for child portraits, but the undeniable charm which he brought to these and to portraits of fashionable women became increasingly decorative as his approach became correspondingly conservative. The portrait of Camilla and Mark Sykes (1947, Bradford Art Galleries and Museums) and subject pictures such as 'At the Couturier' (1955, Harris Museum and Art Gallery, Preston) are typical of the fashionable chic which won him a popular following, and in 1953 he painted a series of 'Aero' girls for Rowntrees chocolate. His portrait of Elizabeth II, painted for the Royal Artillery company in 1957, now has little more than period charm to recommend it, though his last commission, 'Peggy Ashcroft as Imogen', painted for the Royal Shakespeare Theatre and exhibited posthumously at the Royal Academy in 1959, has a freshness and originality which are said to have reduced Augustus John to tears. 
Following two years of heart trouble, Anthony Devas died suddenly after a stroke on 21 December 1958 at his home, Flat 3, 86 Elm Park Gardens, Chelsea. Nicolette Devas, in her excellent autobiography 'Two Flamboyant Fathers' (1966), described her husband's stammer, his 'over-sensitive face' and 'extreme good looks in the romantic Rupert Brooke style', and included an invaluable account both of his portrait practice and of their life and friendships in the Chelsea of the 1940s and 1950s. 


@@@@@


doc= 40913


Rowse, Herbert James (1887-1963), architect, was born on 10 May 1887 at 15 Melling Road, Walton, Lancaster, the son of James William Rowse, foreman builder, and his wife, Sarah Ann, formerly Cammack. After local pupillage, in 1905 he entered the school of architecture at Liverpool University, where Charles Reilly had just been appointed Roscoe professor. Rowse gained a first-class certificate in 1907 and was joint winner of the Holt travelling scholarship, which took him to Italy and started a lifelong interest in Italian Romanesque and Renaissance architecture, and yielded a set of measured drawings which won an honourable mention in the silver medal competition of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) in 1910. He became an associate of the RIBA in 1910 while employed as an assistant to Frank Simon, who in 1912 won the competition for the Manitoba parliament building. Rowse worked in Simon's Winnipeg office in 1913. He also travelled extensively throughout North America and worked briefly in Chicago and New York. He then returned to Liverpool, where he opened his own practice in July 1914. During the First World War he worked for the Admiralty designing 'purely functional buildings'. On 29 July 1918 he married Dorothy ('b'. 1892/3), daughter of Thomas Parry of Crosby, and relaunched his practice with a commission for the Fairrie sugar refinery in Liverpool. 
Rowse's competition-winning design for the Liverpool shipping office (the India Buildings) in 1924 was the first among a series of large-scale commercial commissions in the city, often carried out in partnership with other individuals or firms; these included Martins Bank (1927-32), Lloyds Bank (1928-32), and the Bibby Shipping Line offices (1930). The Lloyds Bank branch in Church Street was in Italian Romanesque, while for bigger buildings Rowse used a rich, eclectic classicism, often with a distinct transatlantic flavour. In 1931 he was appointed consultant to the Mersey tunnel authority, and designed the tunnel approaches, arched entrances, and ventilation towers. The largest tower, the Woodside Tower, housed the tunnel authority offices, and was a distinguished addition to the group of tall buildings at Liverpool's pierhead; it won Rowse the 1937 RIBA bronze medal. His tunnel authority schemes featured low-relief sculpture and art deco work, leaning towards the stripped classical style favoured by both European totalitarian regimes and American New Deal designers. At this time Rowse was working closely with Tyson Smith, Liverpool's leading modern sculptor. The Philharmonic Concert Hall (1936-9), with its simplified brick massing and its restrained decoration, was much closer to mainstream European modernism, and is apparently inspired by W. M. Dudok. It was this approach which informed his designs for the British pavilion at the Empire Exhibition, Glasgow (1938), the Pharmaceutical Society headquarters in Brunswick Square, London (1937), and the Pilkington Glass Company offices in St Helens, Lancashire (1938-9). 
War again frustrated Rowse's professional career just when he was beginning to win substantial commissions outside Merseyside, and had purchased 1000 acres in Anglesey, where he planned to improve the estate's buildings and to modernize its husbandry. Whether he then planned to retire is unclear. Rowse served as sheriff for Anglesey during the war, and in 1947 completed the Pharmaceutical Society building (now London University's pharmacy school). In 1947 he secured the Woodchurch 2500 cottage housing scheme, in Birkenhead, upstaging his mentor Professor Sir Charles Reilly with a scheme 'traditionally English in character... modified to suit contemporary limitations and resources'. Woodchurch was one of the biggest regional projects in the era of post-war austerity, and won Rowse a bronze medal for housing from the Ministry of Health. However, the architect resigned before completion, following a dispute with the client. Rowse designed diplomatic buildings at Delhi and Karachi in 1951. He also advised the Belgians on post-war reconstruction, and was awarded the order of Leopold II in 1950. However, he took no further recorded part in British practice until he won the competition for the renovation of the 'Rows' in Chester (with Thomas Harker) just before his death at his home, Chapel House, Puddington, Cheshire, on 22 March 1963. His wife survived him. Temperamentally, Rowse was a perfectionist with meticulous attention to detail, persuading his clients to invest in the finest materials. He worked long hours and set himself high standards, demanding the same of his staff. Donald Bradshaw, writing Rowse's obituary, noted that he was fond of saying 'Never present an alternative; it shows that you have not solved your problem' ('RIBA Journal'). 


@@@@@


doc= 40914


Hague, Bernard (1893-1960), electrical engineer, was born in Barnsley, Yorkshire, on 7 July 1893, the son of Joseph Hague, a theatrical manager, and his wife, Amy Florence Kitching. He was educated at Eccles grammar school and Rochdale central higher-grade school, and from 1908 until 1910 worked as an apprentice turner and fitter to Carter Brothers, millwrights in Rochdale. In 1911 he became a junior electrical designer with Ferranti, Hollinwood, studying part-time at Rochdale Technical College. He gained an exhibition at the City and Guilds College in London, matriculating in 1912 and entering the second year of the course. Hague gained the degree of BSc in electrical engineering with first-class honours in 1915, and went on to obtain the diploma of Imperial College (1916), the degrees of MSc (1919) and DSc (1927), and fellowship. He worked at the Royal Aircraft Establishment as a lecturer until 1919, when he returned to the college as a lecturer. His talents were recognized by George Howe, professor of electrical engineering at the University of Glasgow, and Hague was invited to become a lecturer in the department in 1923. His PhD thesis, 'Testing of instrument transformers', was accepted three years later, and he quickly acquired a reputation as a superb lecturer and a precise and methodical scholar. 
In 1929 Hague went as a visiting lecturer to the Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute, returning to Glasgow the following year to become a senior lecturer. In 1946 he was appointed to the James Watt chair of electrical engineering in succession to his mentor, Howe. He became dean of the faculty of engineering, and served for fifteen years as the president of the Student International Club. Hague was also a member of the council of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, serving as a member of council from 1950 until 1953, and was a founder and director of the Scottish Electrical Training Scheme. 
Beyond the confines of his own department and profession Hague made a great impression on the cultural life of the university. An accomplished oboist, he was a mainstay of the university orchestral society, and played in the orchestra. He was a member of the Royal Scottish Academy of Music. His hobbies included working in wood and metal at his home in Hyndland in Glasgow. Latterly he collected and restored musical instruments. 
Hague published prolifically in technical journals. His most influential book was 'Electromagnetic Problems in Electrical Engineering', published in 1929 and reprinted after the Second World War as 'The Principles of Electromagnetism Applied to Electrical Machines'. Another well-known textbook, 'Alternating Current Bridge Methods', was first published in 1923 and translated into many languages. He continued to revise the text until his death, and a sixth edition, revised by his colleague, Thomas R. Foord, was published in 1971. 
Hague married Muriel Thorne Grose, and they had a daughter, Sheila Thorne Hague. Muriel died in January 1960, and he never fully recovered from the sadness of her loss. He died on 29 September 1960 at Glasgow's Western Infirmary. The University of Glasgow's principal, Sir Hector Hetherington, remembered Hague for 'his expressive face, crowned by the oriflame of his snow white hair, his dress, his handwriting, his craftsman's skill, his love of music and his mastery of his own beloved instrument. He was quiet, even reticent, though easy in conversation, uncontroversial, though firm and clear in judgement, helpful to others, especially to students from overseas, and altogether loyal. (Hetherington, 59)' 



@@@@@


doc= 40915


Hilton, John (1880-1943), social scientist and broadcaster, was born at 14 Rumworth Street, Bolton, Lancashire, on 28 December 1880, the first son and the last of seven children of John Hilton ('b'. 1841) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Bowden. He avoided much of the poverty that the rest of his family had had to endure. His father had risen steadily from spindle polisher to become Bolton's first school attendance officer and his mother, with the assistance of her six daughters, had opened a confectioner's shop which had improved the family's fortunes by the time of John's birth. After attending elementary schools, at the age of twelve he won a two-year scholarship to Bolton grammar school, but turning his back on further study, he left at the age of fourteen to become a handyman in a bicycle repair shop. In 1896, on his sixteenth birthday, he took up an apprenticeship as a mill mechanic, attending evening classes at Bolton Technical School. He became a fitter in a loom works in Bury, but within two weeks was promoted to foreman and later manager in this and another mill in Heywood. On 25 June 1902 he married Ellen (Nellie) Chadbond, a cotton mill worker, daughter of Joseph Chadbond, file cutter; they had one son and two daughters. 
Hilton's career was interrupted by a bout of sciatica, and he spent the period from September 1907 until June 1908 recuperating in St Petersburg. Having returned to England, he became a lecturer and journalist with the Free Trade Union in Brighton, before moving to London where he became interested in the Norman Angell Movement, dedicated to maintaining peace through fostering knowledge about international relations. His connections here led to his appointment as acting secretary of the Garton Foundation which, after the First World War, hosted a government-sponsored study of trade organizations and combinations in the United Kingdom, featuring such figures from the labour movement as Sidney Webb and Ernest Bevin who, together with Hilton, were critical of the ineffective 'Profiteering Acts'. 
In 1919 Hilton became assistant secretary and director of statistics in the Ministry of Labour, where he focused his work on understanding the plight of the unemployed. Eschewing purely quantitative analyses of unemployment figures, he developed techniques for more detailed investigations into case histories using interviews and observations of labour exchanges. These methods led him to point out not only the abuse of the system by certain recipients, but the more important problem of the application of inappropriate rules for assessing individuals' eligibility. His work here gained the respect of the international statistical community and he became a strong advocate of the work of the International Labour Organization in Geneva. He also promoted international real-wage comparisons. President of the third and fourth conferences of labour statisticians, he also became a member of the International Institute of Statistics and a council member of the Royal Statistical Society. 
In 1931 Hilton took up, as its first holder, the Montagu Burton chair in industrial relations at the University of Cambridge. He was co-author of a survey 'Are Trade Unions Obstructive?' (1935). He maintained an uneasy relationship with his colleagues, particularly since his position never led to an election to a college fellowship. He believed that too few Cambridge economists were concerned with the social side of economics. In 1933 he began his work at the BBC with a series of talks on industrial relations. Adopting a clear, chatty, and non-patronizing tone, his broadcasts soon attracted an audience and he was invited to give the industrial talks for a much wider series, the 'National Stocktaking', from the end of 1933. In 1934 he broadcast 'This and That', which spoke to the unemployed on a whole series of issues encountered in their day-to-day existence. 
Along with his weekly column and daily questions and answers in the 'News Chronicle' from 1936 to 1939, the broadcasts secured Hilton something of a reputation as friendly uncle figure to ordinary men and women. He received thousands of letters from the public requesting help on many subjects, some of which became the basis for future broadcasts (his third series of 'This and That' dealt with problems of a contractual nature, such as the relationship between landlord and tenant). Others led to wider public debates, such as his investigations into the credit system which had some impact on the 1938 'Hire Purchase Act'. Listeners' responses formed the basis of his book 'Why I Go in for the Pools' (1936), a survey of the aspirations of those who invested in football pools. His championing of the poor and disadvantaged led to criticism, but also greater public recognition. In 1939 he participated in an early television programme in which he questioned such prominent individuals as Sir Walter Citrine on the future of the trade unions. 
During the Second World War Hilton became director of home publicity at the Ministry of Information; he toured the country to listen to the problems of ordinary people so that he could better explain the government's wartime measures. He continued broadcasting ('John Hilton Talking') and in March 1942 he took up an invitation from the 'News of the World' to direct their new advice bureau which was soon receiving 2-3000 letters a week (after his death it was renamed the John Hilton bureau). Furthermore, he visited the forces in north Africa, writing an 80,000 word report on the administration of the armed services, a tour which only added to his exhaustion and overwork. In 1943 he suffered a cerebral haemorrhage and died at the Evelyn Nursing Home in Cambridge on 28 August 1943. 
Although connected to the labour movement and an academic economist by profession, Hilton's empathy for the plight of the poor owed less to political theory than to a deep-seated humanism, influenced by his own family and social background. At times this meant he came across as a cloth-capped John Bull, but his concerns for the problems faced by ordinary people were clearly genuine. As he wrote in the 'News Chronicle': 'I believe... in Tom, Dick and Harry (and, of course, in Peggy, Joan and Kate)... I know how important to the scheme of things are Sir Thomas, Professor Richard, and the Right Honourable Henry... but if they start throwing their weight about too much and I have to take a side, I side with Tom, Dick and Harry' (16 Nov 1936, cited in Lyddon, 95). The context within which his broadcasts must be placed therefore is the general interest in social conditions developed during the depression era. It is no surprise that Hilton was highly interested in the anthropological investigations of Tom Harrisson into the lives of the working class, coincidentally focused on Hilton's home town of Bolton. His broadcasting style owed much to the 'middle brow' intimacy and intelligence of J. B. Priestley, who similarly sought to address universal issues on the radio which could be of interest to all. But Hilton's attention to the everyday problems also anticipated the consumer journalism which was to become highly popular after the Second World War. By responding to concerns over the 'tallyman' and other 'rackets' Hilton drew attention to many of the consumer problems which were increasingly preoccupying a population having to negotiate its way through an increasingly complex market place and official bureaucracy. In the title of one of his radio series, 'On Having a Bit of Money' (1938, published posthumously as 'Rich Man, Poor Man', 1944), Hilton highlighted his understanding of not only the problems faced by the poor, but the hopes and desires to which he believed they rightly aspired. 


@@@@@


doc= 40916


Garstin, Norman (1847-1926), landscape and genre painter, was born on 28 August 1847 at Cahirconlish, co. Limerick, the only child of an Anglo-Irish army officer, Colonel William Garstin (1806-1861), of the 83rd regiment of foot of the Irish army, and his wife, Mary Hastings Moore (1823-1871). His father committed suicide when Garstin was young and, as his mother suffered from muscular paralysis, he was brought up by relatives (mainly an aunt at Fetard) in co. Limerick. He was sent to school in Jersey, where he attended the Victoria College, St Helier, and lived with another relative, Dr Norman Garstin. 
Garstin studied engineering briefly at Queen's College, Cork, and then architecture, entering an architect's office in London. However, he found the profession of little interest, and in 1872 he set sail for the diamond mines of South Africa. He spent four years in Kimberley, where he shared a tent with Cecil Rhodes, and was employed for some of the time by the government secretary, Frederick St Leger. Later he went to Cape Town where he worked for St Leger as sub-editor on the newly established 'Cape Times'. He returned to Ireland in 1877. 
Soon after his return Garstin was blinded in one eye in a riding accident, although this incident did not deter him from his decision to become an artist. He studied in 1878-9 in Antwerp, under Charles Verlat, and then between 1880 and 1883 in Paris in the studio of Carolus Duran. The influence of the northern tradition is reflected in the sombre palette of his early works, and his oils and watercolours include many canal and street scenes of such places as Delft and Bruges, as well as scenes of everyday life in Breton towns, in which he depicted local women in peasant costume. In Paris Garstin had the opportunity of seeing the work of the French impressionists: he is said to have met Degas, and in 1884 he wrote a critical appraisal of Edouard Manet for the 'Art Journal'. 
Garstin exhibited widely in Britain from the early 1880s: at the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, in 1882, at the Royal Academy for the first time in 1883, when he showed 'Philomene', in Birmingham, Manchester, and Glasgow, and in many London galleries, including the Fine Art Society, the Walker Gallery, and the Grosvenor Gallery. He exhibited with the New English Art Club in 1887. During this time Garstin travelled extensively. In 1882 he painted in Brittany, a place popular with English painters and where Jules Bastien-Lepage encouraged his fellow artists in 'plein air' painting. The following year he went to Hyeres in the south of France, in 1884 to Italy (including Venice), and in 1885 to Morocco and Spain. The experience of these journeys found expression not only in the subject matter of Garstin's paintings of the 1880s but also in a developing interest in colour and the effects of sunlight and shadow, and in the creation of scenes with atmospheric effects, mystery, and mood. He also painted scenes of London in a free, sketchy style while staying there in the 1880s. 
After his marriage to Louisa Fanny (Dochie) Jones on 14 July 1886, Garstin settled in Newlyn, Cornwall, welcomed by the colony of artists who, like himself, had trained on the continent, and who were also influenced by the work of Bastien-Lepage. He rented one of the new glass-covered studios on the Meadow (a plot of land bought for development to meet the needs of the growing number of artists), which he shared with his friend Frank Wright Bourdillon. Garstin and his wife later moved to Penzance, where they lived at 4 Wellington Terrace with their two sons, Crosbie ('b'. 1887) and Denys ('b'. 1890), and daughter, Alethea ['see below']. Garstin was a friend of Stanhope Forbes, leader of the Newlyn school, who described him as 'a distinguished looking Irishman with a delightful wit... tall and imposing and with a fine artistic insight' ('Norman and Alethea Garstin', 23). He became the intellectual mentor of the Newlyn artists, forward looking and refreshingly free of dogmatic ideas, believing in the freedom of expression of the individual as opposed to the hidebound conventions of other Victorian painters. However, Garstin was dogged by his impoverished financial circumstances, which forced him to combine painting with writing articles for journals and teaching. From 1899 he took sketching parties abroad, to such places as Quimperle, Delft, and Normandy. Eventually he opened his own school -- the Penzance and District Art Students School, where Harold Harvey was a pupil. 
Garstin's work followed two directions: anecdotal, studio paintings executed for large exhibitions such as the Royal Academy and lively, impressionistic oil studies painted from nature on small panels. He was inspired by the avant-garde work of Walter Sickert and J. A. M. Whistler, as well as by Japanese art with its sense of assymetry. 'Woman Reading a Newspaper' (1891; Tate collection) is powerfully evocative in the manner of Sickert, while 'Mounts Bay from Trewidden' (Tate collection) follows the Japanese compositional style. His most important work, 'The Rain it Raineth every Day' (1889; Penzance Museum and Art Gallery), is strongly atmospheric and has a powerful sense of depth and space. 'Her Signal' (exh. RA, 1892; Royal Cornwall Museum, Truro) is an anecdotal painting with a dual light source, one of Garstin's favourite devices. Many of Garstin's paintings, in both oil and watercolour, show a powerful interplay of sunlight and shadow reminiscent of the French impressionists. The reviewer of an exhibition held at the Walker Gallery, Bond Street, in 1909 encapsulated this aspect of the artist's work, saying: 'His directness of statement and freshness of handling give to his studies of nature a definite significance as frank records of simple facts, and make them decoratively pleasing without diminishing their value as realities' ('Studio talk', 227). His later works were more anecdotal and included scenes of upper-class life -- for example, 'The Last Dance' -- and were designed to have greater saleability. Garstin remained in Penzance for the rest of his life, although he visited Canada in 1892, when he painted the opening of the Canadian Pacific Railway. He died at Wellington Terrace on 22 June 1926, survived by his wife. 


Garstin's first Royal Academy exhibit was hung when she was eighteen and so impressed the president, Edward Poynter, that he asked to meet her. Thereafter she exhibited regularly in the 1920s and 1930s. Although she was based in Penzance until 1960, she travelled to northern France, Italy, Morocco, Kenya, and the Caribbean. She had a very fine tonal sense and accurately reproduced the hot, intense colours of Morocco and the West Indies in contrast to the cooler, more muted tones of scenes of Cornwall or Brittany. She worked directly on to the canvas with a freedom of brushstrokes and light touch, using square hogs' hair brushes. 
In 1960 Garstin moved to the Old Poor House, at Zennor, on the Penwith north coast. She was one of the major painters of the Cornish school in the first half of the twentieth century. She died at her home on 23 January 1978, just before a major exhibition of her work and that of her father, entitled 'Two Impressionists, Father and Daughter', was held in St Ives. Her work is represented in Bristol City Art Gallery and Plymouth City Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 40917


Procter, Doris Margaret (1890-1972), painter, was born at 7 Greencroft Gardens, Hampstead, London, on 21 April 1890, the only daughter of Frederick Charles Shaw, a ship's doctor, and his wife, Eunice Mary, 'nee' Richards ('b'. 1859/60), an artist who had studied at the Slade School of Fine Art, London. When Doris was young the family moved to Tavistock, Devon, where Dr Shaw died. They moved again in 1907 to Myrtle Cottage, Newlyn, Cornwall, and Doris studied painting under Stanhope Forbes at his Meadow Studios in the town during 1907-8. Fellow students there were Ernest Procter, her future husband, and Laura Knight, a lifelong friend, who described Doris as 'a charming young thing, with a brilliant complexion, enormous dark eyes and long slender legs -- swift and active as a gazelle' (L. Knight, 'Oil Paint and Grease Paint', 1936, 161-2). 
In 1910-11 Doris Shaw studied painting at the Atelier Colarossi in Paris, following the advice of 
In 1919 both painters were invited to paint murals for the Kokine Palace in Rangoon, Burma, belonging to the Chinese millionaire Lim Ching Tsong. They travelled to Rangoon in December 1919 and worked at the palace for a year, assisted by Burmese, Indian, and Chinese craftsmen. Shortly after her return to England, Doris began a series of portraits of young women, depicted in simplified, rather sculptural forms. She sent her work to mixed exhibitions at the Leicester Galleries, London, from 1913 to 1935. She first sent a painting to the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition in 1913, a Versailles subject inspired by her honeymoon visit. In 1916 and 1917 she sent flower paintings and in 1922 a Burmese scene. But from 1923 she sent paintings of women. She also began exhibiting under the androgynous name of Dod rather than Doris. 
In 1926 Dod and Ernest Procter had their second joint exhibition, this time at the Leicester Galleries. In 1927 Dod's painting 'Morning' (Tate collection), which depicted Cissie Barnes, the daughter of a Newlyn fisherman, asleep on a bed, was voted the picture of the year at the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition. It was bought for the nation by the 'Daily Mail' newspaper. On Dod's return to Newlyn from visiting the opening of the exhibition at the Royal Academy, flags were hung in celebration of her success and she was led home from the station by a silver band. 'Morning' was so popular with the public that it was toured round regional galleries in Britain, being seen by 60,638 visitors at Birmingham City Art Gallery during February 1928. It was sent to New York on the ship 'Queen Elizabeth', and on its return it was given to the Tate Gallery. A two-page illustrated article entitled 'Painting the picture of the year' describes the artist thus: 'Not very tall, slight and dark, modern looking and extremely feminine... [with] her shingled head, her pearl stud earrings, slim, silk-stockinged legs and neat feet... her legs crossed, her large dark eyes reflective, a long, thin, black cigarette holder in her extremely sensitive, slender hand... surround an outstanding personality illuminated brilliantly from within when art, which is the real business of her being, is under discussion. Then there is clarity and conviction in everything she says. (Tate collection, archives)' As a result of Dod's successes at the Royal Academy summer exhibitions during the second half of the 1920s, the Procters rented a flat in London, first at 26 Stanley Gardens, Belsize Park, then at 32 Elsworthy Road, Primrose Hill. In 1929 the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition jury rejected Dod's painting 'Virginal', a full-length nude figure of a young woman, and she sent it instead to the Leicester Galleries. The genitals of the young woman were visible, and this was probably the reason for its rejection. However, she was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1934, a rare distinction for a woman painter, and only the third woman in the academy's history. She was made a Royal Academician in 1942. 
In the 1930s Dod Procter continued to paint her favourite subject of women, but her style became softer and more painterly. She joined the New English Art Club and showed with them between 1929 and 1932. Two paintings were bought for the nation under the terms of the Chantrey Bequest during the 1930s ('The Orchard', 1934, and 'Kitchen at Myrtle Cottage', 1935; Tate collection) and one by the Contemporary Art Society in 1931. Procter contributed regularly to the prestigious Carnegie Institute's international exhibitions at Pittsburgh, and in May 1935 she was given a show at the Carl Fischer Gallery in New York. Ernest Procter died on 21 October 1935 in North Shields, Northumberland, and after his death Dod started to travel, both for work and for pleasure. She visited Canada and America in 1936; the Canary Islands in 1938 and 1946; Tenerife in 1938 and 1939; and Jamaica four times in the 1950s. On many of these travels she was accompanied by the painter Alethea Garstin, a close friend. She painted in Ireland during the Second World War, and her subjects at this time included flower pieces. Dod died in Newlyn on 31 July 1972, and was buried alongside her husband, Ernest, in the churchyard of St Hilary nearby. Her work is in Oldham Art Gallery; the Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne; the Atkinson Art Gallery, Southport; the City Museum and Art Gallery, Stoke-on-Trent; Penlee House Gallery, near St Ives, Cornwall; and the Tate collection. 


